All right, guys, I think we're
uh ready to get started. We have
a quorum now.
Um
So, good morning, everyone, and
uh thank you for being here. Um,
I'm bringing the investments and
pensions oversight committee
meeting to um to begin and um
I'm
I'm gonna just, after I, we
called to order and we do our
introductions, I'll tell you
guys a little bit about me, so
cause I don't think everybody
knows me on this committee, um.
So, uh, Paul, do you wanna go
ahead and do roll call?
Representative Duncan, Senator
Figueroa.
presents.
Representative Paul.
Representative Lujan.
Senator Lopez.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Shu.
Senator Stephan.
Senator Woods.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Lord. You betcha.
Senator Munoz.
Representative Roel Cao.
Senator Stewart
OK.
That's everyone I have.
Um.
Sorry, I forgot the chair and uh
this vice chair um Barrigo.
Yes. Senator Gonzalez.
You have corn.
Thank you, Paul.
Um, good morning, everyone, and
I just wanted to thank Senator,
um, Bobby Gonzalez for being the
chair last year. He did a great
job and I
I felt like he was sort of my
mentor. Um, and I think that's
kind of how I'm sitting here
today. Um, and for those of you
who don't know me, I'm uh
representative Barrego, and I
just wanted to mention that I
sat on the parrot board for 8
years, so and a little bit of
experience back in 2002 to about
2010 and in pensions and
investments, so I'm, I'm really
excited to be in this role, and
I just wanna um
Just a couple of housekeeping
items, um, Senator Gonzalez, um,
before I get into the
housekeeping, did you want to
say a few words?
Oh,
good morning and uh Madam Chair,
to everyone, just everyone
welcome and.
Let's just work with our work
plan and we're ready.
Thank you, uh, Senator for your
work last year. Um, just a
couple of housekeeping items,
guys, um, I noticed in the
Albuquerque Journal, this
article, which I passed out that
uh Senator Munoz, um,
Um
Wrote and I thought it was kind
of interesting, and so I just
passed that out this morning.
Um, if you guys see anything
like that and you want to flag
me, just send it to either Paul
or myself.
Um, and if you're not able to
attend the meeting, please let
us know in advance so that we
can make sure that somebody um
else can fill your spot for
voting purposes.
And I just also wanted to
mention that um Senator Gonzalez
is working to try to get us to
Taos in October. This is a
non-traveling committee, but
Senator Gonzalez and I thought
at least one of our, our
committee should be, you know,
somewhere besides Santa Fe, um,
because everyone else gets to
travel, so why not us, you know,
so he's working to get that
place up in uh.
At the ski basin
at the Toski Valley, and that
would be in October, so, um, and
I think you're also able to
spend one extra night there, if
you want to. It's a really
beautiful place, by the way. Um,
my phone number in case you
can't.
Uh, reach call is 505-239-1557.
I love to do text, so if you
guys want to text me, if not,
just call me. Um.
And so I try to stay on time. I
try to keep us moving, um.
Um, and you'll find that.
I, I guess you'll find I'd like
to start on time. I, my first
year downstairs on the floor, I
was like, how come we never
start on time? And I was always
sitting there for like an hour
or two waiting, you know, but I,
somebody came by me and said,
you'll get it eventually, um,
and I think I'm starting to
understand that a little bit
better, but anyway, with that
being said, guys, if there's,
are there any questions of uh
the committee?
Or comments, um, Senator Wood.
denies him because he's reckon
about recognizable guy.
Thank you, Senator Woods. I just
wanted to also mention that I,
I've spoken to, to Mimi Stewart,
and she is going to add me as an
advisory member to this
committee. So it was not done
earlier. I requested it.
So, um, so she said no problem.
We're happy to have you the
paperwork. I met, I met you in
Rio Rancho recently.
Yes it is.
All right. Any other comments?
Oh, OK, uh, with that, um,
representatives, we're gonna
move on to our 10:15 um
presentation, and we're actually
2 minutes early, uh, legislative
finance Committee Investment
Pension Performance Report,
Brandon Brandon Brendan Gray,
economist with LFC. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, uh, my name
is Brendan Gray. I'm an
economist at the Legislative
Finance Committee. Um, thank you
for, uh, in, in having me to
present. Um, I'm gonna be
talking about our state
investments uh specifically
their performance, you should
have um two handouts where it
looks like they're circling now.
The first is a slide deck,
pretty short, um, that I'll be
primarily presenting off of, um,
and then also what um Christina
is passing out.
Is the act performance report
looks like this.
Um, and I'll, I'll talk about it
a little bit later, but LFC
every quarter produces staff
work on and present to the
committee, um, a summary of um
the large state investment
performance.
Um, so that's what this is. And
I also want to highlight at the
beginning, we have a totally
new um resource that we're
demoing here live. I'm going to
be demoing live. It's a
dashboard um that summarizes all
the information from this report
from the slide deck that I have
and historical data, um, all in
one place online, um, hopefully
to make a little more accessible
to you all, to the public, your
constituents, um, so I will
pause in the middle of my
presentation. Take a quick break
from talking.
a little bit of showing happy to
take questions at the end, and
Brandon, before you get started,
um, can you, I just wanna
recognize uh representative
Patricia Roybal Caballero, who
just joined us. So, um, thank
you for being here.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Right, and I will um jump ahead
in these slides, um, so here's a
roadmap for my presentation. Um,
I first kind of give a 30,000 ft
overview of our state
investments. Um, I know there
are some new faces, some faces
who have heard this presentation
many times, but always good to
start from the fundamentals. Um,
I'll also in that portion talk
about why it's important that we
look at the performance of our
state investment funds.
Second, I'll talk about how we
look at the performance of our
state investment funds, uh,
that'll be kind of the nuts and
bolts all.
Stop presenting here, go on to
the dashboard, um, and then
lastly, I'll get into the meat
and potatoes of how we're doing,
um, how our big biggest funds
are performing.
To turned me to the next slide,
um, this is, I think, the best
way to think about our overall
Fiscal investment strategy, um,
in 3 buckets, I think about it
the same way I manage my
finances. Um, first, we have our
checking account. That's our
general fund. Uh, these are
funds that you all as
appropriators appropriate to
state agencies, and while
they're not being used, they're
managed, they're vested by the
state treasurer's office in the
least risky investments in the
market, um, and they generate
returns. So that's the general
fund the checking account. It's
called the
State general fund investment
pool.
Second, the savings account may
be a high yield savings account.
Um, these are reserves set aside
again by you all as
appropriators, um, and, um, set
aside uh non-recurring dollars
to be used to offset temporary
short-lived revenue down um
decreases.
Um, those are managed by the
state Investment council.
Um, they were about 30% coming
out of the most recent
legislative session, that's our
reserves, um, right on target.
And then lastly, and what I'll
be focusing on in this
presentation are our long term
investments.
Um, and these are very large,
87.2 billion, um, as of the end
of 2024, um, and there's within
that bucket, there's two types
of long-term investments. The
first type is something we think
about a lot. I think about a lot
as a state employee. That's our
pensions.
About 40% of that 87 billion are
two pension funds, the public
employees retirement Association
fund, that's the one that I have
as a um.
Employee of the legislature, and
then we also have the
educational retirement Board,
that's for um public education
employees, um,
So that's one type of long term
investment, and then New Mexico
also has a very unique type of
long term investment are
permanent funds. Um, these are
revenue set aside by you all as
appropriators into non-recurring
revenue sources, um, so to
create recurring revenues. Um,
so I'll talk about both of those
long term investments in this
presentation, um, and I'll start
with our pension funds. Um,
again, my goal here is to talk
about why it's important to
monitor the performance of
these, of these things and
Um, in my view, the most
important reason why uh why the
pensions are important is that
there's a lot of retirees who
benefit from New Mexico's
pension funds at the table on
the left.
shows active, inactive, and
retirees for both Perra and ERB
and that total column there, you
can see there's about 100,000
retirees, maybe a little more, I
think this this this data is a
little outdated. 100,000
retirees in New Mexico. Um, not
all those live in New Mexico,
but you can imagine the economic
impact that that has when every
month 100,000 people get.
Paycheck from the state of
Mexico, they go spend that money
in the economy, great jobs, etc.
so that's the economic benefit.
You can also think about pension
from a recruitment perspective,
um, a very valuable tool for the
state, um to recruit employees
like me, um, who have a defined
benefit plan, uh, to, to access
in retirement. Uh, this chart on
the right, um, indicates a
survey from 2013 that indicates
employees are more likely to
choose employers with a pension.
So just to reiterate, pension
funds are important and and
these are 22 reasons to
highlight that.
That's the, the one part of our
um long-term investments. The
second part of our long term
investments, that $87.2 billion
are are permanent funds. So I
have this chart here, um.
To talk about why those are
important.
This is uh a a chart produced by
the consensus revenue stimating
Group in September 2024. This is
a long term forecast that the
Craig um conducted at that time,
um, of, and what this chart
shows is the estimated shares of
recurring revenue by um revenue
type.
You can see um on the, the
left-hand side, uh, that's FY
27. That's what we're preparing
for now, the budget we're we're
starting to build this interim.
Um, 33% of our revenues were
attributable to um our grocery
receipts tax. You go down the
list, um, 22% were from direct
um oil and gas revenues,
severance, and taxes and rents
and royalties.
Uh, 20% from our income taxes.
16% from our investments.
So that's the the current
distributions of our permanent
funds, and then 8% of our of
other revenue sources.
And what really stands out to me
in this chart just for a second,
um, just for the record, uh,
Representative Luhan has joined
us and representative Serato.
Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair.
Um, yeah, so this chart, what,
what always stands out to me
when I, when I looked at this
when I was um helping build um
some of this information in the
Craig was just how quickly that
orange line is growing. I think
that's the most important thing
for the committee. Uh those are
our investments, that's what's
spinning off into the general
fund from our permanent funds.
And you can see in FY 27 it's
16%, uh, in 5 or so years, FY
31, 32, it's up around 20%.
That's when it surpasses or
income taxes or direct uh oil
and gas revenues, and it keeps
growing as a share of our
revenue, um, surpassing our
sales tax around FY 40, um, and
then from then on out, is our
largest source of revenue. Um,
and this is the reflection of a
prudent strategy from the
legislature to invest our
non-recurring um revenues,
revenues from a uh from our oil
and gas industry.
And create a recurring revenue
source that um over time will
become not only our largest
revenue source will also help
ensure that um our state
revenues are
positive and um growing in real
terms through this forecast
period. That was the big
takeaway, um, from the most
recent.
Long-term forecasts from the
crag is that the state can
expect positive.
Real revenue growth through FY
25 as a result of this strategy.
And so when we're talking about
our um permanent fund
performance, the reason why
that's important.
is that this forecast is based
off those funds meeting their
long-term performance targets.
And we'll talk about that later,
um, but the State Investment
council, which manages that
money as set performance
targets, the consensus revenue
estimating group uses those
performance targets to build
these estimates, um, and we keep
track of that every quarter to,
to see how we're doing, make
sure we're on track, right,
madam chair. So that covers why
this is important. And next, I'm
gonna transition to
How we do it, nuts and bolts, a
little behind the scenes, if
that's right.
Uh, like I said in the
beginning, you should have a um
report that looks something like
this, also handed out. This is
historically how we have done um
uh performance reporting of our
investments. It's a short
two-page um report uh that has
on the first page of summary, if
you flip to page 2,
And has a summary of the
performance of our pension
funds, um, and
You'll see these charts in the
bottom, this is kind of the
snapshot. I'll get into all of
this, uh, later in the
presentation on page 3.
Uh, as the, um,
Permanent funds, uh, the other
part of that long-term
investment. So I was just
talking about, and then lastly,
on the back of the page, it has
two different items, comparison
with pew funds. I'll get into
this as well. This is how we're
doing relative to all the other
big public funds out there. Um,
and then lastly, uh, the general
fund investment pool like I
mentioned in the beginning, our
checking account, how that, how
that's doing. Um, so that's this
report. Historically, it's been
published quarterly, presented
to communities like this, to
LFC, um.
Orderly, uh, that's going to
continue and in addition to
that, we are putting all that
information, including
historical information on a
dashboard online. So if it's
start with you, Madam Chair, I
might.
Break from the PowerPoint and
quickly click around in the
dashboard if that works for the
committee.
OK. Um,
This is what the dashboard looks
like. I'm gonna get my cursor.
OK, I, I'll just so uh this is
the landing page of the
dashboard. You can see again the
same breakdown long-term
investment funds, uh, our
pension funds, the current fund
value. Uh, this is a question we
get a lot, how big are these
funds right now and this will be
um always updated with the most
recent information so you can go
online and access it here in one
spot, um, for, for everything,
um, land grant permanent funds
severance tax perm fund early
childhood education trust fund,
I'll get into all of those. If
they're one year performance in
your performance.
And those performance relative
to benchmark, either short term
benchmark or long term
benchmark.
You know, get into those later.
And then lastly, the value over
time. You can see how quickly
some of these funds are.
And then I show one feature of
this, we can also click in to
get more detail on a particular
fund. Uh, so I'll click into the
land grant permanent fund, um,
and then this, it's a little bit
more in the weeds on how this
fund in particular is doing. So
again, it has the value, has the
value over time, you can see a
little bit more. 2018 was $16
billion. Now it's sitting around
$32 billion so a very large
increase. Um, you have the
performance in the most recent
period, that's on the top
left-hand.
corner, um, and then in the
middle, that's in the comparison
with peer funds. I'll get into
that a little bit later, but,
um, basically, are we above the
median?
Of a large
Large public funds or are we
performing below the heuristic
way.
And a little bit of analysis, a
little bit about the fund, and
then lastly, a link to um.
That's a, that's the demo of the
dashboard that we've been
working on for
Um, a while.
And uh that'll be online on the
LFC website at um the link on
the bottom of that slide.
Before you move on, are there
any questions regarding the
dashboard?
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, so I'm taking a break.
That's how we report on this.
And lastly, I'll, I'll conclude
here on how we're doing.
How our funds are performing
currently.
Uh, the one caveat I'll make is
that this is covering the period
ending uh 2024. So only through
2024, this is this last quarter
snapshot, um, Q2 FY 25. Um, so
we don't have performance data
yet on the first quarter of FY
20 of um count calendar year
2025. Uh, that's trickling
through now, I will be
publishing all this information
again in the next couple of
weeks, um, but we don't have
that yet.
This slide, I think, is the
easiest way to get a snapshot of
those large state investments.
I've said it many times, 87.2
billion across the five funds or
two pension funds or 3 permanent
funds. Um, this shows the value
as it changed over time. Um, so
again, you can see how quickly
those permanent funds are
increasing the land grant
severed stacks, early childhood,
um, and then the box on the the
right, um, shows the value of
that. So over the year, um, our
Um
Combined value of our large
state investments has increased
by 9.6 billion, 12%.
And then over the 5 year period,
it's increased by $32.1 billion
or 58.3%.
The thing to remember when
you're looking at the value
increase, is that considers
both?
Your performance in the market
and also all the revenue that
you get in general. So the big,
the big inflows here are our oil
and gas revenue. Um,
Over the year, about 40% of that
9.6 billion was attributable to
oil and gas distributions into
the 3 permanent funds, and then
about 48% um over the five-year
period was attributable to oil
and gas revenues. So, um,
hopefully that gets a little bit
of context.
Um, for those. So, as I
mentioned, you can think about
the the value of the fund that's
very useful to think about. Uh,
you can also take away those
inflows and you can just talk
about the performance, how that
that fund is doing out in the
market. That's what I'll talk
about next.
And for the remainder of the
slides.
And just like all complicated
things, there's no, there's no
perfect way to assess
performance um in this regard.
Uh, there, these funds are
responsive to overall market
trends, just the same way any
any person making money in the
market is going to be sensitive
to, um.
And I think the best way to look
at this is over time, over a
long time horizon, um, and then
comparing it with
How other people are doing out
in the market. So with this
chart shows, is it shows these 4
funds.
5-year average returns on
average over the five-year
period.
And then it compares that to
other public funds over $1
billion.
So it takes
Um, some of the noise out of the
market and just comparing um
As apples to apples as we can
get, um, of course, still, I'll
note that there are many
differences between New Mexico's
funds, our pension funds, and
other public funds, it's never
perfectly apples to apples, but
this is, I think, um, a a very
um good way to to get at that
comparison.
So, I'll go briefly through
this, um, at the top, you have
one last thing I'll mention
before, um, getting into the
details, the
The vertical axis, the up down
axis, that's the percentile
ranking compared to everybody
else. So if you're at the 50th
percentile, you're right at the
median, you're doing just about
as good as the average pub large
fund if you're at the top,
you're at 0, you're doing very
good. You're in the, you're the
top performer, and then at the
bottom, you're doing that,
you're at, you're the bottom
performer. Um, so that's the way
to interpret that and then
obviously it's over time, um,
there, uh, yeah.
So what this chart indicates,
you'll see um ERB in blue, the
educational retirement Board,
the fund that funds that
pension, um,
It has in 2018, it performed
around the 25th percentile, top
25th percentile.
Um, above, continue that around
the pandemic time, it kind of
edged down, came back up around
2022 and then has ended 2024,
about the same spot as it
started.
Uh, similarly, uh, you have the
land grant permit fund that's in
red, um, started between the
25th and the 50th percentile,
uh, and then edge down around
the pandemic and then came back
up and is still around there
now. Uh, the parafund uh started
around the 75th percentile, so
that's on the bottom, uh, bottom
of the median, um.
Hovered around there, came down
around the pandemic, um, edged
back up towards the median and
then currently is still around
the 75th percentile of the
5-year average returns. Um, so
there's a trend there with those
3 funds. They started 2018 and
they ended 2024 around the same
spot in percentile ranking, and
a big outlier in that trend is
the severance tax permanent
fund, that's in purple. You can
see it started around where the
land grant permanent fund um was
in 2018, dipped around the
pandemic and then
continued to be among the bottom
percentile uh return performers
uh of, of this sample. Um.
Uh
And then next, I'll go ahead um
fund by fund. This is the last
few minutes of the presentation
I'm happy to answer a particular
questions here, um but also I
know there's a lot of text, so
um I'll be relatively brief.
Uh, so educational retirement
board, um, ERB is, I'm, I'm
always saying this, they have um
the top returns in the state and
among the top returns in the in
the country, um, in the one year
period, the 5-year period in the
10-year period, they exceeded
their long-term target, um, so
the, the light blue column,
that's the returns, uh, in that
period.
The red line, that's the long
term target and then the dark
blue dash is the policy index.
The policy index is
Benchmark based on that asset
allocation, how that fund should
have was expected to perform.
Um, so you're trying to be both
above the um long term target
and the policy index in every
period, and if you can't get the
long term target because of the
market, you're at least trying
to beat your policy index every
time. That's kind of the way to
think about this. Um, and ERB uh
did beat its policy index in
every period uh and then it
outpaced its long term target in
the 15, and 10.
period. Uh, and then missed it
in the 3 year period amid um
what was a challenging market.
Um, and then last thing I, I
gave a little kudos to your. I
also want to, um, point out that
they have very good risk to
return ratios. I'm not going to
talk about that here, but you
can also think about uh
Um, the riskiness of the fund,
the the volatility of the fund,
and ERB does very good best in
the states, um, and, and pretty
good now.
Next fund is um Perra, uh.
Hera outperformed it's, uh,
short term, uh, it's long term
target in the one year period,
um, but missed that long term
target in each other period, um,
but was at or above its policy
index in each period except for
the one year. And then also in
the quarter, I won't always talk
about the quarter, but um the uh
the returns in the quarter which
aren't annualized, uh, was
slightly negative, um, and that
was significantly above the
policy index, which was um
pretty significant.
negative in that period.
Next
Uh, the land grant permanent
funds, those are the two pension
funds, and I'll close with the
three permanent funds, the land
grant permanent fund, um,
outperformed both short and
long-term targets, um, above or
at the policy index in every
period and then um like ERB
above its long term target in
the 115 and 10 year period.
Uh, severance tax permanent
fund, on the other hand, um, did
not meet its long-term target in
any period, um, and was above
its policy index in the 1 and 3
year period, but missed that
that benchmark in the longer
term, in the 5 and the 10 year
period.
And then lastly, uh, the early
childhood education and care
trust fund, the ECTF as we
abbreviate it. Um, this one
doesn't have a long-term target
set formally by the State
Investment council at this
point, um, it's one year returns
was 8% above its policy index
3-year returns, 4%. Um, the
council has set a long term
return expectations is what they
call it, 6.8%, um, so the fun
outperformed that in the one
year period.
Right, uh, that covers all the
material. I know that last bit
was was.
A bit um text heavy, but um I'm
happy to uh stand for questions,
madam. Does anyone have
questions on Mister Gray? Um,
Representative Duncan, and I saw
another hand over here
representative Silva,
Representative Lujan, and
represented and Senator, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just a couple of quick
questions on page 5. Can you
tell me uh what those other
investments are, and the reason
I'm asking is it's flat.
And just
Trying to figure out what they
are and why they're there, why
wouldn't we put them somewhere
else that they would actually
make a little.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, which page? Page
5.
And
uh.
Oh, OK, um, of the, yes, that's
it. Mhm.
OK. Uh, and your question was,
um, why are the lines flat?
Yeah, I mean, is, are they?
I mean, are they reaching their
goal or?
Uh, with what they've got on
that, or should we put them
somewhere else? Should we put
that investment somewhere else
and see something a little
different.
What, what, what is in the
other? What is that? Why is it
flat like that? Madam Chair
Representative, I see, I see
your question. Uh, those are,
um,
Um, a a variety of different uh
revenue streams that don't have
an expectation to.
Um, so those would be like
miscellaneous receipts, um,
license fees of smaller revenue
items that don't really grow
except for ad inflation. So
that's why that line is.
I'm sorry, I misinterpreted. No,
thank you. That's, that answered
it. And then on page 9.
Um, and, and we, you just talked
about this, um, maybe, maybe
Parra ought to use uh ERBs.
Thank you
just, just saying, I mean they,
they appear to be better than
any anybody we have and so
I would think that maybe they
all ought to get together and
find out what they're doing
right. Don't reinvent the wheel
and just say, OK, this is what's
performing well for this group,
maybe we had to invest.
I was there. So, thank you.
That's all the questions I have.
Thank you Representative Duncan,
uh, next we have representative.
Um, er.
Did you,
um, so silver.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, Brandon for the report.
I have a couple of questions.
Um, one, I'm wondering if this
report takes into account, uh,
the Senate, the Center for
Budget and Policy Priorities,
recent analysis of the bill that
was just passed at the federal
level, um, and looking at uh
treasury yields on the rise, and
um the bond pricing uh
fluctuating and how that might
impact our
sovereign wealth funds.
Madam Chair Representative,
great question. This, this data
is um like I mentioned, from
2024, so it's a little bit
backward looking. Um, so that
doesn't isn't included here. Um,
I will say though that um your
economists at LFC are very
carefully um looking at that
studying that the chief
economist behind me is Mount
Torres is keeping me busy with
running scenarios, looking at
all, all the things you just
mentioned. So while that's not
covered here, we are looking at
it in
Um, in the next revenue update,
um, that was certainly been
there.
Thank you, um, Brendan, thank
you, chair, and I think I
wouldn't make a recommendation
that this committee look at that
data and spend, carve out some
time in the agenda to uh look at
any new um results that we might
be seeing from um from that bill
passing and um also wondering,
it looks like many of the
performances are doing really
well in the, in the short term,
the 1st and 5 year, um, but 10
year, um, looks iffy and I'm
wondering, um,
What the analysis is there, why
that is, um, and then I have
some follow-up questions to
them.
Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva,
um, and I would advise that
maybe when we go through the
work plan that maybe you bring
that up and we can add that. Um.
So did you want to respond to
that or do you want to wait?
Yeah, yeah, go ahead, um, Madam
Chair Representative, it's a
very good question. I pulled up
um an example, and your, you're
spot on. The, the one year
period is very sensitive to
what's happening in the market.
Um, and so that can fluctuate up
and down. This was in 2024 when
um assets were
Performing well. Uh, and, and
then in the 10-year period,
really, that's looking at um
Holistically how the
On strategy is, is doing, uh,
and the investment agencies are
trying to um hit that long term
target, but not exceed it too
much.
Because, um, when you have
higher returns, you also have
higher risk. So they want to be
right at that long term target
without introducing unnecessary
risk. And so you'll note um ERB
uh here is performing, um,
pretty, I mean, pretty
substantially above its long
term target, 7.7%, um.
And then another fun like land
grant from the fund might be
right on track. And so that's
kind of the intuition there. Um,
at least as I see it.
Thank you, Brendan. Thank you,
chair. And then my final
follow-up question to that. So
looking at the uh severance tax
permanent fund. I'm on page 3 of
the, of the money matters
analysis, um, in that paragraph
where it talks about the
severance tax permanent fund.
One is just reiterating that um
we, the state of New Mexico is
relying on the permanent fund
for our long-term fiscal health.
Um, as noted in um in page 5 of
the PowerPoint that it's just
making up for all the losses
we're having in revenue in other
areas. And so, then why is there
a policy choice to invest
In in-state private equity
programs that are dragging on
the returns, especially the 10
year returns on this fund. Can
you help me understand that.
Thank you, chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
certainly, um, I think you, you
captured the captured the um
The potential issue perfectly,
and you also, as you flagged it
a policy choice. Uh, so that's
the decision of the legislature,
uh.
To invest a portion of the
severance tax permanent fund um
into assets that might not have
market rate returns, um,
potentially to get other returns
in other areas. But of course,
there's a trade off as, as
always, um.
With that physical, long term
fiscal strategy and then that
that other goal. Um, so I think
to your point, it's it's a
policy choice.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
our next, uh,
Our next presenter or question I
guess is uh Representative
Lujan. Thank you, Madam Chair,
um.
Very happy to be here uh today
and talking about all these
investments and everything we're
gonna do in this committee, um,
so I think my questions are
along the lines of what
Representative Duncan is talking
about on the.
Money matters, uh, last page
top, and we're looking at the um
The ERB and all of LFP and
parara and everything. It says
here above the median um sorry,
New Mex's the largest investment
funds had varied performance
with ERB and the LFPF above the
medium and para and LSTPf
performed below the medium, um.
So those of performing 25 uh in
above the 25th percentile in the
the latter performed below the
75th percentile, and I'm
wondering, as we're looking at
our, our pensions, are we taking
into consideration the effect of
um the baby boomer effect, and
that's why we're looking at
that, that difference in the 10
year um
Um, forecasts, can you maybe
talk a little bit about that.
Thank you, man.
Madam Chair, Representative,
certainly uh a great question,
um.
When, when I'm looking at the
performance of a fund, what I
think the the best place to
start is looking at the asset
allocation of that fund. That's
going to dictate the
performance. And so what's the
difference between the severance
tax permit fund and the land
grant permanent fund is the
result of its asset allocation,
um, in the severance tax
permanent fund, um, it is
invested in below market rate
investments, um, as
representative Silva brought up
uh with the uh paraf fund, there
are
Other reasons why it might be
invested in have a different
asset allocation, um, that, uh,
To your point, managing pensions
are, you know, very challenging,
and there are, there's risk
involved and um those decisions
are made by by Pera, um.
That I, I, I'd be happy to get
into um if you'd like. Thank
you, thank you, man. I think
more specifically, uh, we need
to, to look at what that effect
is with the growing population
of those that are retiring. So I
don't think we're
I'm not seeing it being
addressed, but I did see it in
the, you know, why we have the
fixes in 2020 when we looked at
the cola, and we moved from a 2%
to a 0.5% increase. We've had,
we've recently had legislation
that would uh would have
addressed that or did address
that and we're here, and I'm
bringing this up, Madam Chair,
as you've been part of the para
board, I represent a large um
population of state employees
and retirees and um I think this
is gonna be coming up in
As we get to the next point of
uh.
Of the committee, but I just, I
think that, you know, as you're
Informing us, I think we need to
have a closer look at what's
going on there and really making
better decisions because it's an
issue, um, especially ri rising
costs, um, and food and
everything else and all the, the
issues that we are, um,
addressing in this as
legislators who are um our taxes
and whatnot, what population
really needs that.
to be addressed and how best we
can do that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan,
um, good points. Uh, uh, Senator
Woods.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Brandon, could you tell me?
The uh solvency.
Um
Numbers for P E RA and the ERB.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
absolutely. Uh, the, um, funded
ratio uh for ERB and FY24 was a
60 65%. Um, it's amortization
period was 22 years.
Uh, and then for uh funded ratio
was 67%. It's mortization rate
period was uh 52 years.
OK, when you say 52 years and 22
years.
Explain that a little more to
me.
Madam Chair, Senator, I'll, I'll
do my best. I'm no expert. I'll,
if, if my answer doesn't work,
I'll turn to my colleague or
maybe he'll just, he'll come up.
He, he, he knows.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Joseph Simon. I'm, uh,
the legislative Finance
Committee analyst for ERB and
Perra. So the amortization
period that the 22 and the 53
years is based on the
assumptions that the board
adopts for investment returns
and other.
Uh, other issues like how long
folks are gonna, gonna live with
some of the uh issues that
Representative Lujan addressed.
How long it will take the, uh,
the plans to reach 100% funded
status, which is the goal of the
board is to have all of the
assets they need to pay all
promised liabilities to members,
um, at 100%. So, uh, what ERB is
currently expecting is they'll
be at 100% in um 22 years.
Perra is expecting 53 years,
those do change from time to
time. Sometimes they change
because of actions you all take,
um, related to solvency. So for
example, a few years ago before
you adopted those reforms to
Perra, we were anticipating that
the funds would never be at 100%
that eventually they would run
out of money. That was the
impetus behind that legislation.
Um, so, uh, so you can see the
actions you've taken have
improved those times. Uh, there
were, uh
some uh changes to para, or
sorry, ERB that made that 22
years possible. Um, I will say
in terms of the 22 and the 53
years sort of best practice is
to have that below 30 years. So
ERB is on track to do to repay
that, um, that unfunded
liability within the 30 year
period. Para despite those
reforms that you all adopted is
not.
Uh, currently does not currently
meet that standard.
And
Madam Chair,
Being new to this committee.
It seems to me.
The oversight of this.
is to determine how we protect
our retirees.
through these pension funds.
So just give me a, just off the
top of your head, some things
that might improve.
To, uh
To reach that 30-year goal.
So, um,
uh, Madam Chair, Senator, so
You know, and
There are different levers that
you can, that you can affect,
um, the difficulty with the
pensions in particular is, is,
uh, those, the, the base benefit
that has been earned by folks is
protected as a property right in
the Constitution, right? So you
can't go in and change any
Any benefit that you've
promised. So that sort of limits
your, um, the responses you can
do. So what, what you've done in
the past is you've looked at
contribution rates, whether
employers or employee
contribution rates and increased
those. Um, you know, the
difficulty with that is when you
combine the, the two different
rates, we're starting to get up
to a pretty significant amount
of salary. I have to do the math
in my head, but like for um
For Pera, we're looking at about
um between the employer and
employee rate over 30%, uh,
again, doing the math in my
head, I can get you an exact
number of what that is, of
employees' salaries that's going
into the pension plan. That's
funds you don't have available
to pay, for example, salaries to
retain employees that um
That we're also experiencing
pressure on, and, and you'll
hear about that in other
committees. Um, the other thing
that you can do, and that's been
allowed in the past that you
have done is address uh cost of
annual cost of living
adjustments. So, uh, since, um,
the early part of the last
decade, the educational
retirement Board has had their
annual cost of living
adjustments, um, prorated based
on their, their solvency status.
So once they get up and
over 90%, colas for members are
gonna increase because that
plans on a on more solid
financial footing. Um, you all
did something similar with Perra
a couple of years ago to prorate
colas for state retirees or
retirees of local government,
and um that
Made possible that 53% or that
53 year amortization period. So
two things that you've done in
the past to look at those so uh
solvency is cost of living
adjustments and contributions.
So, Madam Chair,
I would like to see uh uh a more
Detailed summary as to
What it would take to get Perra.
In a, in a
5-year period, 10-year period
into this.
Mode, what it would take
directly.
Um, you know, one of the biggest
pressures that a legislator gets
is
Oh, we got to increase that
cola, we got it, you know,
everything's going up and we're
losing money because our, our
way, our retirement is not
increasing.
But again, it's a future
employees that we worry about,
because as you say, that is a uh
Something that affects our bond
rating is.
is a solvency of, of these
pictures.
So
To, to think about the future of
the state and, and, and the
investments in the future, all
of this stuff has to be
considered.
So, um,
When, when we start seeing fun
values.
You know, and grow and
That's exactly what we're seeing
is how much money is leaving
those funds and not going into
those funds, and when you have a
fund that
Someone's putting money in, and
it's actually a positive more
positive coming in than going
out will naturally
That will help your investments
a lot.
If you still adding to the fun.
So
When we look at page.
9
And we see
This difference in these funds,
that's got to be part of that
is, is how much money we keep.
Installing into these funds, and
that makes invest in council or
whoever else is in investing in
these funds look mighty good.
Because
Everything's a little rosier
when you got extra money coming
in.
So
That's
That's the reason I wanted to be
on this committee is to have a
better understanding.
Of what's going on and it would,
it would seem the easiest thing
to do would
Change out the the investment
council or, or not the
investment council, but the, the
people that is in charge of the
investments, but it's, it's even
more involved than that.
And, and when we start talking
about
Um
Invested in state equity funds.
Well, that's even more
complicated than that.
So, yeah, uh, I would like to
see.
A comprehensive detailed uh
Although state investment, those
the state equity investments,
I'd like to see that in detail
on how that's doing, and I hope
that's in the preview of the
committee.
So that we can directly have a
judgment call because we are the
ones who write the laws, people.
And we can change things if we
want to write laws.
Uh, and, and we're talking about
the future of the state of New
Mexico here.
So
Uh, those two things is my, my
request today to put in the work
plan.
Madam Chair.
Thank you for the time. Thank
you, Senator, and I think we're
going to be discussing that in
detail. Um,
Senator Gonzalez, I think you
had a question also.
I'm sorry.
Oh
Senator Gonzales.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
uh.
I've been in this committee for
many years.
And uh there's been some very
good points that have been
brought out.
And uh Madam Chair and members,
um.
One of the parts that I think
that probably could.
Help us with more clarity.
Yes so the number of years that
I have been in this committee.
We have never had a meeting
together with the boards.
So we have uh the directors, and
then we have the boards, which
is a uniqueness to the
committee.
Because, you know, it puts us uh
as a one committee, but they
also have boards, and we get
caught on that trap once in a
while of um.
Because uh even with that,
Brandon, you mentioned several
times the legislature, which is
really not true because then
they go back to their board, and
a lot of times we don't have
that uh.
Togetherness with the board of
approval or disapproval where
we're going and uh that is one
thought that that that I think
that would really help us and
maybe an understanding to what
limit on the policy part, um,
the other part that uh for years
that I have thought of is um.
Not
There's a lot of detail.
And there's a lot of funds
involved.
But my question is, why couldn't
we have
To where at least understand the
pros and cons.
We would only have one
investment group, and they
invest for all the funds.
You know, and then that way we
wouldn't be seeing this, so.
Type of bars that we see, you
know, with one and uh also uh
I think that I'll keeping in
mind our main objective is to
help our people that.
are beneficiaries to this.
And uh no matter what, one once
we start going that path.
Oh, man, uh, you know, it
becomes territorial.
You know, PRA this, ERB this and
investment, but um, you know, as
far as the
Each part of that, you know,
that could become later, you
know, and I, I hate to use the
word study, but
The first, the first part that I
would say is why can't we invest
just one group.
And then uh we had a
A presentation of
Maybe a couple of years ago, you
might help me on this, so.
We have a one state that they
only have one fund.
And that covers education,
covers the state, covers all
employees.
Um
So, um, Madam Chair, and
senator, so you're right, there
are uh they're actually quite a
few states that have
Um, you know, sort of joint
funds, um, there are a lot of
states that have a lot of
different funds, for example,
like in in New Mexico, we have
local government as part of our
para. There are a lot of states
that don't have that some
separate universities and K-12
education, we have all
universities, so there's any
number of
Of
Ways you can, ways you can look
at that. I would say, you know,
in terms of the one investment
group. So the New Mexico
Constitution places, um, the,
you know, sole authority over
managing investments in the
boards of the different systems.
So we're they to do that, the
boards would have to decide to
do that, right? So because the,
the boards ultimately have
control over those investment
funds. And so there's
There's actually been recently
a, a New Mexico Court of Appeals
decision, um, on, on, uh, the
authority of the boards to
manage those investment funds,
um, where you all come into that
is
is by statute you set what the
boards are. So, um,
You know, so, I mean, the
theoretically you could make the
boards the same. If you, if you
wanted a single investment
group, but under the
Constitution, the boards of the
uh educational retirement fund
and the public employees
retirement fund are ultimately
responsible for those
investments.
Oh, sure.
Alto still bring their soul.
You know, perhaps a possibility
is if uh if we have that one day
up at the Tulke Valley.
That that could be a two-day
thing.
And invite the boards.
You know, and then at the same
time, maybe come with a more
very.
Comprehensive agenda for those
days, you know, what we want to
see and uh just to get a better
feel to it, but on the other
hand, I think that if I was a
board member with Perro.
I would be looking at ERB.
You know, uh
Hey, let's work together, or
what are you doing that is
having you there in the top
versus, you know, with uh on the
performance and uh
And this, the entire thing can
be constructive. It's not
punitive or it's not.
point fingers, it's just to make
it better.
And uh that's a, that's a
thought that maybe we can go
into uh putting this into the
work plan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Joy.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez. Um,
our next question is from
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, uh,
I do have some questions. Um,
I'm, I'm a firm believer in you
you say this a lot. There's
always a disconnect between the
people or the boots on the
ground. Here we got the board,
you have us, you have different
people. I firmly believe that we
could solve a lot more stuff
over tacos and beer and just
sitting around and hashing this
stuff out, but that never seems
to happen.
Um
So it's gonna go off in the
pizza and beer part or tacos and
beer, but in all seriousness
that has been a lot of problem
where I see there's an issue,
there's law enforcement, CD,
whatever.
And there's not
And cohesiveness between us and
them. There's people drafting
bills that don't always see a
lot of bills drafted where the
people it's affected not been
spoken to.
So when I, I wanna ask a
question.
Back to the investment group.
Um, so it's up to each board
then they get their investment
groups.
Who does that board answer to.
At the end of the day when they
come and they say, oh man, we're
gonna say you probably have to
go back up there. At the end of
the day there, let's say one,
it's been obvious who's the
better board on doing the
investment, they're here pairs
here. Who, who do they answer
to? Who, who says, hey, wait a
minute, why aren't you doing
what the other ones are doing.
To get us a better return. Does
that make sense? Hopefully?
Yeah, so, um, Madam Madam Chair
Representative, there's, there's
multiple answers to that
question. So first of all, I
would say, you know, as the
policymaking body for the state
of New Mexico, ultimately, they,
they are certainly required to
answer to you all as as
policymakers. Um,
In addition to that, there are
different methods for how the
board members are selected based
on the the fund, uh, and
actually Brenda might be able to
help me with SIC cause I, I keep
talking about the pension funds,
but SIC as you noted note from,
from Brendan's um presentation
is a huge uh investment uh
piece. So, um, so for, uh, the
public employees retirement
Association, there's a, there's
a mixed method for appointments.
There are 2 ex officio members,
the state treasurer and the
Secretary of State who are
ultimately responsible to the
voters, um, in addition, there
are different par holds
elections based on different
employment groups. So para board
members are by and large
selected by the membership of
those organizations. Um, for the
educational retirement Board,
it's a little different. There
aren't elections, but there are
appointed members by different,
uh, by different
Groups. So, um, for example, uh,
in, uh, the Educational
retirement Board, the public
education secretary and the
higher education secretary or
members of that board, they're
both responsible to the
governor, um, the governor has
appointees on that board, uh,
doesn't have appointees on Para.
So, um, those, again, would be
responsible to governor, in
addition, there are employer,
employee groups like, you know,
educational retirees, the, the
teachers unions have appointed.
to the ERB board. So like, it's
a little bit different and then
as I see you've got um cabinet
secretaries to governor,
obviously is the chair of the
state land commissioner is
elected as well, so you've got
people responsible to either the
governor or the voters, and
there are other appointees that
I'm not immediately remembering
how those, those folks are
appointed.
I appreciate that because uh
what I'm getting right now and
one of the main reasons I want
to be in here is I have.
A bunch of people on Para that
in my community that are their
biggest thing is, oh my God,
it's gonna go broke. I'm gonna
have no money. So what would you
tell them if they were sitting
right here that you would say to
them, it's not going broke,
you're gonna get your parent.
Everything is fine.
So, um, Madam Chair and
Representative. So uh I, I would
say going back to what I said
earlier about the amortization
period of Perra that, you know,
they're above where they where
they need to be in terms of how
long it takes to pay down that
that unfunded liability, but
it's moving in the, it's moving
in the right direction. So
that's what I would say to them.
Over time, it's moving in the
right direction. Um,
I would also say, you know, this
is
The idea behind having an
election for members of the
board is that instills some
accountability. It's, it is
supposed to instill some
accountability. So there are
employee groups and others that
are very active in how the board
manages those funds on behalf of
the membership and ultimately,
you know,
The membership should be holding
their board members to account,
and are they managing those
funds in a way that maximizes
the returns for the members who
ultimately are the beneficiaries
of the fund.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
experts. I, I very much align
with that having been an
activist before, um, having a
big mouth and saying what are
you guys doing? and I want to
see results, so that I
understand you're speaking my
language on that one. I think
the last question I do have is
Is there something that we can
do on our end? or is there money
that could be put into that fund
to accelerate it getting to that
30 year mark instead of the 53
year mark.
So, um, Madam Chair and
representative, so the
difficulty with that is we're
talking about extremely large
amounts of numbers over long
periods of time. What I think,
uh, the, the management of the
funds and their actuaries would
tell you is, um, the way to
Address underfunding issues is
through long-term recurring
revenue into the funds rather
than one time appropriations.
Um, what a one time
appropriation help?
Possibly, but we're talking
about a relatively small amount
of that unfunded liability. So,
just to uh to give you an
example. So the unfunded
liability of ERB at the end of
FY 24 was $9.4 billion. So,
yeah, if you had 9.4 billion,
To give a one time
appropriation, you can get them
to 100%.
So, or if you had, you know, 500
million over, do the math in
your head that many years,
that's what it would take. So
we're talking about extremely
large amounts of money. And so
even, you know, a, uh, you know,
a couple ERB actually and pair
of both actually reported this
to you last year. I'm not
recalling the exact numbers, but
even if we were looking at a
one-time appropriations in the
hundreds of millions of dollars,
it wouldn't do that much to
lower that period. And part of
the reason for that is because
of the, the reforms.
You made, as I mentioned, those,
the benefits already earned or
protected. So typically when we
make changes to pension plans
that they apply to future
employees. So we have a large
number of employees with
relatively more generous pension
benefits that are still in the
system, and that, that will be
expecting uh payments based on
the rules that were in place at
that time. So effectively, it's,
it's a time game, right? We're,
we're waiting for the, the new
membership to make up a majority
or even more of
The funds, and that's really
what helps solvency over the
long term is when those reduced
benefits effectively that you
all
Um, took decisions on more than
a decade ago when they're more
reflective of the general
membership.
Thank you, ma'am. Cheer all the
questions I have. I don't want
to keep us here all day, but
thank you for explaining that.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Um,
Joey, you mentioned or Mr.
Simon, um, you mentioned the
unfunded liability for ERB is
9.4 billion. What is the
unfunded liability for Pa.
Uh, Madam Chair, the unfunded
liability for parrot is 8.71
billion. Um, those are both as
of the end of FY 24, and also I,
I should also mention just to
add another one on here. So, um,
I don't have the exact number in
front of me, but my recollection
is the unfunded liability of the
retiree healthcare authority is
um north of uh of 1.5 billion.
So like between all of those
significant
Liability is out there for um
For all of the uh for all of
these retirement benefits.
OK, um, thank you for that. Um,
I think all of the questions are
wonderful. I mean, I think that
this is definitely um something
that, you know, we need to
really dive into in our work
plan, and I think that um I, I
know that Senator Gonzalez and I
talked on the phone about all of
this, um, and how we wanted to
approach.
You know, this whole issue of
unfunded liabilities and how do
we bring the levels back up.
Given the markets and so on, and
also given the um number of
retirees who, and I think
somebody mentioned the whole
issue of the baby boomers, you
know, cuz there's numbers in
that, um, so we have a challenge
ahead of us. Um, I would just
wanted to mention it's really
hard to compare.
ERB to PERA cuz they're
completely different structures
and organizationally, um, and I
just, in the back of my mind as
I'm thinking about it and having
served on the pa board and
seeing how peril works. There's
like 405, I think at this point,
funds different funds that are
part of Perra while ERB is much
less than that, and, and I mean,
much less like 3 or 4 or 5
funds.
maybe total. So the variations
are really hard to compare. It's
kind of like comparing apples to
oranges, um, and also I wanted
to mention the structure of how
they invest is completely
different, um, because they
choose different investment
strategies and then they have
Different buckets of money
managers and who they invest
with and types of strategies of
how they invest. So I just
wanted to mention that in
context, um, having been on the
board, at the worst time, by the
way.
Um, and I keep saying this is I
was on the para board when we
lost half of our pension fund in
one night, and that was a pretty
scary time, guys. It was in
2009, 2010.
It was like,
I should be like my cohort over
there, Mr. Duncan, and have
white hair because I literally
about had a heart attack when
Be the chair of Perra and losing
$7 billion and following the
fund and ERB, um,
How do we make up that
differences and and
representative Lujan, you
mentioned, you know, there were,
um, there was legislation to
change some things regarding
Paris structure.
Including changing retirement,
um, cause I, like for myself, I
retired at with 28 years, but I
could have retired with 25
years. Um, and then they changed
that.
whole structure that in the
tiers, and that came later on,
and I know that ERB has also
gone through some of those
changes in time. So there's,
there's a lot of variables and I
guess that's what I'm trying to
say is, and that's that that's
sort of what our work plan, um,
hopefully we can dive into some
of those um questions that were
raised with, you know, the
different investment sort of
strategies that ERB uses.
PERA, but remember we're we're
dealing with two completely.
Different types of funding
structures, um,
And I'll just mention that Pera
also has like there's like 42
different funds or municipal
fire. There's municipal, there's
fire, municipal.
Um, police, uh, there's county,
there's uh state.
All within the pair of fund,
there's judges, there's
legislators, so there's just a
lot more.
In that particular fund.
Um, as opposed to ERB and
representative Figueroa, you
probably know more than about
that than I do, but, you know,
you have your teachers, you have
your administrators, you have, I
mean, so it's a whole
It, it's really hard to compare
them, and I think it's somewhat
honestly misleading when we have
a graph that shows them being
compared.
Uh, because it really is a
totally different structure. So
I just wanted to put that on the
table as we move forward, um,
does anyone else um on the
committee have any questions,
um representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Um, let's a
question, but just for the work
plan, um, a proposal to one
include a conversation in the
agenda around the in-state
private equity and how it's
impacting the uh severance tax
permanent fund yields and um
I'd just like to learn more
about it and if that, uh,
private equity investment could
live somewhere else. Um, if
they're like, what are the
alternatives, um, because I
don't want to just not do it as
a state. I see the benefit of
it, um, but I don't want it to
drag on the thing that we are
intending for uh to to rely on
in the future and representative
can you hold that spot because
we are gonna get into our work
plan. OK, um, I'm gonna
asked the presenters if you have
any other comments and if any of
the committee members have any
other questions, uh, for the
presenters and because we're
gonna dive into our work plan,
uh, representative Lujan and
then Representative Woods. Thank
you, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, um, chair, I just
think, yeah, I think taking the
deep, deep dive into this and
really understanding those um
intricacies or those variables,
but also if to Senator um
Gonzalez's point. Is there a way
to merge some of those um those
measures or those variables so
that we do have those better
outcomes, and I think that's,
that's what you're hearing and I
think that that's what I'm
hearing here, so I, I would just
to go back to your work table.
Thank you for all the work that
you guys do. We have an
incredible team, um, Madam
Chair, that, that delivers all
this information to us, but um,
I think we need to compound that
with, with the amount of
revenues that we've been seeing
for our state, but
The factor at hand right now is
uh that we are in a time of
unpredictability, um, and I
think we need to, I think that
that's weighing on the work and
kind of the what you're
delivering to us as well, which
is why we have um the new um
task force subcommittee, I
guess, to, to look at all the
federal influences on our
economy. So thank you for that.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan,
Senator Woods, and I apologize
for calling you representative.
Well, that's, that's not a
A bad slang, I mean.
Anyway, some, some would argue
that I won't.
I wondered is, I know that uh
Izzy's sitting out there and
hadn't said a word.
And uh
I know his job is to kind of
Forecast the future.
So I'm assuming.
That, uh, with him being here
that
In our work plan, we'll have
some thought about the economy
and
And what's coming up, uh, as
As we're looking at it.
So
Um
There's nothing that I, I just
wanted to recognize that he's in
the room and that's his job, so.
Uh, we want to make sure that we
use them wisely. Thank you,
Senator. Um, thank you,
gentlemen. Um, we're gonna move
forward onto our work plan, um,
if there's no objection, and um
I'm glad you raised that, that
question, um.
Uh, Senator Woods, because when
I had a conversation, um, with,
with Paul or
And by the way, this is Paul
sitting right here to my right.
He is our staff and uh and also
Christina is kind of a backup.
She was our staff last year, but
they're both excellent folks and
if you guys don't know them, get
to know them because they're
they're gonna be our our support
and sometimes even our moral
support, um, in the conversation
that uh vice chair, um, Senator
Gonzalez and I had.
Um, with our staff, and I don't
see it on here, but um we did
raise the question of the
national economy, the state
economy.
And kind of the local economy
and how it affects these pension
funds. So I, um, I'm gonna let
Paul present the work plan and
then we're gonna dive into and
that's why I suggested uh
Senator Silva to hold that
thought. I did receive one email
from um
Senator Stefaniks, and um she
also raised that question, which
I assured her that we would get
that in here. So Paul, I'm gonna
let you dive into this. I, with
that caveat that we did question
that we have those presentations
from the nationals and state,
um, level in terms of our
economy and how it affects um
All of these investments. Thank
you.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Um,
I told you my name is Paul
Estock, Christina Vasquez is
back here. Carrie McGovern is
our 3rd staff member. She's over
here. Um, I'm taking over this
job from Christina who's done it
for the past few years because
she's gonna be lead on revenue
and taxation, and that's a
pretty big ask. So doing both of
them was
A tough go, but
Count on the fact that I'm going
to rely on her a lot because she
knows a lot more than I do about
this stuff
and Paul, before you get
started, um, can I ask that he
present and that we hold our
questions until the end and we
can come back and make whatever
revisions, um, so if you'll just
make your notes and then we'll
come back. So if you can go
through that.
OK, uh, in addition, in your
folders, there's a pink sheet
with some
Information about interim
committee stuff that they ask us
to give you every year. Um,
there's also a the tentative
calendar for the interim, so you
can take a look at that.
On paper, um,
You should also have a copy of
the proposed work plan. It's a
two-page.
Document. Hopefully everybody
has it. If you don't.
Holler out or scream or
something.
Um, so, starting at the
beginning, um,
You see items A and B on the
work plan, um, those two items
are focused on receiving reports
that are heard annually by this
committee. Um, item A covers the
sustainability and solvency of
Perra and the ERB and the
retiree healthcare authority
funds, um, it'll also cover any
plans to improve sustainability
and solvency of those funds.
Item B covers the investment
management of funds by the Para,
the ERB retiree healthcare
authority, the State Investment
Council, the state treasurer's
office, and other agencies that
invest public funds.
I don't see proposes that the
committee here updates on the
strategic goals and plans on how
to reach those goals from the
State Investment council,
the.
The ERB and retiree healthcare
Authority.
Item D request the committee
received reports from agencies
that are responsible for public
pensions and the investment of
public funds and each agency's
transparency practices.
Uh, I will have the committee
hearing an overview of state and
federal economic outlook, that's
the economic trends, what's
happening, um.
And how they may impact state
investments and state funds,
investment funds.
Item F will have the committee
exploring the issue of solvency.
With an emphasis on potential
threats to the solvency of Perra
PRB and RHCA.
Um, on page 2.
Item G requests the committee
received testimony detailing the
status of per retirees, cola
restrictions on public funds and
potential remedies to any
operational shortcomings.
Um, that's uh Senator Stefaniks.
Ask for the committee.
Uh, items H and I are
Sort of general topics they
broad items they allow the
committee to address issues as
they arise during the interim.
Uh, so if anything comes up that
needs review, the committee can
decide at that time to receive
testimony and reports on that
issue, while the remaining
within the purview of the work
plan that the legislative
council service approved, so
that's sort of the catch-all,
OK?
Um, on the 3rd page of the work
plan.
Are the meeting dates and
locations, um,
pretty simple stuff for this
committee. We're
To be determined on how
depending on how things work out
if that they may need to change,
we, we rely on uh uh their
generosity and, and Senator
Gonzalez, um,
Contexts in, uh, but we'll find
that out, but those are the
dates of, of our meetings. If
you want to.
How any increase in dates that
you've talked about an extra day
to get
Um, then we need to throw that
in before we go to legislative
council service with the work
plan.
OK. That's the work plan and uh
stand for any questions you have
at this time.
OK, so, um, I'm gonna guess that
we're gonna probably need an
additional meeting, um, just so
I think it would be
Prudent to ask.
Um, if we could
Determine that the date to be
determined because when I looked
at this myself.
Earlier, I felt like, you know,
just in case, and we can always
cancel it if we don't have, if
we don't need it, but I think
that
Given the fact that there's only
really one day after the
legislation.
Um, is
Go to be considered, we may need
an additional date in December.
I hate to say that, but I think,
I think we need to be uh clear
given the amount of legislation
that was being introduced last
year regarding colas and so on,
um, representative, I'm gonna go
ahead and get started then, uh,
representative Royal Cavallo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. First, I
want to say that uh it feels a
little strange, uh, not being
in the chair vice chair position
of this committee because it's
been my position since day one,
but I really appreciate. I, I go
back to Senator Munoz's days,
uh, when I was asked to be on
this committee and, and um to
share the positions with them
me just uh acknowledge you
because I know all of your
experience and
I definitely appreciate
everything that all of the work
that you've done, um, on this
committee. So, um, respectfully,
thank you for for that. Thank
you, and I was just gonna say
that I appreciate.
Deferring it now, and Senator
Gonzalez was a good ride and and
I know we're gonna be uh um on
this committee, but the
difference is that as as a
chair, you're not as engaging
necessarily, um.
On the topics, uh, as much as
you want to be, so oftentimes we
would play back and forth with
committee members and and how
what to raise the issues to
raise and the questions to
raise. So I, I really appreciate
that and thank you for your
comment. So going back to the
um.
To the work plan, I was trying
to um
position my comments according
to.
How their lettered in the work
plan recommendations. So I'm
gonna start with uh
And, and thank you for whomever
included this um article.
Because in the article, um, this
one.
In our packet.
In the article, um, I believe,
uh, Greg through heel.
Um, was quoted.
Because Madam Chair, over and
over again, we get asked the
same kinds of questions that
came up today, which is their
welcome questions because we
have to have some really deep
dives into the answers, so we
know how to frame our policy
recommendations each year, but
um,
He did, he did acknowledge on
page 2 of the 6 pages that a
growing number of retirees
receiving benefits from the
pension fund and larger payouts
due to salary increases have
posed a challenge and quickly
improving the funded ratio of
peril. So that's an important
point that he raised, and that's
been a point that he's been
raising throughout and every
year the presentations have
raised those questions. The
other big point was that there
are roughly 49,000
active employees, pain into the
fund, which covers what we
already address municipal,
county and state employees, and
more than 47,000 retirees
receiving benefits that you see
right now is addressing
Representative Luhans question
about
The population that will be
continuing to retire.
Which brings me then to
Another point, and that is that
our plans, uh, are heavily
weighted by the contributions
that we make into the plants,
but that means that we have to
have a vibrant economy.
And that we have to have a
vibrant workforce and that we
have to have stability. We have
to pay well, we have to offer
excellent benefits and part of
What was also mentioned, not
somewhere I think in the charts
was that um the survey results,
Madam Chair, they indicate why
people seek certain employments
and having security not just in
salary, obviously, but in their
pension funds because it's the
nature, especially in the public
sector that you enter into the
public sector with the
expectation that you're going to
have a good retirement. I know,
um, Madam Chair, you've heard
and you've made this statement.
also that we come from military
families. My father was a lifer,
and when I was getting educated,
he kept saying over and over and
over again, you need to look for
work in the public with
government, public sector,
government, public sector
because of the retirement. So
that brings me to a couple of
recommendations, um.
In letter D, where we are going
to be receiving testimony on
issues relevant to the
investment of public funds, um,
and the administration and their
whatever D is.
Perhaps we might be at the point
of looking at alternative uh
systems that we can create.
That can kind of help balance
that constant.
problem that we have, um,
Between
Active employees, anticipated
retirees contributions and so
on, and that is um looking at,
say, for example, I received a
report from a group, the think
New Mexico that suggested
perhaps we look at individual
retirement accounts, and I know
in past years we've, we've
brought that up. So maybe I'd
like to recommend a
presentation.
On how a system of individual
retirement accounts.
Funded by payroll deductions
could improve our pension fund
performance.
I think that would be a good
place in as we roll out letter
D, and so I'd like to recommend
that and then I, I can later
email suggestions as to who
might best make those
presentations, or it could be a
panel discussion. I know in the
past we've had panel
discussions, um, the past recent
years we've had panel
discussions, perhaps we can have
an engaging dialogue.
Between um.
Maybe that's not the only
system. Maybe we can come up
with a couple of other. Then my
next recommendation, Madam
Chair, would be, um, what I was
saying earlier about how we have
to have a vibrant economy
vibrant workforce is and again
another type of panel
discussion.
Including our um that would
include various departments, I
would suggest that would look at
um
How we're investing in our
education and training programs
in order to ensure a skilled
workforce, because recruitment
and retention is key to the
public sector and our public
funds, and that includes
education sector, which is the
ERB and then our public
employees. Um, the other part of
it is diversification in our
economy.
Diversification in our economy
means that we need to be
attracting new industries, uh,
developing existing ones,
growing them stronger, making
our economy more resilient.
And the way we do that,
is by um
Maybe moving away from what
we're accustomed to in terms of
our traditional um industries in
the state and maybe highlight
science and technology, how
that.
Growth in that area, tourism and
renewable energy, how we're
already in those worlds. There's
no going back. There's no more
discussions about whether it's
yes or no, Madam Chair. We're
already in these um
Uh
Already entrenched in these
three particular industries,
particularly tourism. We've not
really looked at how we can uh
stabilize it, grow it and
stabilize it. So this would then
give us um what someone
mentioned a long term uh
recurring contribution.
Into the fund. The long term
recurring contribution into the
fund, thereby Madam Chair
equals, um, fund stabilization,
thereby
Removes all of the problems
we've had in the past. So those
are my recommendations, uh, in
terms of adding to D and F in
our work plan. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, and I just,
just because this is, I'm just
nitpicky about stuff like this,
um,
I want to reiterate what you're
telling me is that um looking at
our state economy.
Um, and how it affects our
workforce and how these new
technologies, including, um,
Education and training, um,
including, um, the different
types of uh um industry that
we're attracting is is going to
impact um these funds, is that
what I'm hearing on that one.
Yes, within our state, within
our, our state, uh, public
sector because we're responsible
for that, yes. OK. And then the
second one.
Um
I'm understanding.
Uh, item D is that um
How we balance sort of
alternative, the balance between
the active and the retirees and
um how alternative systems
impact that, is that correct?
Is that what I'm hearing? I was
recommending that, yes, we have
various systems of retirement.
Various retirement systems
available to us, and I gave the
example of the individual
retirement, um, accounts, how
they,
and that was gonna be in could
influence, yes, and so with the
whole thing of recruitment and
retention, OK. I just wanted to
make sure that I understood what
you were saying. You did. Thank
you. All right, thank you, um.
I was gonna call you Senator,
um, Representative.
Patricia Realcaballero. Thank
you so much. And uh Senator
Thornton, you had a comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
do. I guess, um,
Being new to this, I'm
I sort of look at this from a um
kind of a big picture
perspective, and one of the
concerns I, and I think most,
most people have the same
concern. It's the issue around
the inflation that's going on.
Everyone's concerned about the
fact that our inflation rate,
um, you know, they claim it's 3
or 4%, but in actuality, it's
probably closer to 7 to 8%.
And, and so when I look at the
numbers that we just saw and how
our funds are performing. It
seems like the, on the average,
they're performing in between 6
to 8%.
A year.
And so the reality is that
they're just basically uh
Basically keeping track with
inflation.
And if you look at the M2 money
supply, uh, that's really the,
the, the driver of, of inflation
rate in the nation.
So, so, I guess what I'd like to
see from this committee is, is
how are we, I, I guess I'd like
to look at our portfolio
allocation, so that gets down to
either uh one item B.
Or I E or maybe a combination of
the two, where we're looking at
the economic federal economic
outlook over the long term, uh,
but I'd also like to see what
the portfolio allocation is
within each of these investments
and to understand where do they
think that they can perform
better than inflation rate. And
because if we're ever going to
resolve this issue of, of more
outflow than benefits and
contributions. It's not gonna
come just from contributions.
It's got to come from
investment.
returns.
And so the question is, people
say, well, we don't want to be
too risky.
I, I guess I would disagree with
that sometimes being
Not being risky keeps us behind
the curve.
And so I would like to see
where, where there may be an
ability to invest in things that
are outside, uh, or that can,
that can make returns larger
than inflation rate. And so if
we have that opportunity, I'd
like to see something like that.
That make sense? Yes.
Um, and just to reiterate also
cause I said I'm nitpicky like
that, um, on item B port
portfolio allocation as it
relates to inflation, and then
also uh looking at specifics
related to investments for each
of the funds the funds. OK. All
right. I think we've got that.
Um, I wanna go back to, OK,
Senator Stefaniks, who is not
here, but she did.
Send me an email and I think we
included that already, and I'll
ask I'll I'll, I'll uh check in
with her to make sure that we
got what, what she said in her
email to me, um, representative
Silva, you had um some questions
about private equity in it.
Does that sort of relate back to
what uh Senator, um, Thornton is
saying related to investments.
The question on investments.
Yes, sure, thanks. Um, yeah, I
would add not just interest
rates, but also um the high
budget deficits and treasury
yields, um, that we're gonna, I
think, see fluctuate and, and,
uh, increased over time and how
that impacts our all of our
sovereign wealth funds and
the choices we have, so not just
like a report, but I, I'd love
to also.
Have the SAC tell us what are
the choices we have given this
trend. Um, and, and then to
Senator Thornton's point, I
think looking at the risk
comparison of other sovereign
wealth funds across the country,
how much risk are other funds
taking on? How does, how does,
how do ours compare, um, and
then finally, the in-state
private equity looking at that
particular investment in uh the
severance tax permanent fund.
um, how and why it's dragging on
its returns and what are our
choices or options for uh
limiting that drag but still
investing in that and, and maybe
there are some options there.
OK, um, and representative um
Silva is
And we put that into um item B.
Uh, as part of item B. Does that
make sense to you? Yeah, I, I
think it could go in actually
neither C or D if we're looking
at strategic goals and actions,
so if we're looking at choices
that we have given the reports
we've been receiving, um, I
think that it could live there,
um, yeah, just for
clarification. Thank you.
And then, um,
I want to go back to uh Senator
Gonzalez, he brought up a
presentation from the board
chairs, maybe, um,
Senator
Just, you've mentioned that it
might be useful to have the
board chairs, at least the board
chairs come to us and discuss
their strategies.
Oh I sure.
I guess what I would want to.
We don't want to take away
anything from anyone.
And uh we don't want to add to
any because I mean, that's
their.
But uh the, the part that I see
is um.
With the
Large
funds that we have.
Would he give us more power by
having them together or
investment.
as
the investments come in then you
just prorate what goes to who.
So it would not be, but it would
be more of a purchasing power.
You know, within, uh, within the
entire system.
Then being fragmented.
And if anything else, you know,
they can.
They can give us their reasons.
It would work, it would not
work, but.
Doing the same, the same thing
over.
We'll be having the same
discussion next year.
You know, and
And doesn't mean that we'll risk
the entire.
fun
At the same time, just look at a
different
And
We would and that's what I would
want to see that. I do want to
extend that invitation. It would
be nice for um.
For the legislators to meet the
board.
It's also vice versa, extending
an invitation uh.
We.
Something that we have never.
Um
Excuse me. Um,
Uh, Senator, I was gonna call
you Representative
Senator,
does it say representative on
your
That's why I was gonna call your
representative, Senator, uh
Sigueroa, and I know uh
Representative Luhan has to
leave, um, how soon do you have
to leave?
I'm sure, um, so like.
As soon as I ask my question or
just I can be brief. Can you,
can you wait until, because I
had Senator Figuero Chigaroa
first.
Are you willing to. OK, thank
you. Um, all right,
Representative Lujan, and you're
gonna senator in a big way, now
thank you for, thank you,
Senator. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair. Um, I just wanted to say
I, I think the recovering the
majority of what I, uh, I just
want to lend more support to
or the individual pension, um,
discussion that Representative
Cabo Caballero has mentioned, I
have actually been working on
this and talking with different
investment groups and actually
had a um meeting with um SIC
tomorrow, but it just got, just
got canceled and and it's, it's
really important. I think we
have a bigger conversation, have
a panel, I, I just like to say
definitely on that, um,
especially when we have
legislation this last year
regarding.
like the baby bonds, I think
this is a full, a fuller
discussion and really seeing
where the gaps are and where we
can take this and really build
uh build it collaboratively. I
think it's worth very much worth
our, our, um our time and
mission for this uh um committee
to do that. Um,
I would also like to um bring
support to, to looking at what
are the other types of
opportunities for investment and
we're looking at technology and
development and job creation and
those sorts of things and tie
that with what we um we are
spending in HB2 from this last
session because if you all want
to remind us how much money we
put towards those types of uh
advancements or in regarding
energy and um technology, uh, if
you thought the
You had, it's, it's a large
amount, so I'd like to tie those
things together because we as a
body are already making these
investments, um, through the,
um, the state budget, um, of
course, I think it's going to be
in uh very important that we
meet with the sub or have the
subcommittee that's meeting on
all the federal, um, highlights
of what's going on uh with the,
um,
Unpredictability of our economy
right now with the markets, I
think that we need to, um,
highlight what's going on there
in order to make these the
better decisions. I know we want
to have that, you know, look at
the diversity within our economy
and our um energy sector.
However, this, especially even
with the package that attacks
the federal tax package that was
passed.
This morning, early wee morning
is going to really affect what
we uh the dollars that we've
already invested in as a state,
we need to be wiser. We need to
be on top of all those things. I
think that is crucial to our
work.
Looking at the risk, I'll go
into that too. We always ask
about what is that risk
assessment when we see that
there's s stability in only
certain things we can do, so we
need to look at what we did in
2020.
And um with that legislation,
and we also need to look at the
legislation that, uh, Senator um
Gonzalez put forward for the
diversification in our economy
because that is, I think was
mentioned not um
But it was mentioned but not
with that uh specific um
acknowledgement, but by 2040, I
think it is now, we will surpass
the revenues in oil and gas with
that, um, with those
investments, I think we need to
look at that, that's integral to
our work as well and um
All the other things I would
support you. Thank you. Thank
you, uh, Representative uh
Lujan, just, um, I think that um
What you're telling me and what
I heard anyway is that related
to what um
Senator Gonzalez discussed about
purchase power and um
diversification and energy
technology, etc. etc. and how
risky are some of those
investments and whether or not
ERB and PERA are actually
investing in those things. Madam
chair, yes, I think we need to
really develop a a broader
strokes just based on what we're
faced with this time and place
because it's not gonna be to our
advantage, even though it's,
it's part of what we would, you
know, we're moving towards, we
need to be um practical. OK. And
uh thank you, thank you,
representative Muhan, uh,
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I am
going to suggest Madam Chair,
that we do something even
pre-item A, because you have
incredible depth of knowledge
and experience in this area, and
so does your co-chair, Senator
Gonzalez.
Uh, looking at the committee as
a whole, though there is a wide
diversity in experience and
understanding of how these
things work, and I think before
we start examining the options
and what we want to change and
overview of what's determined by
a constitutional language, what
said in state statute, and then
what is done and decided by the
boards, so that then as we
progress through all of these
topics, we can focus on what
repel.
talked about what are the
options, what are the things we
could potentially change and
what would the effect of those
changes be, but if we don't
understand the original
structure that conversation
becomes difficult. So that is
the first thing reiterating, I
would like at every stage to
talk about options if we can,
um, and
I think it's important, Madam
Chair, to get a brief historical
overview of the last 15 years
because we have made some
statutory dramatic changes and
everybody needs to know what was
changed when the effect it's
had, again, so we can talk about
whether we want to make further
changes.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um.
And I just want to comment on
that, um, thank you. I was
thinking that actually and I
what I, I added uh an A, a
national state economy
inflation, we got some of that
this morning, but I think we
need to go into a little deeper
dive on that with maybe some
local or some Nash if we could
bring a national expert, I would
love that. And then the second
thing is, uh, to your comment,
um, um, senator, uh, Figueroa.
Keep looking at your sign and
it's confusing me. Um.
The, the history of the past 15
years, and as it relates to all
these funds and the requirements
by the state constitution so
that we know what per what
constraints we have also, uh,
within and, and as Senator
Gonzalez mentioned earlier, we
don't wanna just like step on
people's toes along the way and
make them feel like they're not
doing their job, um, so yeah, I
think that those are really
important points.
will add an A and a B and and
renumber all of these, and then
add um the changes that were
already discussed. I also want
to go to uh, oh, did you have
another comment? I did, Madam
Chair, I just wanna make sure it
doesn't get lost because your
knowledge is so indepth thank
you backing up to the very
basics of what are the inflows,
because we talked only today
about investment growth. What
are the inflows to these?
funds, um, because that we have
control of and change as well.
And what are the outflows? What
are the benefits and how have
they been changed? Not everybody
on the committee understands all
of those pieces yet either. So
that might be a good starting
point. And thank you for raising
that because I know that as each
of these boards go through the
IR the ERB and the para and some
of these other boards as they go
through, they actually make
specific recommendations.
On how to invest, and they have
over overarching policy on
investment strategies. So I
think that those are really
important points, and I really
thank you for bringing that up
because they make decisions as a
board, as on their on their
policy of, you know,
And I, I, it's been a long time,
guys, but.
How their investments.
Overall, are going to be
approached. So I, I
I think that that that is a
really important point, and
thank you for raising that. Um,
OK, uh.
Representative Duncan.
I was gonna call him senator, so
I Senator Duncan, no, thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
the definition of insanity is
doing the same things over and
over and expecting different
results.
So I guess I'm going to go
against uh uh Senator Gonzalez
and say when you have to
sometimes you might have to step
on toes.
If we've got good old boys that
are giving um work to good old
boys, but the outcome is not
what we needed, then maybe it's
time we changed that.
So I'll make that comment 1st.
2nd comment with this new
administration, there might be
some really good opportunities
in oil and gas, nuclear, coal,
um, and I don't think we should,
uh, turn away from that.
Um, that's who brought us to the
dance, and we need to dance with
her as long as we can.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have to say.
So I think um oh,
I'm sorry, um, Representative
Rayval Caballero. Thank you,
Madam Chair. It, um,
Some of the discussion.
Um
Got me to think about a little
bit more detail. When we get the
presentation from the investment
council. This is really
important presentation because
this is
You know,
a huge pot of investment that
we've been making over the past
few years also, that we have to
have a careful understanding of.
Um, and going back to the
discussion about ERB and Perra,
and what ERB is doing.
Versuser, and they have
different dynamics. We
understand that. But one of the
things that ERB does very
effectively in the past
presentations has been how the
board has been monitoring.
Um, the stock market volatility.
That's an important
understanding that we need to
have before we become critical
necessarily on uh in a negative
way about our investments,
because there are many risk
factors involved, but there's
also some very positive reasons
why we invest in the markets
that we do, um, and also how are
is the volunteer volatility and
those risks.
factors, how do they impact on a
regular basis, the movement of
those investments and where, and
getting a good understanding of
that, I think, um.
Then gives us reason why we
should look at ERB as a model.
When it comes to how they're um
positively affecting their
investments. That was, that was
at one point, the other 2nd and
last was um
In all of our discussions and I
bring it up in all of our
committees, every single
committee is that we've got to
tie in our discussions to the
constant state of poverty that
this state is in.
The constant state of poverty.
So how do
Does what we do.
Ultimately uplift our
decision uh population.
Affect our decision making when
it comes to uplifting that
constant state of poverty.
Uh,
Representative Luhan brought up
the baby bonds, other ways in
which we introduced, um, we
talked about benefits and good
salary, um, but
Ultimately, how do we, how are
we going to measure this against
uplifting. We now received a
report just recently, I believe
this week, how our retiring,
aging population.
Is not the beneficiary of good.
Um, of, of, of a good econ
economic standing on their part.
It in fact, because of the
global national and state
economy.
They're gonna be in a constant
state of poverty. So whatever
they worked for all these years,
Madam Chair, to retire, not just
in the public sector but the
private sector as well. They're
now aging into, it's not really
a good retirement because now
they're going to have to penny
pinch and they have to cut in
their daily activities and
expenses and whatever they
thought they were going to be
able to languish in.
In order to just stay living
until
Their, their journey is over. So
Every one of our reports, I
think, should address.
What we do and what that impact
is in lifting us out of poverty
because even our workforce, they
may, they're earning, they're
still earning.
They're not earning a living
wage.
Yet they're having to make more
contributions into their
retirement health care system,
more contributions into all of
their uh benefits across the
board.
So by the time their take home
pay, they take home their pay.
It's barely enough to meet their
day to day expenses.
So again,
We've done very little.
In making in changing the
dynamic of poverty in our state,
with all that we've done. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative, I will just as
an underlying value.
Uh, keep that in our economic
status is New Mexico's economic
status.
And where we sit.
At this point in time. So thank
you for that. Um,
Uh, Representative Cerrado,
thank you, Madam Chair, and I
apologize. Um, I wanted, I have
a kind of dumb question. Uh, do
we also look at ECTF, the uh,
early childcare, uh, trust fund
as well.
I believe we do I'm just curious
because I didn't see it on the
list of what we oversee as well,
so I'd love it if that was
included as one of the
presentations and if we had a
deeper understanding of that Mr.
Simon or Mr. Gray, do you wanna
just, uh, come to the podium and
address that question.
uh representative, uh, yes, the
early childhood education Care
Trust Fund is ECTF is managed by
State Investment council, I
think, um, I, I don't know the
specific jurisdiction of the
committee, but I'm certainly a
state investment council, they
manage that fund and a slew of
other smaller funds so think
about I'm sure, thank you, uh,
as well, um, Brandon, um, yeah,
if we could have that included
throughout uh the agenda. I just
want to make sure because I did
notice it was the LFC report,
but it wasn't in the
presentation. And, and as I've
been noted, noted, I, I've
forgotten things past, but I
don't.
remember hearing about ECTF in
the past, so that'd be helpful.
Uh, and I do want to uh think
Representative Robo Caballero
for giving us the broader
perspective overall. Um, and I
apologize, I got distracted, but
sometimes when you start seeing
things reminds you of these
other 5 things, so, uh, but
your, your notes are important
when we talk about uh $87.2
billion of New Mexico's
investments and holdings. Thank
you. So please keep that in mind
as you're presenting to us in
the future, because you will be
presenting to us, um, OK, so
here's my
I thought regarding all of these
comments is um Paul.
I'm still learning his name. Um,
Paul and I are gonna
And Christina are gonna go back.
I have a pretty extensive notes.
We're gonna revise this. I'm
gonna send it out to you all to
the committee. I will give you a
deadline and probably will be
like 2 days or 3 days, haven't
come back to us, revise it one
more time, and then we'll have
it ready for our, our first
meeting, um, I will be adding A
and B and renumbering everything
to include the national state.
Economy, including inflation in
the stock market, be um the
state constitution, all um the
history of our uh funds in the
past 15 years. I think these are
really important issues that we
need to kind of get into before
we move forward, um, into the
specifics of each of these
funds. So unless anyone has any
objection to that, that.
How I would like to proceed.
Is that good?
So.
All right, are there any
comments and I really wanna
apologize to all of you cause I
missed this morning having each
of you to say who you are and so
I'm gonna go back really quick
and I'll start with the
Representative Lord, what
district do you represent?
I should have done that in the
beginning, sorry. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, Ste Lord
representing Bernalo County,
Torrance County, uh, most of
Torrance County and part of
Albuquerque. Thank you.
Like man, uh Mark Duncan, I
represent West side of San Juan
County.
Good to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Vice Chair. Uh, I'm Linda
Serrano. I represent the South
Side of Santa Fe. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
Natalie Figueroa, but I am
senator and it's District 18 in
Albuquerque.
Uh, thank you, chair, vice
chair, uh, Representative Sarah
Silva, House District 53 Donana
and Nontero Counties.
State senator Roberto Bobby J
Gonzalez.
And represent part of Los
Alamos, Viriba, Santa Fe, and
mostly towns.
Madam Chair, my name is Pat
Woods. I'm state senator
representing Curriqua Union and
Harding Senate District 7.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Anthony Thornton. I go by
aunt, uh, representing District
19 East Mountains of
Albuquerque, representing
Bernardino, Sandoval, Torrance
County, and.
Parts of Santa Fe as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Patricia
Royan Caballero. I represent
House District 13, which is the
farthest southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque.
Not the South Valley, southwest
quadrant. Thank you.
And I'm Representative Barrego,
representing
District 17, which is Cottonwood
Mall area basically, that's what
I, how I like to describe it.
Um, OK, so with that, um, I'm
going to ask for a motion to
adopt the work plan as we
discussed it.
Tentatively adding the
information that we discussed
today.
We have a motion and we have a
second, um, any objections?
If not, then we have a work plan
and I just wanna thank all of
you for being here. I was hoping
that we would get through this a
little bit quicker. I think
probably the um memorial service
might be happening at the state
police as we're speaking here,
so if any of you know where uh
state polices, it's on Jackwire
Road and um Sorios, I think, so
with that, uh, we are adjourned.
Thank you.
