welcome everyone.
We have the agenda here with
public comments.
around 3:15.
And uh we'll see how the meeting
goes here. Our, uh, chairs
representative Johnson will be
late, but she is in route as so
we will begin the meeting just
so that we don't, uh, get behind
on our agenda.
So we will start with um
introductions. We'll start with
our legislators here and then
we'll move to staff and then out
to the audience there with our
with our guests. So we'll start
on this side with uh
Representative Alcon.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I am representative Elio
Alcon High represent District 6,
which is part of uh Cibola and
McKinley County.
In my district I have 9 Navajo
chapters and the whole
pueblozuni. Thank you everybody
for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just want to say um thank you
everybody for letting me sit in
for just a short time. I'm
Jennifer Jones, Representative
Jones, this is my district,
District 32. It's Luna County,
part of Donana, and Hidalgo
County as well, so I wanted to
come by even though I'm, I'm
actually on the way to Santa Fe.
I'll be able to stay for a
little bit, wanted to come by
and just say, welcome everybody
and also take the opportunity to
thank the Fort Sill tribe for
their, their contribution to
My district, to our county, um,
not just economically because
they have this beautiful state
of the art, um, truck stop, but
also, uh, in, in their attempts
to be a member of the community
and and their their cultural
contribution as well. So thank
you, chairwoman and all of the
members. I appreciate you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
5
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Jones.
Uh, hello to everybody. Glad to
be here. Martin Zamora, state,
uh, state representative of the
house, District 63. I covered
the south half of Curry, the
north half of Roosevelt, Debaca,
Guadalupe and a touch of San
Miguel County. Glad to be here
with you guys today. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman. I
feel like we're racing each
other across the state at these
meetings. We just saw each other
yesterday at military and
Veterans Affairs, but I'm John
Blockhouse District 51. I'm in
Alamo Gordo, so about an hour
and a half away, very pretty
drive, great to be here with
everybody and uh I'm excited.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee and
members of the audience,
I'm Charlotte Little. I come
from the Pueblos of San Felipe
and Taos, and I lived in I was
elected in and represent House
District 68, which is in the
northwest corner of Albuquerque,
the city of Albuquerque. So glad
to be here today. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm Luis
Terrazas, uh, district 39, your
neighbor right here, right in,
in Grant County, Grant, uh,
Hidalgo and Katherine County and
so uh it's a pleasure to be
here. I've been wanting to come
here and it just seems like our
schedules aren't, uh, ever, you
know, never work out. Like I
said, some of the members here
were in
in uh we we were in Santa Rosa
yesterday and so here we are
today, but uh I I love the, the
uh
Renovation and the expansion, it
looks nice and it's a pleasure
to be here today. God bless you.
Thank you and staff, go ahead
and introduce yourselves.
Uh, good morning, everyone.
Thank you for hosting us. I'm
Nicole Waispack. I'm a
researcher with the Legislative
Council Service.
Thank you. And we'll start on
this side and move to uh into
our audience and if you'd like
to, do we want to give them mic
or?
Oh, we can bring one over. OK.
Good morning, Jennifer Jimenoki
for Spache Tribe chairwoman.
I'm Doug Spos. I'm for the
Apache Tribe, a committee
member.
Good morning everybody. My name
is Christiane Harvey. I'm the
executive director of the
Greater Luna County Economic
Opportunity Council, and I'm
also the designated economic
development office for Luna
County, New Mexico. I'm
delighted to be here and I've
arranged an exciting tour for
you this afternoon, a private
tour of the historic Luna County
Courthouse.
Good morning. My name is Nelly
Hartford. I am Port Saura Warm
Springs Apache tribe's cultural
coordinator. It's nice to meet
you.
How are you? I'm Gabriel Ramos.
I'm a Senate, Senate candidate
for District 28 and a past the
chair of Indian and Cultural
Affairs, and it's so wonderful
to see all of you.
Again. Good morning. I'm Thora
Padilla, and I'm president for
the Mescalerropache tribe, and
I'll go ahead and introduce our
other council members here that
have joined us.
Um, we have the Fraser Plata.
She's our treasurer for for the
tribal council. We also have
Idella Starr, councilwoman.
We have Alfred La Paz,
councilman.
We have Jacob Daai. He's our
secretary for tribal council.
We have Robert Rice, also tribal
council.
And then Melver Cervantes our
general counsel.
And way over there in the corner
is one of our lobbyists, Kim
Leant. Thank you.
Oh, you got me. Sorry.
Last but not least, Gabe
Aguilar, who's also with our
tribal council. He's over here.
I got it.
OK
So
Thank you. Thank you. And um so
just to remind everybody about
the mics, try to have one
microphone at a time if I shut
it off, it's just because in the
webcast we'll get a lot of
feedback, but thank you, thank
you for joining us. I'm Senator
Shannon Pinto. I represent
District 3, which is way on the
other end of the other part of
the state, but welcome, welcome,
and thank you for hosting us,
um, as we come down and make our
rounds with the interim Indian
Affairs Committee. I think the
last time.
I was here was actually um.
I think it was with my
grandfather, uh, when there was
uh.
Yeah, it was the same room, uh,
same place, and a lot of times
changed a lot of improvement,
and I thank you for, you know,
our, our tribes, nations, and
pueblos for coming together and
supporting each other and before
we actually really begin, we'll
have a representative little
give us a short blessing as as
we come down here to our fellow
neighbors.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. And as we move
forward, we will be a 3 day
meeting. We are here at the Kila
Flats and then we will go into
Las Cruces the next 2 days at
Burrell College and then at New
Mexico State University, which I
believe is right next door.
So a lot going on this week. I
know our Apache nations,
especially the hickory, are also
having a swearing in this week.
It was really difficult after
the date was set um for you
guys. I'm glad you were able to
to get together before and um,
you know, it's always great when
we have leadership come in and
also uh to pay our respects for
those that moved out.
And then we also have the Navajo
Nation Fair also this Saturday,
so it's.
It's been a busy week, uh, even
with the 4 day, uh, with the
holiday.
So.
We have the welcome and status
and then an update from Luna
County. We'll break for lunch
and then the agrovoltas and then
an update from the IRD. So, um,
and then unless there's any
other pending announcements or
anything, we will move on with
our agenda, meeting members. You
don't want the air conditioner,
that is not as cold as it's
cold.
Oh.
Your, your chaperone is not
here. OK, so let's begin with
our
Um
Welcome and status update.
So
Jennifer
The chair of the Fort Sill
Apache and then um make sure you
introduce yourself and then if
anybody's joining you and don't
forget we're webcasting, so
thank you very much for joining
us and thank you, we sure
appreciate it. Welcome.
Good morning everybody. My name
is Jennifer Himanoki.
Thank you so much for Vice Chair
Pinto for allowing us to, uh,
host you and be available for
what, you know, anything that
needs to.
That that you may need.
Um,
Welcome to our reservation. My
name is Jennifer. I already said
that. Sorry, I'm a little
nervous.
OK, so I did, we did mention my
business committee member
Douglas Stores is also here in
the.
In the crowd in Naomi Hartford,
who is our cultural coordinator,
Tippo Macra,
everything she does on the
cultural side.
Uh, this is our 3rd meeting
hosted by your, by your
committee and, uh, we do, we
welcome you back, you know,
we've had such a busy year and
we're happy that
You know, you're able to come
see our new facility and our
Our new truck stop that we have
built and also showing you the
space that we have now for
meetings and restaurants and.
To
You have to turn it off for a
little bit?
I just
position.
OK.
So this used to be a restaurant
smoke shop and it is currently
used as a restaurant, uh, and we
moved most of our facilities
next door, uh, with showers and
bathrooms and lounge areas and
trucker parking. It's just an
easy way for people driving by
to, you know, get a, get a quick
rest or a bite to eat when
they're on the road.
Um.
I'll go ahead and start by
telling you a few things about
our tribe.
We are proud, federally
recognized tribe.
And we continue to work to
achieve our desire to return to
our homelands that my great
grandfather was part, you know,
lived and lived here.
On these lands. So we're really
proud, I'm really proud to be
able to say that and hoping that
um
By trying to
Address the needs in this whole
community we're able to bring
more economic development here
and provide more space for our,
we just obtained a 2000 in 2022
we received 1800 additional
acres to add on to this 30 acre
reservation.
And so with those lands, we plan
on putting housing and different
type of
Economic development activities
that, you know, we right now we
have a wastewater facility as
well.
But I wanted to touch base on uh
You can even read my writing,
sorry.
Uh,
Some of the, I want to touch
base on some of the capital
outlay projects that we received
and wanted to thank the
legislators for all the
assistance that you've had in
the past. We have a fire
substation funds right now and
we have cultural center funds to
also develop our the corner back
here, we have uh educational.
Educational historical uh
placement.
And we're trying to uh expand on
that as well as provide a public
health and safety, like with the
public, with the fire station to
help with the county. Right now
we want to partner with Luna
County to get to, to be able to
get some of those.
accomplishments done.
So, in the past, we did the
wastewater treatment with our
capital outlay funds. We also
have a reuse system where we we
can reuse and fill up tankers
for get for.
For fire trucks that need it in
the area. There's um, so the,
we're able to do a bunch of
different things that we weren't
able to do in the past.
So, part of that is
Part of that is our partnerships
in the community. We really
appreciate our local county,
state, and tribal partners and
I really, really believe that we
have to nurture those
relationships and be available
and try to help out as many
people as we can as we're, you
know, making these transitions
and these, I also wanted to
announce a uh plans for our TO
office to be
housed here on site on my
reservation.
So that's gonna, that's coming
in the beginning of 2025 is when
it's budgeted for. We also are
looking at an environmental
protection.
Office
Right now, we currently, we
currently have a baseline data
for PM 2.5. We've been
collecting for I would say 2.5
years. So we have a good
baseline, we want to have more
permanent structure for
monitoring. We also
Conduct UST compliance for
underground storage tanks here,
uh, we, we also maintain the
drinking water system sampling
here on the, the site. So we're
able to keep track of, uh, and
do all the reporting
requirements and that's a lot
that's on the federal side, uh
for the EPA.
And so we're bringing a lot of
federal and tribal funds to this
property, you know,
approximately, I think it's 18
to $20 million was brought in
from federal funds and tribal
funds to finish off the gas
station here. And so, you know,
we're really excited. There's,
we have a lot of, a lot of
people have been very great uh
through all this process and
we're just, we're just really
excited to, to be able to be
here and announce some of the
things that
You know,
That I wanted, that we wanted
you to see. I mean, we wanted
you guys to visit our property,
see it.
And we want to get to know you
very well, and I will go ahead
and let our cultural coordinator
speak because I, I'm getting, I
can't even read my own writing
and uh
and uh she has a, she has a more
in-depth.
Historical background that it's
going to be able to clarify some
things and at the end, I welcome
any questions that you may have
so that we can try to help
answer anything that you might
have uh regarding anything that
we want to talk about. So, go
ahead.
Hello.
Again, um.
I just wanted to say it's great
to meet everyone. Um, I haven't
had the chance a little closer.
I haven't had the chance, um, to
meet anyone here, I believe, um,
so it's a great opportunity. I
wanna say it's really good to
see, um, we have relations at
Mescalero family since probably
1913 has come and visited and
gone back and forth, so it's
really good to see some familiar
faces and new faces, and I'm
just very grateful and happy to
be here. Um, as she said, I'm
the cultural coordinator, so
that is the center of what I see
and work with on a daily basis,
advocate for all those types of
things, so.
These opportunities to educate
um other people are.
Very humbling and I'm just very
grateful for that.
So, um, I'll get back to uh what
I have written. Um, welcome to
our nation's reservation. I'm
grateful to be here today in
this place. My last visit here
was spent cooking food out back
over an open fire as our people
have done for generations.
Followed by traditional song and
dance, and most importantly,
spending time together with our
families and community.
My name is Naomi Hartford.
And I am the cultural
coordinator for the Fort Sill
Chia Warm Springs Apache tribe.
I wear a multitude of hats in my
role, such as Section 106 or
TIPOW NAR cultural collections,
photo collections, archives,
cultural classes, and cultural
activities.
Language preservation and
revitalization efforts along
with a multitude of other other
educational needs of our
community.
Sorry, let me readjust so I can
not be so distracted.
OK. One thing that I have come
to find in this role working
with federal agencies, private
institutions, universities, and
occasional phone calls by the
public.
Is the lack of understanding of
our tribe's history and
identity.
Just about anyone I encounter
while I am working on these
obligations owed to our tribe
set up by laws created by the
United States government.
Has some sort of preconceived
notion of our identity along
with
Serving our tribe and completing
the obligations, I educate
countless individuals on our
history.
There is a distinct separation
from those that truly do the
work to hear our voices and make
a difference. And those that
barely meet the minimum
requirements.
The widespread of misinformation
of not only our history, but our
identity over time has caused
undue harm to our sovereign
nation.
Misinformations get spread far
and wide through false claim
after claim along with
embellishment, embellished
accounts of our history by those
interested in our story, but not
as us as a people.
We have been through so many
hardships and our sole focus has
always been on the well-being of
our community, made up of our
mothers.
Children and everyone in
between.
This has unfortunately created
an opportunity for people
outside of our community to gain
attention and take our voice
while we are overlooked time and
time again.
We have survived and overcome
unimaginable hardships with
beautiful resilience that has
been passed down through
generations.
I grew up knowing.
Who I was as a child taught to
me by my mother. I am a Chea
Warm Springs Apache and should
always be proud and grateful of
that.
And those leaders that made a
way for us today.
I always wonder while coming
across 100 hundreds of
publications written about us,
if they would even care to know
the truth or if the fictional
delusions will always be what we
are reduced to.
Usually monetary personal gain,
um, a lot of times things are
written and the things that are
obtainable, so if you guys have
ever been interested in learning
about our history. You order
something online and this these
are the types of examples I'm
referring to. Um, a lot of the
books written about us, um.
Because of uh the interest in
our leadership.
Today,
I am here to teach you of our
people who are still here,
despite the choices and rights
that were taken from us for so
long.
We are a nation and ongoing
entity since time immemorial. We
are not some sort of group of
people that claim ancestry from
a historical tribe, we are the
tribe. Why do we have such
interest in New Mexico and our
reservation. Why would we want
to locate to this place? Well,
I'll tell you, this is our home
territory.
Our home territory is made up of
the largest portion is southwest
New Mexico, Southeast Arizona,
and adjacent Mexico.
Before first contact, there were
estimated 3000 to 5000 of our
people throughout our home.
What does that mean?
That means our food, our
medicine, our stories, our
beliefs and identity are in this
place. Our entire tribe was
forcibly removed from the area
almost 140 years ago, not only
physically but also
intentionally erased and severed
from the connection to our
history and ancestors. Our
families were taken from this
place and imprisoned in Florida,
then taken from each other. Men
were not allowed to be with
their families. Our children
were ripped from their mothers
and sent off to Carlisle Indian
School. Our children having the
largest per capita death.
In their history.
To never return home or on
occasion be sent home to die.
While in prison, we were forced
to speak English, forced to be
Christians, and forced to learn
the white man's way. After our
time in Florida, we moved to
Alabama during this time, our
people died at a rapid rates. We
were then moved to Fort Sill,
located in southwest Oklahoma,
which is where
We were located during the
longest length of our
imprisonment. We were told that
we would remain there and never
return to our home.
Toward the end of our 27 year
imprisonment, they started
discussing what they would do
with us and the place we were
promised that no that was
promised is no longer to be ours
but be turned into an army base.
They allowed some of our tribal
members to visit different
places to help determine where
we would be moved. We were able
to visit this place along with
other places, including Mescular
reservation. We were informed
again that we would never be
allowed to return to our home.
Things started changing in
Oklahoma and they decided they
no longer wanted tribes and
areas together, most of them
were were reservations. Ours was
not, so it's.
Different terminology. They
would then place them on single
allotments throughout their home
territories. The government,
after years of discussion, made
a decision to allow a portion of
our tribe the choice to leave
Oklahoma and to join the
Mescalera tribe. Those that
chose to remain with the tribe
or who we, who are here today.
We since being removed in 1886,
long to return to our home.
And made the decision to hold
out until such return was
possible. Our people have worked
in whatever capacity they were
able sense we were first
imprisoned to repatriate to our
home.
So I just kind of wanted to give
you a little bit of our history,
um, because there's nowhere to
order a book on Amazon or kind
of Google. Um, I, this is part
of kind of what I do, so I'm
kind of
Um, approaching guys in the way
that I educate with the
different um institutions and
things that I um work with is
anytime you have any questions
about a tribe, always reach out
to a tribe. Anytime you hear
information about a tribe, a lot
of times, um, you can go to
their website and they have
history, contact information,
things like that. Um, and
A big reason for this is because
it, it happens everywhere with
our tribe, unfortunately, taking
us from this area and not having
that physical connection, um,
having those.
Um,
Sorry, relationships, building
relationships, um,
We have a lot of.
Things that need to be done
within our community, much less
those types of things happen
outside of our community. So we
have to care for ourselves, um,
we made an effort, um, our, uh,
tribe funded some travel for
people to come here when we came
in May. Um, I got to um
participate and um witness
people seeing a yucca plant. I
mean, you guys see them all the
time, um, you see so many plants
and so many things
things that are fundamental to
our identity and the way we
lived life, um, and there are a
lot of people, you know, 140
years later, that have never had
that opportunity, um, when
you're relocated hundreds of
miles away, and the majority of
our tribe is spread throughout
the United States.
Um, I believe there's only even
a third of the tribe that's
located within the area that I
am physically at. So I'm very
used to um needing to reach out,
um, do things via Zoom, you
know, those types of stuff, uh,
to get people educated, um, and
to reconnect people so we get to
have like very, I get, I get to
have a really fun job finding
new ways to kind of come and
connect people to things. So,
um, I'm very
Excited to be here. If you have
any questions about any part of
our history or any of those
other things, um.
Please let me know. Um, I would
encourage you to also visit um
our exhibit that we have been
blessed to be able to put on
display um to kind of
Give people an understanding
which those types that part of
our history is usually what's
well known. What is not is the
connection, um.
So, if you guys have any
question, I would encourage them
now. If not, feel free to reach
out to me.
At a later time.
And also to chairwoman.
I think you does that conclude
your presentation.
Thank you. Um, before we move on
to other meds, we're gonna have
a representative Royal Caballero
introduced herself.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
members of the audience and
those watching. My name is
Patricia Royal Caballero and I'm
a little sentimental this
morning, uh, because the last
time that we had a meeting here.
I um was proud to bring my, my
father, uh, who was 94 at the
time, and he really wanted to
come and uh visit and be on his
homelands, uh, and I wanna
welcome you all to the
Homelands of the Pitromanso Twa.
Pueblo, uh, tribe, San Juan de
Guadalupe. This is our part of
our homeland. This is our
homeland, and our homelands.
As have been depicted in the in
the uh history that was provided
by Fort Sill, Intersect, um, as
a parent tribe, our tribe has
been the parent tribe. We have
intersected um throughout the
generations with the Mescalero
Apache. I'm proud to have them
here today and as they know in
their research, they know that
our tribe, uh, having been the
parent tribe of Homeland tribe
here honor our presence, uh, we
honor the presence.
of um those that we have joined
in relationships with and so um
I'm happy to be here and
representing not just being a
member of the tribe, but uh I
mean of this committee, but
being a member of my tribe today
representing um our presence and
honoring uh my father who was
from the Casia family. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you,
Representative, and thank you
for the background.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman and thank you all for
the presentation. Thanks for the
hospitality. I, I really
appreciate that and I first of
all just wanna say it's, it's
great to see that there has been
such economic development in the
tribe. Can you tell me a little
more about what lands you guys
currently have and then what,
what is your, your plan in the
future, uh, what, what do you,
what do you want to do to expand
or or any other.
Economic development projects
that you see, Madam Chair.
OK, so we have, we have this 30
acre reservation, then we have
the 1880 acres that I was
recently added. We have a 20
acres near Truth or Consequence,
and
We also have some federal trust
lands in Arizona as well. The
Kochie stronghold.
We also have lands in Oklahoma.
Um, this is the only reservation
status that we have is right
here on the 30 acres. Everything
is trust lands, but they're not
a reservation. We had a
reservation proclamation from
the Department of Interior in
2011.
So
Oh, economic development, you
know, in the, in the back, we're
working on trying to get the
infrastructure needed for uh
electricity, water, to that
property, uh, to be able to do
housing, um, apartments or, you
know, some type of living
conditions or living places that
we can bring.
Uh, bring our people as well as
employ more people in the area
because there's probably a low,
uh, there's not a lot of places
that you can live in this
immediate area. You have to
travel either, you know, to
dimming or to Las Cruces, but if
uh we can provide some type of
uh you know, living assistance
or
Uh, any type of activity like
that. Uh, we have a, let's see.
The cultural centers in the in
the planning, the.
Uh, a solar energy project we
were working on. Uh, so there's
a lot of things that are coming
down and about, you know, 10
years or so. But you know, me as
a newly elected chairwoman from
October to now and everything
coming across the plate, you
know, we're still in, we're
working on a master planning for
the whole tribe because we have
restructured a lot of the things
in the tribe that weren't
working and that were
reevaluating a lot of our, our,
our um
Past plans. And so things are
being changed drastically that
we're trying to make work, but
we're also trying to honor the
projects that we already
received funding for and make
sure that we can kind of work
around those projects to add on.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman and thank you for that
answer and
Can I add something?
Oh yeah, go ahead. In order to
repatriate, um, it is necessary
to have jobs and resources at
the location. Um, in order to
support the tribal members that
live here, I work with a lot of
tribal members that are um very
interested in moving and being
here in the area.
Um, but in order to meet all
their basic needs and things
like that, we have to really
kind of plan.
Um, to meet those needs for them
to be able to have somewhere to,
you know, go grocery shopping,
uh, make sure they have an
education, um, make sure that
they're able to um
Have jobs and homes and roads
and all of those things, uh, so
repatriation is an ongoing
process of slow development,
sometimes, as I'm sure you all
have experience with um.
That is greatly facilitated as
we implement um.
Economic opportunities to
support people's basic needs
because that is, you know.
present day.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and,
and I totally agree. I think if
you guys are looking forward to
building houses, creating
economic development. It seems
like you guys really have a lot
of patches of different places
that you could choose, right, so
it could be here, it could be
into your seat, it could be in
in Arizona for all we know, so I
think that's very good that
you're thinking forward in that
way, and I, I do also want to
just thank Mescalero Apache for
being here today. I think that's
so awesome to see, see them here
and I'm neighbors with them, so.
You know, we're close, we're
friends, so I appreciate that
and I also I was in Florida last
week and I was visiting the old
fort out there and it's so cool
they they have plaques about the
Chirico Apache who were taken
and put there, and they actually
have on the walls still
engravings from that time there
of the tribal ceremonial
dancers, and I would just
recommend people put that if
you're writing your history
books, I would love to to see
more about that, so thank you so
much, Madam Chair, and
Final question, your website, do
you have any publications about
the history of your tribe, like
if I could order a magazine or
some kind of history book.
I don't want to. I appreciate
that question because um a lot
of people don't quite
understand, um.
Kind of how sovereign nation
operate and all the needs we
have to meet and sometimes we
have limited services and
abilities to do those types of
things. So, um, as I said, I'm
the cultural coordinator and in
my department, the cultural
department. I have me and I have
an assistant. And we also work
with our tribal historian who is
not a full-time, um, so he kind
of does consulting as needed.
Um, and
I do probably the job of 7
different people.
So that is one thing that we've
discussed at length is writing
some sort of publication on our
history, um.
Because we've never really had a
need for that before now. Um, so
we just shared our history
within our community, and we
never realize the.
Effect it would have on letting
people tell and retell um the
history or cause it's usually
some sort of fascination with a
part of one of our leaders or a
part of our history, um, and to
that, that's just normal, that
is a part of who you are and our
identity. So I think for a
really long time, um, it was
never even considered to do
something like that, um, and so.
That is something that we would
like to work on, um,
establishing a TIO office here
and kind of adding more staff
and being able to fund things,
um, and grow my department to
where there's actually 7
different people doing my job
instead of just me, um, will be
very instrumental in allowing
that to happen. Um, but yes, I,
I'm glad you brought that up
because I totally wholeheartedly
agree and we would like to do
something like that. But there
is, um, history on our website.
Um, so you
You can always go there and it
gives a really, we have a really
good description and basic
history of who we are.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just, I appreciate that and I
think that's so important, but
also I, I don't know how many
elders you guys have. I would
hate for them to pass without.
Giving the history to the next
generation, so that keeps me up
at night.
So, uh, thanks for prioritizing
that. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
thank you, Chairwoman Hiunoki,
and I don't know your name. It's
not Naomi.
Oh, Naomi.
You told me about Naomi.
Glad you're here, and Naomi, I,
I do need your contact info, um,
because it's not here and I
would love to have that. I
appreciate you having an open
door to to ask questions,
especially, and it seems very
basic that you would say ask the
tribe, but yes, we need to do
that, right? And, and so I, I'm
going to get your contact info
and and uh use that, but I, I
have a couple of other things
too. Um, chairwoman, you
mentioned that the Department of
the Interior gave you
reservation proclamation and
2011 just for this area right
here.
OK. So, so the other areas that
you discussed that you talked
about, uh, surrounding here even
into Arizona, would you, would
you be looking for the
opportunity to add those to the
reservation? Is, is that what I
understand?
So no, those, the only ones
that, that the only one that
we're going to add to this
reservation is the, the land
sitting directly adjacent to us.
And it's the 1800 acres we
received on the land swap with
the New Mexico land office and
uh the like the truth or
consequence that's in, it's in
an area that is yeah, it's very
remote. It's hard to get to
access to it because we're
almost, we're in the middle of a
A hunting refuge, so it's kind
of, it's, you know, it's more
going to be a primitive area for
camping and tribal members that
want to see cultural significant
areas that they can visit and uh
camp out there like, um, but
also the coach he's stronghold
is also within the stronghold
campgrounds. So we have the, the
lands inside the campground and
so we're working on uh
establishing some type of
facility or
Cabin or some type of facility
that can uh promote uh visiting
and camping and recreational
type, uh, for that lands. Uh, so
those are the, the, the only one
would be the 1880 acres and
right now we're working on, uh,
we did have a turnover in our
legal, so we, we kind of
revamped our whole legal
strategy, so we have a new
attorneys on board. So we do
have an attorney here, uh,
located in New Mexico. He's work
he's helping us work on our feed
to trust application.
Uh, for the 1800 acres. So, um,
he, uh, so he's, he's been
working on that, um, he has had
a death in the family, so he's
kind of been out of, out of
pocket for the last month and a
half, but uh we are making a
little bit of progress and
hoping to get that uh officially
designated as those reser added
to this, this piece of this
parcel of land, so this
reservation.
I think we had a um a bit of a
discussion about uh.
Um,
There's what, 180 around so with
the additional a little under
2000 and I was thinking about
housing and all those types of
things and um once you start
breaking it up,
And giving handing out an acre
or so it runs out really quick.
So, um, there's a lot of
conversation of maybe they'd
have to live in Oakland area,
like, you know, different things
like that. Um, our tribe is made
up of 814815 tribal members as
well. Most people don't know
that about us, um.
Here's my history again, uh,
little history, we were, there
were about 3 to 5000 of us um
pre contact. Um, there were
approximately 500 when we were
imprisoned in 1886, and then,
um, I, I believe around 164, um,
that left our um tribe and went
to Mescalero in 1913, and the
remaining 84 are who we are
descended from, so we went from
300 to 5000
And down to 500 and through that
time of imprisonment instead of
growing.
Um, we again went down to 264
people, so that I think uh when
people don't realize and
understand those types of
things, they get confused about
kind of.
Different things about our
history as well.
For our community, rather.
And yeah, thank you, Madam
Chair. I just have to say you're
doing your part and and
increasing those numbers as I
understand. How many children do
you have, Naomi?
I have 6 children. You have 6,
and, and the chairwoman.
Very good.
Yes, well, yeah, that, that's,
that's very good, good for your
tribe. So we are very interested
in the future. Yes, I understand
that because that's a huge
commitment as a mom of several
children. I understand that. But
one more thing I just wanted to
say and and kind of a repeat of
of when I introduced myself is
that I just want to thank you
for, for your contribution to
this county because this is the
the population center of my
district and, and I do
appreciate the opportunity.
To partner with you on on the uh
the fire fire department that
you, you have planned here and
with my capital outlay, I'm
proud to do that. I know that a
lot of the people who live here
already are going to benefit
from you being here, and I
appreciate you very much. So,
thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
presenters, you did a great,
have done a great job, uh, I
have a question on you, you
mentioned $200 million that was
allocated to from the federal
government for the
For the truck stop is that
already uh all done or where are
you on that?
So that up to 20 million was uh
with the uh cost of the facility
that we built. So only about 10,
approximately 1 million was uh
HUD grant. So it was the Indian
community block grant.
And so that's 10. The rest was
tribal funds.
Which is that was that strictly
gaming revenue or is it other
things as well?
Yeah, it was just from the
income we made from the gaming
our economics and funding is
what we put into it.
Thank you for that clarity.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora. Representative Frazas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. Uh, I'm gonna try
to pronounce your name. Is it
Jiminokiki.
Did I do OK? Himanokio it's um
my husband is Comanche Nation,
so it's a Comanche name. Thank
you. And then of course, uh.
Um, Naomi Wright, thank you very
much for your presentation. So
you're talking about um housing
here and the housing and then
I'm, I'm just listening to what
you're saying you've got 8150
members. You've got 1880 acres,
you're talking about possibly an
acre per person or is it per
person, per member, for that was
brainstorming and just me
thinking it's OK. And then, um,
and so my, I was just kind of,
my brain's just.
Moving and thinking you
wastewater treatment plant, is
it calibrated already for uh
some of the housing that you're
talking about and let me throw a
few things so that you can
answer
is it calibrated for that and
the second question I have is,
are you going to just give them
acreage and they build their own
home or are you providing
housing for them, and is that a
a way of attracting them back to
the uh reservation.
So the plan was to provide the
housing for the members and the,
the, the way of not giving, but
there could, there has been talk
about parceling a portion of the
lands for, uh, you know, they
can own it if they want to build
a, a property there.
Uh, but there's also, yeah, so
like a little mixture of the
ones that the tribe will have
tribal rentals and then there
will be another one for
ownership. So there's gonna be a
couple of options that we're
exploring right now and the
wastewater treatment, um, no,
that does not.
It, it only is just for this
land, so that's why whenever we
talk about moving and doing
things on the property for 1800
acres is a long, long term plan
because we're gonna have to get
that infrastructure out there.
We're going to have to pump it
or we're gonna have to, um,
Come up with some new, uh, some
different alternative, uh, type.
Energy to get energy and just
everything out there that we're
gonna need because it's
undeveloped lands, and there's
nothing out there.
And part of my questioning is,
is the infrastructure, right?
Just basic water. I, I know you
have power, but water, where do
you have water to sustain that
area? I doubt that there's, um,
any sort of pipeline, so I'm
sure you're, you're working off
of wells and do you have the the
water capacity to, to, you know,
handle that? Have you studied
that in any way, shape or form?
We, we do have a contractor that
is working on.
Establishing and researching the
actual uh groundwater in this
area and uh.
And talking about capacity and
So it would have to be either a
new well, uh, but they're gonna
do, they're gonna go through the
whole.
Every process that needs to
happen in order to make sure
that it's not taking from
anything that is unsustainable,
Uh, we, we also, um,
A lot of our, our, uh, water is
we have a system where it's
reused, so we're able to, you
know, water the dog park area
or, you know, things with the
reuse water, uh, the treated
water after uh Greywater. Uh, so
we're able to repurpose some of
that, um, and we're hoping to
even
develop different ideas of
repurposing that those waters to
see how we can help, um.
There was, there has been a lot
of, like, like I said, we're
kind of.
We're hoping by early 2025, we
have a new master plan set up,
you know, we've been going back
and forth on the different
things that the tribe wants, you
know, we have several members
that live in the Albuquerque
area,
uh.
A lot in Silver City area, and
so we have like a lot of members
that are everywhere and a lot in
Arizona and California,
everybody is placed everywhere
across the this probably the
whole western side of the United
States, mostly, uh.
A majority of them, I would say,
um, with only probably, you
know, like a third of them in
Oklahoma.
So we're pretty much everywhere,
but there's, there has been a
Um, since I take, since I've
taken this new role, I was the
business committee member for 4
years prior to taking on the
chair roll, so I've been
learning, uh, I learned as uh 10
years when I housing authority,
10 years on the gaming
commission, uh.
Election board, I served on
every capacity of the tribe
before I started business
committee and so learning all
that and getting to where we are
now.
Uh, and I actually have the,
the, the authority in the, uh
to, to implement some of the
ideas that I wanted to pursue.
So in 10 months.
We, we've been so busy trying to
get everything, you know, like
things that have been kind of.
Um, I would say just kind of set
aside for the time being, you
know, or there's always
something that why we shouldn't
move forward now we're finding
the funding. We're going after
FEMA funds. We're going after,
um, brick or brick FEMA funds in
uh Homeland Security funds,
everything that we can, we're um
we're trying to access grant
funding from all sources and to
help get us to where we need to
be so we can accomplish the
goals by also uh like dual
purposing, you know, have, uh,
you'll have.
to get some funding for this
project, but also, you know, put
in there, you know, you're gonna
address some other situation
that would still abide by what
your goal is. So that's what
we're working on right now is
trying to
you know, arranging all the
funding sources and making sure
that we're
Not forgetting, uh.
You know, not making sure that
we're not missing something huge
and so we really appreciate all
of our partners that are helping
us with gathering information or
pointing us in the direction
that we need to go to because
that's, that's the good thing
here is I, I feel like everybody
is very friendly. They are
willing to help. They're happy
to help and that's all we want
is inclusion and partnerships,
and we want to be able to also
return that help as much as we
can.
Well, and Madam Chair, I, the
reason I, I don't want to make
this question like a trivia
question or I'm putting you in a
corner. It's more to understand,
you know, where you're at in the
process, uh, land development is
in any sort of project
development takes a lot of
thought, a lot of forethought,
right? You, it's not just this
is what I wanna do. And so it,
when you're thinking of
infrastructure when you're
thinking of um how you're gonna
purpose the the the land, you're
gonna have a lot of ideas and
you.
have members that have different
ideas and different approaches.
It's, it's consolidating all
that together and finally coming
up with something that's viable
for your, you know, for you
guys. And so it's you're not in
the wrong place, you're not
doing anything wrong. It's just
you're kind of just going
through that mill of trying to
figure out how, what can I do
and how can I do it and what
obstacles do we have? And, and
those are just some basic ones
that I was thinking of the end
of the day, we want to thank you
for being here. I think just
like our my neighbor um.
Representative Jones says
because every single town.
City municipality started just
like this.
It was just a little mining camp
or it was just a little place to
stop to get water, and then all
of a sudden, um, we have, you
know, a, a, a city or
municipality developed. So
you're, you're at about 20
minutes from Demming and so it,
it's, I think it's good to
develop this area and I think
Luna County very much
appreciates the economic
development and your, you know,
foresight and, and taking the,
the um the challenge, right, of
coming out and saying,
You know what I'm gonna, we're
gonna develop this. We're gonna
do something with this. So I, I
commend you for that because it
takes a lot of courage to do
that, so, uh, thank you very
much. I think you answered some
of my other questions and, and
so I appreciate your
presentation.
Yes, ma'am. I wanted to add
something, um.
Through these conversations, you
know, different discussions
because there's so many more
elements added to it than what
we're even discussing right now.
Um, I think, uh, we kind of
acknowledge that it's been
almost like a privilege to have
very little and it has forced us
over time for generations to be
very inventive.
Um, and really think about
multi-services and um meeting
more than one need per project.
And then also with that you
Learn to appreciate the value of
relationships, um, and networks
and
Relationships that you can
contribute to each other.
Um, so there's not just a
one-sided effort.
Uh, and I believe when we do
work together, it is more than
we could ever imagine without
that. Um, and that's something
that.
We have lived and learned, um,
and I think you're very excited
because we've talked about even,
you know, building structures,
building instructors. I'm from
Oklahoma, um.
So I know, and my husband
actually is in the field of
construction, so I know how
houses are built in Oklahoma.
He's from Colorado.
Homes are built differently in
Colorado here in New Mexico,
totally different style of
homes. So uh we'll have
discussions of like reaching out
to people and even talking about
what type of buildings to build
in the area, what kind of needs
do you have um in Oklahoma, you
have big green grassy yards, and
that's what everyone has, you
know, that's not what we have
here. So just even those um
things for me as an individual
learning, um, and realizing that
there's lots of things and
creating relationships and
talking to people in the local
areas.
Very important to being able to
develop and make those types of
decisions as well, so we really
do appreciate that. I have one
more question that I in Sierra
County, you said you had 20
acres?
You said 20 acres or something
like that. Where is it in, in,
in Sierra County? Where is this
roughly located?
It's in the the Monticello
ranch. It's in cheese.
It's near Cheese. It's probably
where it's at, yeah, Cochise,
that's where he used to hide is
a little town plate it's really
just a little, there was
cemetery and a few people that
live there and it's, it's called
cheese and it's real close to
Monte Monticello in that area,
so I know what you're talking
about. I've gone to a place
without hearing where somebody
went because we were all over,
we like we all had our own
favorable places and went in
different areas and yeah, that
sounds about right. We all
that's why they named that
because that's where he used to
hide, cheese.
There we also do have uh another
300 acres in Arizona, um, near
the Rodeo New Mexico border, and
it's not in trust, but we're
looking to develop it for either
um some type of renewable energy
or in an RV park.
So that's the place that is
beautiful, the Chica Mountains
are right there. It's, it's a
really cool area and uh so we
were, we were hoping that we can
get those plans moving along as
well.
And then like with things like
projects like RV parks and
stuff, it, it gives us an
opportunity for our tribal and
community members to also visit
these places. Um, I see how much
value it is to have somebody
just walk in this area, um, and
to see the things and tell
stories and talk about stuff,
um, those conversations bring
out.
Things that we know culturally
that we didn't even really
understand where a part of our
culture. So, um.
It's very valuable to kind of
make those places available to
our community members as long as
well as serving the local
communities.
Thank you, Representative
Tarazas. Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Chairwoman Hamanochi,
for your presentation, both of
you. Um, I will begin by saying
that uh I
I'm not quite sure how to put
this to welcome you to this, uh,
to the efforts of trying to
establish infrastructure, uh, on
lands that have not historically
had them. I mean, and the
welcome is to, this is what all
the other tribes have faced in
this state and across the
country, and it is very
difficult, so I have, um, I
admire that you're continuing
those efforts, and I know that
you're following on the heels of
the
Work that started before, um, I
also appreciate the questions
that my um committee members
have asked before me, and so,
Madam Chair, I just have a
couple of clarifying questions.
Um, uh, you, you went through
quite a bit uh of detail, um,
can you just for clarification,
how many tribal members live
here now?
In in New Mexico.
In this area, um, we have a, we
only have probably a handful
that are living within this
area, but for New Mexico, you
know, up to 50 members.
50, about 50, 60.
Arizona, probably about 100
historical cultural ties are
more in the mountains and areas
like that, um, a lot of people,
so I don't know if you've ever
heard of Alan Hauser, um, so
that is my great uncle.
Um, so he kind of came and
established some
His family and those types of
things in Santa Fe area.
Um, a lot of people were kind of
surviving, um, trying to find
ways to feed their families, um,
and that is a lot of what
brought them away from kind of
where we were placed, um, so
losing that cultural connection
um through generations in
because I mean your cultural
connection is like thousands of
strings, right? Um, so losing
different.
Clips of them here and there.
Um,
Has kind of put us in the
situation we're in, um, where
people are saying we would love
to move there, but they don't
know where to go or have a place
to go. Um, I am one that is
ready to move tomorrow as soon
as.
And my job, um, yeah, so I do a
lot of consultation in the area,
um.
For Tpo Agra, those types of
things, and I have to drive 10.5
hours, um, just to come here. So
doing that for the past 100
years to visit a place where you
don't have um resources. Um, I
think we probably visited
Mescalero more than we did here
because you have family or a
place to sleep and those types
of things. A lot of tribe
members don't have vehicles,
don't have those types of
things. So until we can provide
them with jobs and
An opportunity to
Make their family um thrive and
not just be surviving or even
just some people need the
ability to survive even just,
um, so.
Those are all factors that we
consider and think of and plan
for, um, and all of the
different things that we do. Um,
the trip that we had, I mean, we
almost had to have a tribal
stipend for people to come visit
this area, or it would have been
a fraction of the people, and
there are so many people that
never got to come to this area
because they didn't have that
ability.
Um, so until people are given
the ability, it will not be able
to kind of change and grow.
Thank you very much for that
response. Um, none of that is
lost on me. Uh, as we were
talking earlier about um the
indigenous history of, of um of
our people anywhere and
everywhere, uh, it is not lost
on me. Um, the requirement and
that does produce a lot of
innovation. I just wanted to get
some clarification on that and
actually uh when my final
question, Madam Chair, is um,
you know, as you're describing
it, how many
People does it look like want to
come back here are committed to
coming back. Um, it just, just
for, um, this is very
enlightening, I think, to the
members of the committee, and I
appreciate, um,
This information.
I would say you're talking.
20 families that I can think of
immediately, you know, that
might include, include 6 kids
like her and be like 7 tribal
members um for one person, but
you know, so there's because we
would, because we're looking at
the, the, the head grants that
are out there that we're, uh,
you know, we submitted a grant
for, um, housing in Oklahoma as
well, and next year we plan on
submitting for 10 homes to begin
with. Either do
or homes or some type of uh.
Um, I guess.
Some kind of living that, you
know, that's what we're kind of
still planning is is what type
of funding do we have? We have a
year to get ready and get our,
our planning going for that. So,
but we, we also have to think
about all the, the water, um,
how to get water, how to get
electricity, how to, you know,
how does everything, how can we
get everything to coordinate to
get, you know, to be ready for a
certain, you know, so we're,
it's, it's struggling. My
background's, I was 13 years as
was the environmental director
for
The tribe for 13 years. So, you
know, I've always written my
grants for project deliverables
to, to come to New Mexico and
place the monitor, get baseline
data, uh, do our water, uh,
drinking water sampling. We do,
um, so we've been monitoring and
trying to find ways within those
grants to have activities here.
And so having somebody here full
time with our Tippo office is
kind of like protection of our
natural resources.
And um, hopefully we're able to,
um, to do more with that, but
for like 15 years we've we've
had an office in Albuquerque.
Um, it's Fort Sillpache
Industries. It's our
governmental, uh, contracting
section. So we do 8-day
contracts, uh, with at
Albuquerque and it's been, I, I
wanna say about 15 years or so
it's been established.
So
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you for um the time
um this has been a lot of
information and I appreciate
you, um, sharing and providing
that information. Thank you.
Thank you Representative Little
Representative Roya Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation
today and thank you for hosting
us.
I wanted to just clarify a
little bit more, um,
Representative Little's question
about um
Your determination of how many
families or individuals uh would
be relocating as part of your
repatriation process. How would
you, how do you, um, gauge that?
Do you do a survey? Do you, how
is it that you gauge whether
because
Uprooting families, because
basically you've an important
part of a tribe is, of course,
the land.
Um, the resources, but the most
important are the people. That's
what we thrive for. That's what
we work for, that's what we
thrive for.
And, um, it seems that the
development of the Fort Slapache
Chirikawa, um, have kind of
gone.
The other way around,
due to what you said was your
history.
And so that's through no fault
of your own, you, you reclaimed
your land, you reclaimed, uh,
other things, uh.
But I'm really interested in, in
the people.
How, how the people are going to
connect.
Through this, um, repatriation
process because
That's the principal way of
retaining our cultural
traditions are practices.
And ensuring that we, Madam
Chair, pass those on to those um
to come.
So
It's a long way of asking that
particular question, but it's,
it's really important because,
uh,
For a number of reasons, um, we
have historical tribes in the
state of New Mexico. We have
long histories and those
histories, um, go back time in
memorial to contemporary. We all
know the pre Pueblo Wars post-P
wars, we all know the history of
um pre-conquering history than
we have the colonial history and
Western settlement history. I'm
a historian, I'm a researcher. I
This is what I do.
And I'm familiar with your
history as, as I'm uncovering
continually our history. Um,
mine and my tribe and those of
the others I'm discovering that.
Um, we have a lot.
I mean, we go back so far that
When I teach the class, um, at
UNM they're in awe.
Because they don't understand
what time immemorial means, but
they also don't understand.
The connection of people to
their land, to their air, to
their water.
So that's the reason for the
questioning. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Mm
So we have in the past 5 years,
and that we have sent out
surveys to our tribal members,
uh, during our ceremonial will,
uh, we, we have that once a year
in September and we also have a,
uh, a spring dance that we are
ceremony that we have in, in
April time frame. But when they
are there, we try to take
advantage of, you know, the the
amount of people and tribal
members that are present and so
we do surveys in.
We do surveys online through
social media. We do, uh, we
like.
Naomi was saying she, she does a
lot of Zoom meeting classes and
teaching. And so her, you know,
her her language classes have
went from, you know, a steady 5,
10 people to now what, 30, 40.
So there's continuing interest
that continues and so part of,
um, once we provide
opportunities to come out here
to do a tour, or we celebrated
our, uh, our one year
anniversary of the Chiawa Plaza.
So we so we had a, a one year
anniversary and so we invited
all of our child members. We
paid for their stipend, living
costs, so they came from all
over and, uh, I wanna say it was
a little over 100 tribal members
that were here.
So, um, I did, I did see, um, as
I say, representative Jones was,
was present, so we had lots of
children running around, lots of
families. Uh, so, but they, you
know, they absolutely loved it.
We were on tours of some
historical sites. Uh, we, we did
a lot of activities that week
and she was the, the organizer,
so she was.
Everywhere we had belt making
classes. We had different type
of uh things that normally, uh,
We didn't have that much, yeah,
so there's so many things that,
so in the meantime, I'd like to
update um more ways to general
council meetings, we always
gauge the the
Gauge the interest, you know,
ask people, we talk, we have
Zoom, we allow our trial members
to be on Zoom. We try to really
connect with the tribal members
and try to find, you know, what
do you need? what are your
needs? What do you see going
forward and being very
inclusive. And so that's that's
we're, we're really proud of
some of the work that we've been
doing by providing that
inclusive and, you know, 815
members is a lot, you know,
maybe 500 and
75 or so or the adult
population, so getting a hold of
575 people is not as hard as if
it was thousands. So, um, so
we're, we could probably get a
more concrete number once we dig
into that some more. Thank you.
And you know, it occurs to me,
um, just in closing, Madam
Chair.
The deep contrast because we've
been traveling as a committee
around the state as we do and
we've gone into really remote
rural areas and so the contrast
is between the privileged and
the not so privileged.
And we have a vast um chapter
houses in the Navajo Nation that
are not connected, um.
VA anything via electricity via
running water, via uh much less
internet um phone service. In
fact, they suffered a great deal
during COVID.
Uh, because of, of the
remoteness. But this is because
Um, this is their home. This is
their lands, this is what they
know, and this is where they're
going to be.
And it's our responsibility as a
state.
Um, to build a partnerships with
our tribal nations and to see
that the resources that we as a
state have, um, are distributed
um to our populations in our
state. So why I say that is
because
With what you mentioned earlier,
and that is that
You also see that partnerships
are important.
But it's not just partnerships
that have the monetary
resources. It's building the
partnerships, um, in a positive
manner with the tribes that are
existing here.
All right, we have an existence
in this state.
Um, we have a vested interest in
our state, in our region, those
of us that are regional tribes.
Um, and we have um a very
Good partnership.
For the most part, it has its
pitfalls when governments
involve governments to
governments, of course, but we
have really good mediating um
ways in which to resolve our
Differences, and most
importantly, tribal consultation
on every matter is important.
And so I, I raised this because.
I see from your report and from
the amount of um funds that
you've been able to access so
far.
Um, and from your ventures
outside of the state of New
Mexico that.
You're building um.
Valuable resources.
And
I want you to just be cognizant
of the fact that that is in deep
contrast to the vast majority of
the tribes and the tribal, um,
populations and our communities
in the state of New Mexico and
so as you're unfolding, Madam
Chair, your, your, um, economic
development ventures and as
you're unfolding and or adding
to your resources and in your
quest.
To come back to um New Mexico, I
think.
It would be well worth.
Building positive relationships.
And partnerships to be cognizant
of sharing the wealth.
Sharing the resources, um, our
tribes that have vested economic
development ventures, they
contribute greatly to the
surrounding communities. They
employ, they're the highest
employers, um, they provide them
the products, um, Madam Chair,
um, they provide.
You know, they're now providing
solar energy. They're providing,
they're getting into geothermal,
they're getting into everything
advancing for the future, but at
the same time bringing in uh
broadband bringing in all that
needs to happen as a result of.
What happened with COVID
infrastructure needed
infrastructure for the health
and safety of our populations.
And so, um, that, that's really
important and so.
In and welcoming spirit.
Um, in that spirit of
Welcoming. You also have a vast
majority of Hispanic population
that have a long history here
too.
And in the particularly in this
region.
And so it, it just is something
that.
I believe you should consider, I
don't want to preach to you, you
stand on your own, but it's
highly recommended that you um
Take all of that into
consideration and look at how
you're going to contribute.
To the health, safety and
well-being and longevity.
Of our continued presence in our
state of New Mexico.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative Rayvon
Caballero. Any other questions
from committee members. OK, my
turn. Thank you. Thank you for
taking on the leadership of your
role here, especially, um,
fairly young and uh having that
experience there, especially
when you're representing your
tribe nation or pueblo. It is
essential that, um, we continue
that and your transparency here
and answering all our questions
that are, um, members have the
network and the partnerships
with the county. I'm glad to
hear that. It's very positive.
um, even with our tribes, other
tribes, nations and pueblos
because even the history here we
do have some new members, um,
that probably have never really
heard it a couple of us are have
the, you know, the knowledge and
the background that we're able
to bring that, uh, to our
leadership when we come
together. Um, and I appreciate
that you're actually using the
funding that is actually
allocated to you, which always
helps us and addressing the
homelessness situation, um, that
is also appreciated because good
business is coming into the
area.
addressing that in that sense
also considering to diversify it
and not just think that it's
just for your.
Your tribe nation or Pueblo that
you know the employees here are
not just from, from your people,
but you know other other
entities, uh, others around the
area to come and work here
because that does mean the
contribution and we also have to
make sure that you in all sense
that humanity survives in
considering, um, everybody has
that.
Um,
You know that priority for their
family to to provide and um
bring that forth.
So I appreciate the development
here, you know, to rouse us was
uh representing Tarazas who was
mentioned about, you know, all
the thought that's put into it,
but I also know that there was a
lot of trial and error as each
time we they came over here, it
was something different, but
that's the thing, the future is
unpredictable. We really don't
know what's going to happen,
especially with our people, um,
the endeavors and what we're
gonna have to encounter as we
move forward and
You know the history of our
people throughout the whole US,
um.
There were many trails.
You know, I went on the long
walk, the Trail of Tears, a lot
of our people were displaced and
moved around, so they're all
over the US and uh.
For reasons of their own, um,
and then most of it's economic.
As we move forward.
But when you guys, um, speak in
your next uh 11 thing I would
say is that the acronyms explain
what they are, cause you know,
we, we get used to BI E N H A N
T U A. We know what those are,
but some others don't, don't,
uh, uh, or that's.
You know, it has to be something
that has to be described and
explained to us. It's a another
language that we we go through.
And
I don't really have too many
questions because a lot of it's
development and it's kept up
with uh a lot of what the tribe
nations, but I'm getting to meet
you guys here and uh we'll have
more discussions as we move
forward, but I do encourage the
members before you leave here,
uh, fill up your gas, um,
contribute to the county and to
the state here and thank you to
our all our nations, brothers
and sisters, um, supporting each
other and coming together to to
do things and uh and hand in
hand, but thank you.
Yeah
So we will move on to our next
presentation. Would you like to
go ahead. I just wanted to have
to invite everybody for lunch.
We're serving lunch here, so,
just someone to make sure
everybody knew so you don't head
out the door.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you so much for
that, and we will have an update
from Luna County, Chris Bryce,
uh, the county manager, um, if
you would please join us.
Morning, Madam Chair. Good to
see you, uh, counsel, good to
have you in Luna County.
I want to just, if I can just
give a quick update on where we
stand as a county and and where
our relationship with the Fort
Hill Apache tribe is.
I will say in my 5+ years as
county manager.
We've had a phenomenal
relationship with
With the Fort Apache Tribe and
their endeavors out here in
Aquila.
Early on they made contact with
me and we
We've worked hand in hand on
numerous adventures to include
the expansion of
Of this area while they did 99%
of it, they kept us abreast on
everything and we helped where
we could.
We're currently in a joint
venture right now with our
volunteer fire department to
Build a fire station out here,
um.
As you can imagine, a majority
of our
Fire calls are either started by
vehicles on I-10 coming by with
chains or whatever or accidents
on I-10, and that's all within
the volunteer fire department's
responsibility
to have a station out here would
not only benefit.
The tribe and this local area,
but it benefits the passengers
on I-10. It takes a long time
for those big engines in the
water trucks to go 55, 60 miles
an hour from downtown Deming,
uh, or wherever we're at to get
out here. So the ability to
respond from a location like
this is, is paramount for the
people both again in, in, in
accidents and from wildfires
that we get from, from the
accidents and, and from other
causes, but they have been a
true partner in every sense with
That, um, as a matter of fact,
they've done.
A majority of the legwork and
the engineering and other things
we're supporting financially,
obviously supporting with the
fire with the fire truck that
we've gone after with uh grants
and things like that, but it
just shows the.
Really the cooperation that
we've had with this with this
tribe since, again, since I've
been county manager, I can't
speak to what was going on prior
to that, um, they approached me
with their opioid funding that
we're getting through the
various lawsuits against the
pharmaceutical companies, uh,
and, and really questioning
what, what they could do.
To help out Luna County and even
the surrounding areas with some
of those funds that they would
be dedicating to Luna County and
how we could match our opioid
funds to do something for the
entire area, not just the tribe,
but this is, we're talking
about.
You know, possibly, and I work
closely with Hidalgo and Grant
Counties, you know, most
counties in New Mexico, we don't
have a lot of money. So we've
gotten really close and trying
to figure out how.
Not to duplicate efforts, but
to.
Because we're in close
proximity, but how to do.
You know, not competing, but
But uh I'm trying to think of
the world, but
You know,
Working with each other so that
one county doesn't.
Do something and then the other
one spends precious funds on the
same thing, um, and part of that
was
Where do we, where does the
tribe fit in with possibly.
Some type of housing, um, for
either mental health or drug
addiction or things like that
and what.
What part of that process
through that would be best out
here, as you know, a lot of
people.
The recidivism rate through.
Addictions, a lot of that is
going back to the same.
Same environments that they came
out of when they got clean and
that doesn't help anybody. So
we're trying to figure out ways
that we could work on maybe an
isolated area out here would be
good for people and good for
people to heal.
And, and find work and
And, and move on with their
lives in a positive way, but
again, back to it, it's really
the tribe who's been coming up
with a lot of these ideas and
helping us see the vision of
what could happen out here. Um,
I can't speak enough to, again,
what they've meant to us and,
and how we support them and, and
the partners they've really been
in everything that we do.
Um,
With respect to the county, I
will tell you that we've got a
lot going on. We've been very
fortunate the governor and the
Senate and the legislator as a
whole has been very good to us,
both Capitol outlay and other
things. Uh, we've got a lot of
things, as you mentioned, we're
a border community, right? So we
have a large population of our
community, about 750 of our
students actually live in
Palomas, travel across back and
forth, so we have.
Really, there's, there's not
much of a border here as you
might think. Um, people travel
across back back and forth all
the time.
But
We've just spent, oh, we didn't
spend it, we just committed $21
million to a flooding diversion
program that will prevent
flooding in the southern part of
the county and prevents
flooding. The town of Palomas is
2 to 3 ft deep when the rains
come and the resamanus and some
other places, uh, so we're,
we're drying up a lot of that
property.
To induce some of these
corporations that come in. I
know most of you have seen Santa
Teresa right in their industrial
park while we don't, we want
nothing to do with being that
big and that fancy and that
crowded, we do want to be a
piece of what they're doing,
right? And we have a border, we
have a border crossing that's
very popular, um, so we're
looking at a lot of ways to
invest our time and money.
To make that a productive port
of entry. Uh, we're doing
another $6 billion project down
there on the border.
In the industrial park for
Columbus.
Getting roads, sewage, water
treatment, uh, flooding
diversion down there as well so
that we can make our industrial
park down there more viable,
more attractive to outside
companies coming in. As you
know, a lot of international
companies are coming into New
Mexico, Taiwan, and a bunch of
them are really looking hard at,
at doing business in Southern
New Mexico and, and what it
presents its own problems,
right, with transportation back
and forth, waiting lines of 7
hours sometimes over the
bridges, so we're looking to
siphon off a little bit.
Of that traffic and a little bit
of that business into Luna
County.
Um,
You know, we we're doing.
We work very closely with the
city here, you know, if you
haven't been downtown Denning or
in Deming recently, you know,
you'll see a, a children's
playground there next to the, to
the interstate that is the
cities, but it's one of the only
few handicap accessible
playgrounds for kids in the
whole country. So they've had uh
Aaron Sarah, the city's had a a
really.
Good plan and, and good vision
on some of those things that
we've got in inflatable water
park down there. We've got a
fishing lake, believe it or not,
uh, you know, in Southern New
Mexico, we do have a lake. It's
not very big, but there are fish
in it, and people come from all
over and fish there. Uh, it
happens to be right across the
street from our entertain
entertainment complex that the
county owns, which is 6 movie
theaters, 14 bowling lanes, bar
and restaurant, which trust me
is, is a nightmare for a
government entity to run a bar.
Our restaurant and, and all of
that. Um, but we've just
expanded the outside of that.
We've got batting cages now.
We're doing a, a skate park that
will rival any of the ones from
Tucson or some of the bigger
cities. So we're doing some
really cool stuff and I, and I
envision.
With dry does really nothing but
compliment that, um, you know,
and, and their willingness to
work with us, they're keeping us
in the loop and us keeping them
in the loop, we meet frequently
on ideas, you know, when
they're, when they're in town,
we always get together, uh, and
it's always been, it's just been
a pleasure, um.
You know we've got a lot of cool
things, like I said, going on in
the county. We've been fortunate
to receive a lot of funding that
helps us through the legislature
uh through the governor's office
and we're making the best use of
it.
Um,
We do have problems with
employment just like everywhere
else, um.
Yeah, we run the 4th largest
attempts to set her out of Luna
County in the state, which is
both a blessing and a curse,
right? I mean, nobody, nobody
wants to brag about a defense
center necessarily. I was the
warden there before I became
county manager,
so I had a place in my heart as
it is, um.
But
For a small town and and a a
fairly rural county to have like
600 and some odd bed detention
center that employs 120 people,
you know, that's a, that's a big
ask for a small place like this,
um.
Right
We continue to work the problems
again we have really good
partners with the city of Dami.
We have great partners with,
with the tribe and we see
nothing but amazing things in
the future and, and what we
could do together here. So.
With that, I'll stand by for any
questions from anybody.
Thank you, thank you for your
presentation. Represented
Tarazas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
real quick, uh, thank you, Mr.
uh Brice, uh, for your
presentation, catching us up
with what's going on with the
world and the, the port of
entry, it's true. We, you need
to develop it and I know that's
been in, in conversations for
probably, I don't know, 4 or 5
years at least, right? And so
now it's kind of maybe even
longer
and so it's, it's really.
Uh, starting to come together
and I know, I know that there's
been some back and forth of how
that's gonna happen and so it's
now finally moving forward,
which is a good thing, uh, I
work with you guys on and off,
you know that, uh, because we, I
own the mortuary here and so uh
you guys have done a lot of
great things when we drive by
going to cruises, we kind of
look over at your little lake
there and we go, darn it, man,
that's what we need in Silver
City. So you guys have done a
great job doing that and trying
to help, uh.
You know, we hear kids don't
have anything to do.
I think you guys are kind of.
Kind of trying to fill that
little gap that we're uh kids
and families have something to
do, uh, you know, there's
nothing like, you know, fishing
with your family and and doesn't
cost a lot of money and yet you
get to spend some nice time, a
nice time with your family, you
guys have also added the water
park and all, it's really neat.
I, I really, really, really
neat. So, uh, I just wanted to
commend you guys on your work
and your continued efforts in in
trying to to make Luna County a
nice destination for people to
stop or live.
Uh, and also for working with
the tribe here in, in, in, in
working together to coordinate
things that that work for both
Luna County and for them also.
Thank you.
Just one note on the, on the
fishing, you're absolutely
right. And one of the cool
things that we do is once a year
we have a fishing day for the
kids and we, we either gather
donations, the county donates. A
lot of people donate. We buy
100, 200 fishing rods, and then
we, we give those to the kids
who wouldn't have, who don't
have the type of gear to go
fishing, and then we have
volunteers who take them down to
the lake and teach them how to
fish and how to do those things.
So it really is, has become a
really neat family.
Family-wide endeavor. So thanks,
sir.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Taraza. Any other
questions for committee members.
No, and um thank you for your
presentation. Who would have
thought you guys would have
flooding problems down here,
right? It's only, it's only 2
days out of the year, but when
it happens, it floods big.
And appreciate the, the, um.
Cooperation for the fire station
because they think that's one of
the biggest things is,
especially if we're trying to do
economic development is the
safety and the health and
welfare of the employees and
those that are coming into the
area is essential, um, there's
one negative, um, event can
really, uh, you know, to take
away from a community, um.
So I'd really appreciate that
you're, um, cause I think that
will really bring a lot more
into the area, um, as you do
that and so fishing's only nice
when you're catching fish.
Um, so I hope it's before the
event really big and then.
For everybody to get on.
OK, thank you, but there's no
other questions from the
committee members, thank you for
your presentation and uh do you
have any closing statements? No,
that's it. I want to appreciate
everybody coming to Luna County.
I know this is, you know, it's,
it's fairly recent from the last
one, but uh it's always good
having everybody here and and
showing off kind of what we're
doing, so appreciate it, Madam
Chair and council, I appreciate
you being here. If you need
anything, I'm always available,
so.
Thank you. Thank you. And to
those on webcast and our members
and those that are following us
here. Our next presentation is
at 1:15.
But it's a Zoom presentation, so
if anything we may start at one
o'clock if we can get them a
little bit ahead of time, which
would only put us like 15
minutes ahead of that, but uh
we're gonna stick very close to
it because uh they're out of out
of state and it's gonna be on
Zoom. So we will break for lunch
and it is provided, and we thank
you for the um for the food, so,
um, we will go into recess here
until after lunch. Thank you.
