Shannon arni had up
achieve a yahar but the whole
deadline
good morning everyone let's go
ahead and reconvene our indian
affairs committee meeting thank
you everyone for attending my
colleague staff and uh
or
before we move on to
introductions and our welcome
i'd like to ask misreberto
roberts to open a step with a
prayer.
The rental
again thank you everyone that's
honored in the privilege to be
am sharing prayer this morning
in per have only father we come
to you this morning you would
give me thanks for this new day
these new opportunities that you
will still connect we thank you
for
the raising standard
the opportunity to serve our
people and have my father we
think you for gathering as for
this meeting today and
continuing to
have planning prayer
and just a voice for our people
as we move forward and discrete
student new mexico
we ask for a guidance we ask for
protection we ask for
patience
in leadership in prayer and
in
for our humanity moving forward
we ask for prayers from the four
secret direction from the east
in the west in the north from
others and further sky we ask
homely for guidance as we meet
today to hear words to hear
planning and we asked it I asked
that you meet with her
leadership here today and yeah
thank you for giving traveling
merces to come to our community
here
beater for land of twelve or so
new mexico
against that you continue to
protect them and guide and as
they do their work as they
travel through our great state
as they continue to move.
And plan and help our our native
peoples and be with my community
members here getting with her
elderly near reverence mobility
our children have any father you
thank you for all of these gifts
and all of these blessings and
we ask that you continue to
lesser similar mind body and
spirit and continue to make this
whole as we move forward in each
day in these blessings I pray
through our sun discressed me in
thank you and you can stay
seated there and wall after are
introduction swell come
out while a new for your welcome
address is so with that i'd like
to ask my colleagues to
introduce ourselves and let's go
ahead and begin with senator
rodriguez
thank you madame chairman good
morning to everyone thank you
for your hospitality food right
people there for place my name
is nancy i'm senator nancy
rodriguez from santa fe district
twenty four thank you
good morning i'm bill souls
state senator from last
christmas area donated county
what a beautiful landscape and
people in cultures I love come
into this committee I learned so
much about my wonderful state
thank you
good morning everyone madam
chair good morning members of
the and the audience I am very
happy to be here today i'm
charlotte little I come from the
public as simply pm towers and I
represent the house district
sixty eight which is in
northwest albuquerque i'm so
glad to be here today thank you
again for everything.
Thank you madame chair yet a
minute I am anthony allison I
represent the street for I live
in fruitland and my jurisdiction
is about ten miles out of here
and it goes to the north best
corner thank you
thank you madame chairman john
black house district fifty one
i'm in a terror county I
represent almogoris a very far
way but i'm so blessed to be
here to see this beautiful area
and talk all these very
important issues thank you
madame chairman.
Thank you madame tear I am
representative
only
I represent this week said the
despite the civil are machine
country I live in the wonderful
village of milan I represent
nine nine no chapters the whole
plabo zooney and I also have the
billing the milon city agreed
and killed the county and simple
account in all the other
entities that are in between
their commitment
the morning madam chair many
members my name is seal high
representative sixty nine which
covered parts of some one more
kind of similar britain but
instance of or countries
counted a little predicted to
she here this day you all know I
am going to be taking a two year
vacation
but I will be back you know I
was put on the kitchen to back
public whatever but politics
bad partics but yeah I will be
back in you know with an honor
being here i've been serving
the I got nine chapters that I
have been to report eight years
already but you're gonna take a
little breakfast will be back in
a couple of years that i'm not
i'm sure thank you.
Good morning everyone I
representative patty lunstrom
now and I recognize almost
everybody in the road my house
district is house district nine
which is about ten miles south
of here and tomorrow you'll be
reconvenient in my part of
gallup in house district name
out the college but I think the
longest serving numbers on this
committee above me and senator
rodriguez abandoned this
committee since two thousand one
so it's always been a delight
for me it keeps me close to my
district keeps me close to my
chapters and i've never
represented this chapter but
i've been done close so thank
you
thank you for the morning a
committee members and
the people in the community of
their ship springs aren't be
back here I want to thank for
the opening prayer I know
reburder since she was a high
school student summer programs
and so we go way back and I was
proud of our students of what
they've have accomplished and
what they're continued to do in
their community so thank you
reverting for
the prem on state senator
benning shandom from hames
public mexico
I
I hope it's a five counties
within my district I have seven
public
all of hickoria patchy and
twenty nine hour chapters so
that most superdell again in a
so my chapter is literally it's
a white rock in the nasion the
furthest up north and then I
have to hardly which is kind of
the categories from here and
then I used to come out to
coyote canyon but now that is
senator pinto so only go to
crown point and
but then I also got to in the
new redistrict I got a back
approach chapter and the roo and
so a little shifting around with
the.
App to represent people that
nabonation and thank you for
having us here
good morning madam chair vice
chair members of the committee
audience and think you are very
nice to see you
my name is patholicia royball
covieto and I represent house
district thirteen which is the
far southwest quality of albert
and I am very happy to be here
and I want to think you all for
your hospitality this morning
look forward to all the
presentations
thank you colleagues now I would
like to ask our staff to
introduce yourselves please.
A good morning i'm nicole wages
back a researcher also with a
legislative council service
thank you now i'd like to ask
our audience and our guests and
let's begin with our honorable
council delicate.
Thank you
let's go ahead and introduce
yourself
cow.
Thank you mad invice chair thank
you madame chairman members of
the community and
scrape to be here I know you see
often stuck through here when
the rate kents one of the
closest chapters next to four
ninety one and a lot going on
here especially when we talk
about happily between here
between gallop and ship rock so
think you to our members that
are here and even those that
have joined us yesterday and
today and hopefully tomorrow
cheaper and then pinto you
initiate a kian initially to to
check me by sixteen as a churchy
needer should change philippine
order signal and i'm just down
the road out in top achieve and
I think there are some of you in
here that actually see me grow
up since I was little so
they think that's a
go way way back
so but this cheap springs used
to be in my district they no
longer are but I have thirteen
chapters fifteen with lamb base
in my district all the way to
four corners just outside the
farmington and half of gallop so
and most are for ninety one just
a couple of miles covered not
not in my district so but thank
you thank you for joining us
thank you for hosting us and
that's very excited to have a
meeting out here in this
community so thank you manager
thank you
in shlankin are only by sixteen
ninety nine I should chat ashto
eventually now hooks our a son
in insurance it's also they
should a I see to she
add or your day cash that beat
how sort of
one charge a needs non operate a
cash in on this issue a core
yard and he did need hiking
i'm new mexico state
representative wonder johnson
and represent house district
five escalate making lean sound
one counties fifteen now the
nation chapters.
And this is my fifth time and I
am honored and proud to be here
and survive so with that i'd
like to call on riberto roberts
to provide your welcome remarks.
They now related to twenty two
at all
can you change it at a trade on
my discussion in a shanana.
And then under my president here
she best being chapter and
four years and I saw no election
I just like to welcome you and
reach an everyone of you and I
just had to give you just a
limit on information that are
chapter is right here
every matt and earn on
you go out
and wait until a tour from here
vehicle out of her right here
behind here are boring edge
where are we keep on truck to
every
everything and now you go a
little waiter at the whole gun
with you some
from here
and then the google heard a
download or trailer would do the
quality that community does
appropriately not ever watch
it so and they make quite any
not only a receipt that they do
not away from senior center so
you have time today come in with
us and then try it over there
some working so you can come
over and need to start
right here in a well known room
now my sister right here in
charge of robert sure you can
visit and you have time and I
like it welcome to future
everybody to ship to entract on
this is a price where you know
you feel comfortable
and then you are now
the reason why it's popular and
so the way you might understand
you that way but you're to heal
here away back in the corner you
should be a water light yeah
water coming up on the ground so
get us how they made it at all
so but somewhere long away I
don't know how it came sheeps
free
a car argument to the need so I
like to welcome each.
Every one of you enjoy this
place and
thanks for coming out from
various area or something charm
being here thank you
thank you here not only.
Yanana which cannot see some
channels
take two
years a open
a share quite anticipate on my
sonic should not honest asia if
you have grandfather I don't
give some stuff and i'll shudder
the lines of chia hey riberto
roberts and she had okay orange
launch what it eat me a mashes
touchy need attitude outside
education additionally
clarities managership
community center and issue
number shelic isn't that but
much a high call then then let
me mismatch and install my
accounts but out a hankaget a
dozen different
good morning again everyone my
money expressed my
appreciation to each and every
one of you what an honor to have
the privilege to have all of you
here and sheep springs it's
usually a quiet thursday morning
and so today is extremely
special and I want to say that
our leadership are people have
paid for you to be here and
that's how you came to be here
in my mind because we always ask
for that
recognition we have a lot of
good people here it doesn't seem
like it and if you drive fast
and you blink your young you
might miss cheap springs or you
might turn in almost hit into
the mountain and let me may mind
them toward my coach mister
senator schendel here is telling
me i'm he was his sar the
chapter it was like a vision but
he kept going the wrong way and
finally got here so
welcome to sheep springs.
My
position here is the director of
the total community center
and I want to say that
first staff they want to think
are
representative or chair
honourable johnson for a
recognizing and bringing the
committee to cheap springs and
thank you for breakfast this
morning I guess search your hat
ado
to the leadership here is going
to be providing lunch this
afternoon it's I can I know when
I smell I hope that you get his
due tier so it's exciting but I
want to recognize that one of
the things for the never are
communities is hospitality
hospitality is very important
even if you don't have a lot of
food or anything to offer we
always at least offer water or
costy hospitality is really
important and as my late long
let's see don't let people leave
your home hungry and don't ask
if they were or they're they're
hungry you just fix the food and
you put it down and if they want
to eat their eat but you not say
are you hungry you know so
i'm excited to share a break
bread with each of you and
that's that some always one of
the key things in our culture is
hospitality and kindship so
thank you for that and I believe
later this evening that are
never nation president might be
hosting dinner in window i'm not
sure I think we'll get more
details but I hope that we have
you covered for breakfast much
and dinner
and so if you haven't had water
not from the bottle you should
because to also is the spring
yellow color wider but I assure
you is safe.
You'll be blast
so with that I want it also
acknowledged
our melbourne estimate should
not I
sen pintel
and all the representatives from
all corners of new mexico it's
really nice ado
shiash I representatives anthony
allison thank you
he was here on the day that we
opened our doors here at the
community center and i've if I
may i'd like to provide the
short presentation on our
community center
our parent organization a non
profit organization called yeah
only the
we also are known as nava who
hope you covered nineteen relief
organization we started
the resiliency program which is
the community centers we have
three one in minimum valley one
here and cheap springs and we
just open our third one this
past springs in standing
so
it's a we are community center
our focus
is to
be a good resource and a partner
to begin and continue the
healing from the penda mac
msu traveled here and you even
got last in sheep springs
you know
you already know that we're a
long ways from anywhere so once
you leave gallop and you forgot
to pick up milk or red you just
go without cause yet turner in
round that
with that sad
the community center offers
services to the community and
it's it's not restricted to just
I received springs but.
All our family relatives and
friends along the court or
anyone traveling the four nine
one or look at rate next door
i'm delegated and honoured to be
recognizing given the
opportunity as a director of the
program I have two staff members
and I don't have a hand out
because I want to tell you
enough information that makes
you very curious to come see us
at the center before you leave
so if that said we have a small
conference through so
representative i'm strong if
you're just driving through in
your life I just need five
minutes to take a call you're
more and welcome to come in to
use our conference anyone for
that matter if you're driving
long for nine one and you want a
nice quiet
pip stop come to our center our
doors are always open we have a
conference room we we are our
internet as powered by
starling thank you star leak and
so with the community I with the
conference room there's
comfortable seating up to about
ten people and then we also have
a business center a business
center that has computers open
to the community for job search
for school work for a copies
printing scamming services and
that we've had a lot of students
last summer come through it do
their online classes at the
center
we don't charge for our services
so
we have stolen a little bit of
business from the chapter for a
backseam and can't being
services but like I said if
you're in oriental common
through to for a meeting and you
forgot to pratt an important
document please that buy and use
our business center and then we
have a classroom for
programming.
We do programming in four areas
culture tradition and wellness
is one another programming area
is youth leadership the third
program is food sovereignty so
we also have a community garden
back here we haven't
we're doing really well and a
community is actually helping us
they provide the seeds the use
provide daily maintenance we've
expanded and we're ready for the
green house so we are going to
have
we've had our first crap of
radish
and that's you know we don't
have that down at the sea store
down here or so where we're
indulging in our gardens harvest
so fluttered to also comes with
a lot of free demonstration for
the community traditional foods
kitchen safety things like that
and then the last one is small
business entrepreneurship
support and what is that mean
small business and sheep springs
is not small business in glass
cruises is that it doesn't look
that way and burn the wheel
small business here's our food
vendors are artists local people
enter perus we have
a lot of fun reason but I look
at them as enterprise they're
very created delicate that
dedicated resilient people to
fundraise for things like youth
traveling out to another country
for sports for help being family
members who have last loved ones
for raising monies for
ceremonies and things like that
and so the community really come
together to help on another in
fun reason the initiatives that
I look at that is
entrepreneurship but our center
also has packaging
postage as packaging
materials scale and we can help
people ship their arts to out
and help sell
we have been having some
business.
Um financial literacy classes
best practices for vendors we've
had food handlers training at
our center these are small
things then not seen like the
whole lat but those resources
are absent in this community so
we're very happy to be part of
this discommunity and they have
embraced me I am originally from
five miles south
truly in senator pinton's
district and I commute and five
miles is not a whole lot but for
over thirty years I was
traveling at least a hundred and
ten miles around trip every day
to work in windor I don't know
how I did that but i'm i'm
grateful for the opportunity
because all of those resources
networks and experience that I
gain is what I use here are our
center is a non profit
organization we operate on
donations and grounds so part of
my my am my responsibility and
no pressure on me as I have to
find a grants to stay open
but we are moving right along
and I have seen the people in
this community embrace and
you've heard our leadership here
introduced themselves and kia
arni i'm kia army and I am here
on and I feel like i've made
full circle i've travel all over
the all over indian country in
different areas in housing in
infrastructure and work force
development and i've come home
and that for me is so important
and so I utilize all those
skills sets and resources here
to contribute and help be at the
seniors if they have a question
be at the
the chapter here or helping on
the community of development
with planning.
So have a lot of experience and
planning and infrastructure
development and housing and work
force development and media and
advocacy for both the states
tribes at the state level into
federal level so being home when
working with the grassrooms
people is more rewarding than I
i've ever done and to help are
must ease and chase answer
questions and fill out forums
and english and navigal I think
that is exactly the vision of
our founders for the community
center
so
I invite you to come visit us I
invite you to start by if you're
traveling for nine one north or
south
we are open monday through
friday and we are here to serve
the people
and there's just so much so much
culture rich in artistry here
and i'm very humble and blast to
be part of that and i'm very
humble and blessed to be here
today to speak to that to each
and every one of you and I want
to thank you for the bottom my
heart for all the discussions
for all the funding for all the
support that you learn to are
tribal communities here on the
alcohol nation and so with that
I want to just again express my
appreciation and invite you to
visit our community center thank
you I have.
The.
It's been looking.
I hear how big you are senator
committee members I appreciate
that report out on her on our
non profit here and we think
working with non profit is the
key to transition rule novel
communities as a committee you
often hear about the challenges
working what we call big naba
who out in window rock and so
our goal is to decentralise and
put some of that power back into
the communities that you
represent so this is a great arm
best practice and what we're
looking at is how them can small
nonprofits who are community
base work with new mexico
dollars since a lot of that is
on a government to government
basis but your need and what you
see in your communities vital
and so what continue to work
together on creating that avenue
for a non profit would I also
want to express is that for
regional projects that the
committee can help is the the
finished later lines for the
navigal gallop water lane and so
there's been a lot of federal
dollars and state dollars
invested into that water line
we continue to work with all of
you as you help with the capital
outlet for later online into the
communities that is a a large
investment and so I think that's
something where we could
prioritize working with governor
grisham luhan on how we're going
to make sure that communities
are long this corridor have
access to fresh clean running
water just
fifteen miles north of here in
the community of sonasty when we
test the water it at just the
threshold of the arsenic there's
too much arsenic in our water
and that's because of the years
of your raniom
expiration and exploitation and
till that should be like how we
look at water.
Another main area of
infrastructure that we would
need a regional or state
approach that goes beyond I
would see your individual
capital outlate is broadband
currently never honestly we
estimate that we need
approximately two hundred and
seventy six million dollars two
completely provided broadband
across nable honestly for the
committee I can get you what
that means for your communities
in new mexico what would that
look like looking with a
different providers and how them
we can invest dollars nab
honestly we invested seventy
seven million dollars of our
interbroadband and we know
that's just not enough the other
area that just was not enough
was roads yesterday you heard
the report from a division
director platero unfortunately
what happened when i'm the ora
money was the arped money with
distribute it the first round
the US treasury told us
transportation was not
an eligible request so all of
our communities lost out in that
major infrastructure investment
into roads but we hear time and
time again how that's important
so i'd like to see what we could
do through this committee
working as chair of the caucus
what is the roads package for
nab who nation in our new mexico
territories the governor and
this committee can move together
to see what would it take for
eastern to replace all of those
army bridges what would it take
for highway four nine one to
finally get the safety corridor
that we were promised what will
it take to move forward with all
of those are ingress roads
because what your sea and the
community is there now forced
almost two drive on head on a
traffic to get access to their
holes or to actually arm pr in a
merge on to the highway this
highway we could pull down
motor.
A accident injuries and it
continues to be the number one
of cause of home save here on
about finishing is motor related
injuries and how can we prevent
that for highway for ninety one
our sister highway five fifty go
into cuba and other areas one of
the other areas that I wanted to
point out committee as we work
together is our communities are
struggling with e nine one one
and so that takes impart with a
broad with the broadband and the
rural addressing we have a heavy
investment on the abortion but
what we want to do is make sure
we're connecting with the
counties and with the state to
make sure that it's sustainable
and that it's reasonable so
we'll need your help as a
committee what is
recommendations to enhance email
to the rural communities that
you represent across this great
state I want to point out that
there's some great
collaborations with our state
partners which include your own
new mexico tourism department
they have come on board to help
us restore the trail of the
ancient and so we want to
enhance our ability for cherson
activity not only do we have a
lot of artists ins and benders
but we have a lot of tourists
are traffic that that's an
opportunity so if they're coming
from downsouth or up north we
want them to come through our
cordor and see the beauty that
were all in joint today so we
appreciate it as committee can
look at the investment into
tourism and continue to invest
in arm indian country when it
comes to a tourism in terms of
transportation as we have a
secretary as certain are here we
appreciate you what we want to
look at now and and sweeping
with the senator shindow
we now know that if never
honestly allocate it federal
dollars are not spent that the
state has an alpertunity to.
Either recapture a re a line
those dollars so I want to
continue to have that dialog
because of nab who nation is not
able to our system to spend down
those dollars how can we partner
with secretary so not through
his department you actually get
that money down into the ground
the regions I e represent I look
forward to to work in with you
of course our senior centers if
I could ask the help of this
committee are we submitted for
capital outlay and unfortunately
at the time of maybe two weeks
ago we were given notice from
the department of aging that
they denied about approximately
four point five million dollars
of senior center programs for
nab honestly in capital outlay
if this committee can help with
the follow up madame chair coach
here we want to make sure that
if it's an issue in terms of a
signature that we're able to
rectify that because our senior
centers rely on are that type of
investment at from
a state partners which this
committee continues to support
an vote for allocation so we we
would I hope for your continued
support our senior center here
is in desperate need of a van
they've been asking for many
years for a new van they thought
they were on the list got
knocked off the list now about
every
so often they'll get like a
little replacement that will
break down when it gets fixed
it's reassigned somewhere else
what we want to do is get them a
band so that they know that
they're taking care of so we'll
work with you representative
johnson on figuring out what is
that mean with long term aging
and with nab who nation the last
thing that I want to wind down
and why it so important into
investing into community
projects is prevention for every
one dollar any entity spends on
prevention.
It seems that seven dollars on
direct services which could mean
like dell time rehab centers and
so nab issue we have a dinner
action plan for suicide
prevention substance abuse
prevention violence prevention
and are missing and murdered in
their relatives this this is
helpful when committees like
yourself support are investing
indian affairs with their
behavioral health graph so I
think it's going to be reburdant
who's gonna champion that for
our side and have access to
affairs department behavioral
health resources were also very
appreciated on the capital
outlay that was provided the
thirty million to identifiers we
hope that that's used to offset
some of our swordfall costs for
for the representatives capital
outlet projects and the last
thing is we we request and we
would benefit from this
committee continuing to support
the federal infrastructure
reimbursement so as the chapter
in the nation invest in federal
programs which is our cut it's
wonderful that the state and the
committee is supporting that we
could see re investment i'm into
our community so it's very vital
I wanted to touch on those
issues as we have members of the
appropriation committee here
with us and that you start
prioritizing how we're going to
move forward in this next
legislature those are critical
places that that help our
community and so we appreciate
you being out here today and if
you have time just eight miles
on west of here is the mountain
rejuvenate yourself go up there
you'll be amongst all of our our
beautiful chush game tin and we
appreciate a time thank you
cherical chart.
Yeah.
Think you should not a
representative lench
thank you matter of chair let me
start by thanking the panel I I
did have a couple car men stolen
just like to particularly
address these for the council
delegate
i'm aware of what happened with
the senior center situation
madame because I have a chapter
that was denied and for no
reason because the application
had gone in and
I have no idea what happened but
I do plan to follow up on that
with one of the chapter
applications that we had
but I do want to talk a little
more countedly about something
you had set in your opening
comments about giving the power
back to communities as the
longest serving house member I
can tell you it doesn't feel
that way out here and the reason
it doesn't feel that way it's
because the number one complaint
I get and everyone in my chapter
meetings as the projects are
held up and window
so it doesn't feel like we're
giving power about to the
communities you may be but they
need to know that the
communities need to know that
and I don't know how you share
that we're sound but they need
to have a better understanding
because there's not a chapter
meeting I go to and I go to a
lot of that that isn't the
number one complaint the other
thing I wanted to mention madam
chair over the last several
years
consistently i've seen an
educational package come through
the new mexico house and it's
you're after a year and what it
does is it checks a fund for
proposed fund and it divides
money even lay among i'll need a
communities in the state i've
never voted for that because I
think it needs to be population
based the problem with thirties
is that we then get information
from the council or from the
president this is no we support
this my community stop support
that.
So i'm glad that you are
chairing the new mexico carcass
because we have to have some
counted conversations about that
when you take a very small level
of community and it gets an
equal amount of educational
trust fund money in this
proposed legislation to the
largest native community which
is now the whole I don't think
that's fair I think that is not
right and I know there's a
number of us on this committee
that come from this part of the
state that don't support that
but we need to know why you guys
do and and that's never been
clear to me you know we're not
trying to be counter to what
your leadership is about but we
need to understand why
and the other issue I wanted to
mention madam chair the state of
new mexico I set up a fund for
match dollars for federal
applications I don't know if the
driver's taken advantage of that
in the local chapters how but
there's been a funding source
it's now been set up to match
federal grounds but what i'm
asking you to consider is to do
the same thing because this is a
reimburseable process for these
capped all out my projects so
people will say well you've
underfunded so and so you've
underfunded these people but
it's about how much that they
can pay for because it's a
reimburseable I don't understand
why the tribe doesn't set up a
fund like that that the chapter
can use as canada guarantee for
those dollars as opposed to
me putting a hundred thousand
into a project where it needs a
million and then it takes ten
years to do the project and it's
all because it's a reimburseable
that needs to change in the
state of new mexico but until it
does I think the naval council
and in your budget process I
decided to find for the same
purpose and using those art of
funds might be a good thing to
do
I would also incurs encourage
strongly that when you.
Ask that those are performance
be reallocated to a state
process that those moneys go
back to naval communities period
cause as where they come from so
I that's just a few calm and
spat of terror because i've been
out visiting my chapters
recently and I can tell you that
they got to know that you're for
them
and that you are trying to put
power back into the community
level but I think the way to do
that as to set up a found that
they can access so when they
come to the state in new mexico
they can ask for an adequate
amount of money for their
projects thank you manager
thank you representative
representative of garcia
thank you madame chair thank you
presentation a little bit on
what is lump on you know some of
my chapter losing their money in
all one sooner just lost a
hundred and ninety thousand
dollars here
recently but they cannot really
write it and you know what
happened here everybody in this
room here's the same thing never
hold
on and I don't know what the
problem is but there is a
definite problem
and what's happening between
and the chapter houses madam
chair then what I hear all the
time if I talk to november they
say well to check
you doctor chapter houses who
never under the money so you
know and appropriate and capital
lowly through for equipment
installed for this to your hit
for construction as for but i've
been reoptivised some of these
money through for bank in the
last time I did it
could you know you can can keep
undoing that a big issue
with your presentation you said
that you needed two hundred
where you're getting two hundred
seventy six million for
broadband is that it too well
then I wondered coz what's
happening
there is rural.
Naba who in their refront year
and available
representative outlined turn
over like late ballet
white rock island more new these
people don't have anything out
there and near you know i've
been a rep three years and
they've heard a sim all sung in
that all the time we're going to
get it to you we're going to get
it you
don't do not go to put an
enforcement with the kind of
forty three house you know and
and I hope this money to try to
get really covered all of never
home because the fire is a state
madam chair is concerned
about he's considered all of it
all surrounding it gets left out
in especially my district
it been really left out because
you know I
have
worked with mr freedom there on
a lot of issues
again and we talked about the
seat problems that were facing
all the time and never changes
we have me next year will have
the same meeting to have a sim
discussion again and that that's
not personally people after we
really need to address on the
issue
one more lasting madam chair you
mentioned suicide prevention do
you have any small cyprovision
of veterans because I am require
a view and i'm veteran you know
and the item if you're aware of
it or not but our veterans
suicide is a second height in
the national sydney mexico we
need to address all the issues
for veterans loaded that that
last month is a comment and
we're not on that subject but to
me it is a subject and
told me we really need to make
sure that these money for the
broadband motor everybody
everybody got get pretty equally
not just the main order of the
other native nation cause people
are going to left down and if
you don't want to look at it is
cause you don't want because you
know if
it's reality thank you for that
thank you manager.
Thank you representative
representative robot couple
error
think you madam chair and thank
you all for your presentations
very helpful so i've asked this
question throughout the years
and arm
after yesterday's presentation
and today and various comments
it's important to ask again how
effective it is your working
relationship with the indian
affairs department are they a
resource to you and the reason I
ask this is because we continue
to hear you after year about the
bureaucratic obstacles that are
faced by arm are chapters are
communities throughout the state
when it comes to
issues such as what you raise
today all of the concern to the
road the infrastructure the
connectivity bride bound the
services are throughout right in
yesterday we had a huge amount
of money that we saw reverting
back because of bureaucratic
obstacles so in my view madame
chair
there's got to be and they
always side as the department
being the one someone to be able
to medigate through these things
to help navigate mitigate the
problems
if it's not the department I
know you I know never honation
has their own
office
what department I don't know how
you refer to it and then other
tribal communities and nations
have the same
but everybody across the board
has the same issues
so
there are state issues there
window rock issues they're
federal issues.
And the bottom line is that our
communities are not receiving
are in a timely manner the funds
that we want them to get because
it's not just in the form of
capital outlet but it's also in
the form of all of the services
that that were set up
representative lunch raised a
great point and that is the fun
I think that's a avenue we
definitely on our end have to
pursue
pending as one issue the other
major issues where I start it
with and that the bureaucratic
obstacles that once the funds
are there how do they get the
stupid it in a timely manner so
we're not faced with all of
these
returning of fathers and and and
other obstacles because it's not
just about money it's also about
how whose evaluating in
assessing the outcomes it's
gonna be us doing it r people
doing it mark
the bureaucracy doing that so
how do we set up the policies
and mechanisms to allow us to be
the surveyors of the outcomes so
those were those are some I
started with a microphone but I
need to try to identify who it
is that can help medicate
through all this thank you
madame chairman.
I don't know if somebody wants
to briefly answer that or any of
our it could be a dialog I don't
know madam chair how we can do
this but
there were under the chairs both
of their guidance here thank you
thank you we have representative
send representative home in
representative little under list
i'd like to wait for a final
comment from you because we are
we are now at eleven fifteen
so let's go ahead and hear from
representative allison
thank you madame chair
thank you for the presentation
it's good to know that your
community center is thriving
it's as reinforces there if you
put an assignment with a good
leadership it trives and I see
that with misroberts thank you
for keeping that open I was part
of the
opening ceremony several years
ago so it's good to see that
it's right
never nation leadership often
throws the word around
resiliency I think that is a
good example receiving it and I
also mentioned look you also
mentioned local leadership is
what you're striving for
several years ago there was a
beautiful building built to the
north of here
not long after it opened there
was a fence built around what
was the purpose of that building
and why is it still fenced today
it seems that maybe that
something or we can recillion
can local government local
control in place to see the
benefits of what that building
was constructed for
so that is my question what are
we gonna do with it what are we
doing about it
thank you items here.
Thank you representative well
wait for the answer after we
hear from representative of
alcohol
not unfair I just have a since
we have a department that state
level of somehow or not we
should we should make that
agency the funding agency for
all our capital projects that
are to be added to the never
whole next so we can avoid these
run around and have a home
nation they would directly to
the state and get things funded
and done there will be a lot
less paperwork
a lot less iga speaking
everything else because it'll be
handled by basically the state
will handle the state buddy
chapter for get their funding
and
then they will reimburse the
state after the project is done
I guess it would be the way to
do since we have a
department to call them in the
repairs department not just
leave it as that because that's
going to settle my mind for like
twenty years long and already
been there sixteen years thank
you very much
representative little
think you madam chair and it's a
quick follow up question on
that I am aware that we this
committee had made a request for
aging in long term services to
present on elder care services
they were not able to join us uh
this week during this serve a
series of meetings I just want
to make sure that we do have
them present to this committee
before this interim session is
done thank you
thank you representative little
matter vice chair
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee and
thank you.
Um for your presentation the
words there was a pilot I guess
in some sense until hatchi about
the broadband would really want
to know how that that's greater
and I lived there and it seems
to have gotten better as far as
their capacity so I want to know
how how we can expend that more
after yesterday's.
Meeting with iad the
restructuring
I just want to picture people
are aware there should be people
that you should be able to
contact
through the chapters if this
restructuring does not improve
our system by next year we need
to come back to the table and
really revisit everything again
with that because they
understand with the training id
supposed to be coming out doing
training for our chapter
administrators with the capital
outlet and on that point
I also know that our federal
partners with the better into
administration and are tribe on
the aids aren't with our better
ins department with new mexico
if you coordinate with them
there will be able to come out
and help me better ins
in which they'll actually bring
their equipment and
input whatever our veterans need
that so there's action actually
happening windy tried to
coordinate those sticks both
under state site and if they're
site and I found that very
encouraging this year to see the
actually happening at some of
these events so that that's
whether the one of the best
things I had seen those words
are better it's getting on some
service i'm not sure how we
can move things a little bit
further because that's just the
benefits it's not really the
housing and some of the
initiatives we need further on
that aging a long term services
was invited to be sure today
they canceled on it and hoping
they will be able to come
forward later in the maybe on
our next meeting
so keep that in mind and we'll
try to keep that in my into that
some of the concerns about where
why someone projects were not
moved forward in that sense.
I'm glad this chapter is not
under this but those that joined
us there and the eighth answer
from our delegates uh there is a
list that I will give you up
their reversions that were given
to us yesterday from our indian
affairs department and it was
almost close to one point five
million that was reverted from
the nation so we really need
some boots underground in some
people that are really aware of
what's happening in the
community and the request that
are chapters are giving us
per if they're not able to reach
the dally gets and get it to the
nation so that needs the
communication like needs to be
put forward
and I really want to know what
are we going to do about fab
fire by your safety
long with the emptys and the
are are long for smith because I
know there's been several
structures that have burned
because we haven't had the
up.
You just couldn't get their time
so it's like total **** and then
had how our people recovering
from that i'm thinking out of
chair members of the committee.
Thank you
senator schendo
thank you manager no not a
question just a common thank
representative some to bring it
up this idea back in two
thousand five hundred million
with joe surely president joe
surely when I became cabinet
secretary and we had this past
tif and I was doing analysis
about how much and an annual
basis nable nation would get no
suggested to them because the
chapters were always in a
position where they're trying to
find a money is it if you
already know on an average what
it annual appropriation to stay
there in the mexico makes I
understand you have different
funds that you have created
maybe on a new mexico sake as
we're the only state that I
think does this is why don't you
create a revolving fun.
And take a three year average of
what that is like look at the
last three years and see what
the nable nations are gone from
this day and create that fun and
that way you always have that
fun and and then the chapters
will spend it and then you send
you a receipt and then the
refund gets repanished and so
it's just ongoing and
twenty plus years later who we
are having the same issues I
hope that
as you're looking at it you know
there is something that gets
done because at the end of the
day it's our constituents that
lose out not the government it's
our constituents and I think
that's the frustration for all
of us you know I represent
twenty chapters and when we go
to chapter meetings this is what
we hear is the disconnect
between big album and the
chapters and so if there is a
way I mean it's it's in maybe
this solutions are too simple
but we make him complicate it
and I think you know if there's
a way that we can help out uh
really great because at the end
of the day it just you know more
investment for our local
communities that were represent
so thank you madame church one
big that comment.
Thank you senator would you like
to provide a response
yet thank you I appreciate and I
love frank conversations i've
been um
in the time of looking at
systems and the frustration with
our communities each time that
we have these sprink discussions
i've been the caucus chair for
about six months and so i'm
learning a the system on how new
mexico works what nab honestly
are there is definitely areas
that we could work together to
reduce the bureaucracy of both
sides and what we want to do and
I can make the commitment so i'm
gonna take all the hits I do
want to recognize we do have
office of the president staff
here
mr gay and bear the ones who are
on the ground just like indian
affairs working with your
chapters but as a delegate
because these programs are so
vital.
I'm focused on how to get this
rate and that's when my
commitment every time we speak
so let's go to say there's good
news here.
Lgas at our locally government
government certified chapter and
will give you a high level
summary for new mexico how many
of those chapters we have or how
many you may have as super
delegate because they have the
authority and they seem during
arm or arpa is that they could
start entering into subrecipient
agreements so we also need to
educate chapters what is their
power because they've been
disempowered by window rock for
so many decades they don't even
know what power they have
so that step one step two is
when it comes to the education
act representative i'm good news
here the council and the
president both support an
education act based on
population and will give you
that resolution and we lobbyed
hard and that's how we met a lot
of you up in santa fe it was my
first time being caucus chair
and I back to myself what an
experience but will give you
that information and it's
probably
one of the few times that the
president's office and the
council
completely support the
population distribution and we
look to have a strategic session
where in our budget cycle so at
the end maybe midseptember and
what will do is will bring in
our leadership to have those
round table discussions on what
is our position prior to going
to santa fe in january so you're
all fully aware
second being with the match
dollar.
I could get back to senator
sindo i'm not sure when this was
developed but naval honestly
does have a match.
Um.
Dollar account.
What were not seen our chapters
are not requesting that funding.
And I could tell you the six
months that I have been chair
and we have delivered leicester
gazzie who i'm came on board
february we sweared in march
april so new eyes to the process
I can also because I believe
it's accountability I could give
you a listing of what chapters
requested that funding could
have simply requires a chapter
resolution
and so every year the navigation
council.
And maybe this is a better
number we should look at every
year we allocate two million to
this fund
why is it only two million
because for the last.
Almost six five for six years we
didn't have chapters requesting
this funding.
So this year working with miss
jaff
arm dcd division of community
development we were able to push
out eleven point two million
dollars.
Now I could give you a listing
it hopefully it's a majority of
your chapters who have a short
call because that's how we see
projects so there has to be i'm
saying there has to be this
education then for chapters to
know that there is an additional
dollar and that it's not going
to be window up to solve or to
get their programs and projects
going but that's something good
that we already have
for arpa every delegate and now
um within the last.
Three years.
And it was a fight and when I
look at freelance here because
he fought me against it but now
we're doing equitable
distribution of our but that are
available to the community so
every delay get received about
three years ago eight point two
million dollars which can be
used for your projects shortfall
where negotiating with president
neighboring cos about fifty days
ago he line item vetoed a next
are next installation of a
funding to our communities and
so we will spoke with him he's
agreed to equitable distribution
and so we look for another eight
million investment into our
communities so if you receive my
emails.
Has anybody received my emails
from the committee I am telling
the chapters.
Get your project listing
together do your cip have your
chapter resolution and when we
have this money i'm gonna put
you freight and center because I
think as a chair of the caucus
that's my role rate to push all
the projects forward so i'm
gonna also need your help to see
what projects did you find that
you're have some concerns
because we know what projects
are underfunded and then we
could work together to start
allocating money but I do need
that chapter resolution.
Because I don't want to chapter
to see
why are you giving money to that
chapter you know you're your
favorite them and but through
resolution and working with the
representatives we could work on
this so these are opportunities
for us and I think madam chair
will need to have a very
specific convenient if you could
help me so that we could talk
about capital outlet cause I
want all of the projects that
you receive my goal is the
projects you receive from the
chapters that there's some type
of vetting and they get
technical systems so you know
for sure they have their
landword dropper that's been a
issue right away that's an issue
and so those projects are the
ones that that do me your
deadline
is is some of the some of the
issues ok let's see
representative bucker let's I
make a commitment to go over
with you and your office the
project that you lost and why
you lost them we've been having
weekly mediums with arm division
of community development and up
again emails out to communities
that were that their projects
were set to revert june
thirtieth so for sure the last
five months prior to reversion
everyone should have been on
notice and we were able to see
with some projects and so I want
to make sure what we're the
issues with your community and
projects and then if how do we
work together to make sure
they're successful.
I do want to say four arm where
we're are concerned about the
twenty eighteen projects that
were vetoed by the governor I
think that sent a signal to us
that there is either an issue
where it's going to be a multi
year allocation or that we
really need a tighten up to see
what projects can be complete it
within the timeframe and every
authorization now is not on the
table or frowned upon then
that's going to go back to the
very so we can let you know okay
this project was probably gonna
take four years and multiple
funding and they may not meet
your time lane what I did it
know as a nation.
Ok I could pass here to differ
to the to the committee thank
you.
Oh yes so about the building so
the bill being big you
representative allison that
building is under nable honestly
in regional business office the
chapter invested a lot of money
in the survey and the land
withdrawal so this actually
highlights why some of the
projects are in a challenge
because it was built without the
proper land withdraw and without
the
having a conversation with our
utilities on on how we needed to
expand utilities to meet the
needs of that building so we're
doing things backwards and that
was that tourism for a number of
years and now it's fenced
because on the individual who
owns the sinclair i'm gastation
now has that on business site
least for a twenty five years
without the knowledge of the
community and they have been
very aggressive in i'm not
providing the space for the
vendors and so we are looking
for an operator and we've also
asked the nonprofit it was a
very hostile situation and so
will continue and that's the
challenge of working with
outside business owners that are
not based in the community on
they become very hostile to the
community when we want to see
the community thrive so that's
any other questions what we're
to ask answer directly okay
thank you thank you
representative garcia quickly
and then representative lunch
drum
thank you madame job reform
you mentioned that the chapter
would another blame for the
money there's a definite
disconnect between the chapters
and your office cause your
telling me completely different
there is a disconnect some work
because they're saying they're
applying for it never condition
not giving the money so we need
to address that issue and just a
common there's over five billion
dollars in the treasury of the
plan to have been reverted.
In america not for sure but over
a billion of that is from never
been reverting back to the state
we know that a lot of money and
they just said the torred loss
can get it back but we really
need to address the issue of
stopping the bleeding cause it
couldn't keep unhappening over
the wall you just finish in a
lot of a lot of funny is not
being put out to the chapter
because you're not asking for it
in their saying exactly opposite
the tracy you don't believe
already sharper I got nine of
them and I hear all the time in
everything every representative
has a chapter house in the
district is you in the same
thing so we need to address and
we should take the manufacturer
take a chance thank you
representative lunchtime
thank you madame chair just have
a couple things to say is there
I think it's going to be
important that at least the ya
legislators that represent
nobody communities start meeting
with the council delegate
but I can tell you that I work
very closely with the council
delegate from my area and he's
in the front row here and we
have actually been involved with
strategic planning work with the
chapters that we both represent
and it's worked out well but I
can tell you it's from those
meetings so they can tell
there's a disconnect
to be able to say that these are
the funds are these other funds
were available while these are
decisions that were made before
even became a council delegate
made by you guys before he was
elected into being a council
delivered so that is the senior
center that we need help with
yes it's red rock and there
they've there ninety percent
there are now they're ready for
the funding and it's not there
all kinds of reasons around that
but the other comment I want to
make is that I need to be on
your contactless because i've
never heard from you
unless you're sending it to the
legislative email I don't know
but I can certainly give you.
The way to get a hold of me my
cell number and everything cause
i've not heard from your own
and I represent one of the six
native districts in the state of
new maxical thank you
thank you representative thank
you colleagues and think you
should not at those of you
sitting before me I am want to
thank you for your presentation
and I want to let you know that
I don't think there's any one of
us and a representatives or
senators here who have a chapter
who
irremark dollars to assist our
chapter communities and so
moving forward we know what the
problem is we know what the hold
up is and we know what to do so
we're not going to talk any more
we were not going to be the dead
party to death and then we are
going to invite aging a long
term services back before our
committee we have up until
december so they have plenty of
time to
open their calendar to meet with
us and then one read example
that I want to mention is I ear
marked eighty thousand dollars
for a sheep springs chapter here
eighty thousand dollars is not a
whole lot of money.
But they did develop five or
more bathroom additions for
elders in this community up the
road and so when we
my priority my priorities for my
chapters is powerline extension
waterline extension and bathroom
additions because when i'm
walking in albertsons or safeway
my elders come up to me and they
say she
asked show on the doshifian
eighth she younger are short
talk and about but said the
should see e gray and the issue
should you go to twelve
and send hard harder so
I don't understand why
or are are per dollars from
window or chapters
or are not providing those
services I went to ntua on
behalf of my constituent
they told me that that
constituent has to wait five to
ten years so I did inform the
president of our alcoholician
why are our elders and are
veterans who have disabilities
and are young families who are
starting their
their lives waiting five ten
years
for powerline water line so I
think that's another
conversation that we can extend
that we can use capital outlet
to his sister chapters and our
communities along with the art
so I just want to think you very
much thank you for your
hospitality
this is one of my chapters i'm
proud to serve you i'm honoured
and we'll continue to work
together but we have a.
Department of transportation are
on on on dark now and I have
traveled to quote so thank you.
Okay department of
transportation secretaries
reserve an hovier.
Okay are we ready thank you
a good morning madam chair
members of the
you got
good morning yeah good morning
madam chairman members of the
committee thanks for having us
my name is reconcerned on the
secretary from the mexico
department of transportation and
i'll go through this
presentation first and then
we'll move to a district five
and district six presentation
reports and we'll try and keep
it minimal and then you can far
away with any questions that you
are may have
I want to start on page two with
the funding outcomes from the
twenty twenty four legislative
session and again begin with my
since you're appreciation for
the outcomes of the twenty
twenty four legislative session
just over half a billion dollars
of non recurring appropriations
to the department of
transportation and you'll see
here on slide to how that breaks
up into a few buckets are the
line share of that came by way
of seven's tax bond projects
that we've got to get obligated
by twenty twenty five five
million for while i've court
ongoing funding for roadway
beautification and there pick up
we dedicate a hundred and twenty
million to roadway maintenance
there's seventy million for
additional projects identified
during the session and then
fifty million and support for
our are continued
electrification efforts across
the state
what we decided to do on peace
and slight three let's just give
you a sniper to promote the
public facing dashboard that we
created to track all of the
twenty twenty four legislative
funding and so you see this link
here at the bottom try to keep
it simple or tracking three
primary buckets of funding.
The three hundred and twenty
million and stb projects the
seventy million and special
projects and then our
maintenance projects so if you
go to that dashboard you can
look to see by the map where
these projects are which of
these three pockets from which
are these three buckets the
projects being funded a quick
overview of what process we're
going to put on that corridor
and then you can look at that
paychart like we're showing you
there to identify the funding
source so even though this is
aim that
publicly displaying where the
legislative appropriations are
going we had to identify
additional funding sources for
some of these projects to make
sure that they got done
on slide for
I just wanted to show you a
snippet of a couple of programs
that
find local and tribal energies
the first of which is going to
be the local government road
fund and so on this library just
showing you that and in this
program going back to twenty
twenty one where some local
government road fund projects
are are are being put in the
ground beginning
you know we never honation up at
the top and then last the most
current words at the very bottom
of the table the local
government road fund project is
provides between twenty two and
twenty seven million dollars
every single year it's not the
most ideal program for a couple
of reasons one is it does
require a twenty five percent
match of the local but the
funding has to be split up on
the
based on those bullets at the
very bottom cooperative programs
or two programs school bus roads
municipal minutes for cheering
so it gets a little one key in
so we've been evaluating whether
or not we need to just kind of
collapse that program in to what
you're going to see on slide
number five and so on slide
number five this is just a high
level of transportation project
fund awards to tribal entities
going back to two thousand and
nineteen and again because this
find is a lot less restrictive
and because the match is.
Only five percent with an option
for a match waver you'll see
going back to nineteen nearly
twenty nine million dollars of a
words to travel energy and so
this is the more effective
approach for trouble and is
we've been talking about may be
merging the two programs but
you'll see here this is a
disbursement program and that's
helpful because the energies get
the funding up front and they
don't have to you know struggle
with cash flow and week for
reimbursements
again we have a hard chip waiver
the proposals were due on march
thirty first of this year and
now I think today where status
to the obligated to send those
recommendations to our
commission
on slight six I wanted to talk a
little bit about a a measure
that's front center for due to
largely in part due to
legislation that was presented
by representatives hockey be
hill in art in the cruce that
really tasks the department of
transportation with addressing
the fact that we are number one
in the nation for pedestrian
feetalities and so what we've
done of course is centralised
the data that helps us identify
words some of the hot spot areas
are in the state of new mexico
so that we can really focus our
efforts on conducting audits at
those locations identifying rude
issues and challenges and then
working with local governments
trying to trust them but so we
have a number of a tremendous
amount of data available to us
and I wanted to just pull one
piece for you here because it's
important to know that that of
data from twelve to twenty
twenty two when you were looking
at crashes that resulted in the
death or impacted in capacitated
individuals at the scene
bernaldios on one county
mckinley county john cunning
sanity county at the highest
risk and pointing out to this
committee of course that of
those in these crashes twenty
three point one percent of them
were native americans and the
statistic is high also for males
and so.
What we've got to do is you see
the circles on the map that
identify hotspots and just this
category is really start looking
at those intersections looking
at those corridors and
identifying what we can do to
really prevent those deaths i'm
happening in the future we can
do the same per bicyclists
protestrians and motor vehicle
related crashes in accidents and
so this the measures you'll see
on page seven is really aim that
just being really intentional we
know that our engineers are
designing roadways with safety
at the forefront of what they're
doing but we have to look at
existing assets and understand
the vulnerabilities there are so
are these are some of the things
that you'll see coming from this
effort and we'll send an
invitation to you all but at the
end of august we're hosting a
safety summit to talk more about
the partnerships that need to
exist to get these things done
at the end of the august in
albuquerque on slightly very
quickly this is a new program
that were excited about the
governors asked the duty really
be front and centered in state
beautification
efforts and and we know that
that's going to include a few
things one is going to be
ongoing later pick up in
beneficiation we know that we
need funding a pick literal to
beautiful our roadway so that's
going to be one the other is
going to be enforcement how do
we essentially work with local
municipalities county is tribal
governments to understand where
the residents of new mexico are
contributing to this issue and
how we hold them accountable
from a legal dumping to one
secure loads and and of course
literary and then the third
component is going to be
education how do we raise a
generation of new mexicans that
like appreciate the beauty of a
state like new mexico and work
to preserve it and so one of the
programs that part of this
effort is we've launched this
killing that unification grant a
couple weeks ago the
applications are due august
fifteen but dot is going to be
funding programs beat local
beautification programs in local
governments.
Two essentially assist in
sustaining this effort and we're
being represcriptive and so
you'll see on the bullets here
these are some of the things
that we want to see in that
local beneficiation program and
we're gonna find a local
beautiful case in coordinator to
ensure those things are kind of
ingrained in the culture of
those communities but you'll see
here from service learning to
see the ordinances to the use of
correctional facility in made to
creating opportunities for
residents to report a legal
trash dumping etc
and then the last measure were
excited to just share generally
to let you know what we're doing
is our workforce development
efforts you know any dealt is
really doing a tremendous things
with regard to recruitment and
retention and in fact we are
we've been able to a lower our
retention read significantly in
the last couple of years and
were for point four percent
lower than we were just a year
ago and so some of the things
that were doing to create a
pipeline is we released an rfp a
few weeks ago and those
proposals are do actually today
from institutions of higher ed
to help us develop programs for
a work force that
essentially feel
high turnover positions where we
know an institution isn't
already preparing workers for
for that work so we're excited I
understand that is of yesterday
we had three institutions
respond and so what will be
doing is standing up these
training programs so that high
school students those who want
it a career pathway change or
those who are looking for work
in general we can tell them
go here get trained and come and
work for the deot and and we we
can give you a good career and
so I want to close was really
just some ideas about how
they're opportunities for us to
work in partnership with tribal
governments including that
available nation and those
throughout the state of new
mexico
is opportunities really exist
with bills ability to f.
Find a local and tribal
governments directly and this is
really becoming this is this is
a reality in fact just last
month the federal highway
announced raise grants directed
to directly to local and tribal
governments
I I know that there have been
chapters raymond available for
example that's received direct
awards and so it's been great we
had to get over our saltiness a
little bit because now we have a
lot of competition for federal
grants but they're all our
neighbors and communities but
where we can help of course is
the steep match fund which was
talked about a little bit
earlier by representative lunch
from we can provide grant rating
support to tribal energies and
local governments and we of
course through our districts can
provide that project management
and oversight support so that if
they don't have the capacity to
manage these projects we can do
that and I think in a little bit
you'll hear from our district
engineers about how that's
happening in some instances one
of the areas that we can work
together on of course he is the
very lengthy process of bia
approvals on right away and for
those of you that have worked
directly on projects where DO t
needs easement approvals or the
purchase of right away when that
occurs is sometimes we can wait
anywhere from ten to fourteen
months for bia approval on those
are on those agreements and so
that can extend a project a year
on its own right because until
we indefinitely until we secure
right away and
we can't move forward with
breaking ground and getting
projects to construction dig
ones for broadband was talked
about a lot and we of course are
working with the office of
broadband access and expansion
on projects where that makes
most sense but even better than
that we've been encouraging
broadband office of broadband to
just simply identify core doors
that are dark we can help
engineer those projects and we
can get them the right away so
that they can just start laying
fiber I think it's wonderful
when we do a project for five or
ten miles that we get fiber
there.
But what happens in the five or
ten miles before in the fiber
ten miles after we don't want to
check aboard this and so we've
offered with to work with
broadband to say if you need
fifty miles from here to hear
and it's on our right away
that's engineering at fifty
miles a fiber in as soon as
possible
we also of course would like to
work with the indian affairs
department to peace funding
together a quilt funding
together for projects on rode
infrastructure and i'm gonna
point to that that
picture on the right there and
this is here on your mexico
twenty two it's in district
three where essentially the
country published looking to
turn that forward intersection
into a roundabout to address
traffic safety incidents right
they've gone to yet federal
funding for this project we're
supporting them with state broad
fund and indian affairs is
supporting them with tribal
infrastructure finding right and
so what we're doing with the
indian affairs division is
working on the timing of all of
these problems these funds and
and and and programs that were
managing so there between when
capital outlet is do we're
getting funded when as our t p f
projects getting funded when in
these new affairs putting out
their money so coach it is a
good example of how we're doing
that and there's another example
of further northern nokia we get
where we're working on for pay
avenue the same way state
tribal infrastructure funds and
federal funds we also a couple
of the bullets opportunities is
clarify rules and
responsibilities and weep sat in
front of many of you many times
where you've post questions like
we know it's not your road white
why can you just go why can you
do this why can you do why can't
you why can't you in and there's
never a good answer and my
philosophy is always we say yes
until we can't it's never know
it's yesterday we can't and so
we always we always kind of
figure out ways to get to yes on
a number of projects but it's
important that we first
understand our roles and
responsibilities.
But whenever we start
overlapping those rules and
responsibilities we we really
clarify them with this is what
we're going to do for you this
is what you're going to do for
us and collaboratively we're
going to we're going to fix some
much needed infrastructure needs
and then the last of course is
one thing that we see a lot with
with tribal governments and
local governments especially
because there's gone going
transition is there
understanding of
how to use state resources
strategically right often times
will be me with up a local and
tribal energy we ask questions
like did you submit a license
have you met with your local
legislators have you explored
capitalism as a possibility all
of these things right because
you know when we come to the
table we also want to tell local
and tribal energies this is well
should be at the table so we can
make this happen and so we try
and work through our local
government the easings and we
have one at every district so
that when we meet with partners
we don't only talk about what we
can bring to the table but what
they can access when they were
both all
local leaders when they meet
with you all and then when they
interact with the state funding
process and so are all stopped
there and and
well one other thing and I I
just wanted to address this
because I know it came up is the
idea of better redistribution of
tribal funding to state entities
and so I think there has been
some miss
understanding about what happens
here so on federal highway or
newest department of
transportation at the end of the
year they identify funding
nationally that hasn't been
obligated the way it's supposed
to be obligated what they do as
they poor that funding into a
bucket and then they go to
states that have been successful
in obligating their funding and
they give them the opportunity
to get a portion of that bucket
and because new mexico do you
tears done has really done well
and obligating their funding.
For at least the last five years
we've gone to that bucket and
have said we want this much
money and that amount is
dictated by how much match we
can put on the table for that
money so we say we want another
hundred million we have to have
twenty million of state funds
sitting ready to match that
hundred million and so two
things are important right is
one in twenty twenty three of
that bucket of finding only one
percent of it was from tribal
transportation funds conference
nationally and two is according
to federal highway in twenty
twenty three none of that tribal
transportation fund that was
reverted came from new mexico
which means that our tribes are
doing a good job obligating
their funding and that
nationally it represents such a
small portion that goes into
that bucket right so there are
opportunities for us with
redistribution to work with
other partners on getting
projects done but we wanted to
be sure that you know it's not
this idea that a tribal energy
doesn't spend eighty thousand
dollars in and beauty then goes
and says okay thank you very
much we're going to put it here
it's a larger broader federal
process so with that matter I
can hand it off to mr martinez
thank you madame chair committee
members my name is have you had
martinez and the asked acting
district engineer at this reply.
If you look at the packet this
is the one i'm i'm going for
so district five incompasses six
counties someone real riber
tells santa fe those almost and
torrents county
are district headquarters are
located in sanity and we were
closely with seventeen local
entities and ten tribal
government includes two nations
and eight northern levels
have we got a page two I wanted
to highlight the laws of twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty are
basically that was you know
money that was given us to a
us by the legislature I and as
you can see here all of our
projects we are able to spend
all that money so for a twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty on
page three
it has the last of twenty twenty
one twenty twenty two and twenty
twenty three and also you can
see that all of our projects
were also completed are with
them funding that was allocated
to district five the totals are
there I don't go through all the
details of the projects but if
you have any questions about
happy to answer about any of
these projects
a quickly on page for
these are the last twenty twenty
four that were just passed and
you know i'm happy to report on
some of them we we've already
started on some of these
projects so you know a few of
them are already have
the contractor out in the ground
there and the other ones of a
kind of identified you know when
our estimated time frame on to
get those funds as started for
those projects
the next page on page five are
these are unpoented construction
projects
I and as you can see you know
right now we have over two
hundred and seventy seven
million dollars within district
five.
Under construction contracts
are are recently completed
construction projects we've had
about fifty two million dollars
we've been able to close out on
our project close outside the
last year
page six shows our maintenance
projects are these are with
district funds that that are
allocated to us I and in there
we get about six point nine
million per year to spend on our
maintenance projects a lot of it
goes to retain
but like bridge box coverage a
route signage or are signing in
striping either so that's our
budget that we spend for
maintenance
right now we ever ongoing fiscal
year twenty nine right now and
so we started some of these
projects I will already the us
five fifty project is already
started we did industrial and
now we're going to complete it
in cover it with the
microsurface
of h seven shows our district
five step
that is a you know our projects
that we have up upcoming right
now I right now we have shown it
by you can pay look by letting
your of twenty three twenty four
twenty five twenty sixth and
twenty seven thousand currently
fiscally constrain years on our
step here but if you have any
questions regarding it I I think
you know one of the main
projects that we did start with
US sixty four of mile post zero
to seven point eight here in the
area I and so fees one and fees
to are under construction right
now
a page eight try to shows are
transportation project funding
that we've awarded and fiscal
year twenty two and twenty three
these are all the different
empty teasing locations of and
the funding amounts are for each
of the projects that we were.
Awarded a to it I want to think
the legislature for you know
giving funding this
transportation project on all of
the entities are really thankful
it gives them a good way to get
additional funding for their
projects in the needs that they
have on their roadways
each night as a continuation of
these are pride the more scored
ones in fiscal year twenty
twenty three that were awarded
in your you know a couple of the
highlight here is we did get
shiprock farm road I had no
nation you know they are a
warning of project to do a
double chip still on that
roadway
page term camera shows the the
dots of the locations on where
those projects are of that we're
awarded for twenty twenty three
and then they are the last page
kinda shows the tribal lands
that are within district five
they have a listed there are on
all the the two number onations
in the eight percent center
within district five
thank you
I guess we're three minutes into
the afternoon it's a good
afternoon
madam chair members of the
indian affairs committee my name
is lisa baker i'm the district
six engineer and district six is
located in the western new
mexico and encompasses siebel
and mckinley counties and we are
portions of catching soundable
sand one were riber valencia and
saquoral counties.
I'm here on the first page we do
were actually had quartered in
milan or branch new mexico and
on the first page here we do
have what our budget
responsibility is and our
employee breakdown
on page two
they are the last of twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty this
is the house bill to funds that
we received and the majority of
these projects have been
completed there are few designs
that were still working on
allison and the new mexico for
bypass but the majority of
everything else has been
completed on page three we have
the laws of twenty twenty one
twenty two and twenty three and
as you can see the majority of
these projects are also complete
we do have some projects that
are not fully funded and so they
they still remain here but were
hopeful to get additional funds
to get those projects than as
well on page four we have the
laws of twenty twenty four.
Which are the the funds that we
have just received this last
legislative session are we have
encumbered a majority of these
of funds and we are looking and
we do have estimated start dates
on all of these projects here
and the majority of them were
planning on starting this fall
once we have contractors on
board.
On page five we have our ongoing
construction projects are for a
total of just a little over
ninety eight million
we have our completed
construction projects there as
well which is also total that
ninety eight million
page six we have our last year's
contract maintenance projects
these are projects that we did
with our maintenance funds that
were allocated every year and we
were very lucky to get some
additional funds so we we spend
a total of twelve million
dollars last year
this year's contract maintenance
funds the majority of them are
either estimated to be completed
this a deseason or are ongoing
and those were little over seven
million
on page seven we have our
district six step projects and
these are for our physically
constrained years from twenty
twenty four to twenty twenty
seven
and then on page eight are the
planning years and these are
projects that we have in the
hopper or either.
In the process of being designed
or we're looking at but have not
or not funded yet
on page nine I included the
districts tap fifteen projects
prioritising these are projects
are currently unfunded and there
are um
priorities based on our
transportation as it management
plan project evaluation process
so as you can see based on the
data these would be the projects
that should be funded.
We have upcoming studies on the
bottom of the page there that
were working on the district
would like to continue to have a
very strong shelf program and so
we want to make sure we're doing
studies and have projects that
are also in design so that as
funding becomes available we can
continue to get these projects
completed
on page ten we have our
transportation project funding
for fiscal year twenty two and
twenty three those projects that
are shaded are projects that
have been completed.
On page the next page there we
have where those projects are in
relation to the district amount
and then on the
page twelve we have the local
government road front projects
for physically your two and
twenty three again the projects
that are sheeted or the projects
that have been completed.
And then the last page on page
thirteen we have a map of the
tribal lands within district six
end just their associated names
there some
if there are any questions i'd
be happy to answer them at this
time
thank you first on the list I
have
representative lunchtreme and
then representative little thank
you very much madame chair thank
you for the presentation
couple things I wanted to
mention for the committee's
benefit I want to complete mount
dealt's work when we had our
train derelmant
months ago just west of gallop
that's in the heart of my house
district with I think the team
worked well together I can speak
regular updates from the
secretary and others so I want
to thank you for that it was
something that I don't think
anybody expected so I want to
give you kudos for that
I would like to know amount of
chair industries six who is the
local government layers on who
is that person.
Madam chair representative.
I apologize for that our local
government supervisor for that
unit in his name is michael
dealey unfortunately he'll be
retiring at the end of this
month so we will that position
will be vacant for now but we
will get that position filled
madame chair I also wanted to
ask about
and this is a perfect example of
how I think the mexico dlt
working with a now the homemade
could come together because i've
seen it on the ground with one
particular project and that's
called the annie planning bridge
it's a blue wells road it wasn't
that long ago that that bridge
was completely washed out
now that's a bridge probably
nobody in here but me and three
other people know where that is
but that's an example of
coordination
with district and the county and
now without nation those are the
kind of projects to prevent that
from happening again because
every time we get a big rain
that gets washed out it's still
a not unlike a lot of areas
throughout this part of the
state
but the big issue for me madame
chair and
for delegated priority when we
all get together I think we need
to be arm and arm and work very
very hard with the state in
getting a third lane on I forty
then pushing out no district to
serve me on the secretary and
everybody else that we need that
third lane going east and a
third lane buying west for those
of us who travel I forty it is a
miserable situation in those
backups talk about that all the
time then one of those people
that's been stuck out there for
more than a couple of hours it's
super it's super dangerous and I
think that would be project one
if we could when we get our are
a delegation together with.
Um missus krody and the other
council delegates and then
finally
madam chair there is some
concerns on four ninety one the
two chapters that I represent
that I hear this from a lot is
mexican springs and rock springs
and it's all about how you
access its the egress offer for
ninety one into the road that
takes you to their chapters one
of them is particularly
dangerous because you have to go
up a little ways before you can
actually make a u turn to get
back in that turn and I know a
list of knowledge what i'm
talking about there because she
hears it too there's problems
with that and how in the heck
that slip through the cracks
when that road was being rebuilt
I have no idea I mean I have no
idea how that super prouds but
i'm i'm going to on their behalf
mention it again
and I know you all have looked
out of safety court or for four
ninety one
for some reason it doesn't work
because it actually slows down
the trucks that makes it worse
but we do need to do something
for those access roads into
those chapters those of the two
that i'm aware of there's
probably a punch of them up in
the more than part of four
ninety one that have the same
problem
so and saying that for the
benefit of also the council
dallages because that's a big
deal thank you manager
thank you representative little.
Sorry I was not able to hear
that thank you a two questions
the secretary stronger madam
chair secretary sooner you
mentioned that
there were high turnover
positions and that you are
making efforts to
create pipelines for this
positions can you name a couple
of them several of them what
positions are you looking to go
absolutely madam chair
representative so we were
looking at positions like
project construction managers
bridge inspectors lab
technicians and engineer
technicians and the reason these
positions are floating to the
top as critical is because there
aren't credentialing programs
that prepare individuals to do
that work and so we're typically
happens is where the training
academy meaning that we take
individuals who come in in two
entry level positions highway
maintenance workers construction
workers and then they evolved
into the expertise or we crossed
train to get them there so what
we've got to do is just be more
intentional in the programs will
allow us to send our own staff
if they want the opportunity to
promote or to bring in those who
are in to do tea staff which is
the pipeline and and train them
in in those areas
thank you thank you very much
and either secretary or mister
martinez
madam chair my question is on
the safety barriers specifically
guard rails I have been
traveling through out new mexico
and i'm just going to save for
this moment talk about a twenty
five in a forty
uh those guards seem a seem to
be doing what they're
provided resulting the intended
purpose which is to keep
vehicles from either crossing
over the medians or even the the
guard rails to keep people from
going out.
But i've noticed that there are
so many of them that need repair
and while these are federal
highways systems I wondering how
does dot new mexico
how are those at needs addressed
and does the state of new mexico
have an opportunity to help to
get those done and completed
thank you sure manager
representative so just just to
be transparent they are part of
the national roadway system but
there are responsibility where
responsible for for taking care
of the guard rail on the
interstates and so recognizing
what we're seeing on I twenty
five and forty were hopeful to
announce in the next couple of
weeks is a surge on all the
interstates with a contractor to
come in and do miles in miles of
of card rail and so we're gonna
we're going to make a a big
investment a few million dollars
and essentially surgery forty
especially and twenty five to
get the guard rails fixed very
very quickly and then take note
of course of
the fact that what we do is we
monitor those assets and so
we're working with a contractor
now that already sends a ban in
captures data on pavement
conditions and now this company
is going to be able to use a
camera system to also monitor
assets like guard real bets
damage barrier cable even signs
that are damaged so that we can
keep track of them but surrounds
your question before this
summer's over we're going to
search guard rails on on the
interstates think you so much
aesthetically to if there is
such a thing on our house this
is a beautiful state but that
really is
actually is a little concerning
as you're driving through cause
I don't see this and other
states that were driving through
it happens I mean for sure
they're out there but it's a
little concerning when I see
just the stretches of.
And miles and miles of those
barriers so thank you I
appreciate the response thank
you madam chair
thank you colleagues are
the chef said lunch is ready so
representative alcohol royal
ball cover larrow senator
schendo representative of our
end representative garcia is who
I have on the list you don't
want to see me hang just kidding
representative on
thank you matter material and I
will definitely keep that in
mind
so anyway one of the questions I
came up yesterday when we were
talking with that but now I
would be o for school because
route
now I understand I don't know if
they're still do this but long
long time ago not not going to
go for back the state in the
country's would chip seals who
was route
for the road that the county
maintained less still do that.
There are manager representative
absolutely when that route is on
a state as it we we would take
responsibility of doing that the
other program that specifically
targets that is the lgrf program
that I mentioned earlier in your
secure at the bottom sixteen
percent of that twenty seven
million has to be dedicated to
school bus routes outside of
that eff they if a local
government wants to submit it as
a transportation project fund
they can do that as well and so
the short answer is either we
can help them fund the project
or if it's on a state route we
can address the road issue
ourselves
so that the manager's levels at
the basically the demo cannot
apply for this funding gypsy on
the screw us routes
amount to represent the
absolutely can can apply either
through t p f through local
government road fund and then of
course they could even get a
capital appropriation for that
then come out of care how you
can pay in this lessons and I
mean I got to go home rough the
throat where anyway the other
question that I have for you who
were talking about we can you do
understand that we best to build
this last session where if you
hanging down login after where
you would get the ninety percent
do you retirement use day on a
few more years instead of
getting ninety percent to get a
hundred percent have you looked
at that for especially for
retaining your employees that
earlier as the way it works now
you know you get you worked over
the years will you get ninety
percent of the retirement now
with this bill that we asked if
you work that saber money ears
you get a hundred percent like
my district engineer here that
stick in a leave if she would
just have gone another two or
three years she could probably
have another for five hundred
dollars to monthly
retire with.
So if you thought about working
in your place and I know that
you're not because i'll talk to
your employees and they're not
aware of it
manager representative that's a
good point we need we need to
talk to them about that
specifically because it's
already here and now there's
been two other things we're also
looking at on the retirement
front one of them is of course
the
ability that some states give to
certain individuals to transfer
their retirement from their
state to new mexico and so we're
doing some research on that
meaning that if an engineer from
a montana wants to come to new
mexico we can transfer their
retirement here where they'd get
a better retirement because our
system is strong and perhaps the
cost of living is better so
we're looking at that and then
the other of course is a measure
that you all have already put in
place for educators and long
forcement officers which is the
ability to come back immediately
after but one of the other
things that we did specifically
for our engineers is
is kind of a christmas in july
measure but
just in the last three weeks we
we provided all of our staff who
are in the engineering salary
schedule with a ten percent pay
increase on top of the three
percent that you all allocated
but for our district engineers
specifically it was a twenty two
percent p increase and so we're
essentially working to become
competitive with the private
sector because we know
specifically for our engineers
that they can retire with us on
friday and and are also very
highly sought for monday and so
we're trying to do that as well
I won't use this time to pick on
my district engineer but she
knows what i'm on a big on her
about the private matter because
we got to work to do that thank
you.
Represented a robot couple
please thank you
thank you madame chair
I does I hope this applies to
everybody
and think you represent the
little for bringing up the issue
of guard rails that was one of
my questions and thank you for
addressing that on a timely
basis on secretary so i'm also
concerned about arm
how we're coordinating are
construction and repair efforts
to address flood control
as we know we have a lot of
claimant changes are manson
started early you know different
changes and I want to know to
how or who handles whose
responsible was the main body
responsible for flood control
issues I know they are current
consistently since the time that
I spend in the early two
thousand and grants for example
me continue to be a nightmare
and then they continue to be and
small rural area so I want to
know how these efforts are
coordinated is that the
coordinate with the local
governments
because it becomes a huge safety
issue as you know thank you
sure madam chair representative
i've seen in the last couple
years really good coordination
across a lot of entities and so
initially the owner of the acid
is going to respond per so if
there's a flood on a state than
we're going to be there if it's
a local road than the local
government is going to be there
and then often times depending
on the magnitude organizations
like department of hotland
security comes in and then they
start coordinating efforts
especially for the release of
federal relief funds and so if
you take for example a large
event like what's happening and
real also they take team effort
areas of course depriminate
homeland security is kind of
running the show and then
essentially their supporting
flooding flood mitigations and
road recovery for the local
governments.
And then we're working with them
to do that on all the state
roads and then of course in the
mixes guiding everybody to feed
my eligible reimbursements and
so if you take for example a
flood that took place in a
mechanic county just three or
four weeks ago where we lost a
bridge bypass there again what
happened on coordination was the
county response we worked with
the governor's office to get an
emergency declaration which
gives them now seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars to go
into those repairs and then they
could use a DO t on call
contractor for example to come
in and get that road fixed and
so it's a real collaborative
effort so that the final thank
you for that and that's what's
really important because somehow
we've got address so the final
comment was in terms of the
interstates are I see that there
are a lot of repair work being
done in patching up and sign but
there's also submit major
planning that you have indicated
as well
are you including fled control
to mitigate are in those plans
so that we don't face having to
do patch up work costly that
becomes more costly in the
future
madam chair representative for
those projects that you suffer
example in the districts under
steps went when we go into a a
major construction project
drainage resiliency is is key to
design in those projects rates
that they're looking at drainers
and looking at what we
anticipate in terms of flow and
floods for for years to come and
in designing those structures so
that they can withstand the you
know or so essentially we can
wish that will be anticipated by
we have natural disaster for our
maintenance work often times who
were doing if it's we're doing
patch repair work those measures
are necessarily addressing long
term mitigation for resiliency
sometimes they're addressing the
card that the the issues caused
by that either be a major
snowstorm but threes are flood
or whatever so.
When we start working on major
maintenance projects and
construction projects that's at
the forefront though the the
dream is the flood mitigation
the resiliency is what the
engineers are designing those
roadways for thank you thank you
manager
senator schender
thank you manager thank you
security state engineer
and your presentation I several
questions but what i'm
eliminated by a
question that the representative
little ask but on on the local
government road phone and then
the transportation project fund
these are state white projects
of adam to
secretary
of chaircenter their open state
wide for an entity and they
typically are for a local or or
tribal entity own roads okay so
in that that's what I
guess that's a rhetorical
question because you're talking
about just native projects here
but these are projects that all
done and entities are also for
corrective a matter of chairs
and if you look at my slide
it'll just kind of point out
once but if you look for example
and district five and six
they'll show the other non
travel they need for their
districts appreciate that and
then so so the question I guess
the only thing that really
distinguishes the two is the
fact that the local government
ruled fund has a twenty five
percent match and the other one
has a five so the participation
from local governments on that
twenty five percent is probably
more minimal than the other one
is that correct in before you
answer a question what are the
changes to your contemplating
our doors a ministry for those
legislative changes that need to
happen in on software
my manager center they'd have to
be some legislative changes
because the programs exist in
statute okay we're kind of
thinking about doing is taking
the best of both and merging
them in the one ok.
Appreciate it thank you and then
the other question I have was
on a federal highway non
obligated we talked a little bit
about you know these are tribal
federal phones right nationwide
that are non obligated then the
federal government manager
caused the money and and really
keep some and so from from what
your comment were
were able to receive some of
that money in the stated in the
mexico that other tribes around
the country haven't used is that
is that correct
our madam chair senators correct
and and in specifically because
in in the last year that we
looked at twenty three no tribal
entities reverted funds then
absolutely were benefiting from
those outside of new mexico who
aren't obligating great work
well that that's good news and
are and I appreciate your
collaboration with the tribes
can I think that's kind of
speaks you know you know I I
know that you know for us I
guess we're just going to be a
bit more biased in a but I think
it just speaks to the efficiency
that at least or tribes and and
the dealt is working with to be
able to attract those national
dollars that other tribes or or
other states or tribes or the
federal governments not
obligating for for tribal roads
I appreciate that and then our
last conversation we were in
curtain
for their government to go to
meeting and I know that you've
had subsequent meetings with the
quarter of hamers what is the
status of the highway for bypass
madam chair design completion
what's the project that date and
word of what's the status of
them sure our manager senator so
we're finishing up the design to
a hundred percent we met all
last week with federal highway
administrator for tribal
transportation project finding
to let them know where we are
and what we need to do to get
them
that application and then just
monday we also.
Connected with the with the
public to let them know we
wanted to also apply for a
connecting communities ground to
get some additional funding
there is well so we're in the
process of writing that to so
are but there again to answer
your question senator the
critical path with the travel
transportation funding is going
to be bia approval of the final
right away and so we're hope
we're trying to get them that
agreement by the end of the
calendar year so that they can
turn around that approval before
the legislative session
hopefully we could be able to
tell you all we have twenty
million from tribal
transportation project now we
just need another sixty million
to get it done
okay I appreciate it thank you
manager and then it's one more
question
your own car contractors that
you use how are they better in
how to the how you become one of
those entities so that they can
respond to the situations where
they need to be in on board
pretty quickly sure so manager
send it a week we we are dealt
with we kind of run a process
like state purchasing division
does for general services
department and so we essentially
open up the call for proposals
for the price agreements and so
they essentially are the bid for
the price agreement the
quantities the price
the cost for for the method that
they use their available to was
to use as one calls and we
simply will go by project my
priority who's at the top
meaning the most affordable and
then move down the list and then
we have also this summer well
early spring is we've also made
those price agreements available
to local governments so if
you're a local government and
you have you know eight hundred
thousand dollars to do a project
and you want to use one of our
contractors you can use our own
call to avoid having to do
another RFP on your own
thank you madam chair asked that
question because we have two
council delegate to sitting
here.
And yesterday we had almost four
one point five million and all
the nable nation has their own
entity of the nable engineering
and construction authority and
it's so I I am hoping that there
are pain intention because if
you could create a similar on
call you know for some of these
projects since you have internal
entity that you create it as
your own
you create in your own entity
you're high union I will people
or others and how can these
projects get done in a more
timely fashion without having to
go to all the bidding all the
time so i'm hoping that they're
taking notes and I ask their
question because I wanted to
hear the answer of what you as a
state department is doing you
know for some of these emergency
situations where you have oncome
contractors.
Managers enter just to clarify
i'm miss bigger here stated to
that we'd shared with mister
plateral that process and to the
extent they can utilize the
price agreements as well all
they have to do is notify us
they appreciate their thank you
manager and thank you so and in
the hobby and as well sector
certificate.
Representative allison should I
think
I think mister secretary of
already knows what questions and
when I ask where anyway i'll ask
you anyway
my first question is on the
local government road fund and
the transportation projects on I
know is that this exam the last
time it was fine funded was back
in twenty twenty two who
determines eligibility and can
the local people make a replace
on what projects
promote is my first question my
second question is that district
five argistic is configured with
a dog leg at extends all the way
into torrents county because
torrents county contains and
interstate highway does that
county because of the interstate
take priority on other projects
because it's contributed uh a
revenue generating highway my
third question is the four
quarters monument parking we
worked on however sixth highway
have we done anything with the
parking lot because all of the
parking lot at the four corners
monument is in new mexico and
they had asked us to work on
that parking lot before they had
asked for all the millions that
was stored in ship they could
use and I haven't
heard anymore
on what the progress on that was
and then
on slide for for district five
you said that you had the rock
for mid gason was completed in
twenty nineteen I have not heard
a report on that and i've been
asking that and i'm glad to see
a new
engineer for district five and
then my final question is on
slide seven of district five as
well.
When I got into the legislature
in twenty nineteen one of the
reasons why I got elected was
because of improving highway
infrastructure
one of my pet peeves was highway
sixty four it had seventy seven
significant dips and bumps i'm
glad that we're working on it
and in your graph on slate seven
shows that there is a big
progress through twenty twenty
seven is it okay for me to
publish that for my constituents
so that they know that what I
have promised them five years
ago is continuing
to matter
some of the representative
go to those quickly so the lgrf
and tpfr are bettered by the
districts and then by the
general office and then we send
recommendations to the
transportation commission and
they ultimately approve them the
challenge with those two funds
is combined they're about eighty
million dollars and that's not a
lot of money and so what's
happened previously is that the
funded created and so each year
will generate at least fifty
five million giver take on tpf
and twenty seven million and out
lgrf but what we're trying to do
is increase those funds so that
we can get more out and so for
example it this year each
district will get about eight to
ten million dollars and each
district and you see the size of
just district five and six right
is going to be picking five or
six projects each of them
ranging from three quarters of
the million to one point two
million and so a lot of
communities get left out because
there's not enough funding so
help growing those funds would
be a priority for us and we have
some ideas on how to do that in
terms of project priority we
never look at a region and say
we get more.
Fuel tax or we get more revenue
from that committee and that's
where we're from that community
and that's where we're going to
go what guides the work of the
districts is the data we have on
payment conditions and so what
we challenge the district
engineers to do it say when you
pick a project showers on the
tamp what the payment conditions
are that make that corridor
and then on the four corners
parking area have to follow up
unless my colleagues here have
information but I I haven't I
haven't worked on that project
with
thank you madame chair
representative in the parking
lot is outside of any duty right
away the road connecting to it
is within the duty right away
but if they do want millions all
they need to do is submit a
request to the district and
they'll have to pick them up for
where we haven't stored in
holland out there but we have
millions to give out and all
they need to do is and in a
request to myself.
The process with the request
that's a problem.
What about the rocks file
mitigation and can I publish the
information on when the other
project has now been completed
on highway sixty four
and madame chair representative
else in so the rockfall
mitigation study I was completed
it included twenty different
locations within district five
one of them of course is the
sixty four hour back area we we
asked the consultant that did
the study to give us a fee
proposal on what it was a to do
the design that is the design
they said came in at one point
nine million with the district
feel that that that's not even
it should be somewhere around
the five hundred thousand and
six hundred thousand dollars
range for one specific you know
not even a quarter of a mile of
roadway there and and so we're
going to ask other consultants
to do the design and see if we
can get a better price
okay thanks for that amount of
representative absolutely are
east is public and so whatever
we share with you here you can
absolutely pass along
ok thank you for that answer
some of my constituents are in
my fellow code miners and they
say that give it to us let us
rap a decord around it bring it
down all the looks rocks and let
us fix it for you wants to for
all
thank you.
Representative of garcia
thank you manager thank you
secretary
and german I I got a first wall
I got to mend you one but if you
think the thing number one I got
a comment you on helping ran to
the thirteen we just had
recently in the lowest often
nicer view step up and helped
the communities a number two
miss you mentioned rant writing
support earlier how do people
know that that is there for them
to tap into cause a lot of
people don't know about it out
here in this cut in this country
how do we give them how we tell
the people that it's available
i'm sure obsite it it's a good
question and so the the the the
connection between us in the
communities we utilize his local
government division at DFA
and now they have a new division
on office then they've
established their three
legislative support to
essentially help local
governments with their
infrastructure needs and so what
we do of course is work with
them to push out the funding
notifications to local
governments and and the duty
support to provide grant writing
support noting that df can
provide that support in addition
to the match so
what we did specifically with
for example our cfi grants is we
worked through the municipal
league and the association the
counties to essentially say
here's a year's here's a grand
opportunity not only do we want
to support you in writing those
grants but we want to cord neat
that efforts to that we can put
you mexico on the map and and
that worked because we received
the largest single award in the
country for a project under that
grand so we we try and in get
word out through dfa local
government division and through
opening invitations like that to
local governments.
Thank you for your time for that
important you know and the next
question we've spoke about it
before and i'm glad there's a
country dollar good here or two
of them into people from one
president's office this this is
in regard to the highway
millions of the road I just got
a text
I can't brought the chapter
channel and they want millions
to fix their secondary road
because it's been washed out and
they'll have no way of doing it
in the phone correct me for
money to do those are there be
given if they apply for my
correct
matter in terms of absolutely
just like mister martinez said
if if they just request a
quantity we are we grants our
government partners those
mealings for free in coordinate
their pick up and then they're
there's for the taking
a mr secretary thank for that
then the bump correct they have
to recommend my correct cost the
problem i'm having is that the
native nation at one point so
they didn't have the capacity of
moving for these people but it
is there for free if the never
honation was in my correct
madam show representative yes
thank them should a number i'm
glad to people listening to it
because a lot of your
older
frontier row chapters and
desperate need for it but
if they gave it you you can move
with dinners then the bed common
issue and I know everybody has
problems with track of decent
issues than I just thought i'd
bring it up with sugar garage
with the people where that it is
there all they have to do is get
all the district engineer and
and it's for free no costs to
anybody either the you have to
move yourself
without being said mister
secretary
I will go back a little bit on
now you get ten million old for
clean up communication other
state
and to me the nasty is part of
the state.
Everyday and they don't crash
how are you going to address
that I will touch on that before
but how we can address that part
of the record.
I mountain service and i'm sorry
that was the on the west part of
alba cricket
users on the website about you
know if you get for doctor hill
you can look into their full
crash and that's in the practice
of going back and forth enough
covering the money
our mountains are represented we
had that was in a pick up we've
been using I know district three
has been using the corrections
department and contractors to
pick up trash and that's why we
have to address this boat
through the education and
enforcement piece because we can
pick up trash all day long every
single day of the week like
that's just the reality and so
it's got to be a combination of
enforcement for unsecure loads
which is a major contributor
enforcement for a legal dumping
but then there are issues in
some communities where because
they don't have access to weekly
trash pick up or to a solid
waste authority that allows for
them to done then their storing
the trash in their yards are
there poly cards are over full
feeling or or trash bins at the
end of the communities are
overfilling and then the wind
takes and throws all that trash
so there's a lot of rude issues
but the solution for us in the
meat in the in the immediate is
we got to be out there picking
it up on a regular basis and
we're trying to move away from
that because it it's a never
ending task I thank you madame
chairman shickery and you know I
got up to your time and one day
will be clean the next day is
the same thing again and use
each crash drops going back and
forth lunch girl and your rams
secretary the matter of
enforcement then that fall back
in on the city of overgraduate
big enforcement they really need
to address the issue and back
again mister secretary thanks
for all your state you guys are
doing a good job you know and
it's hard to do everything with
what you got it would talk but
you know people the neck pick
everything they want to roll but
it ended
you do which can on what you got
taken.
Bank manager
senator pinto thinking madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for your presentation
in the work you do and repay
being three seventy one by nappy
and the
guard rails it's more of a
comment that the quicker can
collect on the data that
hopefully we can connect that
with mbb because they get maybe
we're bad drivers how how do we
you know keep that from
happening instead of just being
under a reactive side of just
fixing it
and then the millings are with
my federal partners to hear what
they're filled agents here
I think one of the biggest
issues is that democrat nation
does not and it have the
capacity in which funding with
the chapters and we know these
roads are multiple
jurisdictional roads so how can
we work together since the state
has the millions with the
chapters and now with nation DO
t to just make that one step
improvement and some of our dirt
roads thank you and thank you
for you do.
Okay thank you so much for
joining us here in sheep springs
I thank you for your
presentation and answering or
many questions I will be and
following up with you for a long
last request from mckinley
county uh we thank you for
working on the all to return
mine road bridge although it may
be a small bridge at the tune of
one point three million dollars
our community appreciates it and
we still would like to have a
ground breaking
bridge celebration are blessing
that repair of that bridge means
a great deal and a lot to our
local community members sell
i'll be reaching out to you on
on their behalf
thank you so much and I hope you
stay and join us for lunch
we have a representative from
president office which you could
be recognized in an interview
okay are without colleagues
lunch will be served shortly and
we have an individual who
wednesday introduced yourself I
guess.
The.
Colleagues please stay seated
our you will be served lunch
thank you.
But.
