Uh, my name is Kevin Montoya.
I'm the 2024 lieutenant governor
for Santa Ana Pueblo.
Thank you, sir. Uh, I just want
to say, um, this gentleman, um,
I worked with him before when we
sat on a uh the southern
Sandoval Investments, Land board
here at Santa Ana and so I had a
work already had a working
relationship with him and so it
was easy to easy to work with
Mr. Montoya here, Lieutenant
governor, and we have had a
pretty great year, so, uh, first
thing I want to talk about is um
our um 60,000 acre land in
Detroit.
Um, um, uh, land that we bought
from the King family in 2016 and
uh it came full circle.
And, uh, I was governor at the
time when we purchased the uh
the property and this year when
we came in January 1st, we said
we're going to get this land
into trust and lo and behold, 6
months later in June, it was put
into trust and we put the final,
final signatures on the
documents yesterday and so the
land now belongs to the Pueblo
of Santa Ana, and we're really
proud of that.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank
So, um, a lot of projects going
on, so I'm going to take two of
the projects and then I'll let
you, uh, talk about the other
three. So, um, we have, um, uh,
legislators, Madam Chair, um,
first, um, item is the, uh, a
Santa Ana Education complex and
we've been working on this for
quite some time.
And we'd like to try to house
our students, um, I think it's
from K to 6, I believe. And so,
um, it would have a library, um,
a computer lab with modern
technology,
a performance hall for
traditional and cultural
activities, classrooms for
various educational programs.
And then of course offices for
the administrative staff we need
we need a place for them too.
So, uh, that request is about
14.5 million, but that will come
as we move into these um uh uh
legislative, um, um, uh, events
that, that we have that you all
have. And then the next item is
um, the Santa Ana Adobe and
Eagle State as state housing
development we've got one
project right now that, that
just started
With Lieutenant governor's push
and help and insight, um, we're
now building right now.
So,
um, that will be, um, about 13
homes and uh
No, uh, 19 homes, 13 in the
Eagle Estate area and then 6
homes in the Adobe estates at a
cost of about 13 million.
So, um, that, that request will
be coming as well. So, uh, I'm
gonna turn this over to, um,
Lieutenant Governor to have him
take care of the other three, if
you would,
Lieutenant.
So we have some other uh
projects that are up and coming.
All these projects are, uh,
definitely in different phases,
um, so and the requests uh uh uh
or the cost that we're giving
you right now are are total
cost and um as the phases come,
we'll be able to um.
Or when the request comes, we'll
be able to get more of an exact
amount of exactly what we're
looking for.
Um, first we have the uh senior
citizen access and office space,
uh, you know, as, um.
Our elders, uh, grow in age and
new coming elders, um, would
definitely good, uh, utilize uh
bigger space for our senior
citizens, um, and that cost is
looking around $3000.
Um, the next one is the tribal,
uh, Santa Ana Pueblo tribal
Administration complex.
It's been doing for a while we
had a, uh, the original we're
still in the original government
complex that was built in.
70s?
80s, 70s, 80s, something like
that. So it's been a while, you
know, and it's a, you know, uh,
trying to, um, update that to
code to make sure that we're um
housing our employees and, and
leaderships in um in in a safe
space in those areas, um, so
we're looking at a new judicial
complex, uh, which is a big one
where right now we're in the uh
planning stages, pre-planning
stages, um, looking towards uh
going into uh design phase.
Um, the total cost for this
project is about 18 million.
And
We have the Santa Ana grid
system.
Um.
This, uh, project is, uh,
electrical gauge system, uh, at
the traditional village of
Domaya.
Um, we are not doing
electrification project there
currently, um, and right now.
Uh,
The funding or the support uh
outside of what we already uh
put into it, uh, it's around
$2000.
And um this will help uh bring
um.
Uh
Safety concerns and um power
concerns uh in the traditional
village at the Ol Pueblo.
OK, so
there you have it, a snapshot of
what Santa Ana is is doing at
this juncture. Uh, we also have
one other, uh, project that we
started this year. It's up at
the old village at Old Santa
Ana, and it's a um uh society
house for one of our internal
entities and so we hope to have
that project done by February
and uh so this, this year has
just been a, um, oh gosh, a
whirlwind of activity for the
Pueblo and
Um,
uh, uh, we're, we're, we're
just, uh, glad that uh we're in
October and heading toward
December 29th that that somebody
will, somebody else will take
the helm and uh uh I can't say
enough about how Santa Ana has
progressed
this year and over the course of
many years, um, as, as you know,
we have the Santa Ana Star here
across the road we
have the um um it's called Tamay
Adventures now, uh, it's a land
development corporation and
economic development arm, and
then we have the two golf
courses, Twin Warriors, and
Santa Ana Golf Club, and then of
course we have the um Damaya
Hyatt resort and Spa, so those
entities have done very well
over the course of time,
um, however, um, we, um, want
to, um, ensure that, um, going
into the future that the the
people of Santa Ana are
Taken care of, well taken care
of, and, and we already
have a lot of, um, um.
Uh, I, I guess benefits for the
Pueblo, and so I won't go into
that, but I believe we've done a
very good job and one other item
that I'd like to talk about is
the Indian Health Service. I in
health service just this past
year, um, decided that, um,
They will put a uh uh Indian
Health Service facility just to
the north of here as you're
coming from the uh Tamaya Hayat,
just below the soccer fields.
It's going to be a huge
facility. I forget the amount of
uh square feet that it's going
to be, but we're going to have
to get ready for that and we're
um working with the Indian
Health Service and the folks at
the, um, uh, in DC uh with the
folks out there, we've had
meetings with.
them and so we're, we're meeting
with a lot of different people
doing environmental assessments
and that sort of thing. And so
just a lot of activity going on
here at the Pueblo, so we're
really proud of that and uh with
that, um, uh, Madam Chair, and
legislators, we stand for
questions.
A representative little.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
quick question, thank you for
the overview. It sounds very
exciting, uh, it seems that
there is quite a bit of activity
going on, um, that will follow,
uh, in the years to come as
well. Um.
My question is about exciting to
hear too, the Indian Health
Service actually building.
A facilitate, oh, your
microphone. OK.
Yeah.
There you go. Um, it's exciting
to hear that they're actually
building something I'm very
happy to hear that because
unfortunately, we in this area
anyway, we experienced a lot of
downsizing.
So my question is, Madam Chair,
about the service population,
uh, will this be, can you
describe
The intended service population
that's going to be served in
that facility.
Mhm.
Uh, yes, Representative, uh,
thank you for that question.
Yes, I believe so.
Yes.
Yeah, the people in the
surrounding area will will be
served,
including people from
Albuquerque, um.
What do they call the um Indians
from around the country who live
in Albuquerque will be served as
well.
Mhm.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the great presentation,
Governor. Uh,
The, the 60,000 acres purchased
from the King family. That's
real exciting. I'm sure you all
are real excited about that, uh,
does that include farmland and
ranchland or what, what, what
kind
go go and turn your speaker on.
Thank you.
Uh, it's mainly ranch land
representative and thank you for
your question. Uh, there's elk,
uh, game in the area, elk, uh,
bear, cougar, um, antelope.
And other uh species of wildlife
in in the area, so, uh, the plan
by Santa Ana is to keep it as
pristine as possible, no
economic development in the area
and just want to let you all
know that this, this land that
was purchased in 2016 was part
of our um.
Migration, if you will, um, as
we came as the natives came to
this area and Santa Ana came to
this area here. That was part of
our migration. And if I could
just give you a sense of, of, of
that migration we came from.
The Chaco Canyon area and points
north.
Um,
Are people, um.
Talk about it as the White House
and my assumption is
the White House, the polar ice
cap.
Is that where we came from
possibly, but we settled in
Chaco area and um we came to
this area here, but, uh, part of
our migration was that um we, we
went, um, as we settled here, we
went uh west.
To the real Pco area where the
ranch land is.
And we settled there for a
period of time and after that,
we moved the leadership said
let's move again, see other
areas of the uh the um uh.
Um,
The state of New Mexico
essentially, um, today, but uh
we moved toward the Aama Laguna
area and settled there for a
period of time.
We stayed there for
Maybe a few 100 years, maybe I'm
thinking at these places where
I'm talking about we move south
toward um uh Dale,
Dale Secoro, and we stayed there
for a period of time again, and
it was finally decided that we
would
move east of the river, what's
called the Rio Grande River now,
uh, to the Monzanos. We came
back this way and we settled up
in the area called um the Paco
area here on the north face of
the Sandia. We
settled there for a period of
time and uh but that was our
migration route and the lands
that we bought here recently
we're part of that migration
route, so it's a, uh, it's a
very important piece for the
Pueblo of Santa Ana and once we
saw it go on the market, um.
We uh
If you made a call and within 3
months we signed the papers for,
um, I thought that was a pretty
uh good achievement as well.
Within 3 months, we signed the
papers and uh we applied for to
the federal government for
putting it into trust. And so
we, we got that done this year.
And thank you for that question,
Representative.
Thank you, thank you for that,
Governor, and, and great to hear
the history and, and I, I can
feel it in your heart. It's uh,
it's great. So was there any
state money involved?
In purchasing the land.
Or.
Try
Good. It was all tribal money.
tribal money there are state
pieces of state land in there
and so we're trying to fix those
pieces, but, um, um, those are
still being worked out.
OK.
Thank you for that, Governor.
Mr. congratulations. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Lente.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Good morning, my governor,
lieutenant governor, thank you
for the opportunity to speak to
you both this morning.
There you go. Uh, and thank you,
Madam Chair, for the
opportunity. I, I simply just
want to state how impressed I
continue to be about.
The evolution of Santa Ana
Pueblo. You, you give a, a story
of your migration path and, and
I think it's beautiful obviously
touching to a lot of people
here, uh, and your ability then
to pioneer or your Pueblo's
ability to pioneer beyond its
greatest expectations in regards
to your economic development
capacity and what you've done,
right? I mean, you see
facilities like this, you see, I
mean, worldwide companies like a
Tesla, you know, right, as, as,
as a, as a tenant of this pueblo
and
And to know that you've utilized
those types of of capital in
ways where you've generated an
ability to now be
self-sustaining to a point where
you've been able to buy back
ancestral lands, right? Or
you're now able to take care of
your people in ways that you
haven't had a chance to before
because of the inabilities of
the federal government to take
care of us, right? You're
talking about now you likely
healthcare uh police force, uh,
environmental.
Protection and the list can go
on and on, and so I, I, I think
it's, it's worth noting that a
lot of these things that you all
do simply go back to.
I think people think of the the
public just getting rich, but
it's not about the problem of
becoming rich. It's about making
sure that the pueblo provides
services back to the community
which deserve this as the
ancestor, as as as the uh
descendants of those ancestors
you talked about and so, uh, I
just simply wanna say what an
amazing, uh.
Journey that that you can talk
about in terms of an evolution
of a community that once didn't
have much to now being able to
now be in a way self-sustaining,
uh, Madam Chair, and Governor,
one question in regards to um a
gaming operation. Do you know
how much and I'm, I'm gonna call
it a tax because that's what I
always call it, but how much
gaming revenue you've you've
Paid to the state like last
year, do you know what that
number was?
And I don't excuse me, and thank
you for that question and your
comment, uh, Representative
Lente, I don't have that number,
but we can get it to you
definitely.
And, and governor, it it wasn't
and I'm sorry I didn't mean to
put you on the spot at all, but
I know that that number for all
the gaming tribes in the state
that include Pueblo, Apache, and
Navajo has hovered around about
$65 million a year that is paid
to the state of New Mexico for
just by just for the deed of
gaming in this, in this state,
right? And so I, I think it's
worth noting that $65 million is
is one that is put back into the
general fund of of the state's
coffers in terms of which.
We then utilize for making sure
our government runs as as it
should. So when we talk about
capital outlay requests and, and
those are the types of requests
that, you know, I, I, I, I, I
would hope that we look upon
those favorably because
oftentimes those gaming
revenues.
Tribes don't necessarily see.
Or have an ability to dictate
how those monies are spent
because they're they're sent to
the general fund and then spent
on whatever it is that we spend
them on as a state. And so it
wasn't until really the middle
90s that tribes have had the
ability to apply for and receive
capital outlay dollars because
for the longest time tribes were
were considered not eligible
because of the um anti- donation
clause. And so now that we've,
we've we've turned a page and we
have an attorney General's
opinion from the state.
In New Mexico that now um allows
tribes to then partake in the
capital LA process. We are now
seeing these types of requests
and so I, I, I'm hopeful that we
will continue to be able to
achieve those types of numbers
that you're looking for to make
sure that you, as a, as a pueblo
can um consider yourself a
beneficiary of the Cala process
in this state, so, uh, governor
and lieutenant governor, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in front of you this morning and
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
A representative, uh, thank you
for your comments. They're so
appreciated, um, uh, you
mentioned about, um, um, about
getting rich, not about getting
rich, it's stability for us as
Pueblos, those people who have
gaming operations to provide for
our people,
but there are also some other
um.
Tribes
who
Uh, I wish as, as, as a sitting
governor would be able to do
something like that for their
communities because um sometimes
they're they're hard pressed,
but um I uh uh just wish that
they would have been able to do
something like we've done and
Sandia has done and other gaming
tribes, and again it's not about
getting rich. It's ability to
take care of our people, to
provide uh college scholarships,
um, water and sewer, housing,
health care, and you name it.
That's what we're trying to do
with the funds that are derived
from our economic development
arms.
Uh, thank you, Representative. I
appreciate it and, and we look
forward to working with all of
you again, um.
Throughout the years, it's, it's
been an amazing, uh, uh, I, I
guess, um, uh.
Uh, trek for me, being with the
state engineer's office, but
watching all of you work
watching all of you work not
only on the floor but in your in
your committees and it's, it's
pretty amazing how um you you're
able to take care of the
constituency of the state of New
Mexico. So thank you so much and
we look forward to seeing you
again. Oh, yes, sir. OK.
Thank you, Representative Lente.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Governor
and Lieutenant Governor. I am,
um, extremely uh proud.
And congratulate you. I've seen
and heard your reports of this
coming and uh the fact that you
finalized it, um.
Brings a little bit of mixed
emotions for me, as you know
throughout the years, um, how
I've talked about, um,
The contradiction of the tribes.
Being the uh original
landowners.
And um stewards of these lands.
And because of the history, um,
throughout.
Our Western civilization history
we know how that has transpired,
so Madam Chair, I want to thank
you for your history, the
migration story, uh, it's
important to note that I want to
just ask real quickly, um, were
you, did you mention at any
time, um, I, I, I think I heard
trust where these 60,000 acres
originally trust lands.
No.
Uh, thank you for that question,
Representative Roybo Caballero,
um, no, it was not, uh, it was
owned by the, the King Ranch,
the King family, Bruce King, and
that's who we purchased the
ranch from.
Thank you. I just, I think I may
have just heard trust in giving
the whole migration story. That
was what I wanted to make sure,
but um, you know.
It's because of your
Um, quest.
For self-determination.
And um making decisions.
Economic development wise and
just development wise overall.
That has contributed to the
enriching of this particular
area, the whole area actually,
and um I think it's worthy to
make note of that. But I also,
as I said, I had some mixed
emotions because
for tribes, especially what
representative Chair Lente
brought up about the gaming
which we'll hear a report later
on this afternoon. For me, it's,
it's just a major contradiction
that um
We, it should be reversed. The,
the states should be paying the
tribes, the states should be
taking a position and um
deferring to the tribes and the
tribal
sovereignty in this area and
quest for self-determination and
it, it really should be the
other way around. You shouldn't
have to be asking the state.
For the very monies that you're
putting back into the general
fund. I've said this, I've been
on the record since day one on
this, and I just wanted to,
that's why I have mixed emotions
because part of me is saddened
that throughout these
generations time immemorial that
we've come to this place. And so
at some point, uh, as you
recall, your tribe and other
tribes are aware of how I tried
to reform the gaming
distribution, uh, years back.
Um, I hope we can revisit that
at some point because it's a
tremendous amount of money that
the tribes are contributing to
the general fund and then having
to come back and ask for it
back. So at some point, I hope
that we can visit that whole
gaming structure for the purpose
of um
Be more fair, just, and
returning what is rightfully an
originally yours and ours as
sovereign nations in this area,
in this entire nation. And so I
say that because um
It's been a long journey for me
seeing how you have evolved, not
just you in Santa Ana, but all
of our tribes have evolved and
the struggles, Madam Chair, that
you've had to undertake. My
final point is on the Indian
Health Service. I have, I think
you answered the question. The
Indian Health Service facility
that will be coming, will be
open to serve.
All of the um
Nations, tribes, pueblos that
are uh recipients of the Indian
Health Service care. Is that,
did I hear you say that? Are
they gonna, well, in part of the
other part of the question is,
will they be replacing their
facility close to UNM or this be
an additional facility.
Uh, this facility will here at
Santa Ana will take care of the
surrounding, um.
Area if you will, people from
Albuquerque, uh, those that come
from different tribes, uh,
nations from across the US, um,
uh, the facility, the facility
on Lois, uh, next to UNM will be
um
Uh, I believe part of the
building is going to be saved,
but I think there's going to be
some renovation going on of that
facility and over the course of
time, um our our understanding
here this year when we came on
board in January was that um the
Indian Health Service looked for
several sites. Uh, there was one
on the west side of Albuquerque
that they looked at some
property there and um I believe
another um uh place was looked
at, but they came to Santan A
and they thought this would be a
central
to put this facility. So, um,
we, um, um,
We took that chance and said
let's let's have these
discussions and so we also
understand that the money, the
money for this facility has
already been appropriated, so
it's just a matter of, um,
finalizing our, our initial
meetings and then uh possibly
going into planning and design
and then construction at some
point, um, so that's.
That's what's happening.
Thank you, um, Governor, I'm
happy to hear that. I'm I'm, I
received my health um services
from Indian Health Service, and
so, uh, once it's done, I'm, I'm
hoping to continue my, my uh
services and also I want to know
that it's close to the whole
Sandoval UNMH uh uh regional
hospital complex, so my I'm
envisioning that this could be a
major medical hub in the future.
because our tribes are growing
and our populations are growing,
so this is a really great site
for it, so I appreciate it.
Thank you for all your efforts
and again congratulations on all
that you have done and continue
to do for our populations. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Roy Caballero for your comments.
I appreciate that.
OK.
Thank you, Madam, uh, thank you,
Representative Roybal Caballero,
and they have Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Good
morning, Governor, Lieutenant
Governor, again, thank you for
your hospitality. It's my first
time in this building and it
was, it's absolutely fabulous,
you know, it just speaks highly
about, about your foresight and
your continued work and, and,
and perseverance through all the
hard times. Uh, so I, I'm really
impressed with this. I recall,
Madam Chairman, the public
safety building that it was it
called a public safety I think
fire station.
And something we came to that
grand opening, I think it was
several years ago and it was
something that was so direly
needed, uh, I was so impressed
to see that you were putting the
community first, not only for
Santa Ana, but you were working
closely with the entire
community and that says a lot
because it's about your
continued service for the people
when it comes to the boundary
lines around you, you don't see
those when there's need, and
that's the way it should.
And so I want to thank you for
that. Just briefly, Madam
Chairman, uh, we were talking, I
know Representative Lenta spoke
about the capital outlay, but I
was um thinking about the TI
also, the tribal infrastructure
fund, something the legislature
approved several years ago, um,
and it was a very good move
because as we know, uh, there is
a percentage there that's it's
4% or 4.7% right now, maybe 4.5%
because we changed that and it
um it is a very
Very, very good fund to provide
for capital outlay needs. Um,
there is one thing that we need
to take into consideration,
Madam Chairman, is that
The costs of construction and
building materials have gone up
quite a bit and so when the
requests are made by the tribe
or, or, or anyone for a certain
amount. By the time it gets
approved and then the bonds are
sold and then the funding is
released, then the planning and
design comes in, the costs are
quite higher than the amount
that was allocated and so we
just have to keep that in in
mind and.
And, um, and proceed with that
thought,
um, the um King property. I'm
happy to hear that you finally
got that put into trust. Um, I
remember, uh, from way back, I
think Governor, you were the
pioneer of the thought that you
had back then finally became
reality now and it's now into
fruition. So, um, this is a big
thing when you think 60,000
acres to the process. I don't
know how many legisl
are familiar with the process,
but it is not an easy one to get
all this done and then put it
into trust and finally get the
ink in there with the signature.
So thank you very much and thank
you, Governor and lieutenant
Santa Ana. Yes, that's all I
have, Madam Chairman, for the
sake of time.
Senator Rodriguez, thank you for
your comments. I appreciate that
and uh yes, uh we're very proud
of what happened this year, so.
Thank you
Thank you, thank you, Senator
Rodriguez. Um, so I have
questions, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
what's the total population of
your, your up Santa Ana members
and then uh how many I'm sure
you have some in in off off the
reservation too.
On the Pueblo, we have about
900+.
Yeah. Do you have an idea how
many are off that I don't have
that number, um, Senator, but
there are, there are a few
outside of the the pueblo.
Thank you.
And
When we talk about gaming, and I
think it's more of a comment,
especially for our members here
because I've been to, it's
different for every state, uh,
with the compacts, you know, in
Oklahoma, they're the ones that
decide how much to give the
state. And if they want to give
the state more money for certain
projects, it's up to those
tribes, um, nations up there,
uh, how they want to. So it,
it's, it's different everywhere
and that it's really that
relationship that created.
Between government to
government. So, um, you know, I,
I don't think we're up for any
kind of change in the compacts
were a bit, even though there's
some, some talk of it. And when
you talk about not getting rich,
it's, I think it's something
incorporated culturally,
especially when we talk about
our Hawaiian indigenous
population. It's just about
surviving and sustaining, um,
you know, they don't have the
land out there, um, and they
talk about economic development,
but
It, it's really just preserving
some of what they they already
have um going. So it was
interesting to
It's good that we get out there
and really see what's going on
um with, with throughout our
our.
Our national indigenous
population.
And, uh, but I appreciate the
capacity you served in um with
the water and stuff. I mean,
that was always um.
To see that familiar face and
that trust and um thank you for
all the work you did in that
capacity and then as you are
here and as we move forward and
I think with the IHS facilities,
um.
You know, it's been in the works
for years and years, especially
when, uh, I think Sipy was one
of the other um locations um
that we were looking at. But
that money along.
Because
Those populations that work in
those industries, those are
career fields.
So I hope there's a way um that
that pipeline, if we can help in
any capacity, um, to encourage
our people to serve our people
in that place is built, uh, to
move forward. So thank you for
that and our, our your advocacy
is always appreciated. Um, thank
you, Governor. Thank you,
Lieutenant Governor. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, thank you, uh, um,
for, for those comments and
we're hoping that with this new
facility that a lot of our, um,
tribal communities.
Well, um, maybe, uh,
Have their people go into those
medical fields that that will
probably need um uh there's
gonna be dental in there,
outpatient services, and so
we'll we'll need many health,
um, uh, conscious type people,
uh, for that facility. So I'm
hoping that we'll be able to get
that done and uh like you said,
uh uh our people taking care of
our people, but also from, from
the outside, we're we're
welcoming to, uh, to, um, hire
whoever we need to provide those
services, so.
Appreciate it and, and, uh, if
that's all the questions, I
appreciate everything today, um,
all the questions that you ask,
comments, and uh we look forward
to working with you going on
into the future. We have, I, I.
I want to say we have some
outstanding people working for
us, um, lobbyists, etc. and so
we look forward to working with
all of you and
One big thing, thank you for all
that you do for the people in
the state of New Mexico.
Resent Lent as well. Um, I, I.
I like being in those committee
hearings, it's it's so good to
hear the, the, the dialogue that
goes on and, and sometimes
there's a serious, uh, serious
discussions, but at the end of
the day, you're all working for
the state of New Mexico and
thank you very much,
Representative Allison, uh, I,
uh, I wish you well in your
retirement. Thank you for your
service and it was good to work
with you. Thank you.
Thank you, Governor, and uh
thank you, sir. Thank you for
hosting us, Governor, and we
appreciate you and thank you
for, I'm sorry I missed your
update, uh, but, um, just want
to thank you and uh you know, I
always think about my committee,
our committee, Indian Affairs,
and the staff, and then of
course our community members and
everybody who does work around
the state on our behalf and I
just really wanted to.
Treat our committee to a good
menu, uh, venue, uh, so that,
um, we could have a good meeting
space and uh it's a way of
thanking them for their hard
work. So thank you. Madam Chair,
we're always happy to host if
going into the future, whoever
is sitting in this capacity
here, please reach out to them
and I'm pretty sure they would
love to have you here.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you. So now
we'll move on to agenda item
number 6, and before we do, I'd
like to have representative
Lindstrom, uh, do an
introduction.
Good morning. Good morning,
everyone. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I want to apologize
to Governor Myron Armijo. I
missed your presentation today.
Uh, we've worked together for
many, many years and um I'm just
I apologize for missing it. My
name is Representative Patty
Lundstrom. I represent House
District 9, which is half the
city of Gallup and, uh, 7 Navajo
chapters in McKinley County and
for the benefit of the public.
I've served on this committee
for 20 years.
Uh, voting and non-voting
capacity, but uh I want to
apologize, Governor, because I
actually went to the, uh, Tomaa
Resort and Spa. That's noted on
the agenda. So I apologize. I,
um.
Right. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, do we have our presenters
here for from Hungary, New
Mexico, indigenous communities,
I believe I saw Jil this
morning. Good morning.
So if you'll, I'll take a seat,
introduce yourselves, and feel
free to begin your presentation.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for having us here
today. My name is Jill Dixon.
I'm the executive director of
the Food Depot, one of 5 food
banks here in New Mexico. I'm
part of the Feeding America
network. We are based in Santa
Fe, but we serve a 26,000 square
mile service area including 9
counties in northern New Mexico
ranging from Santa Fe to the
Colorado border over towards
Farmington and then over to the
east on the Texas Oklahoma side
and.
This is my colleague Katie
Anderson.
Thank you, Jill. Um, Katie
Anderson, I'm the vice president
of Strategy Partnerships and
advocacy at Roadrunner Food
Bank. Uh, thank you so much for
having us today. We really
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you, uh, Roadrunner,
uh, covers 16 counties, uh,
through, through TFAP
distributions, um, as well as
providing support to, um, the
rest of the state in every way
that we can, uh, so we are, um,
very engaged and interested in
this conversation and in working
more.
closely together to address
these needs.
All right, I think I'm going to
launch us today, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, I'm gonna go ahead and start
us off, if we could go to the
next slide.
Um, I usually like to start, uh,
these conversations and before I
say anything else actually I
want to acknowledge. I know
that, um, so many of the folks
on this committee are very aware
of the situation, um, and, um,
have seen it for many years. And
so we want to acknowledge that
very openly and the facts that
we're going to share. I know
that many of you are going to be
very, very aware of them. Uh, so
very quickly, we're going to
start off with um the definition
for food insecurity. I know it's
kind of a simple way to start,
but, um.
Oftentimes those two terms are
used interchangeably, and the
difference between the two
really is that hunger is a
physiological um experience like
we've all experienced hunger,
you know, you get a late lunch.
We all kind of know what that
feels like, um, you know, my, my
youngest gets angry when she
doesn't get food in a timely
fashion. Um, but food insecurity
is a little bit different in
that it is being experienced on
a household level, and it means
that an entire group of people
are experiencing a lack of
access to food, oftentimes lack
of access to nutritious food and
are unsure where that food is
going to come from. I'm not sure
where the next meal is going to
be coming from. So when we're
talking about, um, these
challenges today, we really are
talking about that household
level, um, challenge and, and
making sure there's enough food
for everyone in the house to
live an active and healthy life.
Next slide, please.
So these are the, this is the
data for New Mexico overall at
this point in time, 15.2% of the
population of New Mexico, um,
has identified as being food
insecure, not sure where their
next meal will be coming from,
um, that is 1 in 7 people
throughout our entire state,
321,000,370 people and 1 in 5
children, 1,000,420 children are
actually facing.
hunger, food insecurity, um, on
a daily basis in some cases.
Next slide, please.
Thank you. Um,
It has been documented that food
insecurity is twice as common,
um, and I just want to let you
know that this is a screenshot
specifically from the USDA. Uh,
it's twice as common among
indigenous communities living on
reservations compared to all US
households.
Um, and even that data is
probably not completely
accurate. We believe the number
is probably higher than that.
Next slide, please.
And this is the data that that
is out there, um.
Right now that 1 in 4 Native
American people experience food
insecurity, and that's across
the entire country.
Um, which is more than twice the
rate of white non-Hispanic
individuals.
And that 35% of Native American
children are 1 in 3 experience
hunger, food insecurity on some
level. Um, so obviously a very,
a very concerning number and
something that I know you all
are concerned about and
something that we are concerned
about as well.
Next slide please.
Thank you, Katie.
Really somber statistics there.
I know, um, I can speak on
behalf of myself and my
colleagues that we take those
numbers incredibly personally.
Um, it's unfathomable to us that
that many children go hungry in
communities right next door to
us and deeply not OK. Um, so
every day we wake up with the
desire to do better and to do
more and we're grateful for your
support in the pathway towards
that.
First I would just like to say
that hunger is a policy choice.
When we make policy we either
choose to let people continue to
be food insecure or we don't.
And we've made a lot of really
incredible progress with
policies like universal school
meals over the past many years
towards choosing a food secure
future, particularly for those
living in indigenous
communities.
Um, but hunger remains as a
symptom of poverty. It is not an
issue unto itself. It can only
be resolved by meaningfully
addressing poverty when we're
looking at long term solutions.
And there are challenges in
creating food security in need
of communities as well as those
in the other communities in our
state. The first among those is
poverty itself. Native and
Hispanic populations experience
higher rates of poverty than
they
counterparts. There's also
immense challenges related to
living in rural locations,
economic deprivation long
distances to the places where
economic development is actually
happening, lack of access to
broadband that can help bridge
those gaps.
Lack of transportation in itself
is complex, especially when
we're looking at poor
infrastructure like roads that
aren't surfaced properly,
weather conditions that
contribute to that, just paying
for a car and filling it up with
gas and having to drive as far
as you do to get to where food
actually is, um, that also is
accompanied by a profound lack
of public transportation. So
there's very few options. It's
not uncommon at a food
distribution to see people who
Piled 234 families into one
vehicle, um, just to get access
to that. And that's
Not because they just wanted
company. Um, but to ease the
miles of the road, it's out of
necessity, and we have to design
programs to accommodate that.
Um, there's also incredibly
difficult issues around food
access, um, we can count on
grocery stores, but so many
people living in our
communities, especially those in
native communities cannot. There
are 13 different what are there
1313 grocery stores
The Navajo Nation in the
entirety of the Navajo Nation,
which is just unreal, um,
because those really should be
the first location. When we look
at folks having access to SNAP
benefits. The second question
should be how can they use them?
Is there a grocery store that
offers fruits and vegetables and
protein within a reasonable
distance to the folks that are
living in that community, um,
because SNAP is the first line
of defense against food
insecurity, and if folks have to
travel 50 miles one way just to
use those benefits.
And they're not in a place that
has fresh fruits and vegetables,
then we still have a problem.
And food banks alone can't
overcome that, although we are
trying quite hard.
Um, there are also major cost
changes too when you do see food
at a grocery store that's closer
to a native community, the cost
of that food is higher than it
would be in urban Albuquerque,
um, and that just seems deeply
unjust, doesn't it? Um, that
your SNAP benefits won't even
stretch as far as they would if
you were in an urban center and
all of these are
disproportionate factors that
affect folks living in native
communities that exacerbate
their food.
Security and really create a
cycle that we don't move beyond.
Next slide, please.
And this brings us to hunger and
health, um, it's despairing
sometimes to just talk about
hunger itself, food insecurity,
how many people live with it,
but the real
Desperate tale is in what the
consequences of hunger are for
children, for seniors, um, for
our elders and everyone living
within a community.
Please understand, and I know
you know this, you've been so
supportive of this work, that
the health of our communities is
deeply dependent on people
having access to nutritious food
on a regular basis, enough to
meet their needs.
And it's
That intersection of hunger and
health is what you hear this
movement around food is
medicine, um, really rising up
in our communities and we want
to help make that connection for
you today. Food banks always
have been and still are. The
first level of defense in that
food is medicine conversation.
We believe that access to
healthy nutritious food is a
human right, and that every
single person living in this
country should be able to access
the nutritious foods they need.
And when that system is
interrupted, you get into a
cycle of poor health, which
seems obvious, but it's not just
our physical health that's
impacted, although you see
incredibly higher rates of
complex disease, diabetes, heart
conditions, other related
conditions that spiral out from
there. But you're also talking
about mental and emotional
health.
Families that are food insecure
are families that are struggling
with poverty. There's higher
rates of conflict, substance
use, depression, anxiety. Those
are not optimal environments for
children to grow up in.
And when we see that 35% of
children in native communities
are food insecure. We know that
it is a much bigger problem than
just getting access to food.
We need to address those
underlying root causes. Next
slide, please.
Overall impacts. First, I want
to give an incredible shout out
here to the passage of Universal
school meals, um, across the
state of New Mexico, you all
were part of making that happen.
It is.
I can't even tell you how much
of a sigh of relief it is for
the food bank network to have
that as a tool in the tool kit
for how to raise people up and
create a more robust safety net.
It definitely leads directly to
better school performance.
Children are more likely to go
to school when there's
available, the availability of
food just in general. It's a
motivator. I started as a public
educator, um, the first thing
kids wanted to know is whether
that burrito in the cooler was
there for them and could they
have the one for so and so who's
absent today. Um, it's a huge
motivator. We had children that
wanted to come to summer school
and, you know, make up better
grades and classes because
there's food available.
Um, having that program continue
to be fully funded. I know there
was some tension, uh, as the
legislature closed last year as
to whether that would happen is
absolutely essential to making
sure that New Mexicans are food
secure. Food banks don't do this
alone. We have to have all these
other programs lifting people up
simultaneously, including the
expanded enrollment in SNAP. But
you can see that there's a
number of outcomes that none of
us want high conflict in
families, poor health outcomes.
social behavioral implications
and it all starts with making
sure people have access to
nutritious food. Next slide,
please.
has
I'm gonna call out really
quickly, um, besides SNAP, um,
which, which, um, Jill has said,
has spoken so beautifully about
the importance of SNAP for a
state and so many people within
our state, a program that is
very specific to Native American
communities within our state and
across the nation is for dipper
or the food distribution program
on Indian reservations, um, that
is, um, administered through the
Indian Affairs department, so
the food banks are actually not
in any way.
connected to the Fiipper
program. Um, there are, uh, I
believe,
5, make sure there's 5 groups
that are administering that
program. Uh, one of the biggest
challenges with Fidipper is that
those who receive it cannot
receive SNAP benefits.
And this is something that's
being addressed at the federal
level. Unfortunately, it is not
a state, state level decision to
make. Um, but there is
legislation and discussion at
the federal level about, uh,
removing that, uh, requirement,
which we fully and totally
support.
Um, it would be incredible and
wonderful, I think, for there to
be deeper engagement between a
lot of the different food
distribution opportunities that
are going on now along with
Fidipper. So I bring it forward
because it exists and it is
something that is happening for
communities and I think that
there are many ways that we
could help to stretch, um, to
really stretch the the efficacy
of that particular program for
communities, um, I know, I see a
lot of shaking heads about this.
Snap rule, it's, um, I don't, I
can't quite wrap my head around
why that ever became a rule to
begin with. Um, but in reality,
the food that is provided
through the Fidipper program is
the same food that is oftentimes
provided through TFAP, which is
the USDA commodity program. So
some of the challenges there can
also be there's not a lot, a lot
of cultural relevance for native
communities with some of that
food. Um, and that's also
something that we've been
lifting up to the federal level
and to the USDA.
If we're going to have a very
specific program for Native
American communities that the
food that's being provided for
that program needs to be
culturally relevant and it needs
to be culturally relevant for
the area that it is in.
Um, so I just wanted to bring
that forward.
An add-on note to that is, you
know, definitely when we're
looking at health intersections
there we're talking about the
dipper food being packed in
sugary juice rather than in
natural juices, um, lots of
things that contribute
negatively towards diabetic
conditions. But as Katie so
aptly pointed out, um, Snap is a
disqualifier for receiving
Fidipper, but in the TFAT
program, when we want to
highlight disparities and bring
them.
For.
It's an automatic qualifier.
So when you go to a food
distribution and you want to
enroll for TFAP at one of our
drive-through distributions,
TFAP, the emergency food
assistance program. That's the
USDA commodity Food Program
that's administered by the food
banks. We hold a contract with
the state of New Mexico as
individual food banks to do
that.
When you come to register,
For on tribal lands, it's um for
dipper, but we can bring TFA
into native communities also,
and we do, um, which we're going
to highlight in a couple of
slides from now. But when you
show up to register at one of
those sites where we are
distributing TFAP, we ask, are
you enrolled in SNAP? and they
say yes, and we
Check a box and they're
automatically enrolled.
But if you ask that same
question about
Snap for for dipper. We're like,
sorry, we can't.
Give you that this food too
then. So I do want to highlight
that as a disparity that it
does, this is not a
complication.
For the TFAT program.
Thank you, Jill. Thanks for
bringing that forward. So as, as
food banks, we wanted to bring
this part forward, um, and, and
we also want to acknowledge that
so many members of this
committee are very aware of the
importance of food sovereignty
for um for Native American
communities in our state, um,
that we absolutely as food banks
agree with that and believe in
that, um, and that our goal in
working with communities
directly is to support and
partner with.
them in whatever way they wish
to partner.
Um, there may be some locations.
I'll give an example of of Ha Ms
Pueblo, um, Roadrunner's been
working closely with Haus and
having, um, a really wonderful
growing relationship, um,
bringing food uh food
distribution to begin with, but
now we're working with them to
actually build out a pantry
within the pueblo, um, and also
talking about what ways that,
uh, that farmers and producers
from within him as Pueblo can
provide product to that pantry
in order to be distributed to
Community. Um, so ensuring that
as these conversations are going
on that that anything that we're
bringing in is food banks is not
disrupting the food, um, the
food supply in those particular
communities in a way that is
going to be negative for that
community. Um, next slide,
please.
And these are just a few
examples of, of some food
sovereignty, uh, work that's
going on across, across the
state is is certainly not an
all-inclusive list. Um, I know
Santa Clara in the past has been
working to reintroduce
indigenous foods into the diets
of of tribal elders, uh, Yakanal
has been working with the puelo
of Laguna, uh, from youth to
elders to learn and participate
in agricultural practices, um,
hey Miss Pueblo again, wonderful
Haus, um, has
Created a food sovereignty
assessment and some of the
things that respondents
identified were that they would
like to have a food bank element
there, tribal garden,
educational programming, uh,
seed and farm support. So, um,
one of the biggest things that
conversations that we have early
on as we seek to partner with
different communities is what
does this look like to you? How
do you want a partner? What role
do you want us to serve to
ensure that we are being highly
respectful of
What the community would prefer.
Next slide, please.
Right
Unsurprisingly, there are gaps
and challenges, um, as there are
for operating any highly complex
system. First and foremost, next
slide, please. Um, we're gonna
talk about lack of data, but we
understand that this.
Distributing food within native
communities really depends on
relationships at its core, and
there's a history of difficulty
in forging those relationships
for a million reasons. For a
long time, the two governmental
programs sort of closed the door
between food banks and native
communities because folks
couldn't be eligible to receive
TFA because they were getting
for dipper and they're for food
banks didn't have a place to be
there.
Uh, that doesn't exist any
longer, so we're really working
hard to make sure that we forge
relationships there, but it is
understandable that there
is a lack of knowledge about
each other. And there's distrust
in some spaces and forging
forward with developing those
relationships as a process that
takes time and sometimes that's
impeded as elections happen and
leadership changes over and
there's a step back that
happens, that the people that we
got to point C in that
relationship with are gone and
new people are there and we need
to start back at point A. Um,
for this reason,
The food depot has been working
specifically with community
health workers and diabetes
educators and healthcare
providers where there's less of
that transition. Um, so that we
can really work on continuity of
services. But one of the big
issues is that getting a
mobilized effort to improve food
security relies on data.
Everyone wants to know the data
points. And while Katie was able
to scrounge and look in between
the couch cushions to find the
data that we brought today.
There's a
found lack of data about the
prevalence and depth of hunger
in native communities and among
native folks. And
We could talk all day about the
sociological reasons for why
that is. Um, but the truth is
that there, it's so hard to
find, and I will call it out
that our parent organization
Feeding America, if you go to
their maps, the meal gap page,
and you click the demographic
that says Native American in New
Mexico, it says there is no data
available for your search. Now,
we can make a commitment that we
have a seat at the table in
Feeding America, and we are and
will continue to apply pressure
that they need to do better.
They have an intense data
collection system. They need to
go into communities and start
researching this meaningfully.
And that's a piece of advocacy
that we can have to start
advocating more effectively, but
we need to really understand the
depth of the problem before we
can meaningfully address it.
New Mexico does have the
potential to be a national
leader in this space. We have
high populations of native
folks. That is what we are all
about, and we have two major
educational institutions here
plus several others in smaller
areas of our service area.
So we could highlight these and
we will with our education
partners, um, especially the UNM
think tank is always looking for
something new to dig into data
on. Um, but these are great
things for all of us to pull
forward. How, who's doing
meaningful research into hunger
and native communities. How can
we leverage that for additional
support, both nationally and
locally.
And we also need that data to
intentionally go after federal
funding. When we talk about
trying to leverage every federal
dollar we possibly can. We're
doing that, um, which we'll talk
about a little bit more. But
it's so important that we have
really good data, especially
about our actual communities,
not data extrapolated about the
experiences of native native
folks in the Northeast.
Or in Alaska, but right here in
the desert Southwest. We need
real data so we can start making
meaningful progress. Next slide.
All right, this map, uh that's
pulled up here is a census track
level, uh, need map for food
insecurity, and it is something
that uh that Roadrunner created
this year, and I'm going to
share with you really quickly
what our measurement tools were
to determine by census track
level, what, uh, what need looks
like. Uh, we actually took 6
pieces, 6 data points, um, we
took life expectancy.
Uh, we took food insecurity
percentage the population or the
number of people experiencing
food insecurity. We also took,
um, 50% or higher community of
color within that census tract,
uh, we utilized uh the area
deprivation index and the social
vulnerability index, say that
many times over, it's a tongue
twister, um, but those two last
measurements take a lot of
things into account.
Including infrastructure, um,
access to resources and things
of that nature. So as you can
see, um, the darker orange
indicates an area of higher need
and really across the board, um,
those community Native American
communities in our state, um,
are, are ranking, um, are at a
level of, of highest need.
Um, there is nothing else, uh,
to our knowledge, information
like this available at this time
and the food banks are utilizing
this data to actually be very
targeted about our approach, um,
and outreach to different
communities, understanding that,
you know, in a particular area
there is an incredibly high need
in ensuring that we are doing um
regular outreach and seeking to
get food distributions into
those areas if there aren't any
at this time. So this is the
most, um.
Sight of county level data,
which is what we used
previously. This is really
allowing us to dig in a lot more
deeply. There are 612 census
tracks in the state of New
Mexico and 33 counties. So being
able to switch from the county
level to the census track level,
um, it's going to be a really
helpful approach so that we can
do this work a lot better, um.
And, and do our our outreach
work a lot better as well.
To give an example of how that
plays out in real time and we
will look more closely. The Food
Depot has a mobile food pantry
distribution in Las Vegas and we
were trying to transition it to
a TFA distribution, um, so that
we could get additional food in
there, especially some of the
pork loins and really nice meats
that come in with the TFAT
program. But it's hard because
you have to register people and
there's about 300+ folks that
come to that distribution and
everyone was feeling a little
cranky about it, um,
Especially the volunteers who
were knocking on windows and
asking people to register and
the people were like, ah, I hate
government forms. Um, so things
are getting a little tense and
we were having a conversation
about what we ought to do.
Should it just go back to being
non TFAP, etc. Should we let it
just be smaller and move on to a
different community, and what we
pulled up was the census tract
that showed the exact track
where that distribution happens
is one of the deepest pockets of
need in our.
Fire service area.
And
We bingo, thank you. Um, as a
result, we were like, no, we
need more advanced solutions to
this to make this work, so maybe
we need to bring staff in to
handle registration. We need to
make sure that TFA shows up in
this community. This needs to
happen. And that's the kind of
work that's happening, happening
at the macro or at the micro
level all across our service
areas with every food bank we're
looking very carefully where the
next distribution should happen.
Let's go ahead next slide there.
All right, so to boil down from
the really high level that we've
been talking about of what's
actually happening in native
communities. New Mexico's food
banks are partnering in 12 out
of the 19 pueblos to provide
food assistance, um, on at least
a monthly basis, if not more
frequently, you can see the list
of the pueblos where we are
present on the right there. Some
of those are in Katie's service
area, some are in mine, some are
at our other three food bank
partners locations out towards
Gallow
up towards Farmington and over
in Clovis.
Out of the 50 Navajo Nation
chapter houses in New Mexico. We
have a presence in 23 of them,
and we have 3 total presences in
the Apache.
Nations.
Next slide.
Those numbers are not 100%, so
that means we still have work to
do. Um, you can see that there
are 7 out of the 19 pueblos that
we still need to continue to
work on advancing those
relationships. I can speak to
Tesuque and Santa Clara that
we're about 70% of the way there
to making a distribution happen
in those pueblos with the Food
Depot Picqueri has been a little
bit harder to gain access to and
try to advance those
conversations, um, and we're
looking for another
You know, significant jump in
the Navajo Nation chapter houses
to move that forward. And that
goes back to the challenges that
we discussed earlier, but we are
really persistent. I think
everyone's always said that
about food banks. We're very
persistent. Um, it's an enormous
area and we're just going to
keep waking up every day and
doing good work. Next slide.
OK, but there are really, really
wonderful things happening, um,
and this is a picture of our
team, um, from the Food Depot
out there. Mary, who's sort of
towards the center there, I
think holding the apples and the
black shirt. Mario Campo is in
charge of our Foodmobile 2
program, which is a dedicated
program to trying to provide
consistent nutritious food
access and native communities.
Uh, this, I'm not sure which
place this picture was of, um,
but the first Pueblo that we had
a presence in with this program
with Sanilda Fonso, and the
majority of that program was
funded by the Reach and
Resiliency grant, which came out
of the USDA. The Food Depot
benefited from those funds. We
bring TFA foods into that
community as well as others
working with the community
health workers, and as an
example of our dedication to the
nutritious food component, the
community health workers that
We were partnering with from the
Pueblo dictated significantly
what kinds of food got brought
out there. If they didn't want
to see pastries, we don't bring
pastries. If they only want
food, canned fruit in natural
juices, that's what goes. If
they wanted to make sure we had
lactose free milk. We brought
lactose-free milk. So there's a
wide diversity of food options
that are offered there, a
minimum of 3 produce options,
usually a couple of protein
options and the community health
workers are
actually administering the
distribution. So they're having
those conversations with folks
about which foods are good to
choose if you have diabetes,
which ones you should be
avoiding, and they have
relationships. Everyone knows
each other.
Um, and it's been a really
robust partnership.
You can see some of the other
quotes, um, of just what people
say as they go through, um, we
usually try to time our
distributions there to be the
week before feast. So folks can
participate in feasts the way
that they want to, and we get a
lot of feedback about that and
try to organize around the
Pueblo schedule of when they
need to see our food
distributions happen.
Next slide.
So some of the obstacles and
challenges obstacles and
challenges that we've been
talking about, um, I think are
are pretty clear and well known.
Um, obviously there are, there
continue to be access to water
issues, um, I, I will share with
you that, uh, in 7 of the Navajo
Nation chapter houses where Roer
currently does monthly
distributions. Um, one of the
largest weight items is water.
Um, we bring out huge amounts of
water along with food and.
Without fail that that tends to
be one of the most popular
items. People are really, really
excited to have access to water
and to be able to take that
home, um, we've had, I've had
numerous instances of, of folks
pulling up and saying, I just
ran out of water yesterday, or,
you know, I've been out of water
for a couple of days and really
thankful to see, see some water
availability. So, um, water
continues to be a concern. road
conditions absolutely can come
into play, um, Roadrunner, Food
Depo.
All of the food banks rely on,
on big trucks. In some cases 53
ft trucks and, um, those trucks
are not able to navigate um
roads that are, are dirt and and
the maintenance is not great, so
we work really hard to find
other options including smaller
trucks and we've talked through
some of the other, um, potential
transportation possibilities to
address that, but of course the
smaller the truck, the less food
you can bring. So we kind of are
always having to play that, you
know, that balance.
game
Um, obviously lack of food
access that um that Jill brought
forward, um, what is
particularly stunning when you
look at the map of New Mexico
is, um, we have mapped all of of
over that um census level, um,
need map that we have. We've
also mapped all of the snap
availability across the entire
state. happy to send you all the
link to that if you're ever
interested in looking at it and
what is really noticeable across
most, if not all, of the Native
American community.
in our state is that most of
them do have some kind of snap
availability, but it is almost
solely dollar stores and
convenience stores.
Which, as we all know well, um,
The availability of healthy
items in those two locations can
be very difficult.
Um, there's a lot of lack of
infrastructure in our state, um,
there, there's very little cold
storage for food in many parts
of our state. The majority of
cold storage for food is along
the Rio Grande, the valley, and
then when you get outside of
that, um, the cold storage just
decreases as you go further out.
So, um, not just for the food
banks, but also for local
growers, uh, and producers, uh,
many of them don't have a place
to take their food for cold
storage.
That it continues to be an issue
and a need in our state. And of
course, we're all very aware of
the challenges around broadband,
um, for when we do
distributions, we'll go out to
sites and have the incredible
opportunity to interact with
people from the community, um,
and we also have, you know, we
have some uh information that we
take down electronically, and
there are many places that we go
where there is not any way to
connect to any kind of cloud,
um, and we have to figure things
out in those particular
instances um and sometimes
having to go old school.
You know, pen and paper. Um, but
it definitely causes challenges
for, for distribution of food
and also just general resource
outreach.
Next slide, please.
Growth opportunities. Um, there
are a lot of opportunities for
growth, and I will say that the
food banks are very, very
excited about that. Um, the
opportunity to expand food
distributions in places, um, in
places where it doesn't
currently exist. Um, obviously
food access infrastructure,
particularly um cold storage,
vital, vital to our state and to
many, um, many parts of, uh, of
our indigenous communities
within the state.
Um, and the opportunity to
invest in food sovereignty
projects, um, more of that is
always a better thing, um, for
the, for every community. Um,
and then the opportunity to
invest in unique and innovative
projects to address food
insecurity, so I do want to
point to that picture on the
bottom left, that is actually a
out, it's kind of you can be
outside on its own. It's a, uh,
they're blockers that can hold
the refrigerator that can hold
groceries. So are there
potentially areas
Where folks can can order a box
of food, um, and it can be
delivered to a location like
this and then they can come and
pick up that food when it works
for them. Um, because oftentimes
for those that work or have
other challenges in their life,
um, being able to come out to a
distribution at exactly 9:00
a.m. one time a month doesn't
work really well. Um, and we
want to expand the ability for
people to get access to the food
they need.
So next slide please.
OK, I'm gonna leave plenty of
time for questions because I see
you all writing furiously, so
we're going to speed through
this. Um, I just wanted to
surface that the New Mexico
Regional Farm to Food Bank
program exists. It is federally
funded. There was fantastic news
from the USDA this week that
there is going to be additional
funding to continue that
program, um, as recently as a
couple of days ago, um, we
thought that that program was
just going to sunset after 3
years of heavy lift to create
it.
Um, but that is a program that
is purchasing from small and
mid-scale local growers,
including indigenous growers and
funneling that food at market
rate into the food bank so that
it can be utilized by the people
that we serve. Um, so keep your
eye on that program. It's been
incredibly innovative and
really, really impactful, and it
actually is going to have
funding unless something else
major changes, but we won't even
wish that next slide.
And finally there is going to be
a food as medicine summit coming
up on November 12th. Um, if
you'd like us to follow up with
an email invitation to that, we
will, um, it's a great
opportunity to learn about the
intersection between nutritious
food and healthcare outcomes and
what role the food banks are
playing in that ecosystem.
Questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. I have Senator
Souls, Representative Zamora,
Representative Robal Caballero,
representative Allison and
Representative Little. So
Senator Souls. Thank you, Madam
Chair. And first, thank you for
the hard work you do that's
often not fully appreciated and
such, very much appreciate that.
I always.
Madam Chair, I'm always trying
to think of how do we fix the
problems. And so,
How do we this has two problems.
We have to solved today's
problem. We have people hungry
right now. We also have a
problem of how do we fix the
societal issues that allow
people to be hungry.
Um,
And I always get back to we're
not a poor state. We are a
wealthy state. We allow people
to go hungry. How do we fix
today's problems, you know, what
does that take, uh, and then
after that, how do we fix the
long term systemic problems that
lead to food insecurity and
hunger.
Well, you're not going to start
small, are you? Um.
Madam Chair and senator, um,
thanks for the question and
that's exactly the conversation
we need to be having, and I
would be lying if I said I had
the perfect solution to that,
but, um, nationally, there is a
conversation starting about root
causes. Um, we know this is
fundamentally an issue of
poverty and so as you encounter
all of the different spaces
where poverty is showing up.
There's a lot to discuss. We
have to look at the healthcare
sector for that.
We look at the cost of
childcare, the cost of housing,
the cost of food, and there's
just so many there's not one
solution. I know some folks
might sleep in and say, we just
need to raise the minimum wage
to
Whatever number of dollars it is
today, um, that will be higher
tomorrow and that will be
enough, um, and we, it's not
that simple. We know that we
need to impact and uplift folks
who are economically
disadvantaged in a number of
ways as a community. Um, so I
don't have the perfect solution,
but I fully agree that we have
to keep feeding people today.
There's a line item for $10,000
in the HCA budget for funding to
food banks. We'd love to see
that preserved and actually
Make it to signature. Um, that's
absolutely critical if we want
to make sure people are food
secure right now and we are
happy to be part of the
conversation about the many
different root cause ways that
we can start to impact people's
overall economic security.
Thank you, Madam Chair, you said
the $1000 in the budget, it is
not there now. That's hopeful
for this next year, and is that
sufficient or is that the
minimum we could get by with.
I like you.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
the $10 million is a line item
in the HCA budget right now. Um,
so we're not going through an
appropriations process for that.
It's a special, it's
non-recurring. Um, there exists
also a $1.1 million allocation
for produce purchase that's been
there for many years, obviously
want that to continue. Um, is
that enough to cover what we
refer to as the meal gap? No, is
it what the food banks can
administer within a fiscal year.
Yes. Um, I'm gonna put a big
caveat out here because there's
been a lot of very interesting
conversation. The food banks are
one piece of a many, many 1000
piece puzzle of food security in
the state of New Mexico and the
other food security programs
like Snap and Wick and Universal
school meals all need to stay
where they are and be funded at
the level they are now or have
that funding increased for us to
be able to do the work we're
doing over in our little square.
So there is not a magic formula
where if you guys dropped $500
on us, the food banks can do it
all. We can't. We can't do it
alone. Um, $100 million will go
a long way, and we do have which
we could send out to the
committee some paper that we
sent to Senator Munoz, um,
highlighting how much we are
able to do with the $500 we
received in fiscal 25 and how
much more we will be able to do
at the county level in fiscal 26
if that amount is doubled to
this $10,000.
Thank you. You mentioned the
food bank capacity, um, and if
we've got hungry people, we
ought to be funding the food
side of it up to whatever the
food bank capacity or the
distribution capacity is. Um,
and again, I point out we're not
a poor state for every 1% of
cash reserves that we have
sitting that we're worried about
an economic downturn provides
$100 million of potential food
to make sure we don't have
people going hungry, you know,
and so we, we need to remember.
we've got plenty of money, we've
got to build capacity to be able
to get the food out to people,
but we should not.
We should be building the
capacity while making sure we
have funded the food to fill the
capacity that's available. Um,
you had mentioned, Madam Chair,
you had mentioned about uh we
concerned or hoped that the
federal money is coming in
again, New Mexico is a wealthy
state. We don't have to rely on
the federal government when we
have hungry people, you know,
they ought to be the supplement
to make it a little easier, but
we've got enough money to feed
everybody, and we need to get
after it and start doing that.
So thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you for the presentation,
great presentation. I'd like to
tag a little bit on, on what
Senator Solz talked about on the
federal money. I believe what
I'm hearing from my food bank is
some of the federal money's been
pulled back on the senior
programs. Am I correct in saying
that?
We're probably talking about um
CSFP, which is the, the program,
the box program for seniors.
OK. And, and what I hear is
somewhere around 25% cutback,
maybe 30%.
right.
Yes, that's that's sad to see
from the federal government.
Uh, when they know the high rate
of inflation.
And everything that's going on
across the country.
Uh
And, and I wanna, I wanna touch
base one more time on the
budget. You've been allocated 5
million for 2025 is, is that
what you're, what we're hearing
and you're ask.
You're asking what was in the
past was 10,000, right? No.
Thank you, Representative, the
other way around, um, for the
last two fiscal years, fiscal 24
and fiscal 25, we received $5
million from the legislature,
non-recurring funding. Um, the
produce money sits in a
different bucket, so we'll
ignore that for the sake of
argument. What is in the budget
proposed budget for fiscal 26
right now and there's a lot of
months between now and March,
um, is $10,000 so doubling the
amount of support that food
banks have had to purchase food
with.
OK, thank you for that. And then
on, on the
Farm to food bank.
Are you allowed
Madam Chair, and, and, and
presenters, are you allowed to
have a contract with a farmer or
does the farmer take the risk?
I've, I've heard some stories
about farmers in New Mexico
wanting to sell produce, and
then at the end of the day,
It doesn't get sold to the food
bank and then they have to eat
the produce themselves and they
wind up losing. Are you allowed
to, to do a contract or not,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and representatives
of the committee.
It's a highly complex program
because why not? Um, the nuts
and bolts of it are that if one
vendor intends to sell more than
$60,000 worth of product to the
food banks over a given period
of time that they have to
respond to the RFP to become an
approved supplier at a certain
level to do so. There's another
threshold where everyone has to
be on the approved supplier list
which has some barriers to it.
Folks do need
To go through some safe food
handling training they need to
demonstrate a cleanliness of
facility and compliance with
some basic regulation. We cannot
purchase through the regional
farm to food bank program from
anyone who is not on the
approved supplier list. Some of
the risk that's inherent in the
program is this vulnerability
around continued funding. So 3
days ago when we were looking at
is this funding going to be
continued? We're not sure. We
need to find $2.5 million to
make this happen.
The reality would be that next
season, while the program is
funded, those growers would put
the food in the ground.
And then in June, the funding
would go away and we wouldn't be
buying by the time that food was
ready to harvest. And yes, they
would take the loss because the
funding was set to expire
mid-grow season. So that was
absolutely a risk. When the
funding is guaranteed, yep,
we're gonna be out here, we're
gonna be buying. I can tell you
that the Food Depot is
administering this program.
We're spending a lot of money.
Um, I think I moved money from
one bank account to another a
couple times a week to cover the
expenses, but we had about
$800,000 out for reimbursement
over the last 5 weeks for that
program alone. So really, it's
about making sure that there's
continuity in the funding that's
predictable, so we don't end up
in a situation where someone
plants a crop that then doesn't
have a market with the food
banks.
And thank, thank you for that
answer. Madam Chair, and uh
There's, there's a lot of things
that can happen in there, right?
But, but if a farmer produces a
certain crop.
To be sold to a food bank, there
has to be some kind of security
there for him.
Uh,
And he, because when we're
talking about lettuce, uh, some
kind of.
Produce that doesn't hold very
long, it needs to be moved and,
and, and I think those are
challenges that we'll see, uh,
that maybe can get ironed out
and we can do.
Uh, better in the future.
Uh
I, I can see the challenges. I
can see a hailstorm. you guys
expecting the food in the
hailstorm come by and take the
crop out. So, so there's,
there's a lot of challenges
there that
That will be interesting to see
as we go forward with this
program, uh,
And Katie, Madam Chair, and
Katie, I have a question for
you, uh, we've seen in the past,
and, and I think we're doing
better with it.
What we've seen in the past
where Roadrunner.
I'm going to be blunt, muscle
their way into eastern New
Mexico or tried to muscle their
way into eastern New Mexico.
Eastern New Mexico and eastern
New Mexico we've invested a lot
of money.
In our food bank. We've we've
redone our freezer, we've we've.
Made more refrigerator space.
We've worked with the
The community for donations, we,
we really work hard. We have, we
have a great manager in eastern
New Mexico.
And
We saw Roadrunner.
Write this letter.
That said they were moving into
our.
Area
And intended to serve the
people.
We were very hurt by that.
We don't see how a statewide
Managed food bank.
could do as good and micromanage
what we're doing there in the
eastern part of the state.
I would like to see the food
banks of the state of New Mexico
work together with one another.
It creates a lot more.
Energy, power to buy maybe
better distributions and and and
catching different parts of the
state. Eastern New Mexico
doesn't have.
The knowledge and the capability
of doing what you're doing in
your area.
But we don't feel like
You have the capability to go
micromanage our area.
Madam Chair and Katie, how do
you feel about the statement and
and question that I posed to
you?
Well, Madam Chair and
Representative Zamora, I hear
you, um, and I want to I want to
assure everyone on the committee
that the food banks are, uh, are
working well together. Um, we
worked together through the New
Mexico Association of Food
Banks. Um, we have meetings
every single month. Um, we're
actually getting ready to do
some work together around a
facilitated discussion so that
we're all feeling a lot more
confident in our, in our
partnership together. Um, but we
are all partnering.
Well and working very well
together, um, Roadrunner is
continuing to take loads of food
to Food Bank of Eastern New
Mexico, uh, weekly, and they're
receiving that product and we
are all supporting one another.
So, um, the goal is to support
the Food Bank of Eastern New
Mexico to do the best work that
they can in eastern New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that, Katie.
Those, those are the kind of
relationships that I think are
very important across the state.
And
Also informing those
relationships.
I believe Eastern New Mexico
Food Bank ought to have.
The freedom
To work
In avenues that benefit eastern
New Mexico and the people of
eastern New Mexico.
And
When that happened and that
letter was wrote.
In black and white.
And when I read that letter, I
thought, what in the world is
going on here? I hope that in
the future that doesn't happen.
I hope that eastern New Mexico
can help Road Runner, and I hope
that Road Runner can help
eastern New Mexico.
We look to a better relationship
with Road Runner than that?
And uh thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Katie, and
And presenters for your
presentation. Thank you.
Thank you. We are running behind
schedule, so please be cognizant
of your, uh, your questions and
concerns Representative Roybal
Calero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your,
uh,
Presentation, I love the fact
that you take a very powerful
justice mindset, which guides
your approach, which is very
holistic and recognized that
food sovereignty is a basic
right, so I wanted to begin with
that. I have 3 questions.
I also wanted to just quickly
add that, you know,
to what Senator Solz was saying
earlier, I think if we take kind
of a circular approach.
Rather than a linear approach,
um, which
You addressed taking, keeping in
mind how people think and work
and live and their knowledge,
um, then we will see the
interconnectedness between food,
health, education, and
empowerment and many other
things, and it's all
interconnected, so thank you for
that. So my first question goes
back to, um, Madam Chair, what
you, um,
Brought up on the food
distribution program or Indian
reservation.
Slide
Which really
saddens me a great deal. The
fact that, um,
If you you're a SNAP recipient,
you can't receive the FDPIR. So
I, I can't imagine how
dehumanizing that is to
approach.
And then to be denied. And uh
especially knowing that SNAP
benefits don't even cover.
100% of the need in a household
anyway.
Because there's a formula, Madam
Chair, associated with how that
is determined.
And it's an unjust, unfair.
inequitable formula, and it's a
formula that's been used for
years and no one's really
tackled it. So my question is,
what is the status right now of
the change, changing the rule,
um, what do we need to do as a
state to help influence that
because if you look at the data,
how many people
Of households in the state of
New Mexico are reliant.
On SNAP benefits, Medicaid,
that's a telling story right
there. So I'm very concerned
about this.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Royal Caballero. It, it
absolutely is concerning, um,
and I will say that at the
federal level, you know, I wish
it was one of those rules from
the federal level that the
states have a little more
control over, um, but I do know
that members of our federal
delegation are actually working
on this very issue and are very
concerned about it. Um, there
are also a number of other, um,
both representatives and
senators at the federal level.
That are um and I'd have to, I
can get back with you around the
actual, um, verbiage that's
being utilized, um, in order to,
uh, to make that change, but
there is work happening at the
federal level.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I, um, do you, are
you in communication with the
Center on Law and Poverty, who's
been OK. I just want to make
sure they're the major drivers
on behalf of our population, um.
The other question I have is in
the page, um, where we talk
about where you talk about
obstacles and challenges. I'm
interested in knowing how the
agricultural industry in the
state of New Mexico is
assisting um your work.
And I draw a contradiction here
on the
Couple of slides before that
when you
No when you note the service
gaps.
At a Pueblo is one of the ones
at the very top. It's the top
one that's experiencing.
A gap in service.
And it's, it's
Unbelievable to me because Aamma
for the entire region
historically was known as the
agricultural hub for our state.
They were the ones that, um, set
up irrigation systems and food
growth and distribution.
So I, I just wanted to note
that, but it also concerns me
that a lot of the
Um,
The mechanisms that were
traditional to Akama
Agricultural.
Farming
And food
Growth
Really we're we're um
Adopted by the agricultural
industry in New Mexico, so how
are they helping?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I do want to call out that on
the gap list that is more
related to the food banks having
a direct relationship with those
groups, and it is, it is
possible that that for some
there, there is not a desire to
have, you know, a partnership
with the food banks so they
don't feel like that kind of
relationship is needed, um,
which is to absolutely good and
fine with us, um, but just
calling out that that's not a
relationship that currently
exists.
Thank you.
We can talk more about that
later. My final question is on
the page of growth
opportunities, the slide that
talked about growth opportunity.
It occurred to me, um, that we
learned a lot during COVID.
And one of the things that we
learned is that there's so many
different delivery services and
companies and ways in which, um,
The corporate corporate.
Food companies.
saw a way to help.
Our households during that time
and set up the food delivery
model. The, the massive food
delivery model. Have you thought
about, um, perhaps partnering
with any of those in terms of
getting to the remote areas,
particularly in our rural
communities or just our aging
population or single mothers at
home, other types of, of, uh,
ways to get food delivered.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, yes, that's something
that we continue to explore as
you might expect, there's
barriers, they require a certain
number of households to go
within a certain area. Um, but
relationships with FedEx,
Amazon, many, many different
corporations, um, are all things
that we're regularly exploring
both at the Feeding America
level and at the micro-food bank
level. Um, those conversations
are definitely happening. We're
also exploring more localized
solutions. So is there economic
development money to pay
students from Highlands
University to be drivers.
To take food out to elders
across that county. So we're
exploring both local solutions
and then corporate solutions at
the national level.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just to add real quickly, the
Instacart model.
Where it's connected to your box
model.
So I was thinking of that when
you went through that page.
Um,
It was, it just clipped. I
thought, wow, that if we could
just do something of that nature
and own it ourselves. We just
use the model, we don't
necessarily need to
Involve them, but they have a
model.
And that's a great if you get,
you're already on that track
with the Highland, um,
university students, but it's a
great model and the only thing
is that you need telephone
service, you need internet
service. There we go again with
the circular approach.
It's not just one, and it's not
linear. It's all interconnected,
so how we can as a state.
Help you with that. Think about
it and let us know. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Shanai Representative Ellison.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I really
don't have a question, so my
comments are just commentary.
I
Find your topic food insecurity,
very interesting.
I grew up in an age where
Well, I grew up with no
electricity, no running water.
And we lived off the land, so to
speak. We raise livestock. We
farmed.
Did we ever have food
insecurity?
No.
Food insecurity in my mind was
brought on by colonialism.
Before I went
To the formal schooling of
Before I went to school, I never
knew about baloney, hot dogs,
hamburgers, processed foods.
We lived off the land.
And uh like I said, we raise
livestock and we farmed. We were
not lazy.
We worked hard to get what we
put on the table. My parents
worked hard to put food on the
table.
I find your title very
interesting, Hungary and New
Mexico's indigenous communities.
If we grew up.
Learning how to live off the
land. Have we become lazy?
Is that why we resort to
processed foods. Is that why we
resort to fast foods.
Everywhere you look, and
everything that
We do or see it is based on
revenue.
Are we a generation that is
living on corporate greed.
That's what I see.
Everything you look at has a
dollar sign on it.
And people want to make a living
that way.
I don't believe
In my case, we have food
insecurity because I still work
hard. My parents raised me to
work hard to put food on the
table for my, my children and my
grandchildren.
So just, just a comment, I
appreciate what you do with the
food banks to help various
indigenous nations.
But to say that we have food
insecurity.
I would say no, we don't. We
just become lazy. We don't want
to work hard to put food on the
table as hard as uh
Before the younger generation,
the younger generation is too
quick to go to fast food places,
buy something that is already
prepared processed food and
things like that.
Are we food insecure?
No, we're just lazy.
Thank you for the comment. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I hope
these questions will try to move
through them quickly. I've got
31 is uh to uh for some clarity,
as you introduce the topic on
this 3 slide on hunger in New
Mexico, um, the statistic of
15.2% of New Mexicans being food
insecure. You've got the two
side by side, uh, um, the total
number and that is my question,
is the uh um are these discrete
numbers or
Does the, there's the 100.
14 100.
1420 trying to remember how to.
Pronounced my math or uh express
numbers, uh, 100,420 children,
are they part of the 321,000
total? They are. OK, thank you,
because I was thinking so that
might be actually 400, over
400,000. OK, thank you. Uh,
secondly, um, uh, I understand
that the federal, uh, our
federal delegation is addressing
the issue of the FDPIR.
And snapP restrictions. My
question is, does that
restriction also apply to
commodities that are received
off tribal lands.
It does not.
Well, that's interesting. OK,
seems a bit discriminatory, and
I'm sure our delegation is
exploring that. OK, thank you.
Thirdly, my final question is,
as you were talking about data,
uh, data availability. I was
just wondering if um if y'all
have been working, Madam Chair,
with the, uh, I'm aware, I was
thinking of Aztec, the uh
Albuquerque area, Southwest
tribal epidemiology.
Epidemiology Center.
Uh, in collaboration as part of
the group of that does the New
Mexico Youth Risk and Resiliency
survey. So I was just I'm
wondering if that was part of
where your some of your data is
coming from.
Madam Chair, Representative
Little, I'd be happy to share
out, um, where the data is
coming from. Uh, we do work with
Aztec. Um, I don't know that any
of the data in there is
specifically from Aztec, but it
is, um, census level data and
there's some other places that
comes from as well, but we do
work very closely with with them
on a number of projects.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, finally, I think that, um,
in the past, previous or last
year's session, I was carrying a
bill for funding House Bill 131,
which did not make it through
and we're trying again, uh, give
it another whirl, uh, another
go. Um, but I am of the opinion,
Madam Chair, and members of our
committee that, uh, having a
recurring funding source would
be more ideal than having
To go from year to year, and I
also um respectfully, with all
due respect to my elder and my
colleague Representative
Allison.
Uh, I can talk of, uh, food
insecurity as a mom.
Living in the city, not being
able to live in my community
because of a lack of housing.
Uh, go to the cities of us that
live in our tribal communities,
moved to the cities for
educational purposes, so we
sacrifice for a period of time.
And move our families there with
us so that we can eventually
come upon a better life. Uh, it
also may be for jobs that are
not available on our in our
communities, but I, uh, the
people that I know of which I am
one, is very hardworking to put
food on my table to take the
opportunities to access services
that I as a taxpayer have been
putting aside for many.
Many years and will continue to
and that I see some of these
benefits as
necessary to meet the needs that
families are facing now
regarding their food
insecurities. And so, you know,
I commend the families who work
up the courage, the nerve to go
and apply for these funds for a
short term. It is definitely
not, was never by design to be a
long term solution to
issue
But that those services are
available that should be
available for a period of time
as a safety net. I totally
support and will continue to
support. I do not want to see
family members or anybody that
we know of in our communities,
children especially to be to go
to be hungry. Um, and I commend
the families that they come from
who are doing their very best as
well to ensure by whatever means
necessary.
To an extent, I'm not condoning,
um,
Everything, but I, I will say
that I commend the families that
they come from to look to see
where they can ensure.
how their children are fed
because a lot of us like me, I
don't have access to a field. I
don't have access to a tractor.
I don't have access to the
water to the land even and I'm
not just speaking for myself.
This is for many families and
our native communities that
don't have that ability. So or
opportunity, and that's what I
will call it and so, you know, I
uh, I will support again, uh,
efforts to fill those gaps that
do exist.
And Madam Chair, thank you so
much. I just wanted to add that
little piece. I appreciate the
time to do so. Thank you.
And thank you to everybody on
this committee who is of uh,
supporting, um, ensuring that
our families have access to
food. Thank you.
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanna
start by letting Representative
Allison know I'm gonna miss you.
I like, I like candor when we're
talking about some of these
issues, and I want you to know
I'm gonna miss you on this
committee, but I do have some
very specific questions, Madam
Chair, for the, for the panel.
The first is, is I'd like to
know what your relationship of
Roadrunner is to the Gallup food
pantry.
Madam Chair, and Representative
Lundstrom, we are all part of
the New Mexico Association of
Food Banks.
Together. So, um, with
Roadrunner, Food Depot, Food
Bank of Eastern New Mexico, and
Clovis echo in Farmington and
Community Pantry in Gallup. We
are all, we all work together
through that entity.
Oops. So Madam Chair, I'd like
to know what does a presence
mean in Navajo chapters. What
is, what do you mean when you
were talking about a presence in
23 chapters, and where are those
chapters, Madam Chair,
Representative Lindstrom, uh,
presence means that there's,
there is some kind of food
distribution that is going on
there where the food bank is
bringing in food, whether it is
for a mobile food pantry, which
is, uh, pick up, you know, the
day of or some kind of
that is available a little bit
more often throughout the month.
Um, I'd be happy to send you the
list of chapters that currently
have um that relationship. I
don't know that I could
probably, um, list them all
right now, but I'd be happy to
follow up with that list.
The reason I'm asking, Madam
Chair, is that at one time in my
district, there was a major food
distribution center. I, I
imagine it was set up by the
Department of Ag.
Um,
And at that time, what I recall
being, uh, the commodities at
that time that were being
distributed were very, very high
in carbs and sugar, and you see
a lot of that stuff in the um.
Uh, solid waste bins.
Because people realize that it's
not good for them.
You know, people know that heavy
carbs, heavy sugar, I mean,
we've heard this for years, and
that's the kind of stuff that is
being distributed through a
commodity program by the United
States government, at least at
one time that was happening in
one of my chapters that I
represent.
So when you say you have a
presence in these Navajo
chapters, and you don't have
cold storage. Are you repeating
the same mistake because the
picture I saw up there was
potatoes, uh, look like bread.
It looked like stuff that can
that can sit there for a long
time just like the Department of
Ag did out of Mexican Springs
chapter for years. So I'd like
to know what's different about
what you're doing if you don't
have cold storage.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lundstrom, it's an excellent
question and is absolutely a
challenge that we have to
consider. I can speak to the
distributions that, that
Roadrunner is, is doing at this
point in time.
Uh, 50 to 60% of the product
that's being provided is our
fresh fruits and vegetables, um,
and it is a variety of at least
4 to 5 different options for
community members. We also
provide a lot of water. We
provide lean protein. Um, we're
bringing out things like, uh,
frozen chicken, frozen turkey
for those that can take it and
some as they come through,
choose to not take it because
they don't have the means at
home to store it safely, so we
try to be very cognizant of
that.
And then we also provide, um,
items like um dried pinto beans,
um, we provide brown rice. We
try to provide something that's
a little bit on the healthier
side. So we're focusing very
heavily on bringing out, um,
healthy, nutritious foods. Um,
we do not have, you know, snack
cakes or pastries or anything
like that. Um, there is bread
that is, uh, that is offered for
those who would like to take it,
um, and oftentimes we try really
hard to keep it um whole grain,
um, or.
Some kind of level, not not just
basic processed white bread.
Madam Chair, my question is, why
aren't we seeing bills that
aren't just giveaway of food
products, but things that are
subsidies for meat production.
At one time out of McKinley
County, uh, that was the largest
sheep, uh, production
county in the Southwest.
And I would imagine between
cattle and sheep it would be a
major incentive again for those
ranchers to have some kind of
incentive, so they're growing
their own.
As opposed to sitting there
waiting for you to bring him a
frozen roast.
So I think, uh, Madam Chair, I
hope we're looking at this more
comprehensively.
Where it's not just a simple ag
department of A, uh,
I guess commodity program that I
used to be aware of in one of my
chapters. I know at one time
they were doing that at Fort
Wingate and then at Mexican
Springs in McKinley County.
All that stuff ended up in the
landfill.
I, I mean, people know, we're
not going to feed our kids white
flour every day. We're not going
to give them white potatoes
every day. They need to have
different stuff, just like
everybody else.
So I would like to get a copy of
those chapters, and I'd really
like to have a better
understanding of what a presence
means when we have a lack of
cold storage.
Um,
And I do want to have a better
understanding of why we're not
looking at this more
comprehensively when it comes to
grow your old. I mean, I'm, I'm
not a, I'm not a, uh,
agricultural person, but we have
that those kind of that
expertise on this committee.
That could help us understand
how we can get our our sheep
business back going again?
And our cattle business going
again in northwest New Mexico,
so we don't have to have these
mobile units passing out frozen
roasts. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator
Rodriguez. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. I, uh, good morning to
the presenters and thank you for
all your work. I specifically
want to thank Sherry, who just
retired from the food depot and,
um, all of you for, for your
great work that you do, Madam
Chairman, for the sake of time,
I am going
Forego any questions and I'm
going to just say a big great
thank you.
All right.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Pinto, thank you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, and
thank you for the work you do in
your presentation.
Uh,
The senior centers I've been out
to do need extra cold storage,
um, and I think that's one
avenue, especially when you talk
about the chapters that are in
our uh in New Mexico.
Um,
because they do have a pantry in
which they have the other goods
there and they give out to the
community, but I think that's
one avenue we can tackle, um,
and I think some of the, one of
my, uh, well, used to be my
chapter. They were able to have
a cold storage uh donated. I
forgot who donated the, the, the
freezer and the refrigerator and
all they had to do was put it
together, but they had to put it
in their warehouse.
in which we gave capital outlay,
which was for their heavy
equipment. So now they still
need a warehouse to put the, um,
because they had to have it done
right away.
But one of the things too that
they were able to do at that
particular chapter was they had
an iPad. They had the technology
to see where where the people
were coming from, the household
sizes, have them registered so
they were collecting the data
that needed to go back for the
money. So that was um also a
positive and
And, you know, getting all these
entities together where these
programs are, are we still, I
guess, more for a discussion
offline is, are there any other
gaps when we talk about Wick,
Snap, and the seniors, uh, um,
where else are we seeing still a
gap of a need not being met or a
restriction, I guess, a barrier
that needs to be eliminated.
And I'm gonna put this out there
for my indigenous communities,
those are like I'd like to see
opinions on a bigger scale. I
don't know what um, yeah, and on
the black market right now for
pins and that's, that's it, but
thank you for the work you do.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I have a
couple of quick questions and
thank you for your presentation.
Can you explain to me really
quickly how the food food
distribution works in Crown
Point and Kirtland.
Madam Chair, uh, we would need,
I believe that those two
distributions are run one run by
community pantry out of Gallup
and one potentially echo out of
Farmington, so I'm happy to,
we're happy to reach out to
them, um, and get, get some
response, and get it back to
you.
that's
OK, thank you. And then I just
want to be clear that if elders
receive Snap, then they do not
qualify for the food
distribution at any level.
Clarific can, Madam Chair, thank
you. Um, the, the clarification
on this that they would be
qualifying for a food
distribution but not if it was
for dipper.
So they can receive snap and
then get TFA commodities they
can receive Snap and still get
food from Roadrunner or the
Community pantry or the Food
Depot, but they can't receive
the Dipper foods if they receive
Snap.
OK, thank you. All righty,
that's all I have. Just want to
thank you for your presentation
and uh we look forward to our
continued work. Please also send
me the list of chapters as well.
Thank you. If you'd also like.
OK, I have a little bit of
housekeeping before we move to
agenda item number 7. Our lunch
will be ready in about 5
minutes. So I'm thinking we
could do a working lunch for the
next presentation. So, uh, we'll
take a few minutes to
Uh
Get our lunch, regroup, and then
we'll begin.
Thank you.
