tentative.
So as we move forward, what
we'll do, our vice chair is not
here yet.
But we, um,
Go through introductions and
then you guys can read through
your um paperwork here and then
we will go to Nicole and uh she
will go over some of the topics
that were already uh emailed to
her or conveyed through me or
the vice chair to see if we can
touch on those and then we will
go around to the committee
members for any other additions
to the um work plan, and if
there are any other um
recommendations to for.
locations or um
As far as hosting in certain
areas. So we will start on my
left side here with uh
Representative Royal Caballero.
Representative, you may begin
your introduction.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Excuse me, members of the
committee, members in the
audience, and those viewing. I'm
Patricia Royal Caballero and I
represent House District 13,
which is the far southwest
quadrant.
Of Albuquerque, and I'm a proud
member of the Beetle Manzo Tigua
Pueblo tribe down from Dona
Anna.
Las Cruces area, and I'm
extremely happy to be back again
on this committee, and I will
note, um, please, uh, Madam
Chair, that it was a little bit
heartbreaking for me to come
this morning because I'm gonna
miss sitting with my dear friend
and mentor, representative Elia
um.
I'll go on, who loved being on
this committee, yeah absolutely
look forward to all of our
meetings and traveling around
the states, so I, I will miss
him dearly. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and to
the public,
um, Yate Bene
Joseph Hernandez, uh, my, uh,
clans are, uh, my, my mother's
side is the Za Pueblo people on
my father's side, I am Mexican
on my um maternal grandparents,
uh, grandfather's side, I am the
of the salt people.
And, uh, on my Nelly side, my uh
paternal grandfather, uh, he, I
am Mexican and uh I'm an
enrolled tribal member of the
Navajo Nation. I live about 7
miles west of Shiprock and um
Blessed to, to be on this
committee and to offer a uh
strong perspective. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
hopefully I'll be able to come
to this committee this year. I
dropped a couple of other
committees. I, I really love
this one. I'm Representative Liz
Thompson. I represent um
Northeast Heights in
Albuquerque, but I grew up in
Crown Point. I consider Crown
Point my home on eastern Navajo,
um, so I'd love doing this. I'm,
I'll just throw out a plug for
let's go to Crown Point or
Standing Rock or Coyote Canyon
or one of those kind of places,
but um thank you so much. It's
great to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
Debbie Sarignon. I represent
House District 21 in Bernalillo
County, Lonzano High School
area. I was on this committee a
couple of years ago and I'm glad
to be back on, excited to listen
to what you have to say. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, great to see
everybody again. My name is
Martin Samora. I represent House
District 63. It covers the south
half of Curry County, the north
half of Roosevelt, all of Dubaca
of Guadalupe and touched San
Miguel County.
I'm looking forward to this
meeting and get started in the
interims. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, good morning
again, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Senator Benny
Shindo, uh, representing
District 22 from Hamusu.
Representative Lunstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair and good
morning, everyone. My name is
Patty Lundstrom. I represent
House District 9, and I've had
uh the pleasure of serving on
this committee since 2001, so
more than 20 years. I represent
at this time 9 Navajo chapters
and half of the city of Gallup.
It's a fun committee, you
learned a lot of things, a lot
of important issues, and I
appreciate being here. Thank
you.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Martha Garcia. I'm a
representative from District 6,
which covers Cibola and McKinley
County, and this is my first
time that I'm on an interim
committee. In fact, I just spent
20 days with you on during the
regular session, and I had to do
a lot during those time, but I,
I did learn a lot and and still
learning and happy to be here
and uh look forward to being on.
this committee because it means
um the majority of the people I
represent are in uh northern or
in McKinley County as well as
Seabloo County and ZUY.
And of course portion of uh
Uh, grants and all of Milan and
Bluewater.
So
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Bill
Scherer, state senator from
District one, which is most of
Farmington, west to the Navajo
Nation and about 1/3 of District
1 is Navajo.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
everyone. I'm Angel Charlie,
state senator for District 30,
and I probably represent 5
sovereign nations, the Pueblo of
Laguna, of which I am a citizen,
uh, the Navajo Nation, Alamo
chapter, Zuni Pueblo Isleta
Pueblo, Akima Pueblo, um, and I
live in Acamo Pablo, so I'm
proud to live in one of our
tribal communities. Thank you.
and wordy, madam, sir. Good
morning, everyone. It's so good
to be here with you, uh, and
good morning to those in the uh
watching and and the audience.
I'm Charlotte Little. I
represent House to 68, which is
uh the northwest corner of uh
Bernalillo County, uh,
Albuquerque, um, I also, uh,
coming from the Bernalo County
area represent over
approximately 70,000 Native
Americans who live within the
the the
City of Albuquerque, the
municipal uh area of
Albuquerque, so I'm very happy
to be able to bring some voices,
um of the from that community
here as well. Um, I come from
the pueblos of San Felipe and
Taos, and I'm very proud to be
my 3rd year in this committee,
so thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everybody. Uh, my name
is Angelita Mejia. I represent
Chavez County District 58 and
happy to be here for the first
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. John
Blockhouse District 51, my third
year on your committee. Great to
be back. And so I represent
House District 51 in Alamogordo
in beautiful Otero County. And
although I'm not a, a tribal
member. Uh, my great, great
grandmother was full-blooded
Navajo. So we are very blessed
to have that in our culture, and
I'm so blessed to be on this
committee because so many of the
issues that we talk about here
really do affect the entire
state as well as my district,
and I'm just blessed to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, everyone. I'm Bill
Souls, state senator from Las
Cruces, where the beautiful
Oregon Mountain Desert Peaks
National Monument is located,
um, I've been on this committee
as either a voting or an
advisory member since I started
in the legislature in 2013, uh,
coming from southern New Mexico,
we don't have as much of a
native influence down there
anymore, but I have learned more
about this incredible beautiful
state and the people that
inhabit it in this committee and
got into the most
Interesting places, uh,
Great meals and, and wonderful
hospitality of people as a
result of it, and so I'm very
pleased that I get to serve on
this committee again.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Committee members, colleagues,
and guests, staff, just wanna
say good morning. I'm
Representative Wanda Johnson
from House District 5. I had to
read my sign. Gallop McKinley
San Juan County.
Thank you, and I really enjoyed
this committee. Thank you.
Hi, thank you, chair. Uh, I'm
Nicole Weispack. I'm a staff
member here, and we also have
two other staff members I'd like
to introduce. We have Sheila
Kelleher kind of in this corner,
and we have Paul Sto uh over to
my right as well.
Thank you, and we'll go out to
the audience. We'll start from
this side and move to.
Who do you want to introduce
yourself?
Thank you.
Now Shannon Pinto Yannini.
Tohaish when
and I am the chair for the
Senate interim Indian Affairs
Committee, this uh this.
Couple of months this interim.
And uh thank you members for
attending. It is um
Welcome to the freshmen that
have come in as your first
interim and thank you for those
that have returned and to be on
this committee and I think one
of the first things I'd like to
mention is this is probably the
most representation we have had
of our Native American
legislature ever besides just me
in the chair and I think the
most at one time was maybe 3,
Senator Shino, I recall at one
time. So I, I'm looking forward
to seeing.
how we tackle some of the issues
for our Native American
population, not only in that
aspect, but even um the
surrounding communities that
contribute to our tribes,
nations, and pueblos. And one of
the things I do like to mention
is I believe during the session,
the Ute Mountain tribe was
recognized by our Indian Affairs
department, so there are 24
tribes nations and pueblos in
the state of New Mexico and they
have expressed interest to um.
That they'd like to develop in
that area, and there is a small
population up there, and I think
we do know with our members here
that is a melting pot as we kind
of
Because we know that our
Our relationships, our family,
our ancestors were not just, you
know,
You know, maybe Navajo was not
just Navajo the Zuni and
everybody um meeting together
and having those uh building
families within New Mexico.
So as we move forward, I know we
have a lot of members here and
we do have a short time, but I
think there are some pressing
issues that are going to kind
of, I guess, pop up in that
sense. So even though some of
the topics that are here, we
want to make sure that we
prioritize anything that does
arise as we move forward. So if
there is anything in that sense
too, don't hesitate to email me,
vice chair, or even our um
staff.
Um, if there's something you'd
like to um address immediately
or think it needs to be
addressed and for instance, I'll
just say I was
into last week trying to get my
post office opened after it was
closed for a couple of days. So
things like that just are um
still occurring.
And um
Representative Lord,
OK.
Uh,
let's see if we can get you a
microphone for introductions
here.
you can just uh turn around and
use one of our members uh to
introduce yourself here.
Thank you for joining us.
Good morning, Representative
Lord with this, oh, now I have a
real microphone. Good morning,
everyone. Just drove in from the
East Mountains, nice rainy
drive, and I'm glad to be here.
Thank you, Representative and um
Yeah, the rain, the rain is
always something.
I don't know if you brought it,
but.
Thank you. So we will go um to
Nicole here who's gonna a very
briefly summarize the, and you
have it in your um folder, some
of the topics that have already
been um
But in there, some of them are
also being carried over from
last, the last year and some are
new. So, um, you can.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Vice Chair, um, as mentioned,
I'm just gonna kind of hit the
main topics. I don't want to
read every item on this, um, you
should have it in your packet,
the 2025 proposed work plan.
Uh, in terms of topics to
address, address, it's really
divided into 4 main categories,
uh, so starting first with state
and tribal relations. Uh, if you
look through that long list of
items under state and travel
relations that covers a variety
of different issues, uh, we can
certainly add to that as well.
Uh, our second main topic is
economic development, uh, under
economic development, we have
tribal energy development,
broadband access, um, looking at
the status of abandoned or
uncapped uh gas wells. Also some
work with uh on energy
transition, um, and the
Department of Indian Affairs.
Uh, third main topic is
education. You'll see under
education again a variety of
issues of keeping culturally
relevant education in the state,
as well as some lawsuits that we
will certainly have some updates
for you, uh, during this
interim. Uh, our last section,
which is really sort of
mandatory for this particular
committee is annual reports from
executive agencies. So you'll
see a whole variety of state
level issues that we'll be
hearing.
from particular departments or
addressing these larger scale
issues. Uh, beyond that, we can
sort of add to this if you have
a chance to sort of look through
those if you see something
that's missing, we'd be happy to
sort of add it onto the agenda.
And I'll
Ask you all to look very closely
at the very last page, page 5,
these are our meeting dates as
well as our locations. Uh, the
IAC committee traditionally
tries to get out to a lot of
different communities, um, so we
really want to work out this
schedule and make sure that
we're getting uh a lot of
different areas represented
within the state. Uh, with that,
I'll leave it open to discussion
and happy to answer any
questions you may have,
I'm gonna go to um
Representative, yeah, before uh
before we uh move on. And what
I'm gonna do after that is go
down the um
We planned here.
So if anybody wants to speak on
that, um,
Subset that's in there and then
we'll
I'll write your name down and
we'll go from there as we look
for it, um.
Representative, would you like
to introduce yourself?
A bit.
Thank you, Chair. Good morning,
everyone. Good to be here. Good
to see all of you in the
interim. My name is
Representative Michelle
Paulinabada from Torilla, and
thank you for being here.
Thank you. So, um, a state
tribal relations, uh,
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
didn't see on there something we
may want to discuss is in
radioactive waste, there's that
$1 million from Trino that is
sitting out there, it, the award
has been set, uh, there's a.
Settlement, it's there, but we
can't seem to get the money from
them, from them to here.
So we had discussed some
different steps about possibly
writing a letter or maybe
sending people out to DC and
saying, where's our damn money?
So, it was just something that a
darn, sorry, darn darn
money. Uh, so you might want to
add that in there. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Senator Souls and I have the uh
responsibility this interim to
chair the Federal funds
Committee.
And I'm wondering if we
shouldn't add under state travel
relations, at least some kind of
connection to that.
Um, I know I've heard from uh
Navajo, and they're very, very
concerned about it, so.
I don't know if it's
underreporting or if it gets
tied into this piece. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Serana. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I was actually
more in B and C. Can I still
talk about that?
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
understate tribal relations, if
it's an appropriate spot, uh,
some of you may have received a
letter from the New Mexico
Indian title.
We coalition, no, 6. I have to
do myromanums, um, the title 6
Coalition regarding um the
seniors tribal senior centers,
uh, there have been some issues
that have been raised. They were
raised last year that became uh
um
I informed uh several of us
about these, and I think it
might be appropriate to get an
update on the status of what
those issues are, and there was
a uh an entire package that was
submitted, uh, to which included
the Indian affairs, um,
Committee. So, uh, with
background information, so that
might be a one to address pretty
quickly because uh as my
understanding and reading this,
that um the a tribal plan that's
going to be implemented is going
to, I think it's going to be
implemented in on July 1, so
just as a matter of timing, that
would be my only um one that I
think would might want to be
addressed sooner than later.
Thank you.
Madam Chair.
So Representative little, um,
why don't you, I don't know if
you can, if you have an
electronic copy or give a hard
copy to our staff here or if the
email forwarded to our staff.
Thank you. I'd be happy to.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Charlie.
Thank you, chair.
That's OK.
Um, a couple of things I'd like
to cover housing and
homelessness, um, as I've had
conversations with several
tribal communities. It's an
issue that is now um our tribal
communities are facing like
never before, um, second to
that, I would love to delve
deeper into the actual state
tribal collaboration Act since
its inception in 2009, what
could possibly be updated since
its inception.
Um, under the domestic violence,
uh, shelters. I would love a
presentation update from the
coalition to stop violence
against native women. They work
with all 23 tribes and nations,
um, on the intersection of
domestic and sexual violence in
the state. And then I think um
it would be worth our time to
learn about the federal
executive orders and funding
shortfalls, um, that our tribal
nations are now facing.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and um,
I don't know if I mean if you
received the, I think it was an
email.
About possible litigation on the
tribal collaboration against the
state.
I have to look through my stuff,
but that was um something I
received and I can't remember
who's bringing that or who's
opposing that. So thank you,
Senator Charlie.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I think this is the topics
I'm going to suggest are
appropriate under this. I'm
still trying to figure it out,
but I think the two that I have,
um.
Over the past few years,
particularly this last two
sessions, it became, uh, it has
become very apparent that
We probably need to strengthen
our understanding of tribal
sovereignty. What that means and
how it relates not just to
tribal self-governance, tribal
self-determination, but it
relates to our relationships
directly and um
It, it, it's caused a little bit
of um difficulty, um, either
related to our legislation or
related to our committee
discussions. So perhaps maybe we
can have a a short
Overview presented by our legal
team or someone that um is
expert on how that relates, so
that's really important to me,
uh, it did, it did hold up a lot
of progress in the last few
years. The other, uh, topic that
is of particular interest,
especially now, is related to
immigration, Madam Chair, and,
and, uh, border issues and I
think that we need to address
the impact of immigration and.
policies, uh, and their well
their direct impact on tribal
communities, and we need to be
advocating, um, for sure, for
fair and equitable treatment of
all of our peoples, uh, on
reservations in the periphery of
reservations, and as we relate
with our families throughout the
state because it requires us
traveling uh around the state.
It travel, it requires us
traveling, you know, uh,
interstate around our, our area.
and it, it has the potential for
escalating if we don't have a
good understanding of how we can
mitigate uh and help our our
communities best navigate
through these um border uh areas
border, um,
Uh, inspection areas and so on.
So I think those are the two
that fall, I believe, under um
This category, in addition to
the 3rd 1, which is um related
to public safety, Madam Chair,
and um,
In, in general, we need to
really look at and it's tied
into sovereignty as well. A lot
of things are tied into
sovereignty and relationships,
but improving law enforcement
practices, uh,
On and around, and as they
interface with other law
enforcement um entities around.
This, the reservations, not just
on the reservations but around,
and I know that we've had uh
some issues in the past that we
need to probably get a report
back on from law enforcement as
to how those relationships are
working out because we have
addressed it in the past. So on
this topic, that's all I have. I
have others for the other
topics. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Scherer.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So
mine is more in a, in a general
sense.
Um, that when there's
contentious issues.
That there be some balance. So I
know a lot of times we hear one
side. So I'm just asking for,
you know, a lot of these are
not, well, most of these aren't
particularly contentious, but
occasionally there's, there's
one so I'm just saying if, if
it's gonna
If it's gonna set me off.
Oh, you want, you want to
filibuster in this committee?
I'm just kidding. I just want
somebody out there to say, hey,
this is, this is the other side
of the story. Yeah, and I think
one of the things even with our
new members, um, is that a lot
of this is reporting, some of it
too, we don't know, and if there
is something you want to know
about as a new member coming
this to commit, you know, don't
be afraid to ask us, um, to
cover that topic and in that
sense too, you know, when these
issues are when these reports
are given to us in those
questions, be mindful to
that the people presenting to
might not have all the answers,
and we might have to bring them
back and get somebody to answer
the other part. So, and if we
know someone or you know someone
that can then feel free to bring
in, but thank you, Senator, a
very good point.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, madam chair, um, you
probably couldn't predict this,
healthcare, between Medicare.
IS 638, um, and what's happening
federally, I think as chair of
the Health Committee, um, I
think that's something we really
need to be paying attention, not
that we will know anything or be
able to do anything, but I think
it's important for us to try and
at least stay on top of what's
going on and and know if the
state's gonna have to come in
with a huge dollar amount to
plug some holes for, for New
Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
we will go to Senator Lopez to
introduce herself here. Senator.
Senator
introduce yourself.
It's working now.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
It's really loud.
Um
I have a suggestion but uh
senator, want you to introduce
yourself and then you can.
I got to work right away.
Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, the Southwest
quadrant of Bernallio County.
And good morning. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, under the
economic development, uh, Madam
Chair.
Uh, just a suggestion for us to
look at, consider, um, what is
the economic impact of tribal
gaming in New Mexico.
In other words, what is the
contribution?
Um, you know, for jobs, all of
the other uh components, so it's
not just the gaming aspect, but
uh what is the full impact in
our communities with employment,
um, you know, purchases of
services from community, you
know, all of the other.
I think that's something we need
to really take a look at. Can I
do two contributions or just
one? OK. All right. And then one
other one, Madam Chair, is, um,
I am aware of a group of uh
indigenous women representing
New Mexico, who were recently at
the UN.
Um, and did a presentation, um,
with other indigenous women
across the country, and talking
about uh of course reproductive
justice, but also for forced
sterilization.
And I know that after their
presentation in front of the UN,
they have been um invited to go,
um,
Do some more presentations in
Europe later this year. So at
some point, Madam Chair, maybe
we could invite them uh to come
and present in front of us as to
um get the response from the UN,
etc. as to what uh the
presentation has been.
I think he sent it to
Representative Johnson.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
colleagues, good morning again.
I would like to start with the
I uh state tribal relations item
3. I think we should request a
report from Eastern Alva Agency
Council. They've been working
very hard on streamlining and
the process of the capital
outlay, tribal capital projects.
And then,
I would like to request that we
hear an update about
The Gallup Navajo Water Project.
We have a shortfall and uh like
to find out more about where
we're at and what we can do.
And then I've had requests from
my constituents regarding a
cattle guard maintenance. So
maybe we can ask for a report on
that. I don't know if that's the
situation statewide with um
jurisdiction.
County state tribal boundaries.
And then I have a request from
my constituents on the
continuing topic of healthcare,
education for our autistic
students.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Vice
Chair and notes andresentative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, uh, under a uh state
tribal relations, um, trying to
see how, I don't know if it's uh
here that we could fit it in,
but that, that would be cross
commissioning of our police
officers, uh, uh, along with
public safety. It's just in, in
an ongoing issue, uh, with, uh,
Navajo uh PD and uh just uh
trying to see how uh we can
address the, the public safety
issue with
commissioning, um, and I believe
I uh also echo Senator Charlie
and uh and also others who have
spoke about um the um.
The aspect of uh of uh of of the
unique status of of of of our uh
24 tribes, pebbles and nations,
and I'm, I'm, I'm just trying to
uh, uh, Madam Chair, uh, I think
it was Indian affairs had wanted
to give like a uh an up uh just
an overview of to, to myself and
other freshmens about
IGA, the intergovernment
agreements. We never got to that
point of like having that 10101
with Indian Affairs on uh, um,
uh, on that, and, and I, I just
think uh having that real
understanding of ingovernment
agreements, IGAs, uh, it's
something that is brought up a
lot with Navajo Nation and uh
and I would like to see if other
tribes, uh, how, how others are
feeling
about that and just, just uh so
that way I could have better
understanding. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So just
a few here, actually maybe more
than a few, but they're all
good, I think they're all good.
So, I think on a state tribal
relations on 5 when we're
talking about online sports
betting, I think we need to
definitely focus on that. I
would like to see maybe is,
maybe just a look into the
Florida model because they
recently passed something where
the tribes could have the
Servers on their land, and it
would service the entire state
of Florida. So I think that
would be something to look at,
especially with our gaming
compacts, that's a huge revenue
that I think as a whole and
currently in gaming, and I would
love to just see where we could
capitalize on that for our
tribes in the state, uh, also
the tribal uh impact of tribal
gaming in New Mexico, like
Senator Lopez talked about. We,
we previously had some hiccups
in the past, trying to get
something like that. I think
there was a memorial. I know
there was a memorial that I put
forward.
And the reason it died was
because of tribal consultation.
So maybe just a focus on
consultation with all pueblo
governors as well as uh the 3,
the Mescalero, the Hickoria and
other Apache tribes as well as
the nation. I think that could
be helpful consultation wise
with that. Uh, also, when it
comes to healthcare, I think
maybe a nutrition portion would
be helpful to add some more
about tribal uh.
to grocery stores and things
like that. And I think that's
absolutely helpful, as well as
the liquor excise tax, I would
like to maybe look deeper into
why the taxes usually fail when
we try to raise them, like 20%
last time, which failed
thankfully, but I think that
that's something that we
definitely need to consider
because in 19 in the early
1990s, we passed that increased
taxes and then also alcohol
harms increased as well. So
maybe you wonder how that
happened. Uh, let's see. Oh,
also
number 19. There's an update
from indigenous women rising.
This is an abortion fund, and I
think maybe if we could also get
another perspective, maybe.
Prenatal care on the Navajo
Nation or other tribal areas,
that would be helpful for us.
And so I think that's all I had
on this. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives
representative Garcia.
I thank you, uh, chair.
Uh, I have, uh, a couple of
them. One is in regards to uh
funding for tribal capital
projects.
I think it has been mentioned by
uh Representative Johnson, but
there has to be a process that
has to be put in place so that
uh the process can be shortened
to uh maybe 8 weeks and it's
ready to go.
Right now, it's taking over a 1
year, 2 years, and the state is
uh
Getting those funds back when
they're not being used, and
that's unfair to the people that
have applied for, for these
projects and they have been
funded, but it's not.
It's the process itself that's
holding up the the projects, uh,
both ends from the state Office
of Indian Affairs and uh with
wherever it goes, but right now,
uh, mostly it's the Navajo
Nation that needs to also assist
and see what they can do. That's
one of the major concern that I
have to see millions of dollars
going back instead of being
used.
Uh, like the people.
And communities that needs to.
The other one that I have is uh
I
I have a relative that is um
working with the Department of
Health with the state.
And uh right now,
Uh, she's representing McKinley
and Sela County for disability
and people that are vulnerable,
that's being funded by the state
and uh she's receiving cases on
almost daily.
Uh, to investigate whatever and
one person can't do it by
themselves, and she spits hours
sitting at the computer, even
late into the night just to uh
make these reports and something
has to be done if you were gonna
be helping people that are um
Receiving abuse and mistreatment
by their caretakers.
And that's uh one of the items I
would like to add because many
of these are also our own native
to members that are here.
Uh, within the state.
I think you representative.
And we have representative of
beta.
Thank you, chair. I'd like to
add under this section number
10, an update from CYFD on the
Indian Family Protection Act,
perhaps a subsection in there
regarding the safe haven baby
boxes and CYFD's.
legislation, I guess I I'm for
back of lack of better word
regarding the termination of
parental rights and
non-unification with family
members and share where I'm
coming from with this is this
was a piece of legislation that
failed during the last session.
However, there's not been any
discussion with the Indian
Affairs department or tribal
leadership from any tribe about
what were to happen to a child
that's surrendered to a safe
haven.
box that has been identified as
an Indian baby eligible for
enrollment and share, I think
that this is going to be
reintroduced at the next
session, so I'd like to have a
presentation done perhaps by
CYFD or uh some type of
consultation with the tribes
about.
How that will impact them or if
there are other opportunities
for collaboration on that
between the tribes and the
state. Thank you.
I think you representative.
As we moved down, so that's a
state tribal relations, uh 22.
topics in there, plus, um, I
know some of you already
mentioned some economic
development. Do we have any
other members that would like to
touch on economic development uh
representative Crean.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, mine
kind of falls in economic
development and education. I'd
like to hear about the effects
of, um, on for it is the status
of abandoned and uncapped wells,
but the effects of the gas and
oil emissions on the communities
and on our student learning.
That's been a big, that's been
in the paper and student
learning, especially we talked
about the Chancellor or
counselor counselor, um, and,
um.
That's a big area. I think we
need to look at because it is,
there is an effect and we may
need Department of Health to
come in and tell us exactly
what's happening in there.
Thank you. That's all.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Under um
economic development, I was
looking um to zero in a little
bit more.
On,
um.
Relate issues related to the
production and sustainable
management of tribal lands,
including water rights, resource
extraction and environmental
protection. I think it's
important for us to, in order
for us as a state as a whole,
Madam Chair, to comply with the
energy transition Act and all
the subsequent uh energy related
environmental related that we
see how
we can better um
Contribute to the tribal land
management, um.
Overall, and how we can provide
resources where wherever
necessary. That's one. And then
um
The other in terms of economic
development, zero in a little
bit more specifically as the
state is enhancing and growing,
um, their tourism, uh, marketing
around the country, actually,
I've heard a lot of places that
have been traveling, um, east
coast and far northwest part of
the country, they see a lot of
advertisement, um, we
I don't know if we have the
tourism department, um, giving a
report that it might be helpful
to see how well they are
interfacing with uh tribal
marketing efforts to help
promote tourism in the state,
and then of course uh further uh
enhancing that's just tourism
and then further enhancing our
discussions about uh renewable
energy and other sustainable
industries, again as they relate
to our meeting or or
state goals and obligations in
that area.
I think that's it for the
economic development. Thank you.
Thank you.
And the others, um,
representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Uh, I
As it pertains to economic
development, uh, it is an issue
of the
Um
Impact that this uh federal
monument sites specifically
Chaco Canyon and uh
Um
Tent rocks Gohaga to we are
having the impacts on those
directly relate those do have an
impact to economic development
activities to the communities
that are surrounding them as
well. So it, I'm wondering.
Whether it's here or in another
segment that we may want to have
an update on the impact of
Of the federal actions that are
proposed and how they may
impact.
Uh, not just the monuments
themselves, uh, but also the
economic development um.
I think
Economic opportunities that um
exist around those areas, so it
may be under economic
development, but I think that
it's uh it may fit somewhere
else.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
I, and I think the one thing too
about this committee as many of
you are all on many different
committees all the way around,
so when you're on those
committees, please keep in mind
our tribes stations and pueblos
as far as impact and advocating
or even after if something comes
up in another committee, uh
topic that you think is going to
affect our tribes, nations and
pueblos that uh we need an
update or report on, please feel
free to email me.
the vice chair or our staff
here.
Thank you, Representatives
representative Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I do
have multiple, um,
Uh
Uh, wants to do to maybe to to
raise under the economic
development, um, the first one,
my chair, uh,
There, there is currently a
rulemaking taking place through
the EIB that's being delayed on
the occupational um health heat.
Uh
It and I want to bring that up.
Uh, man, because of the impacts
that it will have with our
tribal communities, the economic
impact as well, you know, and
just trying to understand, um,
you know, more about that and,
and, um, yeah, I, I'm not too
sure what, uh, what, what, what
this committee handles with when
it comes to rulemaking, but I'm,
I'm bringing uh that one up, uh,
Madam Chair, the, the other one
is, uh, with economic
development, I, I
I do, uh, I am a strong believer
that rule addressing is economic
development, and I would like
to, um, you know, bring that
attention to, to the committee,
um, because I still got
communities in my district that
are not uh addressed that don't
have the real addressing, and
so, um, and I know Madam Cha
with rural addressing on Navajo
Nation, we get, we, we part of
the requirements of becoming a
certified chapter, um, uh,
The, the other, uh, economic
Development, um, uh, Madam
Chair, I, uh,
want to um
Uh, is, is, uh,
Uh, career technical education
or CTEs just trying to see how
how that fits in. I know there's
education, but I just wanna look
at it from the perspective of
workforce development, you know,
um, Madam Chair, we thenet
College just started a uh school
of transformation, which is a 6
certificate degree programming
and just trying to uh with, with
the with the gallop water
project that's in my district
now, uh, the federal government
is investing 200.
67 billion uh uh uh sorry, a
million dollars into uh the San
Juan lateral Project, which is
by Table Mesa, and they need
welders. Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you.
And as far as um
We talked about some of the
economic issues or even um some
of the budgets have they moved
through, you know, that that
time will come once it's
finalized and we're able to
really have some concrete, um.
Things to go on instead of more
we don't want to just have a
meeting where it's just all
hearsay, representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think,
I think we all recognize that
crime and the level of crime has
a direct correlation, economic
development, and I think it's
super important that this
committee get an update.
Uh, regarding the DA's office in
McKinley County.
That office was.
I think, uh, affected very
negatively, this last session.
I haven't heard a peep about
what's going to happen.
But I can tell you that as the
chief economic developer for
McKinley County, I get lots of
questions about it.
So, whatever that strategy was
behind that and what happened to
that office, we need to
understand now, all of us, and
I'd like to ask that that be one
of the items that we talk about
or how to make a presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you representative, and
I'll bring this up to some of
the members.
So, we talked about the IGAs.
And the language and the growth
funding that, you know, it's
changed its name, it's gone
through.
In some instances, I'm finding
it hard that
It's coming back where the
funding is not getting where it
needs to be or whoever intended
or came to us and asked for
assistance, and then the money's
not getting there. And it's
they're saying, well, it's the
language. Well, somebody said,
well, they split the money
between two entities and then
they have a shortfall because
our understanding was it was
going, all of it was going to
this entity for those 2 years.
There's somewhere there's a,
there's a break in there, we
have a gap.
I don't know if it's with us and
the staff that when during the
legislative session, we hire
people to do the language and
they tell us it's good to go.
It'll fit whatever we're doing,
they put it in the budget, it's
put through.
But then when it's getting
worked on, it somehow gets
massaged into something else and
it's not in, it's not going
where we intend it, and then
they're having to come back and
it is taking a long time for it
to be um done, even though we
should have already worked that
out when that budget was put
through and say, OK, this is
where it's going, this is how
much they're getting, and that's
how our people are operating
too. They're OK, this is what we
secured and they go ahead and do
some of these, you know.
some of these things to do the
work, especially if they're
trying to help our constituents
of the state.
And then they have to pull it
back because there's a deadline.
Well, I think our budget's up
next month, at the end of the
month, and it's gonna be
interesting cause there, there's
some questions I have, um, but
I'm getting into the point where
I don't, I don't even know who's
really responsible. Is it from
because I know the executive
staff, right, looks at the
language too, and they can veto
it.
Um, but even our staff. So I
hope we can come to terms on
that as far as um and they know
some of the new members here
might not really know some of
the acronyms were 638 or some of
those things like I was saying,
some of our members are members
of other but are of other
committees, you know, um, as we
move forward, uh, Senator
Shindo.
Thank you man uh.
Are we talking about
appropriation, so we're talking
about capital outlay or
What do we, what are we talking
about here in terms of the IGA
I'm trying to get.
verification time.
Senator, and I think it's all of
it in that sense, because I've
had money um that.
It's still sitting there and
they're saying we haven't got
the IGA. They gave it to them,
it's been rejected, came back,
and I was like, you know, that's
something they work out. I'm not
the lawyer. I'm not the one that
draws that up and then it's left
to, I'm supposing the secretary
to finalize it. I don't know who
signs off on the IJ exactly if
it's our legal staff. I'm not
sure.
Um, but I think with our new
members here that process would
probably be something you'd like
to clarify so that they're aware
of it and how that works and if
we get somebody from finance
committee here to um walk us
through that even with the 6:38
and some of these entities, um,
why it's the way it is. I know
some of this too can be changed
through rulemaking, and that was
the other part of the rulemaking
is if there is something in
rural, how does that stand with
within our state versus um
especially if there's an
inequity involved in it.
Um
Anything further senator should
do.
No, I was trying to get uh
clarification, you know, for
many of your members, anytime we
appropriate money to a tribe.
You know, whether it's Indian
affairs department or in the
department because it's another
government IGA has developed in
agreement.
And then that sent from the end
of the affairs department to the
tribe.
And then once that signed, then
the scope of uh work is
submitted by that particular
entity that got the money.
What happens on the tribal side
and how many steps they have is
out of our control.
And I think that's where this
process gets bogged down,
particularly with the Navajo
Nation and the chapters.
It's not, I, I know it's not
that big an issue with the
pueblos nor theory Apache.
But I think the Navajo Nation
has a really long
process and that's why I think
projects get bogged down.
And, and so,
It's only so much we can do.
And I was making comment to the
representative here. It's really
the onus is on the tribe to get
their systems.
Efficient and effective to get
it done because we appropriate
money, we have a deadline that
things don't happen when it gets
clawed back.
I think it's really important
for us to kind of
be clear that there's things
that we can do.
But there's other things that
the tribes have to do themselves
to make sure that the process
works well to support their
communities and and the
coordination between the
chapters in Big Navajo
sometimes.
You know, it gets complicated,
you know, I was cabinet
secretary in 2004. I've been
working on the issue for 20.
Since 2004.
21 years I've been working on
this and
You know, there's only so much
we as an appropriators can do.
You know, the onus is on the
other side, they want the
resources to get them done
effectively, efficiently get
things done on the ground.
And the honest is on them, so I
just want to make that comment
because I think there's only so
much we can do.
You know
We can push him, we can prod
him, but
At the end of the day, you know,
those are sovereign governments
and if they choose to have their
own process to do what, then so
be it.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Royal Caballero
and representative.
Thank you, I, uh, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Senator, for
bringing that up. It a
particular issue that I think
directly relates to um capital
outlay, economic development,
um, and
And that is that there are
issues that I anticipate coming
up reference to land
sovereignty.
And the federal government's
selling of public lands. That's
really.
Important for us to zero in on,
especially as we're facing the
federal government's changes as
they relate to the purchase, uh,
I mean, the selling of public
lands and how land sovereignty
ties into that, but really
importantly, directly related to
capital outlay is um
It's gonna be really important
for us to use the right
language.
Uh, in our, uh, requests and um
Madam Chair, that's come up so
many times throughout the years,
and so
For us to help mitigate um
through the capital outlay
process, which is heavily power
our, our tribes, nations, and
pueblos depend on our support
that we might look at um
The
I think there was a recent uh
example uh reference to the
Navajo Nation, making a request,
um, and mentioning that they
were gifted a block of land.
Uh, I mean, they were purchasing
the land when in fact it was a
gift of land and caused some
issues, I can't relate. It's it
it's had something to do with
one of the requests. I'm not
quite sure what it was right
now. That's what drew my
attention to what Senator Shina
was saying. So perhaps maybe a
um some type of presentation
that can kind of capture how
best we can assist our
communities when they're making
these requests, and then the
to what I was saying was how uh
the federal government's selling
a public lands is actually going
to directly affect our land
sovereignty, and how do we push
back? What's the legal, uh, what
are the legal uh mechanisms,
both the state uh available to
us at the state level as well as
the federal level to push back
against um those land grabs
because I, I envision us going
back to the day of land grabs.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
because I think that's one thing
to keep in mind, uh, members is
that there are limitations as
far as um as the state assisting
or impeding uh with our tribes,
nations and pueblos and so.
Representative Abea.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative
Hernandez for bringing up the
recommendation and also Senator
Schendo for your 20 plus years
of work trying to find a
solution for certain tribes and
the capital outlay and funding
processes. I wanted to comment
that I'm also interested in
finding solutions that can
tackle this, and one way that
you and I discussed, and I think
I shared this with other
members, was looking at how our
counties.
Or also support are also
supporting small communities
that could be an opportunity
there where we are not
infringing any type of policy on
tribes to accept money, but
instead allowing smaller
communities such as chapters to
have partnerships with counties
or other entities that are able
to serve as fiscal agents to
help get money back to
communities in a better way.
I, I think that's an opportunity
that
Perhaps has not been looked at,
and I'd certainly like to look
at it for communities in my
district, especially I have 2
that are over 100 miles from the
Navajo Nation Capitol and to
secure these types of agreements
and to work on this is very
challenging with lots of
barriers in place and with the
turnover in local leadership and
then the larger leadership we
run into so many problems, um,
both on the tribal side and
state side with communication
breakdowns, so I'd like to add
that.
the agenda. Thank you, chair.
Thank you representative little
because they did have real quick
county liaisons cuz I believe
Sandoval County has 2 or 3, so
we'll see what they got. Go
ahead, Senator Sindo. Yeah, no,
I'm thank you, uh, Pauline,
because I know that, uh, you
know, we've done it before in
Sandoval County. We have good
relationships, so really just
depends on the county and
whether they want to engage.
If you, you know, like Sandoval
County, I think years back we
did project with Toryon and have
to do the road. It it was, you
know, it, it.
You know, the money went to the
county and the county fixed
whatever needed to be fixed and
so
You know, people are happy, so,
you know, it's been done before,
so, but it really depends on the
county and, you know, and and
folks like that. So but these
are, and then the other big
thing for folks is that all of
our projects are on a
reimbursement basis.
So that's a challenge for some
of the smaller tribes and
non-gaming tribes.
And so something that maybe
perhaps we need to look on maybe
just a direct grant so that they
don't have to, you know, uh, put
up the money and, and so and
that's, that's the other
challenge I think some of the
chapters and novel Nation
sometimes has.
Gaming tribes, you know those
guys are doing pretty good, you
know, they.
Spend the money and get the
project going and.
But that doesn't help some of
the other smaller communities
and so forth. So that's
something that we may want to
look at as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Representative Little.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair. Um,
so I think that the, um, I would
suggest that the recommendation
to have an overview of the um
intergovernmental agreement
process.
For whoever wants to take
advantage of that, some may be
very well versed in it, um, but,
um, I think that it would be
really uh helpful.
To see that process and not only
that, but uh I'm aware too that
there have been changes in the
time since, uh, Senator Sendo
has been in the Indian affairs
position as cabinet secretary,
staffing is a lot more minimal,
and there are other factors that
are also at play in here and um.
On that note, it may, this may
be for another portion of our
comment, but I'd also like to
Um
In item number 2 on page 4, item
number 2, the reports from
Indian affairs, uh, from they
compile all of the state agency
reports. I'm wondering when
those are due, I'm going to
Mm
Maybe I don't want to assume
that it's the end of June, but
um, and that a report will be
provided, but um,
I'd like to know, and it's a
conversation I I'm happy to have
with the secretary about a
strategic plan, um, that they
have. I think it would be really
important for this body to be
aware of what uh priorities uh
have been identified by the not
only that department, but
through the state tribal
leadership forums as well. Um,
so that it might be streamlined,
we can be at least working.
unit uh
Better
towards uh to achieving some
priorities that um are
identified, so, um, as I
mentioned, uh, Madam Char, I'm
happy to talk with.
Uh, Secretary Monette about
that. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative, and
also keep in mind this session
that's coming up to 30 day
budget session, so as we move
forward, especially with all our
um members here that are hoping
we can make sure we do have at
least some kind of legislation
and advocate whatever we need
to, um, as we move forward to
see if the governor will give us
a message.
So I see, education, and it's
gonna be the annual reports, so
we'll, uh, anybody on education,
Senator Souls. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think we, uh, in
addition, ought to be looking at
some of the rulemaking ined
around distribution of the
Indian Education Act and the
formula that's being used for
that, uh, the current formula in
the proposed rule has over
$20,000 per student going to
some of the small
Pueblo's nations, etc. and only
$300 per student in the large
ones, Navajo. Uh, that seems
like a huge discrepancy that
seems to favor the money going
to adults instead of to the
students, uh, when there's a
difference of 20,000 per student
compared to $300 per student,
uh, there's been a bill in the
Senate in the past that didn't
pass due to that discrepancy.
It's now being done through rule
in the public ed department, and
I think that'd be a good
discussion for this committee.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
In reference to um
The Yazi Martinez #2.
I think um we should just be
real specific about the report
coming that's related to the
specific court order.
Um, that was recently in place,
and with timelines that are sewn
upon us. So I think just zeroing
in on that as soon as possible.
I think we need to get um a
report as to how that's working
and how PED is collaborating
with all the entities that they
were instructed to collaborate
with the stakeholders and uh
everyone related, we really need
to have them be intentional
about how they are reporting.
reference to what Senator Sos
just brought up in terms of the
rulemaking, um.
the, the point I'd like to make,
Madam Chair, is although it
seems
Disproportionate, the
explanation that was made to us
at the education legislative
education Study Committee, um,
was pretty clear that the
rulemaking process has been
vetted by the Indian um by the
Pueblos tribes and nations, and
they have
Already indicated.
That it's good to move forward
in the rulemaking process. So if
we're gonna zero in on that
particular question, then we
need to have representation to
explain why it was, if we want
to. I, I hate to ever question
Pueblo's tribes and nations
because it's not our prerogative
to question if they stated that
they
Came forward, had reviewed it,
had vetted it properly, then
it's my view always to accept
that moving forward, however, it
might be worthy an an
explanation, not an explanation,
a report or an assessment so
that it doesn't cause friction,
uh, amongst our understanding of
that, because there may be some
mixed understandings about how
that actually is playing out,
Madam Chair, numerically and
what the rationale was for um
Um
Approving, not approve, yes,
approving the rulemaking
specifically to the distribution
of those funds and how they came
up with that uh factoring in,
it's complicated, but once you
understand it, it makes sense,
but not everybody was in
agreement or is in agreement,
but, you know, it's already
moving forward in the rulemaking
process, but PED also needs to
be real specific about how that
is, Madam Chair, and then, um,
The only other thing that I
wanted to um
Bring up in reference to the
Indian Education Act. It, I was
Number, um,
3 and 5 directly relate.
To our responsibilities as they
relate to the act itself. And
so, um,
In that same PED um presentation
perhaps they can be real
specific about how that's
rolling out in in specifically
as far as our compliance.
And that way we can understand
why the programs in place.
are such, um, so that they are
meeting compliance, I think.
Just zeroing in on the specifics
might help us understand
further. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's for education. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So on
the point of the Indian
Education funding. I
I was in LESC the other day when
it happened, and I think it's
just super interesting.
How defensive the department was
when it came to the rulemaking
process, because we looked at
the data and I just had to throw
it into like an AI platform or
something, so they couldn't
couldn't do the math right
there, but it was a huge
disparity. Some of these kids,
they were the ones with IEPs, I
think they were getting about
$700 each on the Navajo Nation
versus
I think it was Tesuque pueblo,
each kid was getting, it was
something like $70,000 if they
didn't have an IEP, they got
$20,000. So, I mean, it was a
huge disparity and from the
department's aspect, they said,
well, we went through rulemaking
and a majority of people who we
heard said they supported.
And they didn't really clarify
how they got the information out
to the tribes, nations, and
pueblos because I know there's a
lot more people in the Navajo
Nation than there are in Tesuque
Pueblo, and so it's a lot easier
to get to Santa Fe.
From Tesuke than it is the
Navajo Nation. So I would just
like to see what their
rulemaking process was like and
how they informed people
because, you know, I, I think if
they just took a straw poll of
whoever showed up, that might be
a disparity when it comes to
population, as the Napo nation
is the largest tribal entity in
the entire country, so.
Just a thought. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative block,
and I think that's one of things
too with uh members, um, you
know, our, when we talk about
sovereignty, uh, sovereignty and
our tribes, nations and pueblos,
you know, I, it's a little bit,
uh, how would I say this in some
sense.
All I can think of is a little
bit disrespectful to ask our
governors kind of to come here
to report to us when it should
be to the governor, but we can
possibly, you know, and
Invite our tribes, nations, and
pueblos to send someone to come
and give us an update about
their tribal collaboration
experience that they have had
with the state. Um, so just be
mindful of that, of how, how we
uh present that. Representative
Royvon Caballero. Madam Chair,
on that point, the, the, uh,
press, the staff that was here
on behalf of PED is the
assistant, I hope I get her
deputy.
Secretary for Indian Affairs, I
believe in that department, and
she actually did an excellent
presentation, very thorough
provided a graph, uh, well, she
didn't provide it to us at the
time. She read from the graph
and then said we, we would get
it, um, because she failed, she
apologized for failing to not
provide us the graph so that the
graph explained how tribes,
nations, and pueblos that were
consult all the tribe's nation.
and photos that were consulted,
how they arrived in agreement to
that particular breakdown. So it
would be before we reach um what
I think are
Or
Conclusions, it does from the
surface look disproportionate,
but her explanation was
thorough, and it was grounded in
the data that was collected in
all the reports, and she kept up
adequate record, and she
responded to us uh adequately
about the report, but we need to
have her.
I think uh be present along with
the deputy secretary who was
there, and I always forget his
name, Greg, I think it was, yes,
for, uh, so they were both
present. I think there were 3
present senator so, I'm not
sure. I think there were 3
representatives from the PED
that day from the
administration. But anyway, I,
before it gets
Um, what's the word, uh,
exploded as divisionary or
whatever, it's best to just snip
it in the bud and understand it
first, and then we can ask um
all the questions as they
relate, but I, I want us to do
so and respect to the fact that
there was consultation, and that
was reported, and there were
reports of who was present, who
was involved, all of that. So if
we need to go back to our
specific communities and
question that you're correct.
We, we need to understand all
the details and how all it
related and then.
Arrive at the questions we need
to uh raise. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think this would be under
education, but I think some
information would be good for to
uh it's from the department of,
from our own New Mexico
Department of Edad.
Um, with regards to the closing
of Job Corps.
In the state of New Mexico and
how that affects all of the
students, and I know it's, there
was a um.
Culturally diverse group of
students um in Albuquerque, it's
about 200+ students that
At the end of this month or
done. There's no place else for
them to go and there are other
sites around the state. So maybe
if we could find some
information as to how that
affects those students would be
important for us.
And where do they go?
So just on that. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Ludstrom.
I came out of chair, I, I guess,
um,
for me on this disproportionate
between pueblos and Navajo.
When the chairman of the Senate
Education Committee raises the
issue that I'm concerned. And
I'd like to understand what that
formula was. I want to
understand how that, how it, who
was invited to participate, who
was in the consultation for the
people that I represent, was it
the Navajo president, was it
members of the council? Was it
Doty? Who was it that would say
it's OK that our students get
300 bucks and these kids get
20,000. It doesn't work that
way.
Um, so I'd like to have a clear
understanding and, and Madam
Chair, what I would also like to
ask for your consideration is
that this education stuff be
talked about in Gallup.
as a location.
I think it's important. I mean,
most of these things, the Zuni
lawsuit, the um lawsuit with uh
Yazi versus Martinez, those all
originated in McKinley County.
There's a lot of people that
care about what happens with
these lawsuits. We haven't
picked locations yet, but I
think, uh, traditionally, this
committee has been in Gallup.
Primarily because 70% of the
population in McKinley County is
native.
And there's a major impacts
there for these things. I'd like
to make that request. Um, don't
care what date it is, whatever
works best for everybody, but
I'm a little concerned when the
chairman of the Education
Committee raises this as
something that we need to hear.
Got a lot of respect for Senator
Soles and his grip on what's
going on. So I hope that they're
ready to answer a lot of
questions. Thank you.
Representative, and we will
consider the location uh for
that topic at that location.
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'd
like to add the status of our
tribal colleges, um,
Particularly those who've been
impacted again by executive
orders, um, and the mass
layoffs, have they rebounded?
What is the status of our tribal
colleges throughout the state.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other on
education and like I said, if
there's any thoughts, uh, later
on, please email us a
Representative Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
real quick, a brief, uh, uh,
education issue that, uh, I've
heard in um with is, is actually
among, among the teachers at uh
Central, I, I guess specifically
my school district, uh, uh, but
also other rural school
districts, and that's the uh the
lack of parity among insurance
when it comes to uh teachers
asking for uh the, you know,
getting the same parody.
Yes, state employees, the 80/20
match. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
then we have D and the reports
and executive agencies, anybody
on that topic, like I said, I
know we're all on different
other committees, so if you see
someone that's presenting there
that you think that might be
valuable here on this committee
too. Uh, please, uh, communicate
that to us.
And as we move down this, um.
We know, we did kind of those
that have been on this committee
before. I've not really gotten a
great report from our IAD
department, even though this is
the in the the affairs
Committee, so I'm looking
forward to that, um, as we go
for it. So the dates here.
And then, um, to be determined
sites, I believe we do have
Gallup in line or somewhere
close to Gal or not close to
Gallup, but um between
Farmington and um because of our
bordering nation, one of those
will be it, but we do for our
freshmen legislators, we do have
a rotation, um, that's
established with our tribes,
nations and pueblos, like if we
went to Mescalero last year,
we'll skip it this year or it's.
There's room for it, we might go
back down,
um,
still, and I think Chica is one
place where we're still trying
to get, I think it's even it's
I've been in, we've haven't been
able to get up there. They've
had changes in leadership and
very many different ways, so I'm
hoping there's some stability
there and I know there was some
issues with um education up in
that area.
The um transportation part too,
I know it wasn't in here when we
talk about the cattle guards. It
is a process and um one of the
things representing uh a 15
chapters, well, 13 chapters, 15
with land base is there
that process within our local
government has to be followed
too, that those who need their
cattle guards clean, need to go
to the chapters and you know,
get, they need to work with
their local government and then
go to Navajo Nation DOT who
works with the Mexico DOT. So we
know how much money they need
to, you know, get those things
cleaned out with the processes
and they can um go forward from
there and collaborate with the
residences, so they're not
inconvenienced too much when
sometimes that is the only.
road that goes to their
residences, and if they're out
there cleaning it and the kids
have to go to school, that's not
a very, you know, how you can
get through the Cagu
in that sense.
So, anything further as far as
we move forward, I think gaming
was another one, do we know the
compacts are not open, so it's
just more of a report and us
getting some uh questions
answered, especially for the new
members. Um, and it is changing.
I believe there is a lot out
there when we talk about online
gaming, and I think it's one of
those aspects, um.
In collaboration that
discussions probably need to be
created, so we're not trying to
cram this in. Um.
In a short time period, you
know, rushing is not always a
great, um, doesn't always lead
to some great legislation.
But as um we go forward, um
thank you members. I know
there's some of you that have
been here, some of you do have
tribes, nations, and pebbles
within your um district, and I
did ask for email to come
forward if there's an entity or
um.
Somebody willing to host.
Remember, we got to try and have
these uh facilities that do have
internet available or reliable
internet, I should say that has
the capacity sometimes they say,
yeah, we got internet and we get
there and it is not uh up to
capacity where we can
representative little have a
comment. Thank you. Uh, yes, a
question, um, on the facilities
uh for the potential, uh, uh,
commuting locations, meeting
locations, um, are.
Is there a budget available to
pay for those fees there or must
they come?
Um
No, it's OK, thank you.
But um hopefully that they uh
I know we had what with someone
came out with an electric
vehicle and so make sure your
cars are charged, especially for
this committee, Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, just,
um,
It, it just hit me that I wasn't
sure whether we
Uh
Under healthcare. I couldn't, I
can't find it. Anything related
to there right now, but um I'd
like to see how the federal cuts
and are affecting the Indian
Health Service across the board,
um, urban rural health, I
understand, um, is going to be
or already um they're
experiencing cuts. I received my
services to a large extent
through Indian health services
and uh was speaking to
Um
The administrators, and they
have already begun to consider
closings or working with their
local communities if they're
located in the rural areas as to
how they can consolidate and
collaborate in partner in
delivering um healthcare in, in
anticipation of further cuts.
The other thing that was
mentioned, Madam Chair, is that
at the federal level, when they
cut back, and we all are are
going to be monitoring.
What the Senate does in terms of
the budget bill, because the,
the fine line, Madam Chair is in
the detail, but Indian Health
Services, um, are largely
dependent on uh providers that
make a commitment.
Even after um during their
medical training, they make a
commitment, and that's the one
area that is
Being cut, which means without
providers, what do we do? Do we
increase telehealth?
Um, how do we, how do we put all
that together to continue to
provide the health services, and
one of the areas that was
particularly impacted was in um
dialysis care.
And because that has to be real
specific to the patient and the
clinic and the provider, and
that's where they're feeling
that there may be some major
cuts also. So across the board,
a report on how that what the
impact's going to be on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Representative and
also that, you know, some of
this is still very fluid, has it
been um decided and with our
meeting dates, you know, we'll
try to adjust accordingly until
we actually have, you know, the
facts, and that is one thing I
think our members should
remember is when we operate,
especially in government affairs
that it should be based on the
facts that are there, and I know
there's a lot of opinions out
there that can be shared, but in
that sense too, that it should
be in some sense solutions that
we can move forward on and um
collaborating and getting
something that really needs to
um occur or the opportunities
out there that um
need to
That we are serving our
constituents. So, um, with the
representative lunch and my
share one chapter that's Rock
Springs, so I do work with her
here and there, I think with
representative Garcia, I don't
think we share any. I think
she's one of the boards, um, but
I know with our senators, um,
are coming in during the
session, many of you probably
didn't really get to meet her,
um, but she is the one who
replaced representative Alone
out in, in his district out
there.
So this is her first in room
meeting and welcome to your
crash course, um, I did try to
come over a couple of times
during the session to meet you
and uh senators here, he's
always been a neighbor and one
of our senior members here too,
although he doesn't try to admit
it with a senator Sindo.
But um thank you again for being
on this committee and no
unwelcome represent our Senator
Charlie. Um, it's um.
That seat was very special to
me, um, but I understood that
there was um some things unsaid
that we do, um, and move on. So,
um,
Thank you for um advocating and
also taking on this role then
represent little welcome back uh
as we move forward, it's been
several meetings, yeah, out
there, um, I don't know
representative Mejia, do you
have any questions for us as far
as do you represent any um in
your district, in the uh tribes,
nations or pueblos.
Yeah.
OK.
Are you, are you sure
maybe your family tree somehow
we gotta find out.
And a blog. Welcome back. It is,
um, always a pleasure and uh
with you and the representative
Lord uh seeing you at the other
committees that we are on so
we'll see how that turns out in
Senator So you he's been a
really great advocate as we go
forward, um, especially with
education, um.
And that's we, I know we cannot
be or be everywhere all the
time. I think that's one thing
we have to accept as legislators
and I think that was one of the
first questions I asked Senator
Souls, um, as they stepped into
this role was, how do you keep
all these you can just accept
that your capacity is only so
much, so that, that's one of the
things, so thank you for all,
you know, giving the input that
you can um as we um move forward
and uh thank you, Senator Lopez.
It's um
Also, a great, uh, if you have
any questions, don't be afraid
to reach out and fresh freshmen
to our senior members here, as
they've sat in the seats you're
sitting in and I have some great
expertise in in some instances,
some of the stuff that has
happened has been unprecedented.
Since I've been in all the
special sessions of the COVID.
It is uh
Been a very uh different time
and then with our vice chair
too, uh, the Johnson, um, and if
some of you it flips as you see,
you'll see the, the flips in the
um chairs during the interims
each year as we go forward in
Senator Schendo's, well, now
he's on the finance committee,
so anything will to um
That's a big deal too, as a vice
chair for our tribes, nations
and pueblos to be representative
on that committee.
And the
Representative, it's always good
to see you. I didn't see your
counterpart here. I'm sure she's
very busy.
She's in the building. She's
like I've heard this all before.
I don't need to be in here.
Yeah.
Oh, she came in to make sure
you're here. We can always tell
when he's dressed well she's
here.
get you,
uh, representative, welcome
back. uh representative
Thompson, um, you know, all
that, uh.
It's interesting to hear so many
stories being out on the
reservation.
Representative Hernandez, um,
welcome
and Robocaba later and welcome
back.
Um, and, uh, Joseph's been here
around the roundhouse, so, um,
now you have to step up a little
bit more. Uh, and represented
the beta, thank you for taking
on that, um.
Bring our
The Alamo and um Tala are some
communities that have been lost
out there a bit. I really hope
we can get to Alamo. I don't
know if anybody's really been
out there for a lot of things
that, uh, and I think the
closest we ever got was Socorro
at one time.
And that was it.
But it is a community that
that's still out there. Um, yes,
Representative Mstro.
Selena, that's a long time ago.
Well
I don't want to
say.
Yeah
OK. Let's see if we can work
that out.
Thank you. I don't know if any
of the members, I mean, we try
to keep things down to business
as we go for it. I'm sure Nicole
had a how many pages of notes
now.
Um, but if there's anything that
else comes up, you know, feel
free to contact me or um.
Vice chair or our staff
representative Little
the location because I am
checking into uh for
consideration for a location uh
in Albuquerque would be CNM West
campus. I've reached out to them
and they're uh checking to see
if they might be able to um
sponsor, co-sponsor.
Uh, a meeting there, uh, with
the population and the
organizations and its central
location. It might be a, a good
potential site if, if, if that's
needed.
Thank you.
Yes, and members, I think those
that have been here, the new
members, the locations on some
of these areas, it's not um
I guess when it becomes
lunchtime, it is, uh, it's not
one of those meetings where we
adjourn and you go scavenge out
there because there's not much,
so, um, most of these meetings
they'll be probably food
provided um during the lunchtime
and sometimes it is uh very
enriching diet when you talk
about our native food
yes
so um if there are any
restrictions, dietary
restrictions at the time or
anything.
Feel free to let our staff know
so that we are aware to, um, so
that we can try to accommodate
as much as we can, um, this
committee is very uh
I don't think you need a truck.
Yeah, most places with the car,
Senator Sindo.
OK, uh, man, speaking of food, I
was looking at the calendar and
this may never happen again when
I'm led to, uh, on our November,
uh, 13th and 14th is our
committee meeting that typically
happens in Santa Fe.
At that time, right? OK.
Our annual fiesta in Hamas is
November 12th.
So that's the day before, so if
you wanna take off on Veterans
Day.
You can come to Hamas on
November 12, doing some corn
dances and go our food feast.
Didn't come up to Santa Fe, so I
just saw that and I.
Let you all know, so you're all
invited.
There you go, yeah, that'll be a
cultural day we count as a
cultural experience that, you
know.
For those of you that had never
been to.
A tribal community.
More than that. You'll get green
chili, you get red chili, you
get oven bread, you got,
oh man.
No, there's no enchiladas at my
house.
No, I'm just kidding.
Representative Garcia. OK, uh,
looking at the meeting dates and
the discussion on the
Some of the issues, uh, well,
many issues that we have
discussed here this morning that
uh we need to uh consider and
based on that, I would like to
propose uh July 16th and 18th in
Gallup.
Uh, I think the central location
of, I mean, from the south and
from the north there from uh the
east there are Eastern Navajo
Agency, as well as uh the other
um whats that are in the area,
Zuli Aama.
And uh if uh Chaos bullets that
travel, they can come and meet
with us and uh we find a
location to do that, if that's
fine with.
think you representative Garcia,
um, we'll see what, uh, I don't
know if I'm uh vice chair
Johnson might counteract that
request.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
colleagues. Uh, no, actually, I
do agree with um a gallup
meeting.
In July.
And uh perhaps maybe one chapter
meeting. I'm, I'd like to
request maybe Pinedale chapter.
Since we've been to Sheep
Springs last year, and the
reason is I, I really would like
to maybe we should go to towels.
In August and change our meeting
schedule a little bit.
Thank you.
Well, the, the chair is gonna
put a
The thing in here. So August 1st
to August 10th is the gallop
into tribal Indian ceremonial.
Yeah.
So, and I think that's the
following weekend.
Or the following week.
But I just want you guys to be
aware of that for this year,
that's when that's scheduled.
I don't know if the July 16th,
18th when the Lions Club rodeo
happens in gallop.
Cause I don't think
It's in June,
June,
OK.
All right. Um, any other on the
um representative Royal
Caballero. Yes, Madam Chair, if
we do consider Albuquerque, I
would like to
Also
add any public cultural Center,
um, I know they have the meeting
rooms available, it seems only
logical that we meet there, and
they have obviously provide um
in their sponsorship or hosting
um delicious food, as we've
experienced in other uh um
Events there so um.
That's my offering in terms of
Al, I wouldn't, I really would
have liked to have had it
somewhere where health services
delivered, but they don't have
adequate spaces, the sites that
I'm, um, the Albuquerque Health,
uh, clinic in Indian Health
Service, they don't, their
facilities don't have um
adequate uh um.
Look, I built uh rooms to
accommodate us, so in the public
cultural center, I throw that
out. Thank you.
So thank you Representative
Royal Caballero. So also to
committee members, one of the
things too with this committee
because we're so rules, some
days we will meet in one area
and then we will move to out to
chapter or something, so even
though we're in Albuquerque or
IPCG depending on that order, if
we go out to Tali, that would,
so I hope you know where you're
going. I know that there's times
we've had people at different
locations and uh I think we show
up an hour
Yeah, GP
GPS.
And,
and that's it's hard to leave.
We could, we could actually see
the fruits of our labor with the
water, um, did the whole water
system that was put in, and it's
been a community effort, um,
through many, many hard years,
so that would be a great.
Visit. Thank you.
Yes, and the um
Even, you know, when you're out
there, even if you try to put in
um the building name, it might
not show up, so, uh, don't
hesitate to get other members
things we'll try to make sure we
um foresee some of those
situations. So those emails,
when it says, you know, about
the location, please read the
notes on the locations for this
committee, especially if
there's, yeah.
Um
We'll try to be as helpful as
much as possible, and I know
the, the signage isn't too bad,
um, cause there aren't that many
roads to some of the locations,
so it's very hard to turn, but
uh in some instances and even
for accommodations, um, in
certain areas as far as the um
the nearest hotel or something.
Uh, any other, um, as far as
It looks like we don't have um
too many issues with the uh
calendar as far as anything
conflicting.
Um,
With NCSL or any other.
Um
And some of our meetings run 3
days, some run 2.
But one of the things we will
probably do on the 3-day
meetings is just moved 2 times,
and then the if we have a short
day on Friday, we'll probably
meet at the same location on
Thursday, um, because we have,
well, not we, our staff has to
set up all the uh equipment and
everything, so doing that twice
is a bit daunting, especially on
our, our limited staff here, so
um please keep
But
Well, if we don't get to another
area that's just um part of it
is trying to make sure we're not
getting ourselves too
overworked. Any other um
Comments, questions,
Representative lunch.
Coming out to gallop and and
Pinedale for July, um, I think
that's a great idea, but I, I do
know that ceremonial will be
done by the time.
Our committee comes back
together in August, but I didn't
understand, are you talking
about changing the August date
or.
Too hard to change it, we'll
see, we'll see what the other
cause I don't have the other
calendar, so cause I, I had
understood that they're kind of
already drilled into granite.
That it's hard to change them,
but I'm not sure I understood to
just a plug for gallop for
they want to come out before. So
on August 14th and 15th, there's
a suggestion for towels.
Uh, have we been to Taos
Puebble? It seems like we
haven't.
The
Oh,
so it's it's been a couple of
years did a tour, yeah, we did a
tour of the Pueblo.
I like towels too.
Um, and then September 20.
5th and 26th, is that
Albuquerque or?
Uh, did you guys make a decision
on that? I think August and
September are gonna be the two
because sometimes we try to go
down south.
Like I said, we're trying to
work in Hickory too, and
sometimes we'll go up here up
towards uh Buffalo Thunder.
OK, I'm just trying to get clear
on August, but I.
I like towels too, thank you.
Any others on the um work plan.
Uh, I try to just uh if it's um
repay uh.
Going up there in August,
actually in the summertime would
be really smart, uh, coming down
south, uh.
It's, it's pretty intense. Um,
so just that consideration.
So, OK, thank you,
representative. So one of the
things too on the first day is
if the location does not have
too much accommodations close
by. I'm not sure if we wanted.
Try to
Um
Because sometimes we put the
meeting days till like 10.
You know, it's um hard to for my
Albuquerque people to come out
to where I'm at and with me for
him to come out here to give you
um some hours of uh
We're not um to travel.
when we probably maybe 9:30, 10
on some instances in that, um,
on the first day and then uh
maybe the next trip we have to
move the next day that the
location we're moving to does
have. OK, so we'll, we'll try.
Any other um comments or
suggestions.
Vice chair said you want to meet
at a.
OK, if there's not much more.
Thank you guys for all your time
and attention and care and safe
travels as we open up the Indian
Affairs Committee interim or
2025, um, the vice chair, would
you have anything to
No,
thank you and we will see you
guys on the road.
