On the North Committee the whole
time I've been here, so it's uh
Very fast, fun and exciting
committee and I look forward to
another year of really good
work. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. My name
is Debbie Sarinana. I represent
house District 21 in Bern
County in Albuquerque, The
Manzano high school area.
Um, I great to be on this
committee. Unfortunately, it
overlaps with my committee a
lot, so I don't get to be here
much, but I every time I can
thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee. I am
representative Ammos Castano. I
serve district 70, which is Se
Miguel in Toms County.
Or far right?
Hi. I'm Senator Greg Nibert from
uh, Chavis County. I represent
the five counties in eastern New
Mexico. Chavez Curry, Deb Lee
and Roosevelt and at District
27.
Good morning, Mr Chair. My name
is Alan Martinez.
And I represent district 23 in
San B County.
You very well. And, uh, I'm the
chair of
Senator Roberto Bobby Jay
Gonzalez District six.
Encompasses part of Santa Fe.
O, Sala, Mosa and Taos.
And, uh, as other members come
in, we'll yield to them and
We have a very introduction and
how it will yield to our staff
to introduce themselves.
Hi. I'm Christina Vasquez. I'm a
staff attorney with legislative
Very well, Thank you to all of
you for being here today. Um
July 1st getting close to July
4th.
I think our timing was good as
being a few days before or
And we will go with our first,
um
Presentation of, um
An update from the state
investment on John Clark State
investment officer Sic
Done Welcome.
Thank you very much. Mr Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm really happy to be here
today. Uh, as you said, I'm John
Clark. I'm the state investment
officer, the new state
investment officer for the S IC,
And I'd also like to like to
recognize Charles W.
Here in the audience. He is our
director of communication,
legislative inclined affairs.
He's been with S IC for a very
long time and has been a
fantastic resources. I'm sure
many of you know.
Uh, I'd like to thank you for
inviting me here today to
present, uh, updates on the
state investment council. Our
funds, uh, both the permanent
funds that we oversee as well as
the growing variety of other
funds and the benefits that they
provide to the Mexicans.
These funds are a critical
resource for the state, and they
will soon become an even more
critical tool for all of you to
use as you move forward in
guiding the state in the years
ahead.
I like to move to Page two.
Page two starts with some basic
headlines that you may or may
not be aware of regarding the
council and changes since the
last interim
First. Uh as mentioned the
council appointed me as SI O
back in January after a many
month, uh, surge in interview
process. Uh, this is a job I've
been interested in for about
eight or nine years. I, for
those of you who don't know I
used to be chief economist for
the Legislative Finance
Committee and became very well
aware of the State Investment
Council and its importance to
the state at that point, but
it's become increasingly clear
to me over the last few years.
the not just important but
critical role.
The the S IC and the funds that
it manages will have in the
years to come.
Second, the, uh the Legislature
appointed two new council
members during the 2024
legislative session. Uh, the
first is economist Kelly
O'Donnell, who has about 30
years practicing as an
economist. She has also worked
for a variety of state agencies
such as the regulation and
Licensing Division, Taxation and
Revenue Department and the
Economic Development Department.
The second is, uh, child welfare
advocate Alan Sanchez, uh, who
has also helped oversee a 100
plus million dollar fund for ST
Joseph's, Uh, Both are very
engaged with the council and
have been great additions.
The Legislature also created
three new funds for the S IC to
manage this year, the Higher
Education Trust Fund the
Workforce Development and
Apprenticeship Fund and the
Capital Development and Reserve
Fund.
On this the first day of fiscal
year. 2025 we now oversee 12
different funds under S IC.
Uh, five years ago, we were only
managing five such funds.
We also have 25 different
government entities that have
invested money into our pools
and those assets have grown to
more than $2 billion today.
Five years ago, the permanent
fund distributions to the state
crossed the $1 billion mark for
the first time.
In fiscal year 2025 the benefits
that these funds provide to the
public schools, early childhood
programs, and the General fund
will cost $2 billion. That's a
huge increase in just five short
years.
This is due to a variety of
things. One is the investment
growth of the funds. Another
huge reason is the massive
record inflows.
New funds have also been
created, including the early
childhood education and Care
Fund, which was started in 2020
now has more than $7 billion in
it, and it will just distribute
a quarter billion dollars in FY
25.
Also a constitutional amendment
was passed to increase
distributions from the, uh, Land
Grant permanent fund. Uh, it
delivered $240 million in FY 24,
and it will deliver $270 million
in FY 25.
And it's
Incredible to note that the
total growth of assets of all of
the funds under management
increased by nearly $9 billion
in calendar year, 2023.
On slide three.
You can see a pie chart of all
of SI CS assets at the end of
the last quarter.
Uh, this pie will get a little
bigger with the addition of the
three new funds, and I'll go
into more detail on that in a
little bit.
In addition, the Legislature
added appropriations to some of
these funds during the session,
the legislature added $300
million to the Conservation
Legacy Permanent Fund and $50
million to the Water Trust Fund.
The Legislature also changed the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund status. It is no longer a
reserve fund for the state, and
it will start keeping all of the
annual tobacco master supplement
revenue in agreement inflows,
and then it's distributions will
now match the severance tax
permanent funds distributions,
which is a 54.7% of the five
year average value.
This was a really important
change because it allows us to
change how we invest that money
in the tobacco, uh, permanent
fund because we are now able to
invest it for more long term
growth strategies. And last week
at the SI CS June meeting, uh,
the council approved doing just
that, and we moved the
allocation to growth mode
status.
Slides four and five. Summarize
for you. The dozen funds are now
under the council's guidance and
provide details about how
they're structured. Uh, this is
more of a reference. I'm not
gonna go through all these in
detail. Uh, but these are here
for you. In case you have any
basic questions about a fund and
of course, if you have any
specific que questions, please
let me know.
Uh, I would like to turn your
attention to slide five.
Uh, slide five has more of our
newer funds, uh, several of
which are still in their early
stages of development and the
last three on the list are brand
new funds that we officially
have, as of today.
Uh, last year we saw even during
a short session, Uh, close to a
dozen different proposals to
proposals to create endowments
under SIC and we think this is
incredibly imprudent that is
incredibly prudent by the
Legislature, uh, to create
mechanisms that help take some
of the windfall revenues that we
have today and invest them for
the future.
Recently, as I say staff worked
with staff of the Legislative
Council services can provide
them a guide for, uh, use
whenever you're looking to
create any more endowment funds
or other funds to be overseen by
S IC, uh, so to help figure out
how to structure those and if
you're ever considering, Uh uh,
promoting legislation to create
a new fund for us, Uh, we would
be more than happy to work with
you on that legislation to make
sure that it does exactly what
you want it to do.
On slide six.
You can see highlights of our
performance. Uh as of the, uh,
most recent quarter available,
Uh so it's not the quarter that
just ended. Uh, it's the the
prior quarter. As of March, 31
You will note that, uh, that
there's obviously a lot of
variation in the returns of
these nine funds, Uh, that's
dependent on their asset
allocation and risk strategies.
Each fund will have different
long term goals. Different risk
profiles, but for the most part,
our funds are structured to
provide stable, long term
positive revenue returns without
taking excess risk.
The council believes in
participating on the upside of
market upturns, uh, while also
being highly diversified and
structured to avoid any
significant downfalls in market
downturns.
In the short term, while we are
experiencing a significant uh
uh, upward market in the stock
market, Uh, we you'll notice
that we are under performing
slightly compared to those, uh,
markets. Uh, but again, that is,
uh, just in the recent term, if
you look at the long term
numbers, uh, we're right on
target for, uh, our investment
target for the Land Grant
Permanent fund.
And we are also going to meet
as uh, a council later this year
to discuss
Long term goals for the
organization. We have not had a
strategic planning retreat for
the SI in about 10 years, and
this will be an opportunity for
the council to focus on long
term goals and also take a new
look at what levels of risk we
should take now, with the amount
of funds that are under our
management versus what we had 10
years ago.
Uh, slide seven.
Highlights the flagship, uh,
land Grant permanent fund, uh,
which is today valued at more
than $31 billion, That number is
more than doubled over the past
decade, Uh, primarily due to
unprecedented influence from the
state Land office.
These inflows are shown on the
graphic on the right. I'm sorry
on the graphic on the left. You
can see just how rapidly they've
increased over the years. How
big that, uh, run up in
royalties has been but then in
the graphic on the right, you
can see how the distributions
from the Land Grant Permanent
fund have risen over time, but
they have also been remarkably
stable.
Uh, even during times of crisis
and a good example that I want
to give you was during the great
financial crisis of 0809 when
the land grant permanent fund
dropped in value by 27% in 2008
Land grant permanent fund
distributions were still up 7%
in FRFYO, eight and 11% in FYO
nine. And so that is a huge
benefit of this mechanism in
that the state is able to see
those increased revenues over
time due to the investments of
the fund. But it also
So helps mitigate some of the,
uh, volatility in the revenues
generated by this industry.
On slide eight.
You'll see a refresher on the
Land Grant Permanent fund and
it's beneficiaries. Of course,
the primary beneficiary of the
loan grant permanent fund is the
public or common schools
receiving nearly 88% of the
annual distributions.
Uh, there was a constitutional
amendment passed changing the
distribution. So while the
remainder of the beneficiaries
receive 5% of the annual five
year average, the, uh public
common school beneficiaries
receive now six and a quarter
percent and that will increase
distributions over time. As you
see on PA. On slide nine
So slide nine digs a little
deeper into, uh, these ownership
changes over time on the left
hand side, you can see the
percent ownership of the Land
Grant permanent fund, and you
can see that What has happened
in recent years is that there's
been a significant increase in
the ownership share of the
public or common schools and a
decrease in ownership share of
the remainder of the
beneficiaries. This is due
primarily because the ownership
isn't universal across all
parcels of land and the
Common schools have owned more
of the land where more of the
oil and gas extraction has
occurred. So therefore they are
seeing a greater proportion of
those revenues.
However, despite the overall
percentage of of ownership
declining by the remainder of
the beneficiaries, they still
have seen growth and
distributions as you can see by
the graph on the right
The graph on the right shows a
remarkable increase in
distributions to the public or
common schools. That's the dark
blue line up top and again. Part
of that is because of the
specific land ownership
structure, but also because of
the constitutional amendment
that was passed changing the
distribution for that
beneficiary from 5% to 6 and a
quarter percent But you still
see growth to the remaining, uh
to the remaining be
beneficiaries of the fund here
as an example, we're including
the New Mexico.
School for the Deaf and the New
Mexico School for the visually
handicapped.
On slide 10.
This slide focuses on the
growing importance of the
permanent funds, providing
Providing distributions, uh to
new Mexico schools and growing
importance to you as
policymakers as you look for
ways to both improve K through
12 and early childhood education
funding.
You can see that we are
projecting to ramp up, uh,
distribution significantly over
the next several years.
And
Uh, you can again see that the
constitutional amendment is
responsible for part of that.
That's the lighter blue segment
of those bars. But even without
that, we would be significantly
ramping up distributions because
of the inflows to the fund and
the investment returns from it.
The land Grant Permanent fund
and Permanent fund school
distributions to K through 12
and early childhood education
will grow to $2 billion by
fiscal year, 29 or fiscal year
30 depending on how the, uh
How the oil and gas markets
perform.
If you turn to slide, 11
Here. We're looking at the
growth pattern that we expect
for funding over the next
several years.
And generally, this highlights
the fact that the permanent
funds are growing resource when
it comes to funding education in
the state with annual combined
distribution growth of around
10% over the next several years.
Slide, 12
Focuses on the early childhood,
education and care fund. Uh,
this is a resource that didn't
exist five years ago again. Now
it has more than $7 billion, it
really remarkable growth. And
while IC would love to take, uh,
credit for its rocketing growth,
really in such a short time
span, it's almost completely due
to inflows. It's also important
to recognize that these inflows
can't and won't last forever.
Early childhood Education and
care fund got over $3 billion
last calendar year.
Current estimates show that the
fund could continue to receive
inflows over the next few years.
But since that fund receives
revenues in excess over a five
year average, we're projecting
that over the coming years, the
amount that will be sent to that
fund will start to dwindle and
then eventually stop.
Uh, but again, the run up to
that fund has far outpaced
initial projections.
On slide 13 you can see early
childhood distributions, and it
shows how distributions from the
land Grant permanent fund and
early childhood funds will be
ramping up in the near future.
Depending on market performance
again. And if the inflows come
in, like we expect
The early childhood education
fund has potential to grow its
distributions, uh to early
childhood programs from $150
million in FY 24.
Over $500 million by the early
20 thirties.
Also total early childhood
distributions, which also
includes the distributions from
the Land Grant Permanent Fund
have the potential to exceed 500
million bytes FY 27 just two
fiscal years away again
remarkable growth to that you
as, uh, Alec can decide how to
spend the, uh, this incredible
amount of money that is now
available for early childhood
education.
On slide 14.
One area where we've really
looked, uh over the last few
years to improve our abilities
at S IC, uh, is understanding
and planning around the record
inflows that we've begun to
receive. Uh, but we know we
won't be around forever. So part
of that is our strategy and
team that does a lot of, uh,
internal forecasting and
modeling around our revenue
structure, And that's really
important boasted that we can
provide policy makers such as
yourselves with that
information, but it's important
internally as well so that we
can
The pacing of when money is
likely to come in, and when we
need to plan to be able to
invest it.
Uh, we also, uh, get involved
with, uh stress testing oil and
gas and energy Transition Ri
risk scenarios and when the
consensus revenue estimating
group asks, we help participate
in providing them with estimates
of inflows back to the General
fund from our on slide 15.
This highlights recent
legislation that impacts the way
I see invests, uh, Cine Bill 26
was a 2023 bill sponsored by
you, Chair Gonzalez. And this
really This bill changes the
future of New Mexico. It was
signed by the governor and it
restructures how oil and gas
money flows into the severance
tax Permanent fund. And what it
has meant is an incredible
windfall to the severance tax
permanent fund. Now in the
Few years.
And it enables us then to help
offset the eventual oil and gas
declines that we know are
coming. The consensus revenue
estimating group through their
modeling and in working with,
uh, professionals representing
the oil and gas industry, uh,
have talked about that. You
know, we have some years left of
rev of record revenue growth to
the state, but that eventually
that is going to start to
decline. And we're going to
reach a point where we're simply
not going to be able to drill
new wells fast enough and
eventually
You take inflation into account
we would start to see forever
declining revenues.
This was something that before
the passage of Senate Bill 26, I
became very concerned about when
I was over at the Economic
Development Department, and I
asked my team there to take a
look to see. Can we diversify
the economy quickly enough to be
able to offset those eventual
declines in oil and gas? And the
answer was no.
The answer was, we simply cannot
diversify the economy quickly
enough to offset that revenue
loss the amount of revenue that
we get right now from oil and
gas is too great to the state
and our economy isn't
particularly dependent on oil
and gas. Our revenue is
The New Mexico economy is a
little bit more reliant on
average than average on the
public sector and on retail, But
oil and gas in terms of the
economic profile it it doesn't
really play an outsized role for
the state. But obviously, as we
know a third or in some years,
more than a third of the entire
state general fund budget comes
from oil and gas. So what we
have is a revenue problem rather
than economic diversification
Problem.
So when I came in to S IC. I
started working with the team to
model
What would does that look like
for us now that we know that
we're receiving these record
inflows of current oil and gas
revenues into our funds and
specifically the severance tax
permit fund? Can we offset that?
Right now. We're waiting for the
updated, Uh, economic estimates
that it should come out in
August from the consensus
revenue estimating group and
waiting on some updated, Uh,
estimates from the oil and gas
industry. But the initial
projections are that yes, we
should be able to single
handedly offset the eventual
declines in oil and gas. We've
modeled it out through 2050. We
think that we can provide a
stable financial platform that
the state can grow and build
from that would not have been
possible without C.
26 so it's hard to underestimate
the importance of this bill, and
I really want to commend both
chair Gonzalez but also the
Legislature as a whole for
passing it. The governor for
signing it, Uh, this really was
a a remarkable piece of
legislation that changes the
future of New Mexico for
generations.
Slide 16. You can see some
information related to this and
we'll have more information
available again after the new
consensus revenue estimates come
out, and we get updated
projections from the early from
the oil and gas industry, so
we'll be able to put better
numbers to how we'll be able to
offset the eventual declines and
probably September or October.
But what you see here are two
pie charts showing what's likely
to happen over the next quarter
century.
You can see that. As of today,
the permanent fund distributions
represent about 12% of the, uh,
state's General fund budget,
And, uh, you can see that, uh
severance taxes, rents and
royalties are about 24% with
additional
Money coming into the state
related highly related to oil
and gas coming from grocery
receipts taxes.
And again, you can see, uh,
sales taxes, primarily, Groce
receipts being 38%. But then in
FY 50 were projecting that
severance taxes, rents and
royalties will fall to 9%. We're
projecting that. Similarly,
there will be a decline in the
grocer seats, tax revenues
related to oil and gas. But
there you can see the green
portion of the pie chart
representing the permanent fund
distributions now at 31% instead
of today's 12%.
Coming in just slightly behind
grocer's hes taxes in helping to
prop up the state's general fund
budget. This is really crucial
because not only does this mean
that we'll be able to provide a
stable financial platform for
the state to grow from, but
moving forward. We expect to
have less and less general, uh,
general fund volatility because
instead of relying on
significant annual variations in
revenues coming in from oil and
gas, you'll be relying on a
moving five year.
Of distributions from the
severance tax permanent fund. So
not only will you still have a
growth in the budget, you will
also be able to plan for it more
adequately and therefore decide
what you want in New Mexico to
look like in the future and then
take the steps necessary to plan
for that over time.
On slide. 17 just have some
final thoughts before I'm happy
to answer any questions.
The SI S total assets, number of
funds and complexity of its
portfolio have increased
dramatically over the last
decade.
And especially over just the
last five years.
Uh,
The assets under management have
tripled over the last 12 years
and doubled in the last five.
However, it's really important
to note that our staff has not
grown during that entire time,
and we are now starting to feel
the stresses of that.
Uh, investing more money is not
just as simple as adding a zero
to the end of each of the
checks. It becomes very
different. Uh, it is also a
challenge to be able to, uh, to
get them some of the money out
the door fast enough because we
are seeing such record inflows
And so you know, we are great,
very grateful to the Legislature
and the governor for a budget
that now in FY 25 gives us six
additional positions that we
hadn't had for the last decade.
One important thing to note is
that in cases where we don't
have sufficient staffing
internally, we still have to get
the job done. And what that has
meant is we've had to outsource
it.
And primarily, also it to
extremely highly paid advisors
and attorneys.
Over time. We would like to
bring more of that in house
because we pay a lot of money
each year in management fees and
attorney's fees and while
bringing in more expertise in
house would be expensive, it
would likely say to save the
state orders of magnitude of
money.
I also want us to collaborate
more effectively with other
state agencies and other groups
across the state. Uh, we've been
very active in this area
recently. We've started talking
regularly with the Economic
Development Department in New
Mexico Finance Authority and
others. Um, I've talked to the
venture capital community and,
uh, I have a couple of speeches
lined up at economic development
events moving forward.
I think one issue that, uh, New
Mexico has faced over the years
was not enough communication and
collaboration, um, in the
economic development area, And
although I'm no longer at that
department, we are involved in
economic development with our
New Mexico investment program,
and it's important to let the
public at large. Know what we do
how we invest the funds for the
state and what this means for
the state budget moving forward,
but also how we're investing
money under the New Mexico
Investment program, and we've
made a lot of changes in recent
years.
We're also seeking input from,
uh, community members and, uh,
venture capitalists businesses
on additional changes that we
could potentially make going
forward.
I think the council and I are
very happy to take a fresh look
at how we engage in the new
Mexico program. Uh, whether
that's through policy changes or
coming back to all of you for
potential legislative changes.
The landscape is simply very
different now, with the amount
of money that we have now,
versus when the program was
created, and, uh, we want to
make sure that we're doing the
best job of investing those
funds but also that the program
structure makes the most sense
for New Mexico. And and finally,
I just want to reiterate that we
are going to have a strategic
planning retreat for the council
later this year. I believe the
last retreat was held in 2013
And again, our funds have
tripled in that time and
We know a lot more about where
we're headed and where the state
is headed, Uh, both in terms of
revenue growth and the
challenges ahead. So I, I think
now is the perfect time for the
council to take a fresh look at
what are our long term goals.
What's the purpose of this
organization? And how do we want
to help the state moving
forward?
So very excited to be here
today. Very excited to, uh
continue the remarkable work of
S IC, and I'm happy to answer
any questions.
I know. Thank you. Thank you
very, very much for presentation
of
If you could just give us a
couple of minutes to catch up a
little bit here.
We have some members that joined
us after we started. You can
introduce yourself for a record
and for our Webcast.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair and good
morning and thank you for your
presentation.
Um representative Cynthia Bargo
represent the west side of
Albuquerque, Northwest Mesa.
District seven
Thank you, Mr Chair. My name is
Antoinette Zadillo. Lopez and I
represent the area around the
university, both as south and
northeast areas.
Great to be here.
Thank you.
Not with you.
Oh,
Yeah.
Uh, good morning, Mr Chair.
members of the committee. It's a
pleasure to be here. Liz
Stefanik. Senate District 39,
representing currently parts of
six counties, two of which have
been struck by floods, fires and
not very good for the people who
live there.
So it's important to look at all
these funds. Thank you.
Thank you all very much to our
members that joined us and, um
At this point, uh, since we have
a quorum
Uh, as a chair, I would
entertain a part of a
Accepting our minutes it
presented to us
We have a motion and then we
have a second boy.
So it's S City.
OK?
Is there any objection?
No. Uh, we have approved our
minutes for
May 3rd of 2024. Thank you
members.
We go to our questions. We do
have quite a a list. So, John
Thank you again.
Start with, uh, center Padilla.
Thank you very much. Uh, Mr
Chairman and John. Thank you.
Outstanding information as
usual, Uh, just had two. I think
pretty quick questions If you go
to slide, 12
The early childhood education
and care fund.
Uh, the bottom, right? Um
So at some point, um, a large
influx of this fund has been
because we've done so well with
oil and gas. You're projecting
the inflow to shrink.
As a result of oil and gas.
Or or inflows to the state
General fund to shrink. So
that's where the shrinking is
gonna come from here.
Uh, Mr Chair and senator. That's
exactly correct. So, uh, because
the distributions are in excess
of a moving five year average.
Uh, as that average starts to
include these much larger
numbers, uh, that not the
distribution to the fund will
start to decline so that that's
exactly what it is. Uh, it was
this remarkable run up because
of, uh the inflows and as those
in influence are then calculated
as part of that five year
average the distribution to the
fund will
Decline.
And so, Mr Chairman, and and
John, uh, on page 13 men on the
total, uh, distribution for
early childhood
in FY 30.
816 million.
Which is very exciting when you
think about it, everybody, but,
um, So when I went over and
created that department with a
lot of other legislators, but
that was my my legislation.
There is that
So the fund with the drop off
after 2030
Doesn't grow as much, but it
will. It's projected to be at
least 816 million. What about
31? 32 33 up to 50?
There will still be growth
because of prudent investor
rule, right?
Yes, Mr Chair and Senator, So
it's the inflows that will
decline, not necessarily the
value of the fund itself. We
will continue to invest that
money and generate additional,
uh, money for the fund through
our investment. Granted that the
returns remain where they're at
above 5% to continue dropping
some reinvestment into the fund.
That's exactly correct, Senator
So, I. I just want to remind the
Legislature and others that you
know, while we saw a remarkable
increase in value here, we saw
that in everything so we
shouldn't just automatically
wanna cut this fund off at its
kneecaps. We we wanna make sure
that this continues to fund what
it was in in intended for, so
appreciate you giving us that
analysis. I hope that that's
exactly what we continue to see.
And then my last question, Mr
Chairman is on page 16 so
There's a whole bunch of
information here, so just had a
couple of follow ups. Uh, Mr
Chairman.
The, um, permanent fund
distributions. Uh uh, from 12%
to 31%.
And then I see severance taxes,
obviously going from 24 to 9.
Um, why do you see sales taxes
shrinking by 5%, or it's not the
actual value of the country of
the, uh, portion. It's just
simply what it contributes.
So, Mr Ching, I think that that
is part of the answer is that,
uh, you're unfortunately, the
pie chart doesn't show what the
size of the pie is. So you are
seeing a shrinking of the
portion of the pie that is, uh,
sales taxes or Groce seats
taxes. However, there is also
likely to be a decline component
that offsets traditional growth,
because, uh, there is a
significant portion of gross
receipts taxes that is
Tied to oil and gas extraction,
and so just as we see the
decline in severance, taxes,
rents and royalties, we will see
a decline in that part of Groce
receipts taxes.
When we update this, uh,
following the updated consensus
revenue estimates from the
group. Uh, we would be happy to
include the more specific
numbers of what that looks like
of whether this portion of the
pie is just shrinking in
comparison to the total or
whether it is growing or
shrinking overall, but we didn't
want to put out numbers today
that then could be contradicted
by the consensus revenue
estimate coming out just next
month, so we'll we'll update
that, but there will be a
decline component.
NT
OK, And so, Mr Chairman, then on
also on page 16 other 4% down to
2%. I'm assuming that the
calculation is the same in terms
of but But what is that other?
Can you give us some of the
highlights on what other is?
Mr Chair and Center. I could
guess, but I'd rather uh, look
it up and find out and get back
to you. Uh, because I'm not
positive exactly what's included
there and why that share is
shrinking other than to say
those might be more set stable
revenue sources and we are
expecting significant overall
growth between FY 24 and FY 50.
So if that again may be a case
where those revenue sources
might not be be declining, they
might just be becoming a smaller
portion.
But I will find out exactly what
those are appreciate that. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. So and again,
I think it was your previous
answer Just now that, uh, it's
gonna answer this next one, but
It seems to me like the, um and
and there's other information on
in this deck that would probably
tell the story of the question.
I'm about to ask, but it seems
like actual dollar values would
Woodland. More information to
this slide so that we could see
that you know, we're we're also,
you know, in 2.5 years gonna go
through an administration
change. You could have a whole
different, you know, take on
life and whatever. And so it
just is it because of what you
said about the consensus
forecast coming out next month
that there aren't dollar amounts
on this slide. Yes, Mr Chair and
Senator we're working on, uh,
significantly beefing up this
one slide to become an entire
presentation, and it'll have all
of that detail, and, uh, we
should have that.
Uh, hopefully, September, I
would say, probably October at
the latest.
How did I know you would say
that?
I just knew it. So that's all I
have. Mr. Chairman and again. I
want to congratulate you, II. I
feel very good that we're in
very good hands with your
leadership on the dial on this
item. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Oh, thank you, Senator. Uh, let
me just ask the members and also
with John, if we can keep our
answers a little bit more
precise. We have quite a list.
So that we can stay on schedule.
Uh, we have, uh,
Now, Senator Stefani.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll be
brief. Um, very good
presentation. Thank you very
much.
I would just suggest to my
colleagues that you look on Page
four and five.
That the funds and to see what
the gaping holes are that we
don't have funds for.
And perhaps those are the areas
we need to look at for the
future, That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just I
have just one question on, uh
14 and 15.
You. You lay out the scenarios
of the eventual
Reduction in oil and gas.
How is that gonna be
sustainable? I mean,
You. You said in your
presentation that
One third and sometimes more
than a third of the state budget
has come from oil and gas.
What's the plan to sustain?
All these funds.
If we if we lose a third of
That investment capital.
So, Mr Chair and and, uh,
representative
Luckily that that third won't go
away overnight. The the current
projections are that it will be
a gradual decline. Uh, if it
went to, uh away overnight, we
wouldn't be able to offset that,
but well, you can offset the
gradual decline.
Uh, so if someone came in and
just turned off the spigot, we
would have a real problem but
with the gradual decline that's
being projected that we can
offset and it's really through
compound returns on the
investments. Uh and because of
the wisdom of rather than
spending all of the money that
has come in in these incredible
windfalls of saving it, allowing
us to invest it in these
compound returns so that you
have that money later.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mister Clarke.
Yeah, very well, Um
To a neighbor.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
My question goes to the
constitutional amendment and the
impact it's had on the
Distributions.
Uh, with respect to the
respective beneficiaries.
Prior to that constitutional
amendment basically,
Each entity.
Contributed
So much money to the to the
overall fund.
It grows at a certain rate.
Everybody was kind of equal, you
could calculate the percentage
of the, uh, withdrawal.
Put that in monetary terms each
year.
Now you have two factors. You
have different moneys coming in
from different institutions.
And now you have the public
schools that are taking a bigger
share.
Of the distribution out, then
the other institution, So how
How are
How is your office?
Uh, accounting for
Yeah. Change number one and
number two. Are you
They're having to create
separate silos for the various
institutions so that
Over time that additional money
that's being taken out by the
public schools doesn't impact
future distributions to the
other institutions because over
time, theirs is going to be
increased at the expense of the
of the common schools. If I
understand the impact correctly,
Mr Turner. Excellent question.
And, uh, one thing that I should
have mentioned earlier is that
that constitutional amendment
increases the distributions of
the public schools portion of
the funding? It does not in any
way impair. Uh, the
distributions and the amount of
the fund that is owned by the
other beneficiaries. So what's
happening? Is that essentially
the public schools is running
through its corpus a little bit
faster and
The result will be over time as
it receives six and a quarter
percent year after year after
year, there's still is likely to
be growth in the fund because
our target is 7%. But the there
will be a growing corpus for the
other beneficiaries. And
eventually you will start to see
greater levels. Uh, greater
increases of distributions to
the other beneficiaries, Uh,
that have that slower
distribution rate.
So is that done each year
mathematically on a spreadsheet
or something, and and you you
are keeping track of their
percentage of the overall. Uh
And then you calculate what's
going to get distributed that
year and and then it changes
everybody that year next year.
it changes everybody, and and
and so on. So the other
institutions are not penalized
because the common schools are
getting a larger
Percentage of the distribution,
Mr Chair and Senator, That's
exactly correct. We do track all
of that separately, and the
other beneficiaries are not
being penalized because of the
increased distribution to the
public schools. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um
Center of Slope.
Thank you, Mr Chair. As you can
see, we're all interested in the
plans for when oil and gas is
not the source of revenues, and
I used to complain that oil and
gas just extract and we don't
even make the barrels in this,
you know, for the oil, um, in
this state that it was just
extractive and didn't have the
economic any kind of economic,
uh,
Significant economic, uh, basis
like it doesnt in like Texas and
other states. But now I'm
thinking Well, that wasn't such
a bad deal. If, um if if your
plan works out
And this plan is exciting
because it will reduce
volatility as you said, because
we will have a stable, much more
stable source of income because
that's also been a source of
frustration, relying on a on a
revenue source that goes up and
down as I look at this plan, as
I look at this estimated sources
of the General fund, and I think
this follows up on every
question that's been asked, Um,
the fund distributions are going
to be from particular.
Particular funds and one thing
and this relates to Senator Um,
Stefani's question I see missing
on these permanent endowment
fund is our social services.
Um or I. I see the opioid
settlement restricted fund, but
that's about it. So that seems
like a whole, um, that we'd have
to fill.
It would. Would you agree that
that's the case?
This is true.
Mr Chair and Senator, Uh, that
would be a policy decision for
you. If you would like to pursue
that we would be more than happy
to work with you on, uh how the
bill could be structured in
regards to the structure of the
fund. Uh, really be happy to
work with you on that, Um, we we
don't weigh into the policy
issues of what might make sense
to set up for a particular
public benefit. Uh, but we're
more than happy to weigh in on
how the fund could get
structured to achieve what you
want.
Thank you, mr Chair because I
think that's what we really need
to analyze. Is the future
distributions or to start
thinking about the whole that we
will need to plug with future
distributions of this fund. We
will still still have income tax
and sales tax and related to
that the income taxes. Um you
have them going up 1%.
So does that mean the withdrawal
of the people that work in the
oil and jet gas industry?
Wouldn't cause that much of a
blip.
I know a lot of them actually
are from out of state. I, I I'm
aware of that.
Mr Ken Center. So you see that?
What? Going up by 1%? What
you're seeing is the share of
the total going up by 1% but
between FY 24 and FY 50, the
total pie will grow
significantly. So, uh, personal
income tax revenues will
increase significantly between
now and FY 50 for the
projections on exactly what that
makeup is, over time there, I
would rely on the economists of
the consensus revenue estimating
group.
That's why you're gonna make a
whole presentation just based on
this slide. Absolutely OK, then,
um
I'm excited that you're gonna
have a retreat. I think that's
always do you have an idea of
what the agenda is just in broad
strokes?
Mr Ken Center. We are working
with the council members now to
see uh what items they would
like on the retreat, but, uh, I
think there are a few things
that we should certainly
consider, Uh, one is, you know,
do we want to explicitly one of
the goals of the organization to
be to offset that eventual
decline in oil and gas revenues
and provide a stable financial
platform? Uh, that is not one
right now. Uh, right now, our
official mission and vision for
the agency reflects where we
came out of in the
After the scandal. Our mission
envision is to become a
respected organization and to
grow the funds. It's a good
idea. It's also a little vague
and I think, uh, it's time for
the council to take a look at
maybe more precise, long term
goals. Uh, but also because
we've grown so significantly
over the years I mentioned we're
currently spending significant
amounts of money on external
advisors and attorneys and there
are ways that we could reduce
that if we increase staffing,
uh, but that's something we
need.
Push for and I think it's
important to get feedback at the
retreat from the council if
that's something that they want.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair. I would
really encourage that vision of
really focusing on the offset
that
Of oil and gas revenue because
that's the elephant in the room.
That's the ticking time bomb. Um
and then just very briefly
looking at, um
The prediction of the revenues
beginning beginning to decline.
Um
I believe that's page.
15
No.
The decline.
I, um You said that you had in
now. I'm not. I wrote the
question down on page 15, but I
don't think that's the when you
When do you, um, calculated when
you perceive that the revenues
will begin to decline
significantly. You said that you
you had oil and gas executives
and and econ economist involved
in measuring or predicting that
decline. How confident do you
feel in those predictions? Um
So, Mr Chen
Center. Uh, so, uh, just to be
clear the revenue projections
from the state we are getting
from the consensus revenue
estimating group of economists,
Uh, just a couple of years ago,
they started modeling out long
term projections out to 2050.
Whenever you start to model
anything out that far it the,
uh, uncertainty increases
significantly. So what we've
been doing, um, I. I know the
The consensus revenue estimating
group has been doing this, but
also we've been doing this
internally.
With our modeling is to take a
look at a wide range of
scenarios of what could happen
if there was a faster energy
transition. Slower energy energy
transition new discoveries of
technologies that make it easier
to pull additional oil out of
the ground. Things like that,
and we're modeling that
In all but some of the worst
possible cases we can offset
that loss. We can certainly
offset it, Uh, at the midpoint,
uh, we can offset it with a
couple of the scenarios that are
below midpoint. I if we get
into, um, a situation that's
worse than that. As I mentioned,
you know, for example, just
turning off the spigot
immediately One day that we
wouldn't be able to disaster.
That would be all right. Well,
I, um this was an excellent
presentation, and I really do
want to learn more and I do.
To work with you on
Um, we've been calling it a
alcohol Harms alleviation fund,
But perhaps it should be
broadened, Um, in its scope to
fill in some of the gaps of
social services that that we
made
May experience and not have the
the fun for Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Uh, Senator before I
go to our next person.
We have a couple of members that
have joined us and, uh, Senator
Sanchez, if you want to
introduce yourself and
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
Joshua Sanchez represents cow
McKinley, Socorro and Valencia.
The joy to be here today.
To see all of you haven't seen
your faces in a while. So
Thank you. Thank you,
representative.
Thank you, Mr Chair Natalie
Figueroa House District 30 in
Bernal, Leo County, the
northeast Heights of
Albuquerque.
Well, we had the senator, but,
uh
Represented.
Made to a center.
Thank you, Mr Chair for
promoting me.
Um, thank you, Mr Clarke for
your comments and your
presentation. Um, I am looking
at this presentation as a
Um 30,000 ft View.
Um and I wanna go down a little
bit further into the weeds. I'm
sorry, but used to sit on the P
ER a board so
I, um, apologize. Upfront. Um, I
was looking at your investment
performance chart, and that to
me is very telling, um, of
Of course I
Think about, you know,
recessions and wars and such
such that it
Cause a volatile market, which
unfortunately, we
We may be headed down those, uh,
pathways, which I, um
You know, we're already in war
And then with our presidential,
um
Uncertainty.
There's always that
Sort of break down. Um what I
don't see in this report, And
maybe maybe you have it
somewhere is the breakdown of
each of these funds in terms of
where you're investing.
Um and I and I asked that
question.
Because I think about, you know,
volatility of markets a lot.
Um, especially when we're when
we're investing in.
And you didn't say this, but
Hedge funds or, um, private
equity.
Um
I'm I'm questioning where each
of these funds are investing,
and I don't see that information
in front of me. Um, you may be
able to provide that to me and
some sort of a report. I don't
know, but I'd love to see that
because that gives me a better
indication, And I think it's
fair that all of us should see
that information. Um, because it
gives us a better indication of
where we're actually investing
each of these each of these, um
Idols. Um
And and a better indication is
never mind. It's good for iron.
Yeah, I don't think they started
it in the other meeting.
Um is that my cut off?
Um, sorry to ask the hard
questions. Um, the other thing
that I wonder about is whether
or not you guys have a, uh, any
investments in green markets? Um
I don't see that in here. Um, so
I have to ask these questions.
Um
And you don't have to answer
them all today, but I certainly
would like to know. Um, also,
um, I'd like to know about
The well, I guess my question is
the diversity of investments and
actually where the money is
going.
Um and Mr um
Mr Chair. The other question
that I have is related to the
opioid, um, investment because I
don't see anything in here that
shows me.
Any numbers for the opioid.
Um, which is in my mind one of
our biggest problems in the
state.
So I just wondered if you could
address any of that.
Mr Chair and representative, Uh,
we can certainly get you a table
of the acid allocation targets
for each of these funds. Uh,
that tells you where the money
is going. Um, we don't have a
specific green energy sector
that we're investing into. It's
part of the energy sector, which
is, you know, uh, uh, invested
into in a couple of different
asset classes. Um, but we we
that is not an explicit
Doesn't carry an explicit target
at this point, uh, for the New
Mexico investment program. We
have been focusing a lot on
companies in deep tech and
advanced energy. Green energy.
Uh, So, uh, A lot of the new
Mexico investments have been
focused in that space.
As for the opioid settlement,
restricted fund and the
Conservation Legacy permanent
fund here, both of those are two
new to have annualized
performance results yet so when
we come back here at a later
point in the future, we will
start to have that data, but
they're just too new at this
point.
Um, Mr Chair just to follow up
on that. Do you anticipate when
that may
Um, start showing.
Um
Mr Chair, representative. We'll
we'll follow up and let you know
when that will be. Uh uh, hard
to say off off the top of my
head exactly when we're going to
get those annualized reports
Mr Chairman and members I. I
would like really, to see at
some point in time that you do
have some sort of a green
investment. Um
A policy for green investment
because I don't see that in here
and I think that it would be
helpful to us to know that there
is a percentage of our funds
that are going into green energy
and green investments, and I
know there's it's not just
energy. There's other types of
investments. So, um, I know that
P PR a fund does have that such
a policy because I help craft
that so I wouldn't really like
to see that in the future.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you all very much. Um,
before I go to some comments,
Uh, is there anyone else?
And I wanna thank you members.
We are on schedule, and I just
have a few
You 1st 10, Johnny. So thank
you.
But, um in, uh, in your opinion,
and CNN, we have some
information here.
When do you really feel that
That growth started with a
You know the additional funds
that are coming to the status
four or five or two.
16
2016
Mr Chair Back in 2016. I
remember we had to have a
special session to come in and
cut the budget because, uh, oil
prices had crashed. So we we
really started to see it begin
to ramp up again in 2017 and I
would say we started to see
explosive growth in oil and gas
revenues to the General fund. In
2018. It was, uh, shocking at
the time to many economists, uh,
the level to which receipts tax
Revenues specifically related to
oil and gas were rising. So I
would say probably late, 2017
early 20 se 2018 is when we
really start to see that growth.
Oh, thank you for that, and and
members. So where I'm going with
this is so
Oh, yeah, the hardest things
that I have seen for the number
of years that I have served.
And you just mentioned that is
when you're when you have to
make cuts.
And, uh, you know what? I what I
would like to see. But this may
not fall within you.
You know, we might have to have
LFC or someone else work with
this.
Yeah. So
For every dollar.
That we add to recurring
revenue.
We have to continue paying for
that.
And, uh,
And what I would like to see is
the amount of recurring
Versus say that if we go with
2018 to current
You know, versus to what we
have.
You know, And how are we gonna
balance this? So we don't ever
get into a position that
You know, it could be 10 years
from now, 15, but we we're in a
position that, um
We have to come back and make
cuts and that's very, very
painful and
You know, it's just a very hard
on the entire state.
And, uh, just to have that, uh
Art.
You know of, uh, understanding
that and for example, like, uh,
With the K 12 education would
probably pretty much almost like
double
You know, into the number that
has gone into the recurring
part.
And, uh, that can be very
costly. You know if we're not
prepared to
Work with that and handle that.
So that's one part
The other one on that I was
gonna ask you is on, um
The additional FTS and maybe you
mentioned and I missed it.
Is you have hired everyone or
you're still short.
Uh, so, Mr Chair, we are working
to fill all of the vacancies
that we have at the moment. Um
and then we're getting six
additional positions as of
today. Uh, so that would take us
from 31 to 37 authorized FTE.
One of the challenges that we
face is
There are not very many people
in the state that do this type
of work, so we compete
nationally, and it is very hard
to recruit. Um uh, you know,
highly qualified people and then
also to retain highly qualified
people, Uh, with the salary
structure that's currently in
place. Uh, S IC has suffered
over the years from pretty
significant turnover and vacancy
rates. Uh, we have hired a
number of people recently. I
think we now have 27 or 28
people on staff when I came in
We had 2222 of an authorized 31
and even at 31, we are severely
understaffed for managing $54
billion, and on that point is
there
Any part that could be working
with our universities to what
your demand is. And
Even if it's a special program
that they offer for
Say.
Different kind of, uh,
Certificate or degree.
So, Mr Chair That is part of
what I'm working on. Currently,
there is really no career path
for people at S IC. We have
Analysts who aren't quite entry
level. They're they're not quite
people right out of college.
They have to have some
experience underneath them. And
then it jumps up to asset class
director where we expect decades
of experience. Uh, my hope is
that over time, we can both be
competitive in attracting
recruiting people but also be
able to provide a career pathway
so we can bring in more entry
level people and then grow them
and grow our more experienced
people over time. Uh, but right
now,
You know, we really need people
who have seen, uh, who have gone
through a full market cycle
upturns and downturns and we're
not gonna be able to get that
out of a college. We're really
only going to be able to get
that by competing with other
public and private funds across
the country, and that's where
we're struggling, Uh, being able
to do that.
Very well and, uh, on your
retreat is that a is that a
close retreat?
It's It's a It's all Mr Cherry
it It will be open. Um all all
meetings of the State Investment
Council are open to the public,
and anyone who would like to
attend, uh and it will be
announced, uh, like any other
meeting of the S IC.
Very well, You know, that's also
very exciting that you're coming
with that. And just looking at
your mission and vision again,
you know?
That's a very good
Um at one time.
This is probably a few years
ago.
We got a complete list.
Of all the participants as the
clients that you have
And, uh, maybe that would be
good for, uh, the members to see
Also
And, uh,
I was just gonna ask you one
more thing.
Maybe if you could just expand a
little bit on your third party
clients.
Yeah. So, Mr Chair we do have
about 25 different governmental
agencies across the state. Uh,
that have, uh, governmental
entities. Let's say across the
state that have chosen to
invest, uh, funds with us, Uh,
we don't take, uh, any portion
of that for commission for
operations or anything. We just
put a 100% of their money into
the pool that they're investing
into. Um and
Yeah, that we we go and make
presentations to various
entities who who choose to
invest with us. Uh, but that
number has increased
significantly over time as well.
And it's It's now 25 and
represents a total of about $2
billion.
OK, thank you for that. And, um
Is it pretty much that they do
leave their funds there or do
they take some of our time?
Mr Chair, I it it, they
primarily leave the majority of
the funds there because, um, we
really are able to offer them
the the best investment if
they're able to leave all or
virtually all of their funds
with us, because, uh, our model
is to invest for long term
performance if they're more
concerned about liquidity. Uh
then the state treasurer's local
government investment pool is
more likely the better place for
them to invest their funds. But
again if they
Have a fund where they're
interested in long term
investments long and higher
returns and are able to
withstand. Uh, volatility from
one year to the next. Uh then
it, it makes more sense to
invest into our funds.
Very well, Thank you. And I know
that they do work.
You know?
I've seen that myself and
You know, during the years, you
know
What has happened there.
Members, any other
I know we just really wanna
thank you. And I just want to
mention that, um
Many years I've seen where your
presentation is always at the
end of the day.
And by that time, everyone's
tired and
And so I wanted to make sure
that you were first on the
agenda, too, and we're all awake
and
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate it. OK, thank you.
We'll go to our next, uh
Presentation and that it is
going to be the retiree health
care.
And members of
We will have a lunch provided to
us.
I, uh
The owners of, uh, Charlie
Marquez.
And be a box lunch and take a
break and we'll enjoy that.
Well, thank you, Charlie.
Neil, you're next.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair,
and, uh, members of the
committee if you would allow me
to just introduce a couple of my
staff members that are here with
me today, I do have my deputy
director, Mr Keith wit sitting
behind me and then our general
counsel, Mr Mark Hayden.
Uh, who's we here as well? So
thank you.
Um as far as myself. I am the
Neil Keeper. I'm the executive
director for the retiree Health
Care Authority.
And we'll go ahead and turn to
slide Number two in regards to
the contents of this, which I
know is a long list, and I'll
kind of just, uh, briefly kind
of provide an overview of what
we're looking to accomplish
throughout this presentation and
really, to provide a little bit
of a brief background in regards
to the retiree health care
authority, um, to provide you
with updates with the agency,
um, in regards to some of the
work that we're doing right now,
the work that we see on the
horizon, uh, where we currently
stand as it relates to not only
our benefits, but also looking
at our
Current trust fund for our
investment.
Um we'll also talk about some of
the different assessments. Some
of the tools that we use, Uh, in
order to review our program and
really look at the
sustainability and the solvency
of our program. So, uh, this
topic definitely fits. Uh,
exactly what we try to achieve.
and this is something that we'll
be working with our current
board. Uh, here very shortly in
this month.
As we move to slide Number
three. This is provides a little
bit of a brief overview in
regards to the retiree health
care authority. Uh, we were
created back in 1990.
Um with that there was some
legislative findings that was
stating that there was a severe
problem in trying to secure
benefits for retirees. So this
was being done to provide
comprehensive core group health
insurance or certain public, UH,
service members or employees
provide public service. Um, as
far as the health insurance that
we do provide, we do provide
medical, which provides our pre
Medicare plans, and then we also
provide Medicare coverage as
well. Uh, that goes hand in hand
with it. Some of the other
options that we provide is D.
Insurance, vision insurance and
life insurance. Uh, so we do
have a mix of benefits that our
members have the option of
electing they can take the full
slate of benefits that we offer
or they could take any portion
of the benefits that they just
want to participate in.
Uh, just as a reminder as it
does state that the Legislature
does set the employee and
employer contributions and then
as far as the board duties,
they're responsible for the
administration of the program.
But they also set the premiums
that our retirees do continue to
pay into retirement.
Looking a little bit more at
slide. Four. This is a nice
little, uh, chart just to kind
of show what's historically
happened in regards to those
employee and employer
contributions as I did state
that is set by the Legislature,
Well back in 1990 when we
started off with about 15,000
employees we were collecting
about 1.5%. That was a breakout
between half a percent between
the employee and the employer.
That was for both the enhanced
and non enhanced, uh, you can
see on the very top. That's the
non enhanced members such as
myself who would fall in this
category and then our
Would be like police and fire
who fall into this particular
category, uh, that that Perry
does designate as well.
Now, as far as for those changes
we have seen over the years that
we've seen changes for these two
or three years where it's grown
from that 1.5 to 3% for the non
enhanced and then the 1.5 to
3.75 for our enhanced
So these are the contributions
from about 93,000 active members
who are currently participating
that are making these
contributions to the program. It
is these funds that help us to
grow our trust fund and being
able to invest some of those
portions to really ensure that
this program is gonna be around.
and not only today but in the
future, but it also helps to
offset some of those costs that
we do have in paying our health
care.
Um so we'll get it a little bit
more depth in regards to it on
some of the further slides, but
just want to kind of discuss
some of the the different, Uh,
contributions and and revenue
sources that we do have through
this agency.
On slide number five. This is in
regards to our board of
directors, um, always happy to
report to the board of directors
and that we do have some broad
representation. Uh, that really,
you know, provides a lot of our
various stakeholders and
ensuring that their voices can
be heard, you know, ranging from
some of the retiree groups that
we have with board members on
down to the to the the counties,
municipalities. We got the
teachers federation, so we got
broad representation. I do know
that we're gonna see some
probably additional changes
coming up here soon.
We have a couple vacancies. Uh
so we'll be looking to fill one
of the positions. Um, that's
vacant, which is one of the, uh
the governor as far as um
determining who that would be on
the board and then one of the
newly appointed, uh, positions
that's gonna be serving on the
board will be coming from the
new health care authority as
that was one of the things
within the S latest bill that
they would have a position that
they'd be serving on this board
as well. Uh, so we'll continue
to work with our board very
closely. As we continue to
review our programs, review our
benefits and
To look at how we're going to
proceed in the future.
But I would like to give a lot
of credit to the board over the
years as they continue to, you
know, really evaluate this
program really assess and take
some thoughtful approaches on
any of the changes that we make
and trying to look at how we can
continue to ensure that this
benefit program is helping our
current retirees but also
looking to ensure that for
individuals such as me who will
be retiring in the future that I
would have access to a benefit
like this for when I get to that
point, so really like to, like,
give a lot of credit to the
board and and the approaches
that they take, Uh, regarding
this.
As far as for some agency
updates here on slide number six
We will see as far as for annual
board meeting, it will be coming
up. On Thursday, July 11th and
Ju and Friday July 12th During
this time we the board will be
looking as far as the election
of board officers doing
committee assignments. Uh, we'll
hear a number of presentations
that are ranging from, uh,
anywhere from our investments as
far as how they're doing up into
our vendor presentations as far
as from our medical providers,
dental vision life, uh, giving
us information. We'll have our
actuaries there so they can
provide us some additional
updates of what's
Happening in the market. What
are some of the things we need
to consider? As far as what the
medical trends are? What costs
are we looking at? Taking into
cut? What our revenues are, Uh
so we'll have some modeling
that's done, and I have some
examples in this particular. Uh,
presentation of what was done
last year, and we'll be keeping
the committee informed as well
as everyone. Um, as we get more
of that modeling and
information, uh, here coming up
in our annual board meeting
Mhm.
But some of the other items that
we'll look at is gonna be the
plan changes and recommendations
for 2025 as I did state When we
look at that modeling this may
determine if we're gonna have
any premium increases. Uh, we
know last year that we did see a
5% increase on pre Medicare and
then there is a 0% on the, uh,
Medicare supplement plan. Those
are both of the self insured
plans that we manage, and then
it was a wide variety. As far as
the changes from anywhere from
zero to almost 50% on our
Medicare advantage plan. So, uh,
we did see a lot more taking
place within that.
Particular market.
I'm looking as far as our
meetings for our board of
directors. They are the first
Tuesday of every month. Uh, with
the exception of our annual
board meeting and and our board
meeting in August, and once
again as far as our switch
enrollment, it does happen in
the fall, which is typically
between October and November,
which is a good opportunity that
we get to get out. Talk with our
members provide them education,
Talk to them how they could, you
know, pick the plan that's best
for them and how to utilize
those plans. And where this
comes in handy is that it's
really to educate them on how to
be a little bit more savvy
shopper.
And using their health care, and
that's gonna save them in cost,
but it also helps the agency
when they use a more
effectively. So when we wanna
save some of these dollars and
really help with our solvency
and sustainability, that is part
of it. It is really working to
engage our members.
Um, one of the last items that's
at the very bottom is the
procurement. We recently did
complete the asset management
consulting services.
Procurement. Uh, we are just
waiting final signature. Uh, but
this is gonna change something
that we've done in the past
where we've always had about a
bi annual asset management
review. Uh, on that we will be
changing that and that we will
have some, uh, ongoing. Uh uh.
Consulting. Help, uh, regards to
our asset management, uh, here
on the on a yearly basis and and
providing some more updates on a
regular basis to our board and
to staff so
We look forward to working with
that new group and definitely
we'll share that once
everything's been finalized, Uh,
but that's one of the new things
that is happening with our
agency.
As we continue to look exactly
the composition and
participation in financing for
our agency. Uh, we continue to
see our active membership being
in the nineties. So right now
we're a little bit over 93,000.
We continue to see our employer
groups holding steady. In fact,
we've actually seen a slight
increase. Uh, before we've been
around the 302 now we're about
304. Some of that can be
contributed to charter schools
who are joining and becoming
part of the plan. Uh, but even
this last year, we did have a
couple other groups with a
couple other public entities
that actually decided.
To buy into the program so that
they can actually provide some
of these, uh, benefits to their
members.
Um as far as for the retirees,
we currently have participation
over 65,000, and that does range
between our different programs
that we offer as well as even in
relation to the retirees and
their dependents. As far as the
average age that we continue to
see when we look back at 2021,
and we can see we're about 60.7
that has changed as we are
seeing it to start to slightly
take up as far as the average
age of enrollment being about
61.58 now, so we have seen that
kind of creep up a little bit.
Um as far as the retirees under
age 55 we have about 1329. We'll
talk a little bit more about
some of the changes that the
board has done, but we know one
of them that was recently done
in 2021 was the minimum age of
55 for non enhanced. Uh uh,
retirees or members.
As far as our budget. Uh, we do
show our sources as far as what
we pay for benefits or AC a fees
as well as what are operating
and program support costs are
here.
Um, but really looking as part
of our sources once again, I was
kind of stating, as we kind of
look at the mix between our
revenue and expenses. Uh, we
also see our five sources being
the employee and employer
contributions as stated, but we
look at our retiree
contributions that we still
collect those premiums from our
retirees, the tax and Rev.
Suspense fund. We get
miscellaneous revenue, uh, for
being a part D, a whip plan.
There's some of those additional
dollars that we do receive, um,
as well as some performance
guarantees, if any of our
vendors are not making, uh many
of the requirements that we put
Earth as as far as providing
service to our members. We can.
We can receive some additional
dollars and then some of the
interest that we get real
minimal, But it is another
source that we do have in
regards to our funds and
dollars.
On slide eight is our mission
and our strategic goals, and I'm
not necessarily gonna read
these. Um as they are here on
the slide, But what I'm gonna
say is that these are part of
the decisions that really kind
of guide us and really guides
our board, um and really wanted
to make sure that we do provide
comprehensive and affordable,
uh, health insurance to our
members, so they don't take any
decision that's lightly when we
go and look at exactly what the
impact would be for any planned
change that we would make as far
as uh out of pocket costs that
our members would have They also
really consider, you know what
is the effect that the premiums
that we would be charging
Are gonna have on our retirees.
Um, so it's really a mission
that that that we take close to
heart as far as for our board
and our staff.
Um some of the other strategic
goals as I kind of mentioned
before, is, uh, really getting
out to to for customer service
and communication and education.
Uh, but we're also looking at
how do we extend the solvency of
the program, which we're talking
about today, looking at our
trust, fund contributions and
investment earnings and they're
really looking to avoid deficit
spending and I do have a slide
on that that we'll get into a
little bit more. That discusses
the reasons why we're trying to
avoid deficit spending.
And they're just the
administration where we're
constantly looking to see how we
can provide a better access and
better. Uh uh and and and really
kind of keep costs down as much
as possible for our for our
membership.
Now getting back to a little bit
on slide nine where I did state
that you know, there's been some
things that we've seen as far as
changes. One was the minimum
age. But here's a list of a lot
of other items, too, that are
bulleted out, uh, that our
agency as far as through our
board have taken action on to
really try and ensure that we
are keeping pace with health
care and making sure that we we
don't uh, you know, lose the
dollars and the work that we
have done over the years that we
continue to stay on track of
lowering those unfunded
liabilities, making sure that we
can provide, uh
Benefits to our to our retirees,
um, and making sure that it's
sustainable for for the future.
So once again looking at some of
the wellness options, we
continue to look at those
offerings. See how we can help
our membership. Uh, we've had
changes in our subsidy. Uh,
Currently we're standing at 64
for the retiree 36 for the
spouse and 0% for dependent.
That's something that hasn't
been changed in the last few
years. But it was something
where we've had changes before
to our subsidy levels and that
that affects our members.
Uh, we continue to negotiate the
rates as I did state before
exactly where we are in regards
to our self insured and how it
relates to our fully insured,
which we do on a yearly on a
every four year basis. We go out
to RFP. But even in between that
as as we continue to look at our
Medicare advantage plans as they
do their filing with the federal
government. We really worked to
negotiate those rates with them
as well to try and keep those
down for our retirees who are
participating with it. Uh, we've
also seen the 6000 as far as
life insurance that, uh, what
used to be paid by the retired
health care authority?
Did shift to where it's now.
100% paid by the member. Um so
these are just a brief, you
know, kind of synopsis of the
different changes and different
actions that our board has done
and we'll continue to look at it
as we move forward. Not only
this year in the future of what
we may have to do to continue
with, uh, the sustainability of
this program.
On slide number, 10 gets a
little bit more into some of our
solvency. Updates.
Um, as I did state before. It's
really kind of taken into
account for this particular
assessment or tool that we use.
It really takes into account.
what our projected revenues are,
so it's really looking at our
revenues that we are collecting
today, but really trying to
project them out for another 30
years. Um, it also looks at our
expenditures as far as what our
projected expended expenses are
looking at the medical and
prescription train. Uh uh,
trends.
Looking at the retiree ancillary
premiums, uh, looking at
administrative fees, Uh, agency
operating expenses. These are
all the things that we're
looking at to see exactly where
we running with our revenues
where we're running with our
expenses. Where this comes into
play is it allows us if we do
have extra revenue to be able to
contribute into our fund for the
retiree Health care authority.
Um to once again, you know, work
on where we are, As far as for
our funded status, uh, which
will get more into as well, Um,
we do have certain assumptions
that we take into into account
as far as payroll looking at our
discount rate of 7%. We
typically have set our medical
trend of eight and six, which
will continue to evaluate in
these upcoming meetings. Um,
with the with our board.
Uh, we also look at our planned
design changes and any PLA plan
rate changes, and all of those
do get taken into account for
our solvency. So a lot of times
when we look at our solvency,
we'll actually run different
models, um, giving different
choice and different effect of
what those, uh do to our
members. Um, and what those cost
impacts are so that our board
can actually take a review and
look at it, and they can see
this in many different ways on
looking at a 30 year outlook.
Um, but one of the other things
that we look at is also what are
some of the other patterns of
our of our membership. So as we
move a slight number 11 you can
see as far as our retiree plan.
Participation. Uh, we've seen a
shift or a migration in our
membership. Uh, before we had
more individuals who were on our
pre Medicare plan, which you can
see kind of in that middle there
in red. Uh, that's our pre
Medicare. Uh, membership that's
continued to kind of go down to
where we stand to about 11,000 a
day.
Um, we've actually seen more
growth in our Medicare as people
have been aging in to this
particular plan, or if they do
qualify for any disability, Uh,
where where they could receive
Medicare. They would also be in
this, but we've seen that grow
to over about 40,000 and then
the very top where we do
actually see some growth as well
as up in the top green. Uh,
that's our voluntary benefit. So
when I was talking about the
dental vision and life
insurance, uh, these are
individuals who are maybe not
part participating on one of our
medical plans. Uh, that could be
for various reasons. Maybe
they're able to get their
medical cover.
Through a spouse. Uh, maybe they
return back to work. And there
is some you know, uh, rulings as
far as that we have in place
that if you return back to work,
you're required to pick up the
insurance through your employer,
which I would say out of 99% of
the time. It's gonna be probably
cheaper than what we offer the
retired healthcare Authority.
Uh, you know, as far as when
you're mixed in with 18 year
olds, and you have a variety of
of of age within that, uh,
population that you're kind of
pulling and setting premiums a
lot of times, it's probably
gonna be cheaper than when
you're looking at what our
retiree group is when
We're talking about, you know,
the average age being in the
sixties? Um and we got members
who are all the way up to age
100, So it's a little bit
different as far as the usage of
the age group that we have, Uh
so a lot of times we see members
do that as well.
Um, So those are some of the
different reasons or options?
why they may postpone, uh,
picking up medical coverage with
us, but they may want to pick up
one of the other items in the
time being, Um, but that's how
how we see as far as some of
that additional growth that's
happening in our voluntary
Moving on to slide. 12 gives us
a little bit more of a snapshot
between our medical and
prescription self insured plans.
Uh, we do have on the very top
line. This is kind of just
showing our claims cost. Uh,
where we do see that it's
continued to kind of increase
over the years. Uh, we know that
as far as the average growth is
being about 5.3% for our pre
Medicare plans, and then it's
been about 5.9% for our Medicare
supplement plan. So this is
something that we really try to
manage as best as possible. But
there's a lot of factors that go
into these rising costs. Um, you
know, it could be the contracts
that you have with providers.
You could have your facilities.
It could be any new mandates
that could be passed at the
Federal level or the state
level. All of these things can
be different expenses That could
be either, uh, passed on to us
or passed on to our members. Um,
and there'll be some more
mandates that we'll be talking
about here. Uh, later in our
presentation, uh, particularly
one at the federal level.
Um, on the bottom chart. This
shows just as far as our self
insured premiums. It's kind of
showing where we've gone. Uh,
since 2017 where we were about
$223 to about 339, So we have
seen the increase of our of our
premiums on our our premier plan
And then our value going from
about 174 to about 264 as far as
part of that growth.
Um, for the plant plans we've
also seen in our Medicare
supplement plan. If you're
looking at the far right corner
that last column. Uh, you're
looking about 1 88.64 to about
$240. And this is for somebody
that is receiving the maximum
subsidy, but you can see as far
as what we've had in some of
those premium changes, uh, to
really ensure that we are still
able to make sure that we cover
our costs for those increasing
claims, but also making sure
that we are helping this program
to continue to progress forward.
And then the buyer Bottom right
corner is just showing our
enrollment counts. That's that
11,000 I was talking about for
pre Medicare, which is broken up
for the premier value. And then
that other uh 20,000 is our
supplement, And I know I did
State 40,000 earlier. That's
because the other 20,000 is on
our Medicare advantage plans,
which, as we turn to the next
slide, we also have a chart
there, uh, kind of showing
what's happened over the years
in regards to our Medicare
advantage plans. Now this one
does kind of paint a little bit
of a different picture in
regards to the cost and the fees
that our members and
We would be paying and that
we've actually seen pretty
stable or if anything, maybe
even some decrease. Uh, over the
years in our Medicare advantage,
with the exception of our
Presbyterian MA PD plans one and
two. Those are the two kind of
on the far right there that you
can see kind of, uh, being at
the the highest points. Uh,
we've actually seen, uh, just
recently, uh, one of the larger
OK?
One of the larger increases in
regards to our Medicare
advantage plans.
Um, but this does show a really
does show. You know, from 2017
to where we are in 2024, based
on calendar year basis, uh,
where we've really been able to
keep those costs down on our MA
PD plans. Now one of the things
was there was a reinsurance fee
that it used to be involved, and
we would always see this Yo yo
effect with our Medicare
advantage on every other year,
It would kind of go up and then
it would come back down because
they would suspend it or remove
it and they would go up the next
year. Uh, we don't see that Yo,
yo effect anymore. They've
They've They've stopped at that,
but it was something that we
would continue to see that would
impact
Plans. Uh, but we do know as we
continue to look this year. Uh,
some of the other items that
affected are gonna be the way
they get reimbursed and one of
the ways they get reimbursed is
based on their star ratings. So
C MS has some star ratings
ratings. Um, and that determines
exactly how much reimbursement
these health plans are gonna
get. They're better The Star
rating. If they can get 4.5. I
mean, they could even achieve
five. But if they're at 4.5,
they're gonna get some of the
maximum reimbursement That's
gonna help some of those
programs that they can utilize
those dollars from the federal
government to help offset some
of the
That they would have to to, uh,
receive in premiums from our
members. Um, but on the flip
side if they are receiving lower
star ratings anywhere from you
know, 3 3.5. They're not gonna
receive as much of those dollars
that's gonna put more of a
burden on our members and
because we do share in that cost
and subsidizing the premium,
it's actually gonna provide more
expense to our agency as well
for that premium portion that we
make up so once again as we look
at our solvency and look at the
sustainability of this program,
it's something we want to work
diligently to try. And, uh, you
know, contain
Cost as much as possible.
Um, one of the things that we
are looking at for 2025. That's
gonna be adding some additional
costs is gonna be the inflation
reduction act and we'll get into
a little bit more detail on that
on a separate slide, Uh, but we
know that is gonna have an
impact on our Medicare plans all
around.
On slide 14. This gets into our
solvency model. Uh, we can see
here on our solvency model. Um,
as as far as the the most
current one that we have in
place is we are reworking those,
uh, numbers and those models for
our upcoming annual board
meeting, But we could see that
we start deficit spending in
fiscal year 2033.
Um, as stated before, as one of
our strategic goals is really
trying to avoid this, And the
reason why is is is once we
start to have our expenses,
which we can see there on the
right side and the light blue
versus our revenue in the dark
blue. Uh, we we have to start
pulling that money from
somewhere else when we don't
have the revenue to cover those,
And so that means we would have
to start pulling from our funds.
We start pulling from our funds.
We start losing some of the
gains that we're getting some of
the, uh you know, uh, results
that we would be achieving from
Being able to invest all of it,
so we do have still that long
term strategy of growing it. I
do believe at some point in the
future, they'll probably be a
change in that strategy where
you know we'll probably start
looking at having a little bit
more liquidity and maybe helping
to offset some of those costs.
But I don't think we're there
yet.
Um, and we'll show a little bit
more to one of our other
assessments and tools through
gas B, where it kind of gives us
a picture of where our current
funded status is, Um, but it'll
be something that we continue to
monitor for when that day does
come
As we continue to move on to
slide, 15. I won't go through
every little item here, but I
know it's been a question
before when I presented this
group are what are some of the
assumptions that you are taking
into this? So we do have a list
there. That really does kind of
break down a little bit of what
the revenue is. It really looks
at with some of the different
costs are what are medical
trends being? Uh, what are we
looking at? As far as you know,
the prescription increases? What
are we looking at for a Web
plans? Um, so there's a lot of
different things as far as what
we take into account. And so
these are some of the different
levers of tools that we
Do have control over and some of
these that are that are set. You
know whether it's looking at
some of the, um you know, pay
raises that that go into effect.
We do get a little bit that we
see as far as from that income
that may be passed on from the
Legislature as far as those
approved increases, um so that
would be a little bit more
revenue that would come into us,
So that's something that we know
on a yearly basis. When that
comes out, we do take that and
we put that into the model. Um,
of course, it's hard to predict
the future ones. But we do our
best that we can to to try and
achieve AAA. Good little, uh,
assessment of it and and what we
would
For it.
Um, so I won't take too much
more on that. But that's where
you'll receive a lot of
information in regards to our
solvency. I'm more than happy to
get more in depth of that at any
particular meeting if needed in
the future.
Um, but moving on to slide 16.
This is that federal legislation
that I was talking about?
Um, this is the inflation
reduction Act. It was a federal
law that was passed and signed
into law in August. 16th of
2022. There was a many different
components that you will see as
far as in 2023, where they did
have a cap on insulin, Uh,
providing a little bit more
security to our members. We know
in 2024. They were adding a cap
to the catastrophic tear and
then for 2025, which you can see
kind of in that box there. Uh,
one of the biggest changes is
the 2000 annual out of pocket
maximum for our retirees.
Um, So this is something that is
taking place? It doesn't mean
that retirees pay 2000 out of
their pocket. There's actually
different calculations that go
in, depending on the cost of the
prescriptions, other items, but
it does cap it at $2000. So with
this change, which is one of the
biggest ones, probably since, uh
Medicare part D did come around
in the early two thousands or
mid two thousands. Um, this This
is gonna have a big effect on
us. Um, there's different
projections that are being that
are being shown and illustrated
that this could have an increase
of anywhere from 35 to $50 PM PM
in in costs.
So while we see some of the
reimbursement that C MS is is
giving a little bit lower on
their Medicare advantage plans,
This is another factor,
depending on how these, uh,
reimbursements are gonna be,
too, which is some of the
additional data they'll be
coming in at the end of July
Beginning of August, Uh, but we
already know that there's gonna
be a cap.
With this cap as it relates to
us where we're self insured. We
do have to pick up that
difference of that cost. So
while our retirees, uh which we
are happy for them that they got
some better protections. Uh,
please know that that money has
to come from somewhere so that
money does have to come from,
you know our sources of revenue
that we collect, which is gonna
add to our expenses as we
continue to look at those two
combinations. Uh, we do believe
that we will be able to, uh
You know, handle this change,
but we want to also see what
happens to the year, but it's
gonna be a discussion that we
have at the annual board meeting
is whether or not do we need to
take any action to help address
some of this, uh, whether it be
through a little bit of a
premium change or plan design
change. Um, so we'll have some
modeling. We'll talk with our
board a little bit, but that'll
be part of the discussion that
we have, um some of the other
things that we see with this
model that really changes. It,
too, is the way we get
reimbursed. Uh, previously the
in the catastrophic tier the
federal reinsurance was about
80%, and then we would pick up
20% as far as the plan
liability.
That's changing this year as
well. So we now 60% is gonna
have to be picked up by us, so
that's a 40% increase in the
catastrophic tier. We see where
the federal government's going
from 80% to 20%, and then the
other 20% will be picked up by
manufacturers. Um, if it's a
brand drug, so we're seeing a
big shift, not only the cat, but
also how we get, uh, reinsured,
so we do know there's gonna be a
cost impact to us, and that's
where we're working diligently
to really figure that out and
see how that's gonna affect us.
Um, now for our Medicare
advantage plan.
We are anticipating that there's
going to be some of this impact,
too. They're having to take this
into account as far as with
their underwriters and actuaries
to see what they do on the
Medicare advantage. Plans. Um
you know, as far as how much
they can stay competitive, how
much they can absorb. Uh, but
what are gonna be some of those
premiums that are gonna be
passed on to our members and
that'll be the work that we
continue to do as well in July
and August as they get, uh, the
final numbers as it relates to
Medicare, Part D and some of the
reimbursements, they receive
some more to come on that but
definitely want to make sure uh
to point
Now you know what does impact us
and what can affect our our our
bottom line as far as expenses
and take away from some of those
revenues we we incur.
But as we look at slide number
17, this really gets into one of
those other, uh, tools and one
of these other reviews that we
have, uh, which is the Gatsby?
Um for the government,
Accounting and Standards board.
This is something similar to
that our pensions do as well.
Um, And so this kind of
breakdowns what we're looking at
and really what I like to
highlight based on the last
study that was completed at the
end of last year was really what
we have in green. I mean, I
think that's kind of really
shows a picture of where we are
in 2023 of where our total OPEC
liabilities standing at.
$3 billion. But if we look back
just the two years in 2021, we
were at 4.4.
2022 is 3.4. So we've had
progress in being able to lower
our total OPEC liabilities.
As we continue to look down a
little bit further, we can look
at our, uh, net E liabilities.
Uh, where we have continued to
see those decrease as well by,
you know, over $600 million when
we're looking to the previous
year of 2022, where it was at
2.3 prior to that in 2021, it
was 3.2. So there's been
progress and it continues to be
progress as we continue to show
the history as it moves for the
retiree health care authority
not to say that we don't have
those obstacles that we're still
trying to face. So you know, as
I mentioned on the previous
slide, uh but we continue to see
some improve.
As far as our funded status, Uh,
the very bottom line in green.
Uh, once again, you can see we
are currently at 44%, where we
had previously been at 33 and 25
and 2022 so once again some
progress that's being made being
met. And it's one thing that I
know when I look at other public
sector health plans. Um we
continue to be one of the top
ones. I mean, we keep it kind of
kind of, uh, encroaching up on
there. Uh, I don't know if we've
we've quite hit the top 10
because some of the studies that
are put out there don't really
give that detail yet because
they're a little outdated.
And so they don't really take
into account some of the
improvements that we've made, um
but it but it does show that we
continue on the right path and
that we are continuing to climb
and and kind of be able to model
I would say for a lot of our
other states that are out there
and what we'd be able to
achieve.
Um, to kind of give a little
bigger, you know, historical
outlook or trend on this If you
look on slide, 18. I kind of
took it a little bit further
where you're not just looking in
the last two years. Uh, but
rather looking back in 2006.
You know, we started as far as a
program in 1990. But when we
look at 2006 where we were
standing, we were only at 3.62%
as far as our funded status, So
we have made some
Uh, you know, big growth and
going from 2006 where we were at
3.62% to where we look at a 2023
where we have 44%.
Um, so I think it's something
that we can definitely, uh,
applaud many of the, uh, you
know, prior, uh, staff and and
and the board on some of the
decisions and some of the the,
uh, changes that they've made in
order to get us to where we are,
where we continue to be on a
little better footing, uh, to
ensure that when we do have
things like federal legislation
or other things that may come
out have additional expenses. We
can kind of weather those storms
a little bit knowing that we're
in a little bit better place
than what we look back in the
past where it could really have
really hurt us and put us in a
in a in a hard situation. Uh,
Where we had to maybe make
drastic changes rather than kind
of leveling it out and and
making some smaller ones at a
time.
As we continue to move to 19.
This does give us a nice little
picture in regards to our trust
fund over the last 10 years,
Looking at from May of 2014 to
May of 2024. This does show as
far as the growth of our trust
fund where we currently do.
Stand at $1.4 billion part of
this was was was just as I said
the the management of the
program what we've been able to
put as contributions but also
our investment returns as it's
continued to grow. Uh so we
continue to see some some, uh,
of this. That really works into
our solvency and into that
unfunded status. This is that
big.
Piece of it. You know, we can
look at our revenue that we get
on yearly basis. Uh, but this is
the fun that's really helping us
to lower those. And so this is
the reason why we want to
continue to grow it. Try and
avoid some of that deficit
spending so that we can keep
lowering those unfunded
liabilities. These are the
liabilities that all of our
employers who participate with
us do have to report on their
financial statements every year.
Um, so the better we improve,
the better helps them with some
of their bond ratings. Anything
may be taken into account as far
as those expenses. Uh so we
really work hard to to try and
achieve that.
So with this, you know, as it
looks good, there are other
methods will continue to take
this into account. We'll
continue to review our solvency
and we'll continue to review Our
Gatsby and we look forward to
seeing the results as far as
from this July board meeting,
but also from our gas B, which
typically will show the results,
Uh, come November time frame
again, uh, where we hopefully
are optimistic that with some of
the additional growth in this
particular fund and some of the
work that we're doing that will
continue to see Uh, hopefully
those unfunded liabilities uh,
be decreased and and and have a
little bit more to our portion.
Looking at slide 20 as far as
wanting to cover a few items as
far as legislative action. I
know we talked about those
historic contributions talking
about they've continued to grow.
Uh, this is something that we
had brought up about eight times
to the Legislature in the last
12 years of nothing within the
last couple of years. Um
But we do know that we continue
to evaluate this to see if we're
collecting the appropriate
dollars. Um, right now we're not
anticipating asking for any
money as far as for the sub cup
and Legislature, but we continue
to review it as far as what we
need and so, like I said in
reviewing those historical
contributions where we sit
today, and if there is a time
where the future we may have to
come back
Um, but we
P to change would really have an
effect on reducing the unfunded
liabilities. It would definitely
protect against any rating
downgrades. As I talked before
I'll bring Pref fund our future
benefits and really just making
sure that we can keep these
benefits relevant. Uh, the last
thing is we We We don't wanna
lose sight of this where we have
to really make aggressive
changes that this no longer
becomes a benefit to our
retirees. So we continue to
monitor that, Uh, the last item
was a joint resolution to
protect the retiree health care
funds, um, through the
Constitution of New Mexico or
the New Mexico Constitution.
Uh, this was brought up in this
last, uh, legis legislative
session. Um, this was something
that didn't make it to the
finish line. Uh, but what we
were looking for is really to
kind of do something similar to,
uh, the pension plans, Uh, where
they do have their trust funds
that are protected, uh, through
each of their organizations in
the New Mexico Constitution, and
we're really looking to do the
same thing. Um, we are not
necessarily looking as far as
worried about the retired
healthcare authority. We look
forward to working with all of
our ibac plan Partners. We look
forward to
At the A. That's now part of
that I back partner, but we're
really looking to do is protect
the dollars as those amounts
that I show you that are the
employee and employer
contributions that are really
going into this particular fund,
and that's where we want to make
sure that we're protecting this
particular trust fund for those
members and those beneficiaries
since they made those
contributions. We wanna make
sure that it goes back to them
in some form or fashion,
depending where health care goes
in the future. Uh, we know
healthcare is is a very
important topic. But there's a
lot of things that do happen
from year to year. We continue
to see changes with it.
But we wanna make sure that
we're protecting that those
dollars, uh, from the
individuals such as myself, who
are actively contributing. So,
uh, the board is looking to
bringing legislation. Uh, back
again for this upcoming session.
Uh, we'll be looking at the
language reviewing it again,
seeing if there's any necessary
changes to it. Uh, but we do
anticipate something on the
horizon. Uh, in that regard
Uh, Mr Chair and Committee
members. That does bring us to
the last slide, which does have
my contact information. If at
any point there is any
additional information you want
regarding our program, um, how
we're doing, or maybe even just
a follow up to what takes place
at the, uh, annual July board
meeting. I'd be more than happy
to talk with you. So please see
my email and phone number. Uh,
where I could be reached, Uh,
you know, at the retired
Healthcare authority.
Uh, with that I do stand for
questions and thank you for your
time today.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Neil. Uh, go to our members or
Questions.
Represent bore.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Thank you. Mr You do a really
good job of presenting in your
information is very complete.
Um, I had a question on page.
Pages.
18
I was looking at your funded
ratio.
And you have 44.16%. So does
that mean that 55.84% is
unfunded?
Is that your unfunded liability
because I just took 100 and
subtracted it.
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh,
Representative, uh, Bargo? Uh,
yes. So right now we only have
44%. So it is. The difference is
what we have as far as our
unfunded liabilities, So that's
where we continue to to try and
progress to lower those, Uh,
because that is what our our
employers are having to report
on their their statements as
well. And I and I give you a lot
of credit for raising that from
2006
The 220.
Um 2023 that that is
significant, Uh, Mr Chair, but
My question is my concern is and
and just for the record I do
receive, um
Your benefits. So, um, as a
retiree
Um, so the employee employer
contributions I realize across
the state you have smaller
governmental entities and larger
and so they contribute at
different rates, right? Is that
correct?
Mr Chair and represent
everybody actually contributes
the same percentage. So
regardless of who the employer
entity is as an employee, you're
gonna pay 1%. And then your
employer is gonna pay 2% with
the exception of our enhanced
members, which are the police
and fire if they're in an
enhanced plan through Pera, then
that's where they would pay that
additional 1.25 and the
additional, uh, 2.5. So that's
the only difference between the
ratios. All of us pay the same
percentage. So would you be
looking at that?
Um, percent.
As a as possible an increase if
I mean to fund your unfunded
liability at some point in time,
If you said you're having a
conference coming up or
something, Um, would you be
looking at those percentages and
contributions? Mr. Chair
Representative? Yes. So it has
been in the past that we have
looked at them. Um, it'll be a
discussion that we always do
have with our legislative
committees. Uh, we do understand
that there's been impact to
employees as well for some of
the pension systems where
they've had gone up, so we've
tried to be very respectful and
and trying
To, you know, hit them in the
employees all at once. Uh, but
as we continue to evaluate where
we stand on a revenue basis to
the expenses that could be a
topic that we bring up forth
again. I know the last one we
have. We were looking for a half
a percent increase. Uh, that
would have been split up between
the employee and employer. Uh,
unfortunately, we had not been
able to get that to the finish
line. We've gotten close. Uh,
but not have it completed and
signed.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair,
and I would be very interested
in the outcome of that, um,
meeting that you're having
coming up.
It was just that discussion. So
if you can get back to me on
that, I just wanted to mention
Mr Chair that the, um
The amount the number of, uh,
health care providers that they
have is really, um they have a
really
Great benefit plan.
uh, at various levels, and I
think that that is, you know, we
don't wanna lose our benefit
plans. Uh, and the benefits that
are provided Mr Chair as a
result of, you know,
On the other hand, we don't know
also don't want to pay more into
the plan. If if we can, um, you
know
If we
Hopefully, that won't happen.
That's um, the the My Last
question. Mr Chair is you,
didn't you? You kind of alluded
your to your liquidity, but I
don't see any information in
here that talks about your
liquidity.
Uh, So, Mr Chair, uh, represent
Bargo, Uh, so we didn't get into
all the necessarily different
funds. Uh, but kind of as as
they would in the previous
presentation where they were
talking about the different
entities that do participate
through the S IC. We are one of
those as entities, so it's based
on the funds that are made
available through the S IC that
we have, Um, as far as for our
investments Now we do have the
different asset allocation that
our board does make a
determination on which is why we
go through a previously a
biannual.
Allocation review to kind of
look at it to see if we're going
to hit our targets. Um, but with
our new, uh, RFP that was
completed. Um, As soon as that
contract is signed, I'll be able
to release the name of who's
gonna be providing those
consulting services, But we're
expecting a lot more reporting
that will be available so we can
continue to share but we do have
the standard report that S IC
does provide to us and more than
happy to provide that or share
that. I'm just be interested in
knowing what you liquidity is,
um, in the event of a of a
downfall just
If you could show me that
valuation, I'd be kind of
interested in that.
Mr J represent Bogo. We'd be
more than happy to provide
information on that. Uh, right
now we do. Look at the, uh, long
longer funding period of of our
investments. But there are some
debates on the particular pets
and that has a little bit more
liquidity obviously than the
others that I'm sure we could
provide something. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you. Representative
centers of the
Um
Thank you, mister President.
This is a really good
presentation. Um and I was
impressed. Also on page 18, with
the difference between the
unfunded liability
Um, from 2006 to 2023. How did
you do that?
Uh, Mr Chair, and, uh, Senator
Lopez, Um
Or the retiree health care
authority. It's been a very
slow, long process with little
changes along the way. So when I
talked about some of the the
changes over the last, I think,
11 years on that, uh,
particular, uh, previous slide.
Uh, that's what it's been. You
know, some of it has been
looking as far as what you know
our networks look like, Um it's
really been looking as far as
negotiating contracts you know,
on our MA PD. We've seen a
decrease. So that's helped us.
Um we've looked at as far as
where some of the rules that we
have in place. It was not a
particular
AAA, um, popular one when we
entered the minimum age of 55
and 25 years of a service. Uh,
but it was something that was
gonna help provide more
sustainability. Uh, to this
program and help build up these
funds, um, so it's been a a
matter of a lot of different
things. Some of it's been the
premium increases and being very
mindful of what our medical
trend is and how much we need to
increase our premiums. It's been
looking at plan design, You know
what is the cost share for our
members, which we do in
evaluation of our plan design
against I back
Just to see where we stand, Um,
making sure that we are
comparable to our active plans
and that we're able to provide
for our retirees. Um, so it's
really been a a lot of different
things. I mean, Also, it's our
investments. They've grown.
We've been able to make
contributions to them, Um as
well as with those returns, so
that's helping to lower those,
um, unfunded liabilities with
those returns as well, So it's
been many different things that,
uh, it's been lots of the
previous board and and staff
that have worked very
diligently. Um and just really
looking year to year.
Of just making sure we're
keeping pace and doing a little
bit better. Uh than what? What
The trend is so we can make sure
we're adding to that, uh, that
that fund
Thank you, Mr Chair. So thinking
about this unfunded liability.
How do you predict a liability
when you don't know how many
retirees are gonna participate
in the plan when they retire? As
you said, some people choose
their
I think you said their spouse's
plan. Some people, I guess would
choose the AC, a
Um So how? How do you calculate
unfunded liability?
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator CIA.
Lopez I. I would love to say
that I had the designations and
the education to to make that
assessment of it, But that's
partly what we rely on our
actuaries for. They really dig
into it, and they look at a kind
of what they see with other
plans out there. They do have
different studies that they take
into account what they're
looking as far probability. They
look at our history and then it
helps them kind of look at what
we're looking for, for and for
the future. Now, sometimes they
may not be able to predict as
far as what our growth in and
Aga
You know other entities that are
joining to participate as that
might be a little bit different
because we've got most of the
cities, counties and and
entities participating with us.
There's only a few exceptions
out there, so a lot of them are
smaller, So I don't think it
would have a big impact. But
they are taking a lot of these
factors into account. Uh when
they're helping us to do these
studies, um now they won't do
anything beyond the 30 years. So
a lot of our studies show 30
years which, even if you talk to
them now, there's like health
care changes so much within five
years, uh, that it's hard for
these predictions, so they
really try to keep it within
that window.
They're the ones that really
assist us in in kind of
determining those. Some of those
factors that are probably a
little outside of my expertise
as well.
So how many people do you think?
Retire, like what's the
percentage of people who retire
and then participate in the in
the plan?
Um, Mr Chair and Senator CIA.
Lopez. To be honest, I don't
know exactly what the percentage
is. And I apologize that I wish
it was something that we could
maybe pull up. It'd be something
we would probably have to work
very closely with not only per
ER and B to see you know how
many retirees they have, and
then maybe we could do a cross
reference to see how many of
those retirees are electing with
us? Um, so maybe that's
something we can, you know, kind
of, maybe work with them to see
if we can get a little better
idea. Um, I know how many
enrollees we have and
And I have those numbers. Not
with me today, um, necessarily
on what we receive on a month to
month, But we do calculate the
number of enrollments we
process. I just don't know how
that relates to, uh, the
individuals that are retiring. I
don't know how many are retiring
in a month, but it's something
we can look at and see if we can
get them. Mr. Chair. I would be
interested in knowing that
because that
That is obviously one of the
calculations that would go into
calculating the unfunded
liability.
You know, there's a whole issue
with unfunded Li 40 40% is is
too low, but I don't think 100%
is necessary for a fund that has
the backing of the state. Um so,
Mr Jared, I'm interested now
it's calculated.
Mr Chair, said Lopez. I'll also
talk with my actuaries, too.
They do these Gatsby studies and
I know they actually do pull in
data from, uh Pera and ER B. So
let me see if they actually have
that percentage on hand. Uh, if
not, we'll see what else we can
do to get that for you. But I do
know we do some calculations
also in our gas B, where they
pull that in, so it might be
something they may have
available.
II. I would be interested. Um
and then I was surprised. So the
A R a. We been putting this 200.
2000 annual match, Max.
Maximum. They didn't provide any
funding for that.
Uh,
Mr Chair and Senator C Lopez. So
when they put the max in, they
actually even did the opposite.
They actually took away more
funding so well. This will
probably help them as they work
to shore up Medicare. It
actually changed a lot for a lot
of other plant sponsors, and
it's not just us. It's a lot of
other people from other states
that we've been talking with
that realize there's going to be
an extra burden being taken on,
uh, to help cover some of the
impact of this cost. Um, and
making sure not to just, you
know, push everything through a
premium increase onto our
retire.
Um, but it'll be something we
have to talk about and see how
we can, you know?
Take some type of action, maybe
to help offset a portion of it
and continue to review it over
the year on what that's gonna
be, But we will be seeing
probably less in that
reimbursement going from what
they normally provided at 80% to
now where they're gonna provide,
You know, a lower percentage
with them and the manufacturer.
Oh, interesting, And and this
policy is a secondary to
Medicare once they
When people in relation to Mr
Chair, Uh, Senator C Lopez in
relation to as far as our
policies. We are secondary, but
when it comes to Medicare
prescription part D programs you
can only have one so we are
completely responsible for those
costs. Now there are rules and
things that you know, Of course,
Medicare has in place that we
have to follow. But when it
comes to the cost, we are 100%
on the hook as it relates to our
supplement plan, which is an a
whip employer group waiver plan.
Uh, it's a little bit different
with our Medicare advantage,
plans. The health plans are
gonna be on the hook because
those
Fully insured, But you can bet
they're gonna bake some of that
cost into their premiums.
OK, thank you. And finally, as
you know, I had a real concerns
about the way the amendment was
drafted last year, So I really
do hope. I mean, it was more
protective of any other.
More protective of the pension
plans, And as I said, I would
really be happy to see all of
all of people's retirement. I
mean, no
All people's health care, uh, be
protected in our constitution,
But that's not realistic. Um,
and so I I'm gonna very look
very carefully at the language
of the plan. As you know, I. I
was concerned with it, Um,
creating basically a liability
to the General Refund General
fund in perpetuity. That was
pretty significant. Oh, thank
you, mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, representative of Bur
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Director for the
presentation. I'm gonna follow
up a little bit on the senator's
questions because I think
they're very important.
You went through. I mean the
change in what's funded
That you show on page 18 from
89% on funded down to fix 56%
unfunded.
In 16 years.
Is incredibly impressive. Um,
and on page nine, I think is
where you list all of the
changes that have been made to
accomplish this.
Um so kind of squeezed the
program massage it tweet it as
much as possible to get to this
point. Um and I look at this
list and I see
Decreasing the subsidies and
that is the amount that the
retirees get for their health
care, right.
Um
Removing dependent Children.
Doing that minimum age of 55
with a service requirement.
Narrowing the number of networks
they can choose from.
There's
I'm not sure what's left. So
that's my question. What is the
board considering to
What would be the next three
things that could be done?
Um, to try and continue this
upward trend of funding or
funded ratio.
Mr Chair, Representative,
Figuero? Uh, yes. I mean, so one
of the options that we we
typically always look at on a
yearly basis. Um, is the premium
increases. It's something that
we don't necessarily like. We
really try to, uh, work with the
board to see where we can find.
Uh, a
In between scenario where maybe
we're not impacting him with
8% or 6%, that we would need to
stick with medical trend. Maybe
there's a little bit lower. Uh,
you know, premium increase that
we could do that we would stand
up kind of make sure that we're
keeping up with trend because we
don't want to fall too far
behind, so we'll be looking at
the the increase in seeing
exactly what percentage maybe we
may have to take into account
this year. I mean, that could
range. Uh, the other thing would
be looking at, you know, Plan
design. Um, there is planned
design elements Where, uh, you
know, in a case like this,
where, you know, maybe there's
higher protections.
Maybe we look at a little bit
more of a cost share from a
member standpoint. Um, since we
are providing more of that
protection that they wouldn't
see out of pocket that we could
look at, like deductibles or
something else, So we're gonna
be evaluating one option where
maybe we could look at that, Um,
because even with that, $2000
cap, it doesn't mean that
somebody would pay 2000 it
actually, depending on the
different calculations, somebody
could pay $100, and it could
reach that cap, and that's what
all they would pay for the year.
Uh, the other thing with that
2000 cap, depending on what
prescriptions are getting, they
can actually spread out that
cost over the year. It's a new
program that's going into place.
It does have an administrative
cost to us, but it does help
retirees if they don't have the
money up front that they can
actually pay it on a monthly
basis for the full year in
regards to the prescription, so
another program that was put out
to the inflation reduction Act,
Uh, M three. P is what they're
referring it to as but that's
something else that was put out
there. Um, so those are a couple
of the different, uh, handles
that we could We could pull. I
mean, of course, you know, as
you stated
You could once again, you know,
look at you know subsidies that
could be looked at as far as um
What's been in some of the
reports previously is whether or
not our minimum wage is is is
appropriately set. Um, I know we
kind of compared this against
the, uh, pension plans when they
had kind of changed from the 25
to 30. We were kind of, you
know, moving in relation and and
understanding some of the, uh
uh, legislative reports that
came out and we were trying to
take everything into account. I
think when that action took
place, um
But those would be some hard
things and once again things
that would impact our members.
So, uh, when you say options, we
have them, but I think those
levers are getting a little bit
tighter on exactly what we can
do.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Director. I think, um,
that's the understanding of one
of the committee to realize we
have, uh, squeezed membership
about as much as we can. It's I
think going to be necessary for
the state to step up here pretty
soon. If you look at page 14. My
concern is about the timing that
area where you will go or
predicting that you will go into
deficit spending.
Um, and your predictions on
investments that 7% target.
I love it, but we almost never
hit it. We just heard the
presentation from S IC. They're
not even hitting it so
If we don't edit.
And
That orange box is extended and
you have to do dig into deficit
spending of the fund for a
longer period of time.
We run the risk of digging a
hole. We can't get out of
And that time period.
Mr Chair is the same time period
that we are looking at seeing.
Reductions potentially in our
state revenues, so I would
really like us to consider
addressing this issue.
Sooner while we have funds
rather than later.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Very well. Thank you. Um, I just
have a couple of things, but I
For the members, So we're doing
very well time wise, so we'll
probably try to start at one.
And like I did mention we do
have lunch for us.
Um
What I was gonna ask you. Neil
is so
On the winner. The negotiations.
Uh, Mr Chair as far as for
negotiations, we just completed
the request for proposals. Um,
process that we have to go
through procurement. And that
actually was this year where the
new contracts are going into
effect as we speak today, so we
went through that whole process
reviewed them. Um, uh, scored
them and then made our selection
as well. As you know, any place
that we need to negotiate. We we
We did that as well. Pretty
much the prior three months in
order to have the contracts in
place today.
OK, thank you. And, uh
For how long is this?
Mr Chair, So these particular
contracts are set for four
years.
Um they are renewable. Each year
is the way we do have them set
up. There is also some
termination clauses. So in
theory, if we needed to, we
could we could do it sooner. Um,
but we do have them where we
have the ability of renewing for
up to three additional years so
we can have four years on our
medical dental vision. Uh, as
far as our life and our
prescription. Uh, those are four
years as well, but they're
actually on a different cycle of
when we would bring those up.
Uh, the only thing that I would
say when we do look at these is
it does take a lot of lead time
as we do, the RFP and the
negotiation of these contracts.
Typically takes us a good year
and a half out in order to go
through this whole process just
to get to where we are today. So
it is AAA long process of going
through of setting up your RFP
of exactly the criteria you
want, and then being able to
review that and then get into
negotiations.
He? The less part to this is so
And so
Legislative members and you know
to our entire, um
Group that participate.
How do we know?
I guess the range of the
negotiation was it. A good
negotiation, Was it? There's
Certain areas that we didn't
meet target.
And, uh, is it also possible to
maybe have a report on that?
Uh, Mr Chair? Yes. Uh, you know,
once the the I think the, um
Prose period. As that relates to
us. I think once that's you know
completed, I know there's some
information and elements that we
could either pull out from the
RFP. Or we could just do a
direct comparison of what our
current benefits look like as
well as our premiums. Kind of
like I did on those charts
previously, uh, showing where
were our cost may have gone up
or or you know how it relates to
the RFP. The one thing that I
will say that was probably the
hardest, Uh
Aspect of the RFP this year was
in the Medicare space, um,
particularly on our Medicare
advantage because of the
inflation reduction Act. It was
making it really hard for any of
our vendors to be able to narrow
down a particular cost for that,
So that is one area that we
anticipate that, uh there'll be
some more conversations as the
information and data. Um, but
this is happening across the US.
Everybody that's handling these
plans is kind of going through
the same thing. Uh, but more
than happy to bring some more.
Information back in the future.
Very well. Thank you. Uh, the
last part is, uh, just a
comment.
I have had this from
You know?
Early, uh, say a good
Good old.
And I brought this to my
attention.
Is they do value?
A retirement plan.
They say when you get to a
certain age
You don't realize how important
this is.
Which is almost as good or even
more.
You know, then the plan that you
receiving
So it is a very important part,
you know, and we really have to
look at it and
All of us. You know, we just
need to work and help you with
and
We're helping everyone in the
state. So again. Thank you for
your
Mystery chair. You brought up
something. Uh, it'd be helpful
to know how many people
Um
Are on the plans and then leave
the plans.
Because I believe that there are
some off market.
Off the bar market. Uh,
offerings.
That are attracting people, so
it'd be helpful to
And I followed those numbers.
Thank you.
Mr Chair, Senator Stannis. We
can try and look at that. We We
do see a lot that takes place
where sometimes people come off
and then they come back on, Uh,
not every case. Uh, there's
sometimes where I do see them.
They'll go off off market. But
then I have seen in many cases
where somebody will go off for a
year and not realize that the
premium they're being offered,
uh, did not hold up when they
had to pay extra cost for
prescription. So we we
We see it coming and going, But
we can definitely see what we
could dive into and and and see
if we can pull some of those
numbers and in that in that
regard
Thanks again, You know, Thank
you. Thank you to everyone in
our audience and members, so
we'll
One and we do have our lunches
with us.
So
We're on recess.
