members of the committee,
Carolyn Tobias, Berlio County
Economic Development Manager and
part of the project team for the
I-40 trade.
So we did
provide some handouts for today,
and we are talking about the
I-40 trade port corridor, which
is a multi-state project and uh
multi-partnership with uh
between um us.
in locally in New Mexico,
Arizona, the port of LA and uh
the USDOT.
And uh private partners as well.
Um
So on slide 2, really what our
public objectives was really
looking at, looking at a project
is, especially with our supply
chain in efficiencies that we've
had in our um economy and also
wanting to be able to move
towards a greener economy as
well, is how do we kind of
Bolster both those objectives,
and how do we also build out
future private investment into
our local.
Economies, and so that's really
where this idea of being able to
partner with the port, being
able to be more efficient way of
providing goods to not only
The manufacturers in the
southern part of the country and
the the Midwest, but being able
to make things move a lot easier
for us. So that's where this
project was a born from.
Um
Our public partners, as I said
before, are the port of uh Los
Angeles and Long Beach, uh, city
of Kingman, Arizona, city of
Winslow, Arizona, Bernalillo
County, Sandoval County, uh, the
village of Los Lunas and the
USDOT Build America Bureau.
And each of these cases, it was
how do we leverage all of the
business activity that's
happening along I-40, that's
happening at the port of LA
which is the largest and most
active port in the Western
Hemisphere. How do we take that
business activity that rolls by
us each day and stop being a
bridge communities to other
communities in the country and
actually take advantage of that
and build the infrastructure
that we need to see more private
investment happen in our
community.
Um, for the shippers.
And for the truck manufacturers
and uh the private parties, it
really helps to meet their
corporate sustainability goals
being involved in this project,
enhances the truck mobility
services and really supports
manufacturing and distribution
operations that really need more
efficient at the core of their
logistics and and functions. Um,
so,
Print, uh, private sector that
we've been talking to that are
really um inspired by this
project and want to um make
their commitments further, our
our
Um, companies like Amazon, Home
Depot, um, Volvo, um,
Specific uh harbor, uh, FedEx,
and then on the clean energy
side, terawatt, because we're
not, again, not just talking
about how do we move warehousing
logistics and manufacturing
pieces, but how do we
Change over from a fossil fuel
economy and move over into a
more clean energy economy,
especially in the way that our
goods are shipped through the
country.
Um
For the private.
Consortium, which is going to be
making up of our shippers, truck
manufacturers, and then, um,
The railroads and investors that
are gonna be investing into
these operations.
And also on the uh
To
On the automation piece, not
strictly related to just
Uh, automobile automation, but
other automation as well is
we're partnering with UC
Berkeley as well. Um, so there's
a Rav grant, which is rural
autonomous vehicles grant that's
going to be testing vehicles of
all different sizes in rural
areas and in the public areas,
um,
UC Berkeley chose to partner
with us, and that means that
we're partnering with UNM and
the Pueblo of Laguna as well to
do this testing if we're
awarded, and we hopefully we
should hear about that this
week.
Um
This is project is really a
public-private partnership and
working together, OK, and again
across multi different states,
and as really meant to catalyze
with public investment into some
key public infrastructure that
we need to have our sites ready,
and I think it's probably an
element that Mr. Roper was
talking about earlier with the
uses of the LIDA funds, um, but
being able to have our sites
ready to actually deliver sites
for development to happen.
Um
And
Once that public infrastructure
is in place, a lot of times the
private invest infrastructure or
private investment and follow,
and that's where this unique P3
opportunity, um, takes place for
us.
Um
And once again, this is, this
next map on, on the next slide
is really showing the how the
court of
The country's goods really
travel through I-40 and through
the BN a rail line.
Um, and coming from the port of
uh uh LA and and Long Beach, and
really showing that all these
goods that passed through us.
But don't stop here, or we don't
add value to them, and the rule
of the proposition is how do we
do that? And how do we create
that value for um job creation
for our community and investment
into our community.
And that's a big part about
presenting today today's
committee, especially with the
investment piece is how do we,
especially when
The eventual fall off of fossil
fuels, how do we replace that
revenue to be able to invest
into the state for further.
Um, fighting is really, really
just showing a demonstration of
how fast the transcontinental
cargo is really growing along
I-40 and um
And the forecast for the 20,150
of seeing even more tonnage and
more of
Great traveling on that
umbilical cord, and a lot of it
is going to be continuing to be
done by truck.
And um not just, but really
connecting the seaports to the
other part of the country,
really to be thinking about how
are we going to be that
connection from the seaport to
the rest of the country.
Um,
59 is our phase one, which we're
talking about phase one is from
Port of LA to Fort Albuquerque,
which are an ideal dream and
next phases is continuing along
I-40 and continuing to push this
type of efficiencies and um
trade routes further east along
the country to make it uh more
um efficient for our, our
country.
And continue to build um that
piece out. So we're talking
about here locally in
Albuquerque at full build out,
we would be at 6000 acres as a
trade port, but our
demonstration site that we
hopefully can announce soon.
We'll be a 50 acre site for our
truck mobility center to attract
that initial set of private
investment.
Um, flight 10 is really, we
want, we want you to think about
the, with an airport or with a
seaport, all of the goods and,
and items that go processed
through either of those pieces,
and um the flow of goods across
different modalities, whether
that be the rail or the highway,
or in the air, but that the
truck mobility complex also
becomes an extension of both the
seaport and the airport hubs of
being able to push goods
throughout the country and
have that happen here locally.
Um, specifically the report
locations and the investment
attractions, each hub is meant
to be a pearl string and really
build on one another and spaced
out enough to uh continue to add
value to each of the different
Cubs, um, with anchoring here in
Albuquerque.
Um
And offering different
competitive advantages, um, it
doesn't mean that in between
that we're not going to look at
where we can add value, and it
stops in between different
pieces, but these are just the
major investment hubs that were
focusing on first and then
continuing to have that spread
through the community.
Um, this project also takes
advantage of a lot of automation
and big data, and once again,
we're not talking about just.
Trucks driving by themselves
down the highway. We're talking
about how does this automation
also help us improve loading
processes, smarting tracking
systems, so we're actually
tracking the goods more
efficiently and effectively
through the country, and
predictive analysis about where
those need to be going, or how
they need to be shipped
specifically to a piece. So
where
This is where a lot of AI and
big data merges in with shipping
and logistics world, and having
that really um being centered
here in Albuquerque.
Um
And
Once again, the uh
We're looking at also testing
and automation is how do we,
within the truck mobility
complex itself, how do we move
goods more efficiently and
effectively, and whether that it
be a um autonomous vehicle
moving those pieces or really an
AI system being able to tell us
where each of the different
goods need to be placed to be
more efficiently and effectively
moved.
And ultimately, of course,
safety is of paramount concern
and wanting to be able to as
this as this type of
technologies is rolled out
further into different parts of
the country and becoming more
mainstream that we're taking
care of um safety efficiency.
So the trade ports and
investment from the US
government that we receive
first. So we are a regional
infrastructure accelerator, um,
grant awardee or um trade ports,
there's been 3 that have been um
awarded and who are in New
Mexico, um, so first one was in
Tradeport, California. The
second one was in Tradeport uh
Donana County, and the third one
was in Tradeport, um,
Albuquerque.
And so, our trade port.
He is um.
The heater.
Um, the
Um
So for the
Regional infrastructure
accelerator in uh New Mexico,
uh, we are the furthest along on
our planning processes, and
we're also awarded just now a
$15 million raise grant to
further out the planning and
engineering at each of the
different hub sites, and being
able to be ready to actually
with additional federal or state
funding be able to um deploy
infrastructure into the
different projects.
Um, we are also applying for a
clean fuels grant, um, that will
help out with, um, the
development of hydrogen and the
electrification, um, that, that,
that will be needed as well for
um electric and hydrogen trucks.
I will say that the state also
used this business plan of the
Treport corridor for um the CPRG
grant, the clean pollution
reduction grant, um, from the
EPA that this last year, and
Um, this was a $500 million
grant that the state was going
after, they would have actually
helped deploy infrastructure,
uh, for the Treport project and
other projects that would have
furthered our hydrogen and our
electrification of um
Uh, freight trucks.
So we continue to push for more
grant opportunities as we can.
Um, so I asked for the, the
legislature just to let you know
there's a, um, is that we're
actually working with a
representative of Lustrom who's
putting together a trade port,
um, and
Initiatives, uh, funding a
package, um, that really gets at
the site of readiness again
about being able to deploy
infrastructure to have these
sites ready, the private
investment can follow and have
job creation and the development
pieces.
And um
We are also asking for the power
up New Mexico bill, which
actually helps push our utility
providers to be able to deploy
infrastructure ahead of schedule
as well, which will also aid to
the site a readiness. And
lastly, we ask that um
There'll be some hydrogen policy
and permitting guidelines
actually set, because right now
currently for hydrogen fueling
as a state, we don't have any
policy or guidelines set and
just having that policy would
set us on the path for how we
can actually push forward with
that.
Um, but with that, we stand for
any questions and uh thank you
again for your time today.
Very well, thank you, all
members.
Uh, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, uh, Marcos and the nice
lady here with us today.
Um, very impressed with your
work and your presentation.
Thanks for all that you do. You
know, I learned so much, um, in
this um committee every time I
come, it's not very often, Mr.
Chairman, I'm not a member
ordinarily ongoing of this
committee, but um I was happy
that I was able to be here today
and uh learned so much from you,
Marcos. Thanks for this. You
know, I do have one quick
question. I'm trying to
visualize this uh trade port
we're talking about.
And uh maybe you can help me
understand a little bit right
now, I looked at the map that
you showed us on this um handout
and uh the corri or feedership
that we're talking about, um,
how much of that is already in
place and working as a trade.
Or it or in Albuquerque. We just
drive by there all the time and
we never know if, at least I
don't, if um
It's already working in the
capacity that you're looking at.
Can you tell us a little bit
about it, Marcos. Mr. Chairman
and uh Senator Rodriguez. So
currently there's not a um
specific there's warehousing and
logistics operations in
Albuquerque, but there's nothing
to this magnitude of it centered
around uh truck mobility center
of having it being a designated
piece. So the big thing to
thinking about the port is so
busy right now, which led to the
ships being backed up during.
COVID and is always on that
precipice of happening again, of
being able to, rather than
having the warehousing logistics
being in California, it's this
push that, which the port wants
to do is push out into the um
continental US that places that
are designated for the uh
sorting the and the and the uh
shipping out to the rest of the
country, because that aids in
their green goals as well,
because then they don't have
trucks that are idling, they
don't have ships that are
idling.
And that they can be more
efficient of just getting the
goods out into the country and
then being able to um sort and
place them to where they need to
be.
OK. Thank you very much. Just a
final question. Um, I would
think that a lot of this would
be able to qualify for LIDA
funds, right? And it is an
economic development driver.
It's a, it's an economic
development engine that would
really boost economic
development throughout the state
for the entire state, I should
say, and um the proper time
when, you know, if it's not
already in some pieces, uh,
looking at lead funds, it's
something that, you know, it's
gonna
great jobs, which is one of the
requirements for lead funding,
Mr. Chairman. It's going to
generate economic development,
um, and just, um.
Increase so many great things
here in New Mexico, so I would
think it would qualify for some
plants there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Marcus and lady.
Very well, thank you, Senator,
Senator Neibert.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
where's the 6000 acres located?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator and
Iber currently we're looking at
near near the Amazon area, so
that'd be a Trisco and I-40, um,
but we're still negotiating with
the landowner on how that would
be pieced out, but there are
over 6000 acres there that could
be used for development.
And Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm not that
familiar with Albuquerque. So
where's the Amazon area? Is that
on the west side or south or?
Mr. Chair and Senator I correct,
it's on the west side. It's one
of the last exits before Laguna
Pueblo.
OK.
And, and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Gonzalez, the, the, uh
The, the thought process that uh
New Mexico would serve as, as
this hub, um, obviously, things
don't stop in Albuquerque.
And, and so from someone who,
who travels
East of Albuquerque on I-40,
with some trepidation of
On a regular basis, uh,
You know, it, it seems that New
Mexico generally, uh, we're
going to
Promote particularly uh enhanced
truck traffic and things on
I-40.
Um, we're going to have to make
some investments in in
infrastructure, not just to
Albuquerque, but
Really serving the Chicago and
and
Markets to the east, uh.
Him, and I can tell you I-40,
uh,
It is literally, uh, at, a train
of trucks, uh, as many of you
know,
And
Having uh additional lanes or
having some other uh uh
infrastructure in place to take
care of, of that traffic is, is
sorely needed in my opinion.
Um, so I, I, I
Certainly
Wish you the best in this
endeavor. It's exciting. I think
it's something that uh
Uh, particular look looking at
the, the quantity of
Of uh
Trucks
At least the uh uh trailers that
are on trains that go through
New Mexico. I think, I think we
may be up to 3 miles in length
on some of the trains that are
going through, uh, New Mexico at
this point in time, and
literally, um, most of that or
all of its originating at Los
Angeles, uh.
Uh, at the pork there in, in
Long Beach in Los Angeles and,
and heading to markets to the
east or vice versa, uh, markets
in the east heading to Los
Angeles, and so we get a lot of
train traffic, we get a lot of
truck traffic, um, and
And having a, a place that where
in the, in New Mexico where
maybe that can be somewhat
collaborative is, is exciting.
But I would encourage my
colleagues to, to continue to
look at the transportation
aspects.
Probably both rail and, and uh
highway and particularly I-40,
um, because that
Presents many opportunities for
us that, that you all see and
also uh present some, some
sorely needed.
Upgrades and infrastructure.
So, I appreciate you bringing
this to our attention, and I, I
think, uh, this is one thing
that we need to capitalize on in
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Neber, and that we agree with
all those comments as well, and
we think that
Seeing that down the future that
having this type of initial
public investment and financing
that private investment follow,
there's ways to pay for that
future infrastructure, and also
with the, this is really
building that as the um
Um, and technology improves, and
we eventually move away from um
fossil fuel pieces and looking
at electricity or hydrogen
piece, which is not there yet.
But the federal government isn't
building that spine, and this
helps build that spine of
infrastructure, so that way, as
shippers and truckers are ready
to make that leap, that leap is
there for him, that
infrastructure is there for them
to be able to do that. And so
this is really setting the
groundwork for that, and then as
a bridge.
Currently as a bridge state
being told how infrastructure is
going to be done. This is really
taking a different approach and
saying this is how we're going
to do it, and this is how we're
going to leverage our
proposition to create value for
our communities. And so that's
what we're doing with the
project as well. Thank you.
Very well, thank you, Senator.
Representing Borego
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Marcos,
you always do such a great job
and, and I, I'm sorry, I forgot
your name.
Carolyn Tobias, Carol, and I
know that both of you have done
a really tremendous job with
this, and Senator Nyberg
actually took the words right
out of my mouth because
Just last Sunday, my great
nephew who lives in the East
mountain area, had an 8 year 8
birthday, and I traveled on a
Sunday morning to his house for
uh in the east mountain area and
I was sandwiched between like
A ton of trucks.
And I was terrified cause
usually I, I take the root, you
know, the, the, the side route
instead, but that day I was in a
hurry, so I was on the freeway.
I was terrified.
Literally terrified, and I think
to myself, cause a lot of those
people in the East Mountain area
also work in Albuquerque,
travel, and so what Senator
Neibert, I think the piece
that's missing here a little bit
is the DOT and the city of
Albuquerque, um, municipal
development, just so that we
have some sort of plan because
this is not only gonna influence
I-40, it's gonna influence the
entire
Um
Traffic circulation pattern of
of the city of Albuquerque.
So, I, you know, I, I would love
to hear this a little bit more
in the future, maybe, uh, with
DOT here as to how they plan to
um work with you and also maybe
the city and the county
transportation folks to hear how
We keep our
Regular traffic, I guess, safe.
Um, when this is implemented,
um, so that's just kind of my
first point, Mr. Chair. Um, and
then the second question that I
had, um,
And you might want to comment on
that, but the second question
was with regard to these 3 trade
port initiatives, um, I guess
that's the legislation you're
coming forward with.
To the legislature with, and I
just wondered what the amounts
might
We'd be looking at is, am I
correct in that?
On page 15.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Apogo. So the, the first one is
uh for the trade war initiative
would be a fund that DOT for
trade ports to be able to
access, that is still being
drafted, and there's not a
specific amount, but more of a
how revenue could be placed into
an account at DOT for trade
reports to be accessed, um,
representative of Lindstrom will
be sponsoring that and um I
believe it's still being final.
so I can't
Comment on the specific amount
there for the um
Power up, uh, bill, that piece
will be, um,
Really allowing utilities to um
be able to uh build
infrastructure ahead of time
before having a customer that is
on the uh hook for that specific
infrastructure.
And then with the hydrogen
policy, that's really um
designating a department within
the state government to design
rules and regulations, how
hydrogen would be um operating.
And then on your earlier
comments, representative, just
to let you know, we are, uh, New
Mexico DOT and Arizona DOT are
both um supportive and partners
in the project as well and have
been working with us and so
we'll communicate that to uh
Secretary Serna to be able to
provide some comments on that
too. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. This is very exciting
stuff, and you may not have the
answers yet to some of my
questions, Mr. Chair, but
Probably because we had a leader
presentation right off the bat
this morning. I'm gonna ask
And then
Tradeport is described fully
built out 6000 acres. How many
jobs are you expecting it to
provide.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Figueroa will, uh, we can get
back to you with that specific
answer on the jobs, but that
would be based off of what
private end up user would end up
going in there from the
warehousing logistics or the or
the manufacturing one, but we
expect it to be a high number of
jobs in the specific.
Yes.
Thanks, Mr. Cha. Thanks, Marco.
Um,
The other question I think is
about the power up bill, um, and
building out grid infrastructure
before there is a customer at
the end. So it's a little bit
speculative, but it's the only
way we're going to get ahead of
the demand. I'm gonna have the
infrastructure to draw the
business, but what kinds of
protections are there?
In it, how do we prevent having
built out assets and stranded
government assets that don't get
used.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Figueroa, that's a, a good point
as well, and that's something
that I think the bill is
currently in its draft form is
really trying to articulate and
being able to make sure that
we're not just building
utilities to nowhere, and they
were actually building them in
sites that are actually gonna be
ready for development and
actually not having utilities,
just build out, um, their
infrastructure at the same time,
they don't want to be building
out infrastructure that's not
going to be used. So we're
trying to make it a
wholesome advantage to be able
to for at least for us to be
able to identify these are the
areas that uh we know where
folks want to go into. And I
think that that's something that
probably our economic
development department will
probably be working hand in hand
with um utilities as well based
on the uh calls for sites that
they're seeing, but are
continuously passed over because
the site is not ready or the
lead time to having that
infrastructure in place would be
too long. And so I'm sure all of
our economic development,
economic developers across the
state as those handful of sites
that they keep on showing.
But no one's biting on because
it's gonna take 2 years to get
that transformer installed or
that take a long time to get
that water line in there. And so
I think having, that's going to
be a bigger discussion, I know,
later on in the session about
how do we pro push New Mexico to
have more of our sites that are
ready for development and uh job
creation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Marco. That leads directly to my
next question. What is the level
of collaboration at this point
between the state economic
development department, um,
cause Carolyn is here for Berco,
right? Economic development, but
are the regional rep
representatives, the
partnership.
State involved in any way at
this point.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Figueroa, yes, so
that the state, as we've been
been including them in all of
our presentations and keeping
them up to date on what we're um
doing as well. And so we've um
they are very up to date and
supportive of our project as
well and provide that have
provided letters of support for
the project as well, as well as
the DOT, and I think really that
the
They, I mean, this is a massive
project that obviously that
we've undertaken, and I think
one specific state agency didn't
want to take over that
ownership, that's just me saying
that, um, but they are very
supportive and want to see um
this become a success as well,
and then we've also engaged our
federal partners as well, uh, I
meaning our congressional
delegation has been super
supportive in writing letters of
support as well, and Senator
Heinrich and Representative
Vasquez both provided earmarks.
Uh, for a little under 2 million
for the build out of a Trisco
Vista further as well. So we
have um ported from the
delegation as well, and then at
the, the state, our office is
here too are supportive.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Marco.
Last question, I have a million
because this is fascinating to
me, but I'll stick to one last
one. When you talk about green,
green energy initiatives,
sustainable fuel changes. That's
a field that it undergoes rapid
change. So when you're talking
about building out
infrastructure, you're building
out infrastructure or something
that exists now that may or may
not exist then there might be
something new then. How do you
do that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative
Figueroa. So the two ones that
were like really focused on is
really so we're we're looking at
uh truck mobility, um, we're
looking at long haul trucking,
eventually being used that
hydrogen fuel cell.
Yes I needing hydrogen filling
along the way. And then the
short distribution route, we see
electrification for our truck
traffic as well. So that's where
we see if needing to have both
components of being able to have
a grid that can support the
charging infrastructure for
trucks that are running
throughout the community, and
then having the fueling for
hydrogen trucking that's being
pushed um across the, uh, as a
new way of
Um
Charging of a fueling, um,
s
Um, and a lot of this is being
pushed by not only California,
but the federal guidelines on
how to um
Change over eventually and uh
and in the near future.
Um, but
They have mandates to change
over, but there is no, not any
lead for how to build that
infrastructure across the
country for the, you see the
massive pipeline of goods that
travel back and forth between um
the seaports and uh the
continental US.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's nice to see New Mexico
thinking ahead and planning for
these things.
That's all.
Very well. Um, anyone else?
Um, I just want to mention to
the members that um
It's very interesting and uh.
On some of our funding that, you
know, when we look at something
and work with it.
But this whole thought actually
started with a
One small appropriation from
junior, the junior money.
You know, to get a study going
on the truck mobility and then
also looking at um
The 11th hour type of uh.
Rest area
And uh this was
What, about 6 years ago, maybe
more,
and this was really a bill that
was put together to create a
strategic plan for the state,
because at the time, no state in
the country had a autonomous
vehicle application with mixed
in with economic development
incentives and how do you marry
the two, so that way you can be
using um automation in the
future for economic development
and job creation. So we took the
two components and merged them
together, um, and then that
created this.
centers, a lot of the centers
for what's happening throughout
the state on different mobility
centers happening in the
northwest part of the state, and
then also in the southern part
of the state, and really fueled
already what was wanted at those
different pieces by giving an
avenue for that to happen. Um,
so it's been a long time
building to eventually roll into
this tradeport piece and is
really the USDOT really likes.
this project specifically and
members of Congress like it
specifically because it
accomplished two goals that
they've been tasked with is
getting states to work together,
and then trying to focus on
clean energy as well. So having
those two folk guy really um
It gets a lot of attention for
this project.
OK, uh, very well, and thank you
for the presentation and uh
we'll
Keep working with it.
Oh, another interesting comment
that I just want to mention is
uh
You know
It shows that we really haven't
had that much growth in
population.
In our state, but traffic we
have.
I mean, if it's from Santa Fe to
Albuquerque and from
Albuquerque to Belelas Lunas.
And then the same thing up north
going from uh.
Anywhere from Los Alamosa to
Santa Fe or.
From there to tell so.
I think has really increased.
You know, and it continues and
so.
Working with this is uh
Put in your Mexico in a, in a
good part of uh
trying to be proactive and stay
ahead.
So thank you again for being
here and uh
Uh, members, so.
We have had um
Representative Alone and
Representative Alice.
Approved as voting members.
And uh we will
Act on the minutes.
And uh if we can have a motion
for the minutes for
My 2nd.
See him.
Right away made a motion. Good,
good for you.
OK, we have a motion and we have
a 2nd. Is there any objection to
our.
The on the minutes. Mhm.
Lunch here.
Uh, very well, um.
We
We are waiting for
Our lunch will be delivered
probably in the next 15 minutes,
and we have another presentation
that we can
Go ahead and do, and that way we
don't have to have that this
afternoon.
And uh we have from our own
staff, uh,
Cristina Vasquez that has done
some research and I think you'll
find this so.
Interesting, so.
me start any time.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you guys for
this opportunity to um present
on um this opinion, it's called
Bartlett v. Cameron, and it has
to do with colas. Um, I wanna
remind you guys that any
opinions expressed in this
presentation or the accompanying
case brief that Rebecca's
passing out right now are my own
and do not necessarily reflect
the opinions of the New Mexico
Legislative Council Service or
any of its staff.
Um, so this case brief is a
review, like I said, of Bartlett
v. Cameron, which was um a case
about ERB colas. So,
In 2013,
Um, the legislature passed a
bill called Senate Bill 115, and
um
It got signed by the governor
and some retirees didn't agree
with this bill. Um,
They brought a case, uh,
concerned retirees brought a
case seeking a writ of mandamus
against the ERB in 2013 and
Rudiman Damus is a court order
that compels the government or
an uh a government agency or an
official to fulfill their
official duties or to correct an
abuse of discretion.
So in SB 115, the question
before the court was what, I'm
sorry, in Bartlett, the question
before the court was whether the
Constitution of New Mexico
grants retirees a right to an
annual cost of living adjustment
to their retirement benefit
based on the COA formula, in
effect on the date of their
retirement or the entirety of
their retirement.
Um, the facts of this case are
as follows. So again, SB 115
changed the COA statute, um, and
it made it so that retirees were
receiving the smaller cola
increase on July 1st of 2013 and
for future years, and this
decrease was um 20% up to 20%
less, um, compared to what
retirees would have received
under COLA provisions in effect,
um, at the time of their
respective retirements. So that,
that was a pretty big blow to a
lot of retirees and like I said,
um, a certain group of
them was upset and they brought
this case. Um, the retirees who
brought this case argued that
the legislature may not reduce
colas for 2013 and for
subsequent years, they claimed
that they had a vested property
right in the Cola formula that
was in effect on the date of
their retirement.
Um, their position was based on
Article 20, Section 22 of the
Constitution of New Mexico,
which provides that quote upon
meeting the minimum service
requirements of an applicable
retirement plan created by law
for employees of the state or
any of its political
subdivisions or institutions, a
member of a plan shall acquire a
vested property right with due
process protections under the
applicable provisions of the New
Mexico and United States
Constitutions.
Um, it's worth noting that
because the Constitution only
mentions the plan. It doesn't
define an employee's vested
property right that the court
has to look to statute. So the
things that you guys passed.
Um, the state argued that a cola
is not a part of a retirement
benefit. Um, it's a separate
amount that a retiree might
receive, but only if there is a
year over year increase in the
consumer price index. And again,
this is speaking to the ERB
pension plan, but Bartlett is
presidential and it applies to
ERB and to Parra.
So one interesting thing that I
um came across when I was
reading the opinion is that both
the court and the state noted in
this opinion that retirees
making the argument that the
Constitution protects their cola
from change, um, they never
brought a case when the cola was
changed to increase. They only
brought a case when it was
decreased. So the court found
that curious and you know, I
thought I would just mention it
during the presentation. Um,
however, to answer the question
brought before
the court in Bartlett. The court
has to examine the cola statute
through the prism of case law
and of the Constitution. And the
case that they referred to in
Bartlett was a case called
Pierce v. State.
Um, Pier speed state just for a
little background on it. Um, it
was a case when retirees
challenged legislation that
repealed a long-standing income
tax, uh, exemption for
retirement benefits, and it
effectively lowered the amount
of benefits for retirees. And
so, um, some people were
concerned and they brought a
case um in Pierce. In Pierce,
the Supreme Court upheld the
legislation, um, that the, the
income tax exemption was
Um, that got removed is OK. The
legislature is allowed to do
that, it's public policy, and
they found that the public
pension Plan Acts do not grant
contractual rights to retirees.
So
A little bit further in the
constitutional analysis that
Bartlett Court had to do. They
looked at the ERA and how the
act defines retirement benefit.
And the statues in the ERA
establish um that a retirement
benefit is
They say
A retirement benefit is an
annuity paid monthly to members
whose employment has been
terminated by reason of their
age.
So you'll, in that definition,
there's no mention of a cola.
The ERA also defines a
substantive right to that
benefit and um that the employee
receives when they retire and um
in that statute, which is
section 22-11-30.
They say that there's no, the
court said there's no reference
again to cola. So in the actual
definition of the benefit and in
the provision that provides a
substantive, um, right to your
benefit. There's no mention of a
cola. So, for these reasons, the
court ultimately held that in
the absence of any contrary
indication from our legislature,
any future cost of living
adjustment to a retirement
benefit is merely a year to year
expectation that until
does not create a property right
under the Constitution.
Further stating that cola is
provided independently from the
obligation and payment of
retirement benefit. Reducing a
cola perspectively may affect a
retiree's economic purchasing
power, but it does not reduce
the employees substantive
retirement benefit.
Um, and that's kind of the
conclusion of this little review
of the um Bartlett opinion, and
if you guys have any questions,
I will stand for those now, Mr.
Chair.
From our members, are there any
questions?
Senator.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Probably not a, not a question
but I mean it, it sounds like
the court has uh pretty well
squarely dealt with the issue
and, and so are there any uh
Is there any legislation or
issues pending to
Change the status of the cola to
make it a property right.
Um, as a staffer for legislative
council service, I cannot answer
that question um about what
other people are working on, but
I can tell you that, you know,
you've been at these meetings,
Senator, and you've heard all of
the discussion about colas, and
the reason I was asked to review
this case today just to remind
people that the court did make
this decision and that
legislature ultimately holds the
power to change.
Um, and they can decide, you
know, to raise or to lower
colas. That's their, the
prerogative of of the corpus,
so.
Um, Mr. Chair,
it sounds to me like the
Most flexible.
Outcome for the legislative body
is to keep the status quo.
Because if you place a property
right on
That aspect of the retirement.
Then you're locked in to meeting
those economic thresholds
regardless of the budgetary
situation of the state at the
time.
And so it would tend to tie the
hands of the legislature if we
were ever
Created property right in an
expectation of receiving a cost
of living adjustment at whatever
rate we we decide.
Would that be accurate? Senator,
um, I can't comment to the
accuracy of that, but what I can
say is that, you know, you guys,
um, as legislators, the reason
why that was changed in in SB
115, why this case was brought
was because at the time there
was issues with solvency and the
funded ratio. And that is
something that we're seeing
right now as well, and that's
why, at least I believe that the
colas have, you know, been
lowered. Um,
So it's all just to protect that
fund. That's, that's why it's,
you know, the court says it's
nothing personal, it's just
reading the statute and reading
the Constitution in tandem with
this case law says that
The legislature is allowed to
make this change and, and it is
their prerogative to protect the
um funds, the retirement funds.
I hope that answers your
question.
It
Mr. Chair, um,
You know, there's some other
Potential pending.
Litigation with the courts
should the legislative branch
decide to, um, get engaged in
that effort, um.
Regarding uh some benefits that
uh court personnel are receiving
that were struck down by the
Attorney general. I don't know
whether
The legislative body is going to
be willing to, to engage in that
fight or not, but there's
certainly uh an issue that's
been teed up by the courts and
uh
Uh
So these issues will pop up from
time to time and
And, you know, from
From my seat uh that soon won't
be my seat, uh, you know, having
flexibility within the
legislative branch, I think is
uh a very important
Aspect, particularly as we
Not only deal with budgetary
issues and good times, but we've
also seen some very
Uh
Slim times, uh, when I first was
elected, we weathered uh uh
tremendous, uh, storm had the
raid virtually every savings
account held by any state
institution, including schools,
and it was very difficult. So
having
Flexibility on some of these
things, uh, uh, is prudent,
particularly in times of
Of uh lean, uh, tax revenues, so
I would encourage the body to
continue to uh maintain things
that give us flexibility to deal
with issues as they arise. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Very well. Anyone else?
Um, I just want to
Say that
In the number of years that I
have been here, you know, I
think we have to be very careful
because um
The part that you don't want to
get to into uh.
Both organizations have a board.
That we don't
Even though we have the power.
But within that power comes
responsibility. You don't want
to also
Have something that it's an
unfunded mandate.
You know, which can be very hard
on.
The whole thing
structure of the settings, so.
Uh, it is something that has to
be very carefully thought of.
Thank you for the report and
very well, thanks.
Uh, members, um,
We'll go ahead and uh we're
gonna check on our lunches, but
they should be here any minute
and
And if everyone is in agreement,
that's a quarter till you want
to come back at 1:45 to 1 and
We'll be able to leave early.
Yeah, right here.
We'll break until uh
Q1:45 to 1.
But our lunches will be here in
