Do you have a timer so I'll let
you know like you have 10
minutes or something like that,
and then we'll open it up for
questions till about 2:30 and
then after that we will have the
retiree retiree healthcare
authority, um,
And do you have any guests?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, yes, if I may, uh, I do have
a couple of board members with
me, uh, Mr. Adolph Zubia in
Astorga. They are richard
representatives on our board,
and I believe
Miss Patty French, a former,
former board member, former
board chair, uh, was here
earlier as well, uh, a couple of
staff members at Anna Williams,
our deputy director Anthony
Montoya, our general counsel,
and Michael Kilfoyle, who is our
de.
Go ahead, Madam Chair, so, uh,
just give an overview of Perra,
uh, slide 2,
Some of you, I know there are a
lot of new members, uh, but just
for reference para uh was
established in 1947.
Um, we are a 401A qualified
government plan, um, under the
Internal Revenue code and we're
governed by the New Mexico
Public Employees Retirement Act.
Uh, you were all probably all
worth this, but as employees,
uh, when you work for a parent
entity, uh, we take a portion of
your salary, um.
It's given to Pera as well as a
portion that the employer uh
provides to Perra and we invest
that over a career to provide
for a pension for the rest of
the member's life.
Um, were a defined benefit plan
to a defined contribution plan,
uh, so as I say, when you
qualify for retirement, that
benefit is guaranteed, uh, for
your life as opposed to a 401k
where if you exceed the or
exhaust your whatever balance
you have in there, the benefit
or anything um.
We have a number of plans, um,
actually 31 different retirement
plans that we administered two
tiers of benefits, um, and
there's multiple parameters
around, um, age and service um
as when somebody can retire, uh,
different multiple different
pension factors, um.
That kind of stuff that goes
into the formula.
Um, our our members are eligible
to receive a cost of living
adjustment. Um, we also do
administer disability,
retirement benefits under
certain conditions.
So that's just kind of
general overview of what we do.
As we talk about, uh,
What governs us on slide 3,
there's a number of different
statutes that govern us, uh, the
biggest plan we administer is
the public employees retirement,
uh, that's state workers, um.
Municipal workers, county
workers, fire and police.
Legislators are under the uh the
PARA Act, but we also administer
benefits for uh judges, district
judges, Supreme Court judges,
courts of appeal judges, that's
under the judicial retirement
Act, uh, we administer a
retirement separate for uh
magistrate, retiree or
magistrate judges that the
magistrate Act.
Um, David Archuleta mentioned,
we have a reciprocity agreement
uh between uh ERB andyra, so
that's its own act.
Um, our investments are governed
under the New Mexico ambassador
in New Mexico's uniform, uh,
prudent investor Act, that's
part of state statute that
actually I know it. The question
was asked earlier today that
actually uh passed in 2005.
We also administer a deferred
compensation uh program we call
it this uh pair of smart save,
so that's a voluntary um
retirement um plan that
employees can pay into the
employers don't put anything
into it, but it's a supplemental
retirement Act that we, that we
offer to uh not just to par
entities, but ERB entities can
participate in that as well.
Um, and then we, we have a
number of rules under the Mexico
administrative code and
internally a number of uh
policies that are passed by the
board, um, that govern our, um,
policy statement, um.
Proxybo proxy voting policy
statements, um, investment
procurement.
Um, that we follow, and those
are all listed on our uh on our
website.
But again, just to reiterate the
31 different retirement plans,
two tiers of benefits.
So it is, uh, we are, we are
quite complex.
Uh
So we do have a board of
trustees, uh, it's a 12-member
board, uh, 10 of those members
are elected by different
constituent groups. Uh, we have
4 state members.
3 municipal members, 1 county
member, um, and as I stated, the
two, retiree members that are
here today, and then we have two
ex officio members, uh, Laura
Montoya, uh, the state
treasurer, and 92 Lou Oliver,
our secretary of state. They
were on the board as ex officio
members.
Uh, we do hold board elections,
um, it feels like every year,
uh, we've got one up this year,
uh, Mr. uh, Juan Diaz has turned
out, so we are holding an
election for his position. He's
one of the state members. Uh we
did have another, uh,
Scheduled election for a
municipal member, uh, but only
one.
One member better or.
Um, declared for that position,
and she was uh she was voted on
by uh by the board, and that's
Miss Beller, but I, she was
turned out, she's the only
person that applied for her
position, so she will continue
on the board.
Yeah, next, Madam Chair, is just
a general overview of a kind of
uh as an organization, again,
uh.
The pair of board is at the top,
uh, the pair of board appoints
me, and I appoint um everybody
else uh underneath, uh, we are
88, um.
FTEs currently we only have 2
vacancies I've been very proud
of that. We've been able to
retain, um, our staff, and uh we
hope to continue to do so.
Uh, but
That's, that's just a general
overview of how Perra is
structured currently.
slide 6, Madam Chair, a brief
overview of who we, uh, who we
serve, who we represent, uh, so
on the left is the parapla,
again, that's our largest plan.
Consists of municipalities,
general members, uh, firing
police, uh, state general
members as well as state police.
Uh, so as of last year, and
we'll update these numbers and
bring them back to you in the
fall. Uh, the number of active
members paying into Perros
49,816 under the Pa plan.
Uh, the other plans that we
administer, as I mentioned, uh,
uh, judges, 133 members,
magistrate 64, uh, legislators,
110, um, and then volunteer
firefighters, we do have a, a
separate retirement plan for
volunteer firefighters.
Um, and then we are, this is
kind of
Different than everything else
we do. Uh, we are designated as
the Social Security
Administrator for the state of
New Mexico.
Um, so that was, um, given to
er, I believe, in the 50s. And
so what that in that role, what
we do is we are the liaison
between the Social Security
Administration and any um public
entity in New Mexico. So we,
we've had a lot of charter
schools that have come on, you
know, over the last 1520 years,
and what we do with that is we
help them with the liaison
between them and Social Security
and making sure that they either
elect or uh not elect to have
coverage under Social Security
to where the liaison um for
those.
slide 7, same representation,
but this looks at our retired
membership, uh, under the PE
plan. Again, our biggest uh
46,000 retirees that we pay, so
that there's a difference of
about just under 3000 between
our active members and our
retired members, uh, that's in
contrast to what you heard from
ERB where ERB has about 60,000
active members and about 47,000
retirees, so they have much many
more active members paying in
than we do, um, and that's
Demographics, government is not
growing at the state level, at
the municipal level, um, so
that's just something that's,
that's one of the challenges
that we've been, uh, contending
with and we will continue to do
so going forward.
And then again, in the other
plans.
Slightly, uh, Madam Chair, this
is kind of uh overview of where
we were at at the last, uh, the
end of fiscal year 24.
Uh, our total fund value was at
17.8 billion, I believe.
As of today, we were just under
18.7 billion.
Uh, we had an investment return
last year of 8.66%, uh, net of
fees.
Um, we have 335 participating
employee years, we paid out
$1.45 billion in retiree
payroll.
Um, in our funded ratio is 67%.
Um, our amortization period
currently is at 52 years.
And our accrued liability
currently is 26.5 billion.
And what that means for the
committee, uh, Madam Chair, for
some of the new members.
We've promised $26.5 billion in
benefits. Um, we have
We had $17.8 billion cash on
hand, uh, the bottom of the
chart where it says unfunded
accrued actu actuarial liability
is $8.7 billion. So that's,
that's the shortfall that we
currently have.
Compared to the, the benefits
that we have.
Uh, next, Madam Chair, um, kind
of gives you an overview of our
funded ratio uh throughout the
last 30 years and some
significant events that have uh.
Made changes or dropped that uh.
Funded ratio, uh, the biggest
thing and it's kind of off the
chart here. I believe in 1992,
um.
We had a cost of living
adjustment that was tied to um
the CPI consumer pricing that
was changed to a flat 3%
compounding cola.
Uh, when that change occurred,
there was no increase in
benefits to um take that into
account.
Uh, 1997.
Um, you can see our funded ratio
was doing better, uh.
Peror and, you know.
The Legislature increased
benefits, um, which isn't
necessarily a bad thing. Um, the
issue was a grandfathered in
past service credit.
Um
With no corresponding increase
in contribution. We had a 2.5%
pension factor, uh, everybody
got grandfathered into a 3%.
That person that had 3% could
have retired the next month and
the 25 years that they had paid
in at the 2.5.
pension factor, um, left with
3%. So it was, it was a big
increase in we were trending
along quite nicely the early
2000s. We got our first uh kind
of market shock.
Um, during this time frame we're
with a dotcom bubble, uh, we
were still treading along pretty
well, and then the Great
Recession hit, um, I believe at
that point in time when it hit.
We were worth about $14
billion.07 billion dollars.
Um
You see the the the drop quite
uh.
grammatically in our funded
ratio.
Uh, there was an attempt to do
pension reform in 2010. It was
called the Legislative plan or
the ideal plan and uh that went
nowhere. And finally the first
round of pension reform was
passed in 2013. And so during
those uh
You know, that 56 year period,
we went from 93% funded down to
65% funded.
Uh, our unfunded liability at
that time, um.
Before the Great Recession was
less than a billion dollars, um,
by the time pension reform got
passed in 2013 that had grown to
over 6 billion. As you can see,
we started making some pretty,
uh pretty decent progress, um,
the reform was significant, but
we, we uh figured out it wasn't
quite enough. So in 2020, um,
Pen reform 2.0, the former
Senate Bill 72 was also passed.
And uh
We, we've been pretty static,
um, and I taught in, in, in the
coming slides.
Madam Cha talking about
demographics, this, as I told
you, this is one of the problems
that we are, uh.
You know, we are, are preparing
for that, but that we are
dealing with is a retiree
membership just keeps growing
while our active membership is
continued to stay static and,
and that's not unique to Perra,
um, you hear that with Social
Security, I mean, it's the baby
boomers, they're getting to the
top of the pyramid. Um, there's
not.
As many people on the bottom of
the period pyramid kind of um.
Being able to subsidize those.
Uh, I expect this.
I don't expect the end of this
fiscal year, but probably by
next year, uh, we will be paying
more retirees out than we have
our June payroll we had.
About 48,000.
Which I read on payroll and so
it's, it's getting close. I
don't know, I don't have a good
feel for what our active
membership is, but it's not
gonna, oh, why, why that's
difficult for us is our average
in the, the
Uh, chart underneath the
Or the box underneath.
is our retirees are relatively
young, um, their average age is
69, average benefit just over
33,000 a year, um, in our
mortality rate in our population
is increasing.
We didn't experience study last
spring, uh, we used to.
Expect males to live till they
were 83, uh, females should live
to they're 87, the experience
that we are seeing is that's
actually improving in the
population that's retired under
us. So we revised those
mortality rates, we now expect a
male in our population to live
till 85, and a female to 87.
So we've been just looking at
our average age of 69.
We've got to take into account
those benefit payments for the
next 15 to 20 years, and we
still have people like 1, Madam
Chair, is just a funded ratio uh
by the funds we administer, as I
said, Per our biggest um we're
currently at 67.2% funded, uh,
judges and magistrates are, are
much smaller, um, you know, it's
less than 500 members in between
the two, both retirees and
actives, uh, with those funds
have been struggling 50 56% per
uh
Judges and
As things are, will never pay
off their unfunded liability,
magistrates 52% funded, a little
better, at least there's some
time on the horizon, 67 years
till we pay off their own funded
liability, our legislative plan.
has been um
Come down a bit and and.
A little bit of history on that.
Um, we used to get $1.2 million
a year, um.
From the state that funded the
legislative retirement plan, it
was overfunded. Uh, the
legislature, I believe, in 2018,
um, stopped that contribution
and diverted um
Those contributions to the
judges and magistrates fund. So
I'm sorry, it's actually 2.4
million we got. So each, each of
those plans get got half of that
1.2 million apiece. Uh, that
ended, um, this last fiscal
year, um, just under the law in
2018, so that contribution is
going to start coming back to
the legislative plan.
Judges and magistrates will
still get that 1.2 that you guys
had um deferred to them, but the
state is now going to pay us 3.3
million is what's needed to kind
of get us back to 100% funding
in the legislative plan and
that'll start occurring again
this year.
And then volunteer firefighters,
uh, we get 100 $750,000
appropriation um from the fire
protection fund to fund a
pension for volunteer
firefighters and the way that
works is if you're a volunteer
firefighter and you work 10
years or volunteer for 10 years,
and you, uh,
You become age 55, we'll pay you
$125 a year, a month, I'm sorry,
um, if you do 25 years and
you're age 55, then we'll pay
you $250.
The only, the only difference on
volunteer firefighters is they
don't get a a cost of living
adjustment, that that pension
that they, they yet remains.
Well, uh, Madam Chair, talks
about the two reforms that were
done, Senate Bill 27 in 2013.
Uh, as a pension fund, there's
very few levers that you can,
you can pull, um, you could
either uh cut benefits, uh, you
can increase the amount of money
coming in, or you can reduce the
amount of money going out, and
the reform in 2013 did all three
of those things and increased
contributions on employees and
employers, they reduced the cost
of living adjustment. It was at
3%, um.
Down to 2%, change the deferral
period. Uh, but the biggest
thing it did is it created a new
tier of benefits. So anybody
that was hired.
Um, on July 1, 2013 or after, is
in tier 2, and they have to work
longer, um, they get a lesser
benefit and they pay the same
amount of contributions.
So, so that was a big
A big change and that's, that's
actually one of the changes that
really helps us going forward.
It just, it takes time for that
to work its way through the
system.
Uh, Senate Bill 72, it passed in
2020.
Again, um, reduced her cola,
change it to a very low rate
model. So now that is based on
our current funded ratio as well
as our investment return in any
given year, um, increased
contributions by 4%, 2% to the
employee, 2% to the employer.
And we are right now, and that
was phased in this fiscal year,
we are in the final year of that
phase in phase in contributions.
Uh, the states already did their
portion, but municipalities and
counties were given a two-year
deferral to.
Budget that in. Um, and so this
is the final year for uh
municipalities and counties, uh,
having that contribution
increase.
Um, and then they both reforms,
we increased the pension maximum
someone can earn, uh, from 80 to
90% in 2013 and up to 100% in
2020.
And right now our population um
Is, is being dominant by being
dominated by tier 2, which is
what we want because tier 2,
those are, they're getting the
lesser benefit, uh, tier one.
Amateur one employee, the
benefits or the
The contributions I pay in isn't
enough to
Provide for the benefit that I
will receive. So until all of
tier one is kind of out of the
population, are unfunded
liability once tier 2 kind of
fully takes over, we anticipate
that about.
2030s, mid 2030s, that's when we
really start seeing improvement
in our.
Uh, slide 13, uh, just gives the
committee and I'm hoping an
explanation of why, why the
reform in 2020 was necessary.
Uh, we were taking too much.
Out of the trust fund to
subsidize retiree payroll. Uh,
so 53% um was coming from
employee, employer
contributions, 47% was coming
from uh the investment trust
fund. And that was expected to
grow, and we were going to get
to a point where we were taking
out too much too soon that it
wouldn't have been sustainable
over the long term.
So again, we reduced the cola,
we increased contributions by
4%, and now, as of FY 24, you
can see the difference. Now 61%
of our payroll is being paid
from contributions, 39% is
coming out of the trust fund,
but that, that means there's
more in the corpus of the fund
that it will continue to grow
over time.
Uh site 14, Madam Chair, looking
at our, our cost of living
adjustment. This is.
If you guys have not heard, um,
of this or have constituents,
um, contact you about this.
This is a big concern for our
members. It's a big concern for
us.
Um
And, and so we have two, well,
we've got multiple cola models,
but the two main models is the
reform in 2020, um.
The governor made a carve out
for anybody that was age 75 or
older, as of 6:30, 2020, that
they would continue to get 2.5%
compounding cost of living
adjustment, as well as any
disability retiree earning less
than $25,000 or any member that
worked a full career, which we
define as 25 years and was
earning less than $25,000 a
year. They would get a 2.5% pull
up.
If, if, you know, they started
because of the cola if they got
out of that 25,000, they move
into the other model.
Uh, that model is the variable
base cola this month we will be
issuing a 0.63% cola uh to
anybody that is eligible.
Um, and you can kind of just see
how, how that's grown since the
reform happened, um, and you can
see how the 2.5% cola model, how
that's going away because that
population is, is dwindling.
Uh, so this month, we will be
paying 43,212, um.
Para retirees that 0.63 or the
2.5% cola model, um, and that's
91.63% of our retiree
population.
63, we understand is not enough.
Um.
And and doesn't mean much to it,
an individual, but when you're
looking at over 43,000 of them
getting that. Um, it is costly
and it just adds to our, our
monthly payroll.
The judges and magistrates have
a different model. They get a 2%
cost of living adjust adjustment
every 3rd year. So last year
they got a 2%, so they're gonna
go without a cola for the next 2
years, um, and then that 3rd
year they'll get their 2%, um.
And then volunteer firefighters,
as I stated earlier, they are
not.
Uh, 15, Madam Chair talks about
um.
The contribution increases that
were passed in Senate Bill 72,
uh, for the state. What that
meant as of the end of last
fiscal year was 123 million in
recurring dollars coming into
the fund. Uh, the first two
years of the, the municipal and
counties, that was an additional
56 million. And so last year we
had 180.
Plus million coming into the
fund that's recurring. Again, we
had the contribution increases
that will, we'll calculate now
that we close the fiscal year
and then he says, so by the time
all said and done, we're gonna
have well over $200 million
coming into the fund, um,
recurring that legislature
passed in 2020. We've, we're
always asked about if we got one
time money, um, what, what would
that do for us? And that's where
I included uh the slide or the
chart below, um, you know, if
you gave us $200 million which
is a lot of money coming from
the state.
uh, for one year, um, you know,
that increases us from 67.2% to
67.8%.
So it's a lot of money, but it
doesn't really move the needle
when we're talking about lump
sum or cash infusion coming into
this plan, uh, it's got to be
significant, um, you know, if
you gave us a billion dollars.
Um
One time, you know, it, it does
well for a funded ratio where we
go down to 47 years.
funding ratio um.
Goes to over 70%, um, but it is,
it is big dollars needed form of
cash infusion kind of move the
needle to get us uh quicker.
You know, somehow we had $8.9
billion we got that we would be
100% funded.
But it is, it is, it is very
expensive.
Madam Chair, we talk about
contribution increases, um, as I
said, as a tier one member, the
benefits that I am accruing.
Um
are more than what I am.
Paying in
Uh, so if we looked at
If we just increase
contributions to get us on the
path to 100% funding, um, for
overall the para fund we'd be
looking at an increase of 6%.
And currently, um, on the bottom
line, uh, what we pay in in
general against all plants, 31
different plans, uh, the
employee pays 16.66% the
employers 13.5%.
Next one over, if you look at
state general, that's our
largest of of.
Our largest division of the
power plant, um.
Employees or employers pay
19.24% of our income in state
general an employee like me pays
10.92%, and that's regardless of
tier tier 1, tier 2.
So tier 2, the contribution
rates that they are paying is
appropriate for the benefit that
they will receive. Tier one,
It's, it's not, and you could
see the other ones. The, the
only one I'll call out is uh the
public safety plan, which is
state police, adult correctional
officers, um, they, they
actually have a surplus. I mean,
they're, they're contribution
rates uh were funded
appropriately um when these
plans were established. And if
you look at
And what they pay, that's 25.65
is what the employer pays in on
their behalf employees 9.6. So
that, that's about that 6%
difference between um.
The regular para plan and state
public safety. I mean, that's
where those contribution rates
should have been, um, when these
changes or these plans came.
Uh, 17, Madam Chair, and we, we
get a lot of uh
Questions on this, and I'm sure
you will too. That's why we
throw this in here. Um, is what
would it look like if we just
went back and reverted to the 2%
cost of living adjustment that
was in place prior to 2020, um.
And it would drop our funded
ratio from 67% to 63.6%, um.
And and so that's
It doesn't seem like a big deal,
but over time as those retirees
keep coming on as their
mortality increases. I mean, it,
it's, it's costly and it gets us
back to that point where, you
know, long term solvency becomes
an issue. Right now, I don't
believe it's an issue where
we've kind of ready the ship
short of no.
Um, major crisis that happens,
we're we're still.
On the right trajectory, it's
just, it's just taking a little
bit longer than we would, we
would have hoped.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, uh, just
kind of a general overview of uh
Where Pa's investments are as of
the uh fiscal year to date. This
was as of March 2025. Uh, we
were up 4.31%, I believe are our
one year return is going to
exceed our our assumed rate of
return is 7.25%. I believe we're
gonna, uh,
Be well above that for this
year. Um,
And paid out.
34% of of
This year or year today, uh.
benefit payments came from the
investment fund, um.
And any, any questions you have
about investments, I assume
we'll do a deep dive later
during the interim on our
investment so I didn't include
too much, but as I said, my
Kilfoyle is here and he can help
that.
Uh, like 19 Madam Cha just just
upcoming challenges, um, you
know, we, we understand.
Um
The need for a cola for a
retirees, it's getting back to
some, some uh
Better model, um.
Expensive. So I can say we, we,
there's no good answers other
than long term solvency, like
you say, we we're on the right
path, um, but it's, you know,
with demographics, it's the next
decade we're gonna have to
manage very prudently.
Um
We've, we've had legislation in
the past session, past couple
sessions to increase
contribution rates for judges
and magistrates to kind of get
those plans back on the right
track.
And then a recruitment and
retention, you know, that's
that's an issue across
government, um, as I stated, uh,
we've only got 2 vacancies.
We've been very fortunate to
have our vacancy rate low. We
hope to continue that.
Um, but it is a challenge. And
so 20, Madam Chair, uh, we, we
put this in all our
presentations before you, uh,
just shows where the funds that
we pay out in New Mexico, what
counties they go to and the
dollar amount, um, so we paid
out $1.45 billion in pension
benefits last year, 89% of that
stays in New Mexico. Uh, what
we've seen is if you retire from
per, you retire.
You're, you're not leaving New
Mexico, you're staying as part
of that community. So that is a
big impact that goes back into
the state, uh, in the form of
pair of benefits.
And with that, Madam Chair, I'm
happy to stand for any
questions.
Grant is that the end of your.
Presentation.
OK, um, well, he did that and
still have 27 minutes.
Um
Uh,
yeah
It was a very good job,
actually, it was very thorough,
um, so I guess with that, then
we will just go to uh questions.
I have a first senator Gonzalez,
and then senator Stefaniks that
have a couple of questions.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, Trujillo at the very
beginning of.
You mentioned the charter
schools.
So they're under PRA.
I'm chair Senator Gonzalez,
they're, they're not under PERA,
but as the Social Security
administrator for the state when
these charter schools are
formed, they have to do, uh, I
believe it's called a 217
agreement that their employees
have to either elect or not
elect. So we work with a charter
schools or any other public
entity and Social Security
Administration to get that
election in place and make sure
that that agreement, that
referendum agreement um comes to
fruition.
So, so, so they're not reported
to us, but in our role as Social
Security administrator, we do
work with charter schools or any
public schools that has uh
changes in those their social
security agreements.
So, so they're not reported
under PEA, but we're, we're kind
of the liaison for for those
types of agreements.
So uh this, they can't be under
ERB.
Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, no, I believe the
way they're formed, it's under
the.
Right, um, Madam Chair on the
next one is um.
Uh, so did the 13th check
happened or it didn't happen?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Gonzalez just for the committee
information uh this past uh.
Legislative session, the last
two legislative sessions, we
have had legislation provide
funding, it would have been $66
million that would have allowed
us to do a 13th check for
eligible retirees that would
have been equivalent to 2% of
their, their annual benefit, uh,
that did not pass, um, we get
through the first committee in
both years, appropriations, uh,
but it is something we'll
continue to do understanding
it's not, it's not enough, but.
Um, it would provide some relief
to retirees and the 13th check
would be in addition to any
compound E. coli that we would
receive if that would have
passed, we would have given the
0.63% compounding cola.
As well as a 2%.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, Senator Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, Mr.
Trujillo, how many years have
you been the director?
Uh, Madam Chair and her
Stefaniks, I believe, little,
little more than 3 years. But I,
but I've been with Pera since
2013.
10 years with ERB prior to that.
OK, thank you. So, um, Madam
Chair, um, on page or slide 4.
I have a little concern that
Out of the municipal and county
members, they're all from
Albuquerque, Bernalo.
So I'm wondering if there could,
what, well, first of all, I
immediately jumped to, do we
need to change the composition,
but once we open up statue to
change composition, we get into
all kinds of configurations, but
I do think that that's not
representative of the state.
And so I, I would like to point
out that concern, um,
I am not from Vern County, I
represent 4 counties, and I
would like to see people from
other counties involved with
this.
Um, man here on
Slide 15.
You have at the bottom.
And I'm assuming
This might have been an old
chart, but the very last line
fully fund the plan by 7125.
So this would have been
something from the past.
Madam Chair, yes, uh.
I don't recall if you were on
Nipo last year, but we did have
a deep dive on this, and so this
is from that, from last been
given, you know, that money
during last session.
$8.9 billion we would be fully
funded.
OK, so men, the reason I'm
asking that, Mr. Trujillo, is
If this is from last year, has
this picture changed at all.
Even minutely.
Madam Chair and Senator
Stefaniks, um, it will, uh,
we're just in the process of
closing out this fiscal year,
uh, we'll do our annual
evaluation and bring that back
to you in the fall, and we'll
update these numbers with, with
what the new information is, uh,
but, but I don't expect it to
change much. OK, and so Madam
Chair, um, Mr. Trujillo, here's
my hardest question.
What kinds of discussions have
you and the board been having
about um making the cola whole
for those individuals who are
stuck and going to eventually
sink.
into poverty.
Madam Chair, um.
phonics, it's actually a very
good question. Uh, our board's
gonna be having a retreat, uh,
not next week but the week
after, and that is one of the
topics of discussion is what
kind of levers do we have, um,
that would kind of change.
Um, that kind of stuff.
Uh, because every, everything
basically has come through the
legislature. Um, so we will look
at
You know, right now, somebody
has to wait 2 years to become
eligible for a COLA. What, what
happens if we change that to 5
years?
Uh, what if we put a minimum
wage?
But if everybody had to wait
till age 65, like ERB right now
we don't have a minimum age.
Um, what does that do?
Um, of course, what, what would
that cost in the form of
contributions.
Um, you know, we've talked
about.
Potentially implementing a new
where their pension factors that
does awful for recruitment and
retention, and the issue with
the new tier is it takes about
20 years. It takes a generation
for that.
Tier to kind of fully take over,
putting in a new chair today
does nothing to assist our
problem.
So we, we are going to go over a
bunch of different variables,
um, to see what.
What kind of moves the needle,
if anything.
Great. And Madam Chair and Mr.
Trujillo, um, I appreciate that,
and I hope that you and the
board will discuss the fact that
Having static income.
Doesn't really help our economy.
And it really holds people back.
It puts them back into
Um, sliding their income almost
into poverty or into poverty.
And we know that as people age,
they have more medical problems,
probably more medical bills. I
was recently somewhere and I
know that Snap is not.
Relevant to the cola, but I had
an individual in Torrance
County, come up to me, senior,
say, you know, the state sent me
$60.
What do you think $60 is gonna
pay for.
It's not gonna pay for all
summer.
So I already have people talking
to me about their incomes and
how
There's just not enough buying
power. So if there is can be
some discussion, um, I would
really appreciate it. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Um, on that point, um, Greg.
If after
The retreat.
You have discussion about some
options.
If we can get you back on the
agenda to discuss that, that
very issue, um.
Senator Stefaniks, are you done?
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Sidia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am, I appreciate the
presentation. It's, it's really
good and really helpful, and
I've seen you present, you do,
you do a great job. Um, the only
thing and maybe it was my lack
of attention or something on
slide 18, uh, the performance,
the takeaway is that you've been
doing really well in
performance, and that's great.
However, I didn't understand the
chart exactly.
The
Yeah, I, I just didn't
understand. Could you explain it
a little bit more.
Um
Specifically, what value add
means policy benchmark what
you're using is that in PER I
know what the total fund returns
are, but I, I
Wasn't clear on what these were.
And how to read them. It just
wasn't clear about that. Sure.
uh, Madam Chair Senator Lopez,
and just remember this is uh
As of last quarter, so not
fiscal year. Uh, so, uh,
Obviously
this school year today as you
see 4.31%, um, is what we
returned our policy benchmark
according to our asset location,
which we just adopted um.
It's been about a year and a
half.
That's if our asset location was
fully implemented, that's what
we would have anticipated early.
And, and the red, the value add.
We underperform. OK.
Thank you. Um, so with regard to
the asset allocation, um, we got
to see ERBs, asset allocation.
I, I think you said that you're
going to do that in in a future
presentation, go deeper, deeper
into that, but I guess I have a
similar question, and that is,
how have you been well,
Maybe the answer is the same,
but how has the
craziness of the, the recent
volatility affected you,
um.
Yeah, sorry, I didn't go too
into investments cause I expect
and I, I was just assuming we
will do that in this interim.
Um
But I, I will say we've, we've,
uh,
We've done well. I'll say
historically, you know, we went
from $14 billion to $7 billion
overnight, uh, so the para
board, pair of staff um was very
risk averse. So we had a very
conservative portfolio, uh, and
one of the main reasons for that
was uh because of the cash flow
issues that we had, we had to
have that liquidity to subsidize
retiree payroll, um, as a part
of Senate Bill 72, that reform
that allowed us to take a little
bit more risk, prudently, um, as
far as the tariffs and kind of
the craziness.
It's been happening as, as Bob
Jackshaw mentioned, uh, we're
investing long term, um, at, uh.
I don't think we're at a new
all time uh and watermark is
fund is fund value, but we're,
we're knocking on the door, you
know, we're gonna report a
number well above that.
That's really good. Um, I, I
appreciate that and thank you
for the presentation.
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Going back to uh Senators uh
Lopez's question and referring
to slide 18. Uh, could you
explain a little bit more about
what the policy benchmark is.
And how's it relate to, say,
what's the the S&P 500.
How do you, what is this policy
benchmark and then how's that
compared to what's more of a
standard comparison which is S&P
500. Madam Chair and Senator
Thornton, um, if it's OK with
the committee, if I can have my
ilboy will come up and tell me
with there that answer.
Madam chair.
Oh.
My name is Mike Kilfoyle, Deputy
Chief Investment Officer, or
apparel.
And so the policy benchmark
would be set by our board in
consultation with the uh general
consultant.
And it would be like 5 main
buckets, so to your point, S&P
500 bonds, um, alternatives,
stuff like that.
But for each bucket, they would
have like a standardized index.
So for S&P 500, you know, just
SPY, stuff like that. And so the
policy benchmark is literally
that.
Public market benchmark.
Waited accordingly to the
buckets that we have.
And so as they all rolled up,
that is what we go against.
So if our board said one time
that uh.
We should only be in 100% S&P
500 stuff, that would, thank you
for that.
Um, and I think I had one other
question.
slide 11.
Uh, you had talked about the
funded ratio.
I'm sorry, madam chair. I, you
talked about the funded ratio
and you apparently and, and
Forgive me because I'm new to
the committee here, so I'm, I'm
still worrying.
But uh
You went and you talked about
how we spent 2.4 million and
actually put it into the JRA and
the MRA for a couple of years to
help with their funded ratio.
To, and now that's coming back.
Is that correct? You're saying
now we're gonna come back to
the, to the legislative.
Uh,
so explain that to me exactly
why, what you did and then why
is it coming back and how, what
impact would that have on the
future? And then the other
question I had was because it
seems like the fireman's fund is
overfunded. Why did we not do
similar things with them as well
to help wither.
Madam Chair and Senator
Thornton, uh, so correct, so, so
the legislative because your
fund historically um was
overfunded.
And the other two funds were
struggling, um.
They chose to uh.
Stop that 2.4 million coming
into and they deferred it to
judicial. I was 2018 and it was
set to sunset, uh, this year.
Uh, so that law did take effect.
Um, but the way it's written is
that 1.2 million will continue
going into both those funds, but
now the we we tell uh the
legislature, what is needed to
bring them back up to 100%
funding, so the 1.2 and 1.2
continues, but now it's gonna be
an additional 3.3 million coming
in to get the legislative fund
back on 1.2 million is going to
continue in the other two funds.
But 3.3 is going back to LA to
help them get back up to 100%.
Madam and Senator Thorn, that is
correct as far as the volunteer
firefighter, it's a very modest
benefit. It's $100 a month.
Um, and I believe we only pay
out about
It's less than 1800 pensions
under that and, and
You all are pretty aware of it
if you're from a rural area, um.
BFF is struggling to recruit and
bring people in, um, so we don't
have as many.
Actives these days, um, but, but
nobody actually pays in, that's
a volunteer, it's, it's the fire
protection fund that's funded,
and that's just been 750,000, so
it's, we've had more than it's,
uh, and, and we have had talks
with state fire marshals Office.
Look to kind of increase the
benefit to see if that would
help for recruitment, um, and
because it's, it's, it's a very
small plan, any any tweak it, it
wipes away those surpluses or
that overfunding pretty.
OK, Greg, um, so,
I'm looking at page 8 and I'm
trying to put all of this in
perspective.
I know it's, it's been a
difficult few years.
I'm glad to see you have a new
investment manager cause I was
gonna ask where that person was
earlier, so I was glad to see
that.
And it's also nice to see a
young person there, um, so our
total fun and and I, I, I would
say that people remember things
in threes, you know, it hits you
once and you kind of and then
the next time it's like, oh
yeah, and then the third time
maybe it clicks. Um, so our
total fund value is 17.8
billion. That's the total fund
value right now. And um at what
rate of return are we getting
interest on that?
Money.
You know,
madam or is it different levels
for different funds.
17.8 billion was as of last
fiscal year and the return on it
was the 8.66%. The 8.66%, and so
this year,
Would you say that that would
increase?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, our fund
value, uh, will 1.8, yeah, just
under 18.8 billion, um, and will
be
Reporting our uh we're still
closing out the books, but I
expect we'll be somewhere in the
same
neighborhood as next time. OK.
OK, and so the issue that I'm
I'm looking at here is that you
have more retiree, you're you're
going to at some point and
you're not reporting all the
retirees as of this date today.
Uh, this was 2024, so there's
probably more retirees, and the
issue that I see coming is um
There's a, it's gonna be
lopsided because we're gonna
have more retirees than we have
people paying into the fund, um.
And of course, that's gonna be
an issue, so especially when
we're talking about.
Maybe a cola.
I mean, how are we gonna pay
those existing retirees, um. And
so I guess my question is,
Does
Work with HRs across the state
municipal and county to try to
recruit positions that are
vacant. I mean, do we have that
discussion ever. Uh, Madam
Chair, we, we work with each
entity, um.
With their business people and
their HR, but not as far as uh.
As a recruit, we, we can't.
Make counties or an employer or
hire. No, I understand that and
so we, we don't, and we don't
get information on.
You know
I told you we have 88 FTEs, but
two vacancies. We don't know how
much their budget to budgeted
for for employees, we just get
how many people they're paying.
So, other than it being a
And to the
to.
The committee because I think
that in a lot of instances,
there's a lot of positions that
are vacant in a lot of the HRs.
Across the city, county and
state.
Um, and I, you know, recruiting
those individuals is something
that.
And I'm not saying that this
committee can do that, but I
mean at some level there has to
be somebody listening that would
be aware that we need to start
filling those positions in order
to start.
Cause this fund is actually
created.
To sustain itself in a sense,
but it's not being time if we,
if we continue in this trend,
um,
And so I just raised that as an
issue, is that's something that
we should be really.
thinking about is how our
participating employers, and
then the second piece of that,
um.
Is um the contribution rates.
Um, those contribution rates, I,
I know municipal, I know C of
Albuquerque has higher
contribution rates than, for
example, the county of Berlio
or, you know, uh, city of Santa
Fe. So I mean there's different
ways to achieve this balance,
but
Asking municipal municipalities
or the state or the county to
increase their contribution
rates is another issue, because
it takes away from their budget.
And so, um, I'm just putting
these issues for things that we
should be thinking about in the
future, and I've thought this
through for many, many years,
guys, and
It was on Para for 8 years and
you know I watched how these
things and I watched the fall.
In 202009 and then again 2013, I
guess, so I just, these are and
and senator um Gonzalez and I
were talking about this, and he,
he mentioned to me history has a
big effect on this, and as I was
thinking about his comment, I
was sort of thinking through
some of these.
Issues that
You know, here we are tasked
with how do we
Preserve this fund and make it
stronger for our employees, and
I know you guys are gonna be
talking about that.
Um, you said next week, right?
Uh, Madam Chair, 2 weeks. In 2
weeks. And if I may, Madam
Chair, just on the contribution
side, um.
Since I started, I, I started
with the state in 2003, um, I
believe contributions between
the employee and.
Um, so it's not, and we're not
saying the legislature hasn't
done anything because that's a
huge increase and you see the
dollar amounts just the benefits
that were promised.
You know, we're properly paid
and we don't already receiving
the benefits.
And I know you don't have a a
magic ball or whatever a crystal
ball, but if the economy were to
change and maybe in a negative
way, then we could even go
further in in the negative, I
guess, um, and those formulas
would again have to be.
Somehow reviewed by this by the
legislature. Hopefully, we go in
the positive, um, but I think
that, you know, it's, it's
something now.
Um, all, I mean, there's a lot
of different variables is what
I'm saying, and how those
variables, I mean, the stock
market and then.
You know, the contribution rates
and the formulas that we look in
and the investments that we
make. I mean, there's just like
so much going on, um, how do we
create
At least one of those variables
that's or a couple of those
variables that are stable.
Now, I had one more question,
and this is regarding smoothing
and you're, cause I know that
there is a process involved
because you have so many
different um funds.
That in the end, when you get to
those total value of 17.8.
There is a process of smoothing
and could you explain that?
Sure. Uh, Madam Chair and
members, so
it's called the actuary value of
assets, and we, we smooth that
over a four-year period. And
what that does is that reduces
the volatility.
What happens to us, what it
looks like.
Uh, so there, there could be a
year where we return less. We
don't, we don't take that.
that loss up front. We smooth it
over a 4 year period, um, just
like last year, we exceeded the
7.25%.
We don't take that full return
and apply it right away. We
smooth the ups and the downs
over a 4-year period. So our
investment return 8.66% in our,
in our actuarial evaluation when
we smooth it in, um, that, that
actuarial value or return is
going to be probably be
somewhere around 6%.
So it just kind of reduces the
volatility, so there's not so
many shocks.
And is that how you get your
amateur amortization period of
52 years. Madam Chair, not, not
the amortization period, um,
that's just what our actuaries
see with what's happening now,
that we think about it like a
house, that's when we'll pay off
the mortgages 52 years, uh, the
smoothing just reduces kind of
the volatility. All right, well,
I just wanted to present that to
the committee because I think
that's an important point of how
they get to these, you know, um,
it's not just
This is the figure and this is
the figure, and those are the
figures that are across time or
across space or that space
anyway, um, that smoothing
process does
Affect all of this, so I just
wanted to mention that
Representative Lujan.
I, I mean, and just to add a
little bit, I don't know that
you, um, that we heard from.
From, um, Mr. Truhiro, um, about
the.
The ranking of of Perra, um,
nationally with the American
investment.
council, and I don't know if you
wanted to make mention of that,
just based on all the things
you're talking about, all these
variables and all the things
that you have to do, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, in pointing
that out uh just yesterday it
became public, uh, our private
equity returns, um, for the 2nd
year in a row has been in the
top 10 in the country, uh, for
returns, I believe we're at
15.92%, uh, in our
Private equity portfolio. Um,
so, you know, when we assume
7.25% of our assumed rate return
private act to almost 16%, so
very, very proud of uh.
The team that does private
equity uh for us, um, both
currently and and just yeah,
just came out yesterday.
Thank you for pointing that out.
Thank you,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm gonna come at this from a
little bit different angle here
and and uh so I'm a
self-employed businessman and
have been.
Um, nobody promised me a blanket
anywhere.
parachute anywhere.
And I think that we'd be remiss
if, if we didn't tell the folks
who went to work for the state
or.
Judges or whoever.
You can go invest on your own.
But if you think this is going
to take care of you, you are
sadly mistaken.
I wish that what we could do is
we could give everybody their
own money and say go invest
where you want to invest.
Take it or leave it. Um, but
you, you have to live with it
once we do that. So, um, do we
do anything with new hires, for
example, and let them know that,
hey.
When you're, you're like this
gray-headed guy over here.
when you're 20.
And start saving and doing other
things because this isn't going
to take care of you. Do we do
that with new employees?
Madam Chair and represent
Duncan. Uh, we do as much as
possible. We, we do have an
outreach group uh that travels
the state, um, and we try to get
into as many new employee
orientations as we can, um, and
you know, participating in Per,
it's, it's a condition of
employment, but as you say,
that's probably not gonna be
enough.
Um, so we try to push the
deferred compensation plan, um,
hard.
When somebody starts
And
It's hard to say, but we, you
know, we
Try to educate them about Social
Security as well. I mean,
because with what we have at
Perro, that's kind of the three
legged stool you've got your
pension, you've got your, uh,
savings in the firm so, so we
try to educate as much as we
can, um, you probably remember
coming out of college if
somebody was talking to you
about that, you probably didn't
pay much attention, uh, but, you
know, we, we, we do the best we
can and and and you know,
everybody says kids today, they
don't, they don't care about
retirement, um.
When I started, I didn't care
about retirement. When you
started, you probably, you know,
you.
I'm, I'm at 22 years, I'm, I'm
looking forward to it, so it,
it, it helps
Thank you, ma'am, sure, and, and
uh I appreciate that, uh.
I, uh, I bought my first real
estate when I was 18 years old.
Kept it going for many, many
years. So I just, what I don't
want to see, and I think the
fireman's Creed is, is, what is
the fireman's creed? Your lack
of preparation that part.
And we seem to want to go back
and help folks, um, that didn't
do things outside of their
retirement with the state.
And, and, uh, and then we're
going to take money from every
one of these tax-paying citizens
and say we're going to go ahead
and help this crew because they
didn't do what they needed to
do. So, what do you, and thank
you, Madam Chairman, one last
question. What are you
comfortable with on the funded
ratio?
Um, for the next 50 years of
your life, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan.
What do I think it's going in
the next 50 years? No, I said
what are you comfortable with?
Ideally, it'd be 100 if we can
get to the 75, 80%.
And show that that is
Sustainable or improving better.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I think that's, uh,
you know, something that we as
legislature ought to help you
do.
Are there any other comments for
Greg?
Apparently not. Um, thank you
all. We look forward to hearing
from you again after your
retreat and uh.
wondering what the board has to
say about some of these
questions and uh.
Appreciate your presentation was
very good. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members.
Looks like uh for the committee
we're about 30 minutes ahead of
schedules, which is great.
I, yeah, I know that's
wonderful, so I'm just gonna
keep moving if we have our next
presenters.
Here, um,
We have the retiree healthcare
Authority, and just for the
record and the.
Webcast land out there. We are
about 30 minutes ahead of
schedule, um, but we are gonna
go ahead with our next
presentation, the retiring
Healthcare Authority, and today
with us we have.
Neil Kiefer, the executive
director of retiree Healthcare.
And you can also kneel, um, Mr.
Kiefer introduced your guest.
Please.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I
appreciate the extra 30 minutes
for our presentation. Just
kidding, just kidding.
No, but as far as with my guest
today we'll have to see about
that. My guess is if we took a
vote up here
on the left hand side of me is
actually my deputy director,
Miss Linda Attenio, who will be
helping me present today.
Um, she's been at the agency for
coming up close to a year with a
lot of uh private industry
experience, so I'm happy to have
her and uh enjoying to have her
up with me, uh, in this process,
um, but with that, Madam Jara,
let me know if there's anything
else, if you'd like us to start
or not.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, we
appreciate the opportunity
today. Uh, if you do see as far
as the agenda and what we will
be covering, you'll see it on
page 2. There are many items
that will be going through today
that really kind of affects our
program as well as our members.
I mean, because this is really.
The benefits that we offer to
our members and when we make
changes, when we do premium
increases, uh, they're the ones
that are being affected. They're
the ones that are having to pay
it. So we don't take that
lightly, uh, we really do try
to, uh, ensure that we are
providing a comprehensive and
affordable benefits to our
members.
Uh, but we do recognize, uh, the
different challenges that we'll
also be talking about as we
continue to go through this. So
as far as what we'll be covering
today, um, you'll see for the
1st 4 bullets, we'll kind of
give you a little bit of a
background in regards to the
retiree Health Care Act, our
board of directors, some agency
updates and agency overviews.
We'll get a little bit more into
detail as far as our historical
contributions, which is a
revenue source that we do
receive. We'll look at our
enrollment, um, as far as the
participation for our members,
they do pay premiums when you
are in retirement, so that is
another.
revenue source that we do
receive.
And then we'll look at some of
the benefits and premiums, kind
of telling you exactly what we
offer and what they're paying in
regards to that. Some of the
other areas that we look at that
really are just tools that we
use for our organization.
has to do with our solvency and
so we'll provide you some
solvency updates of uh where
we've last reviewed and where we
stand today. And a lot of the
assumptions that we go into it,
um, once I get to that slide in
that page, I do apologize. It's
rather small and there's a lot
of number of items, uh, with
healthcare, there's just a lot
of different assumptions and a
lot of different variables that
can play into uh being able to
calculate that solvency.
Um, some of the other things
that we'll look at is the upward
pressures to the plans. We'll
look at some of the board
actions that they've done.
Uh, over the years to kind of
ensure that we are sustaining
this program not only for today,
but also making sure that we're
moving into the future for
future retirees.
Um, when they do get the
opportunity to participate, and
then we want to make sure that
we're also lowering that
unfunded liability, so we have
some information regarding that
as we refer to our GASB, and of
course our investments and
performance will be also going
through that. Um, so many
different items, but uh we look
forward to having the
conversation and thank you once
again. And at this time, I'll
turn over to my colleague who's
going to take us to the early
part of the agenda.
All right.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, as Mr. Kiefer
said, I'm Linda. I'm the deputy
director. I have been at retiree
healthcare for about 10 months
now, almost, almost getting to
that year, pretty excited, um,
lots of stuff has happened in
those 10 months, lots of
education, um, and just being
really glad to be part of um the
service to New Mexico.
Um, I actually have been in the
New Mexico market insurance
market for 33 years. Um, I have,
uh, been on the other side, uh,
employed by the vendors, uh, but
specifically for the state
agencies I've been involved with
state agencies and public sector
insurance since 1992, uh, and
with the retiree healthcare
since 1996, so, uh, I knew them
well when Mr. Kiefer approached
me to um join the team, so very
excited to be here.
Um, I consider myself an
advocate uh for members, so this
is the right place for me at
this time.
Um
About the retiree Health Care
Act in 1990, as you know, uh,
the retiree healthcare, uh, the
legislature passed the retiree
Health Care Act, which created
the retiree healthcare agency.
And it was for a specific reason
to um.
A purpose of providing group
health insurance for the
employees and their dependents
who retired from public from
public service in New Mexico.
That included the state of New
Mexico Agency, public schools,
and county and city governments.
Prior to 1990, these retirees
were set out on their own to
purchase insurance in the
individual markets, so it was a
great thing that was done here.
The passing of the act provided
a comprehensive benefit
offering.
Retirees now have access to
medical, dental, vision,
prescription drug coverage, and
life insurance.
The plants include coordination
with Medicare for eligible
retirees, including the
supplemental and Medicare
Advantage plans.
In addition to many uh to the
offering are many wellness
programs and the added value
programs that we get from the
vendors that we procure with.
The legislature retains
authority to adjust
contributions and rates,
participants and coverage
options.
Uh, we are also governed by an
11 member board.
Of directors overseeing the
health care coverage for
retirees of the state agencies
and public entities.
Theorist staff in setting
parameters and overseas
operations. The retiring
healthcare fund, um.
was um created, and that
consists of premiums,
appropriations, and investments.
This includes employee and
employer contributions prior to
their retirement.
Separate from the retiree
healthcare fund, the agency
maintains a separate investment
account.
Which includes oversight by the
New Mexico State Investment
Council responsible for man
wealth funds for New Mexico. On
page 5, we have a little, uh,
information about our current
board, um, as of June of 2025.
Um
Our president uh is Teresa
Sanders, our vice president is
Mr. Thomas Salazar.
And missed our secretary is the
board um has a a broad range of
public entities, uh, members
from public entities and retiree
groups like the New Mexico
Education Association's
association of counties.
The Healthcare Authority, public
employees retirement, and of
course the education retirement
board.
We hold monthly meetings with
full agendas with staff
operation reports and
presentation from our vendor
partners.
In addition to several committee
meetings, executive finance,
legislative wellness, uh, to
discuss focused.
Um, items, uh, regarding the
daily operations. And then we
bring him to the board for
discussion, and sometimes action
items.
The meetings are posted for
public attendance, so we welcome
all of you, uh, to our next
board meeting or any of them
that you can like you can catch.
Um, the appointments are made
for some of these, um.
Um
We have some appointments that
are made by respective
organizations or entities and
members serve at their pleasure.
Alternates may not be designated
for ex officio members, but
other board members cannot
appoint help now because I can
breathe again. I'm just a little
nervous. I don't know. Don't be
nervous,
um, but if I would ask you when
you're speaking, if you could
just refer to whatever page
you're talking to.
Yeah, so we're on page 6 right
now.
So a few agency updates.
So currently we are getting
ready for our annual board
meeting.
Which will be Thursday, July
24th and Friday, July 25th in
Cloudcroft, New Mexico.
The the annual board meeting
allows us a couple of days to
discuss agency business, new
election of board members.
Um, our investment updates and
asset allocation review.
Uh, we have many of our vendors
there, um, who do provide
presentations and updates to
their um
To, to the respective companies.
Um, we do have our medical
dental vision vendors who come
and we gives us an opportunity
to catch up on any happenings
that are happening to those um
carriers and.
And contracts that we have.
It also is a time for us to
discuss um plan changes for the
new fiscal year.
Um, we have
Or um
We have self-insured plans, um,
self-insured rate increases, um,
that may be happening this year
as they have unfortunately with
the trajectory of healthcare,
uh, we're not seeing decreases
anymore. We just see increases.
Um, so we do have um some plan
changes that we like last year
we had an increase to our
pre-medicare plans, uh, we had a
Increase from 2% to 3%.
And on our Medicare supplement,
uh, it was increased last year
by 2%.
Uh, our Medicare Advantage
plans, um, we do have, we did,
um.
Have an increase on our $0 plan,
and we had some increases of up
to 42% last year.
Um, the, the
The changes for fiscal year 26
that began in January of 26 are
to be determined. This is part
of the discussions that we will
have with the board during our
meeting, so we can propose, uh,
what the.
Uh, renewals have brought, and
then what we recommend what we
recommend to the board, plus all
the information as to how we get
to those recommendations.
We didn't have last year to plan
eliminations because of federal
um a change we did remove two
plants, we eliminated the.
Medicare Plan 2 options for all
of our Medicare Advantage plans,
and all of those members were
moved into the plan ones. So
that happened, uh, for.
January of 25.
Uh, we don't have any federal
changes this year, so I think um
depending on what our
recommendations are and what the
board votes on, um.
We feel pretty confident that
we.
The board of directors meetings
um are the first Tuesday of each
month, unless otherwise
specified. Again, we do invite
all of you to attend our
meetings. Um, we'd love to have
you as, as a guest.
Uh, we do have the committee
meetings prior to the board
meetings as needed.
We also have annually our fall
open and switch enrollment.
Uh, that happens between October
1st and November 15th.
Um, we're after the board
meeting, we get back and we jump
right into preparation for that.
Uh, what we do is we.
Take all of the recommendations
and what was voted on.
voted on by the board, we
translate that into
communication to our members,
and we do mail outs uh via our
um.
be a male and then we also post
on the website, the newsletter,
and then we communicate uh by
postcards just to try to get
enough information out to each
one of the members enrolled in
our plans.
We recently also uh participated
in a procurement to um obtain a
consultant, uh, for our upcoming
pharmacy benefit RFP.
Uh, so we
Along with the other Iback
agencies participated in that.
The new consultant.
will um help us to develop.
The RFP and release it sometime
in a little bit more about the
agency.
Um, again, established in July
of 1990.
Um, with full benefit package,
we started off with about a
little over 15,000 members at
that time. Uh, we only had like
a 6 month lead in to collect um
members that were paying into
the program.
And so we started um paying
claims January of 1991.
Uh
Currently, we have um about 93
93,000 active employees that
contribute to the healthcare
authority fund.
We have about 65,000 retiree
participants.
And we have about 304 public
employer groups that contribute
into the retiree healthcare.
50% are schools, 25% are state
agencies, and 25% are local
government.
And again, the purpose of the
retiree healthcare, uh, we have
a motto at retiree healthcare.
It's the New Mexico retiree
Healthcare Fosters quality of
life and peace of mind by
responsibly administering
affordable, secure healthcare
benefits for our public retirees
and their families.
We have a wonderful staff that
helps us to live up to that.
Um, I guess the purpose for um
The retiree Health Care Act and
providing those services, we do
have our, as far as our budget,
we run on a budget of about
411.1 million is our operating
budget.
406.7 million of that pays for
our healthcare benefits.
And then about 4 million.
4. 4.5 million.
Um, supports our programs and
our 28 full-time employees.
Our revenue sources are um of
course the employee and the
employer contributions.
The retiree monthly premiums
that we collect once they enroll
with us.
Uh, we have tax suspension fund
distributions.
We have some miscellaneous,
which are normally are funds
that we collect from our vendors
through performance guarantees
or tax rebates.
And then we, of course, also
have interest on our right,
we're on page 8 now.
Um, a little bit about the
historical, uh, about our
contributions.
So in 1990 when we started with
a little over 15,000 members.
Um
We started the employees were
contributing about 0.5% of their
Um, income. So these are active
employees that were paying into
the fund.
Um
And
We categorize our our members as
non-enhanced retiree plan
members and enhanced retiring
members. So as you see on the
grid, uh, this is the breakout
for both of those. We did start
off with no pre-material
funding. We didn't have a trust
fund or any type of reserves.
Um, the payroll contributions
for comprehensive benefits, um,
started at the time that we the
program started.
And then
What we've done thus far is this
this has grown from that 15,000
over to.
65,000 members now.
Um
We currently, as far as the
non-enhance enhancement
retirement versus the
enhancement retirement,
enhancement retirement retirees
include our public safety
retirees.
And so basically the difference
is, um,
The number of years that they
have to um be enrolled, uh, or
to participate in the fun is 20
years versus the non-enhanced
retirees, which is 25 years.
Now, that did change it before
July 31st of 2021, the enhanced
employees also, um,
Only had to be part of the fund
for 20 years.
Uh, we did change that, and that
was changed specifically for the
to encourage um long, long
public.
Service
To and to strengthen the funding
base.
Um, also to improve the solvency
of the retiree healthcare fund,
which had significant
improvement since 25% funded in
2021 to almost um
55 or 505.
in 2024.
So again, this also helped us
align benefits with the rising
cost of.
Um, the current contributions
for employees is still at 1% of
salary.
Uh, for the employee and for the
employer.
These contributions support the
retiree healthcare fund.
Um
And helps us to provide.
just one second I wanted to
clarify, it was the Don and hand
that we had to change with, that
was the one used to be 20 years,
it was similar to the enhanced,
which is the police and fire,
through that rule change that
did take place, which the board
had discussed for many years,
uh, in regards to this. In fact,
there was even some delays in
implementing this, uh,
originally it was going to go in
January. We understood this was
gonna cause some problems for
the schools. So we had actually
pushed it back to the end of
July.
Um, in regards to this rule
change, which we had taken a
couple different meetings, uh,
we know that putting the minimum
age of 25 and 25, minimum age of
55 in the 25 years of service,
uh, definitely affected many
retirees, uh, even, uh, future
retirees that be going into the
program, but it was a change
that the, the board looked at
kind of in uh similar to the
pension plans where they had
their move for the 25 years to
30 years, uh, with a lot of
individuals, uh, as far as
starting the new retirement
pension. So, uh, it was a
similar change like that.
All right, on page 9, this will
show you um some information
about our enrollment counts from
2015 through 2025.
Um, we have seen.
Uh, a decrease in our
non-medicare from 2015 to 2020.
And then from 2020 to 2025.
And that probably is attributed
to the age requirement change.
And then less subsidy for
premiums.
Um
There has been an there was an
increase in enrollment on our
Medicare from 2015 to 2020.
And the minim minimal from 2020
to 2025.
So there's a lot of factors into
our members, I think.
Lets people retiring earlier,
um, and then our retirees, we,
we have seen an increase in our
retiree deaths.
And this we attribute to some of
those folks that
Retired in the 1990s are still
enrolled with us now, 35 years
later.
We are seeing more of those.
Um, many, many retirees who
began service in 1990 would have
been eligible for benefits under
the original 1990 Health Care
Act, which required just 5 years
of service at that members of
the committee, I know this is a
question that's kind of come up
before is where, where do we see
some of this decrease? I think
in the pre-medicare, you know,
of course, it's the rule change
that's been taking place. What
are we seeing in regards to our
Medicare? Well, a lot of that is
going to be the agent from our
pre-medicare, so as we've seen
some of our population from our
pre-medicare kind of decreasing,
that's also leading, I think.
A little bit to our Medicare,
maybe not increasing it in, uh,
increasing at the same rate, um,
as, as my deputy did state, um,
I know one of the questions is,
is, you know, what are the other
reasons for people leaving? We
really don't see a lot of people
leaving. We do have some, don't
get me wrong, they can go to the
open market, they can look at
other plans that are available,
but the real driving force is
actually uh the uh
unfortunately, our retirees or
their dependents who are passing
away. Uh, we have over 1300
claims that we process death
claims, uh, which was for 2024
over 1300, the year
before in 2023, or I should say
23, 22. Um, so that's a bigger
proportionate of actually what
we have coming into the plan
that unfortunately we have that
we're processing as far as for
those death claims. So that's
part of where we see a little
bit more of that stagnant
population. I will say we still
do get calls from other entities
that are wishing to participate
with us. We have had a few small
ones that have joined us, uh,
that I know a couple years ago,
the Southwest College had joined
us, uh, most recently, we had
one of the other local
governments that joined us, so
every now and again, we do have
a few that aren't currently
participating.
with us that are looking to
joining the program.
OK.
On page 10, um, this is just a
distribution of the enrollments
by household, um, statewide.
And so, um, we have.
We have members in every single
county in New Mexico. And so
when we make decisions regarding
healthcare, uh, decisions are
made to encompass everyone in
every single county, uh,
especially those rural areas
where we have healthcare deserts
where there is no health care or
they have to travel, um, 2 or 3
hours to get to healthcare. So
again, this is something that we
make sure we, you know.
We want to make sure that we
take into account all of the
retirees statewide.
We do have about 5300 members
that live out of state.
that have left New Mexico, and
then we have about 5 that live,
uh, excuse me, can you get us a
breakdown of how many
Um
More or less pre-M Medicare.
And then how many Medicare, uh,
you know, how many members are
in each of those categories,
please, you don't have to do it
now. I'm just asking.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair. So on page
10, this is the household I can
tell you for households we have
about 48,000 to over 40,000
that's being displayed in this,
uh, as far as the map for New
Mexico. However, if you go to
page 9, page 9 is actually going
to give you a breakout of our
pre-medicare member uh
population. So our pre-medicare
is going to be all the top 4
lines, which is the Blue Cross
Blue Shield Premier Plus,
Premier Premier Plus, and
Premiere. Now those names have,
uh, which I'll be talking about
through some of the board
actions, have evolved a little
over the time.
you will see where they've been
uh renamed where we now have the
premiere and the value. So those
top 4 lines are gonna be our,
our pre-medicare population and
then starting with the Blue
Cross Blue Shield Medicare
supplement and every plan below
that, that's gonna be our
Medicare population. Uh, you can
see where our, our Medicare
supplement plan uh has decreased
a little bit over the years, but
it's about an even split today
between our supplement plan and
our Medicare Advantage plans.
Um, so it's pretty fifty-fifty
as far as what our members are
selecting, um, in regards to
that, but we do feel
For many of our individuals that
are participating in our plan
with Medicare Advantage, it
really gives you different
options, uh, you know, having a
$0 copay, uh, of course, we do
have some more expensive ones
that, you know, for a fully
subsidized employee could be up
to about $99 but it gives them a
little bit of flexibility, gives
them choice as far as the
networks they want. Is it going
to be an in-state or out of
state benefit that they've been
utilizing it or they have the
option of the sub plan, so
there's a lot of choice that
that gives them hopefully uh the
option to pick what's best for
them and their family. And, and
I appreciate.
The enrollment counts and the
breakdown, but I don't know
based on that, how many are
disabled, and how many are over
65.
So I'm just, that's what I'm
asking. Thank you.
Go ahead.
Um, on page 11, um, these are
our current offerings, Mr.
Kiefer touched a little bit on
these. So we currently offer,
uh, for pre-medicare, which is
our um P 65 and non-disabled, we
offered two value HMO plans, um,
you can select, uh, those are
administered by Presbyterian and
Blue Cross Blue Shield.
And then we have 2 PPO plans,
uh, preferred provider
organizations, um, also
administered by Presbyterian and
Blue Cross Blue Shield.
And so the breakdown on page 9
kind of gives you where our
membership is distributed for
each of these uh plants.
Uh, for medic for Medicare
Medical, these are members that
are 65+, um, or disabled.
We have one supplement plan
that's administered by Blue
Cross Blue Shield.
And then we have 5 Medicare
Advantage plans and they have
the choice of United Healthcare,
Humana, Presbyterian.
Blue Cross Blue Shield, HMO, and
then in 2025, we added the Blue
Cross Blue Shield PPO plan as
well.
So this gives our members um
Many options, as far as um what
plan they can be.
We also have our voluntary
benefits, uh, we have.
For dental, we have the Delta
dental plan, and then also in
2025, we added a Blue Cross Blue
Shield dental plan.
We offer two options of basic
option and a comprehensive
option.
And so this again gives members
by adding that Blue Cross Blue
Shield it gave them um a second
option for dental coverage.
vision, we continue to have a
contract with Davis Vision.
And then we offered the
supplemental term life policy,
um, which is through the
standard insurance company.
OK.
On page 12, um.
Then this provides you
information on our under 65
self-insured plans. Again, we
offer the premier PPO and the
value PPO administered by Blue
Cross Blue Shield and grid up on
top, um, gives you basically our
pre 2017 through 2025 for each
of those plans. It also has our
supple Blue Shield.
And it gives you what the the
enrollment counts, um, so 8,0499
on the premier plan and then
3,218 on the value plan.
And then, of course, I
supplement if that's over 65
members of our Medicare, that is
20,000 on the Medicare Advantage
plans on page 13.
This gives you a grid that.
Shows all of the carriers that
we have had between 2075.
Um, it also gives, um,
Actual uh premiums that our
members have paid.
And if we look at the Medicare
Advantage, um,
Our premiums back in 2017 were
actually higher than some of the
premiums that we have now in
2025.
So there were some things that
happened. There were some
federal mandates. There was uh
additional reimbursement that
CMS provided for Medicare
Advantage plans that help those
plants decrease.
The premiums, um, and so that
impacts us, which is in a good
way, because we were able on the
plans as well.
Um
For calendar year 25, um, the
last 3,
There's 3 blank spaces there,
and those are the option uh
removed for uh fiscal year 25
because of the Fed.
Inflation reduction Act, where
our um the prescriptions are
capped at $2000.
And so that change led us to
remove those plans because
The membership on our plans is
on the right hand side here, the
total membership for Medicare
Advantage is 2.
And uh for each of the
respective plants, um, 2000 117.
Um, Presbyterian has 1,938.
are United Healthcare is at
8,746.
Blue Cross Blue Shield, HMO is
4800 pointing out that the Blue
Cross Blue Shield plan is the
first year was last year, um, it
covers members in the plan. So
again, giving members um in
state auctions. OK. Thank you,
members of the committee. I'm
gonna take over on slide 14 in
regards to our solvency. Um, so
the current solvency that is
being displayed is actually in
regards to last year's meeting
that we have for annual board
meeting where they had actually
determined as far as the
changes that would take place
was going to be the 2% for pre-M
Medicare that would be for the
uh retiree and spouse and
there's about 3% for the
dependent children and then it
was 2% for the medical
supplement plan as far as a rate
increase. Uh, once again, with
our solvency as we look through
our solvency, we take many
factors into consideration. We
look at our medical trend as far
as what our costs are being
determined. We look at the
revenue as far as any additional
revenue that we'd be receiving,
whether that be through maybe
some of the pay raises that uh
state employees and teachers may
getting that's, that's a.
A component of this that would
actually go into the revenue.
Um, we would also see as far as
any of the premium changes we
know as far as making that
decision, whether it be this
percent, higher or lower, that
all gets taken into account, and
that really helps us to
determine where we're at in our
solvency. One of the things that
we're really looking at here
with our solvency is one, we're
looking at the longevity of the
program, which we do see that
this goes beyond 2055.
The other thing we look at is we
look at the deficit spending. So
when we're looking at this
particular chart, you can
actually see that little uh red
or oranges box right there in
the middle, and that really
shows that as far as for fiscal
year 2034 to fiscal year 2037,
where we are going to be deficit
spending. That has to do with
where our expenses start to
exceed our revenue.
And we're, where that brings
concern to us is when we start
having that occur, then we have
to start tapping into our trust
fund. Once we start tapping into
our trust fund, we're not going
to get the same returns. And
it's going to start bringing it
down a little bit sooner than
we'd like. Uh, we know that our
unfunded liability has not hit
where we're at. So our goal is
really to try and push off that
deficit spending and really not
starting to pull from the trust
fund till it's really needed. So
this is something that we really
look at on an annual basis. Um,
it does vary based on changes,
so it can be be impactful. We'll
once again look at it this year,
looking
As far as what healthcare trend
is, seeing what our claims came
in for our current members and
then seeing what possible
adjustments that may be
necessary, and these will be
brought to the board as far as
the information that are
actuaries come up with. We'll
give them some different
scenarios that they get the
opportunity to look at, seeing
where it's gonna put us in
regards to our solvency, as well
as really take it into
consideration what kind of
impact it's gonna have to our
members. Uh, I do know our board
who has worked diligently over
the years for this, uh, has
really had to make some tough
decisions, but they've really
done it in an effort to
ensure that this program is
going to be around now and in
the future. So it is one of the
balances that they really do in
regards to that.
Um, as mentioned, one of the
other factors that really played
into the the solvency was the
minimum age of 55, as well as
the fact that there was the
change in the uh years of
service, uh, that's one of the
other things that they kind of
move and shift a little bit as
far as extending that and
something that was taken into
account.
As we do move on to slide 15.
This is where I kind of
apologized a little bit before.
Uh, once again, this takes into
account those different
assumptions and there's a number
of assumptions that are going in
there. So each one of these can
play a part in this solvency
study. Um, so when we name a few
of these as far as when we're
looking at it, it could be
looking at the payroll growth.
Um, taking into account where we
started with our asset balance,
seeing where that's going to
grow. We look at our investment
return, which is currently
looking at 7%. We look at the uh
um increases as far as to any uh
pension tax revenue that we're
going to receive. We're looking
at our prescription rebates that
we receive, uh, looking at any
of the egg whip that we get for
being a part D plan for Medicare
as far as those subsidies and
reinsurance fees that come with
us.
And we received those dollars.
Uh, we also received a
low-income subsidy. Now that's
more of a pass through. This is
something for some of our
individuals who are on Medicare
and are lower income can
actually receive support with
their premiums. So through this
program, it's kind of just one
of those things where we
participate and then that money
does go to our retirees to help
them with those premiums.
Uh, other things we're gonna
look at is gonna be the trend of
our Medicare Advantage. Um,
unfortunately, we've seen a
couple plans over the last
couple of years. I've seen some
higher increases. Um, I am happy
to report though. I've also seen
a couple of our plans that
aren't gonna be holding uh
steady this year. Uh, so it's
unfortunately a little bit of a
mix, probably looking at their
claims experience, looking at
what their costs are, um, but
that is something that we look
at, uh, once again though, with
those increases, if any of our
members are maybe dissatisfied
or don't like the increase or
maybe the plan's not working for
him. That's where we have the
October
to November, open enrollment
where we do actually go out in
the road, go to many different
communities around the state. We
also have some online virtual
meetings so that these retirees
could hear all the information,
here are the different changes
we have as far as it increases
for, for premiums plan design,
and then they can make the best
choice for them and their
families. But that is part of
this uh calculation as I do move
on to page 16, you'll see a few
more of those assumptions. I
just wanted to make sure that I
included, um, because these are
all components that really play
into that.
le van c y uh, but just the
shows also any plan design
changes for our self-insured
plans, whether we make any
co-pay changes as far as
increasing on our medical or
prescriptions copays, uh, that
does have an effect on our
plans.
And then really looking at the
last category of our member, uh,
migration and participation. Uh,
we work with our actuaries and,
and who have obviously many
years of education, uh, in
studying this, and they do try
and anticipate what some of the
migration may be between our
members, uh, particularly when
we maybe have a higher costing
plan with a lower costing plan,
seeing exactly maybe what
something on migration may be in
our membership might actually
serve their needs and get a
better price for them.
Moving on to slide 17, we kind
of look at some of the upward
plant pressures that we do have
to take into account from year
to year. Um, one of the most
recent ones, as was noted, was a
federal mandate to the Medicare
Part D, which was the inflation
reduction Act, uh, prior to this
year, they had put a cap of 8000
then for this year, they had
actually implemented a cap of
2000 for all of our Medicare
participants. uh, next year,
that does go up to 2100, but
this was something that uh we
probably couldn't have foreseen
many years back that there was
gonna be this cap. So there's a
little bit of a shift in that
cost while it's a
great thing in providing
additional protections for our
members, it is going to add a
little bit more of that cost
that's going to come to the
program and having to actually
pay for those particular costs,
uh, that are still required for
those prescriptions and to the,
to the uh pharmacies that we owe
it to.
Uh, we've also seen where some
of the uh premium increases for
our Medicare Advantage plans, as
I did state, uh, a number of
them have actually increased
over the years. Uh, I was happy
that through our last RFP
though, we did receive a very
competitive bid from one of our
vendors who actually came in
with a much lower option that
provided a lot of access to our
members, so, uh, that's
something that we've seen and,
and, and hopefully uh it's an
option that is available to
them.
Uh, the other thing we look at
is our Medicare Advantage star
ratings over the last couple of
years, there's been some changes
that really dictates how our
Medicare Advantage plans get
reimbursed, uh, the less they
get, uh, more than likely
they're going to pass on some of
that cost to our members, and
that does affect the program
because we help subsidize those
medical costs depending on those
years of service that they
contributed to the program. So
that has an effect on our plan
as well.
Yeah, there's nothing we know,
and I'm sure the legislature
this committee is well aware of
is there's been a shortage of
providers and we know what the
state as there continues to be a
shortage of providers, uh, it
really leads to a little bit
more competition with other
states, uh, many times they're
asking for higher reimbursements
to try and attract them, bring
them to New Mexico. Some of that
can be passed on to us at the
commercial plans and trying to
make sure that we have access to
care by needing to maybe pay a
little bit more in order to
ensure those providers are
coming to our state and staying
here, uh, but I am happy to hear
of some of the different
programs that
are being worked on, uh, through
the various committees as well
as to the state, uh, that
hopefully will help bring more
providers and help retain them.
Uh, the last one has been the
increase in prescription drug
costs. This just seems to be uh
a one that continues to, you
know, pop up over the years. Uh,
it's been the specialty
medications, the gene therapy
medications. Many of these when
they first come out based on the
list price of the manufacturers,
um, some of these have started
coming out over a million
dollars where it really focuses
on uh a particular illness, and
while it can save the dollars in
the long run, the way they
projected based on care that a
person would need to receive.
It's a lot for the plans, you
know, as far as having to pick
up the.
costs, uh, but it's a great
thing for our members where in
some of these cases they can
cure some of the ailments that
they do have. Um, other things
such as the specialties and some
of the GLP ones that come out. I
know that's been something many
of you may have seen, uh, on
your TV as there's lots of
advertisements, uh, we do hear
many great things as far as some
of the indications that the GLP
ones can, can help with, uh,
one's been for weight loss,
there's been a lot of debate
exactly in regards to, uh, you
know, the, these drugs for that
usage, but we know that it helps
for diabetes. It's been shown.
For cardiovascular, Alzheimer's.
So we are seeing other
indications that this coming.
However, with some of these
drugs though, they are coming
with a price tag too that we've
really seen them kind of ramp up
and it's actually adding more
costs uh to our plan. Uh, many
of the different states are
going through the same uh uh.
Um
You know,
This issue of cost and trying to
determine how do they cover
these, um, some have maybe made
decisions in certain areas where
they're not going to cover this
drug. Others have made a
determination that they will.
It's been a discussion through
many of the conferences that
I've attended and it's really a
mixed bag between all the
different states. They're really
trying to, you know, gravitate
to see how they can assess this
and make sure that they can keep
their programs viable as well.
10 minutes, thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, moving on a little bit, uh,
page slide 18. Uh, this is as
regards to board actions. I'm
not going to go through every
sound. I know there's a number
on there, but I think I just
wanted to display just a lot of
things that the board has had to
consider those tough decisions
that I talked about, uh, that's
where it shows where we've had
to maybe in some cases increase
deductibles or out of pocket
maximums. Uh, there's been some
elimination of plans. There's
been some plan designs. Um, you
can also see what our premium
rate increases have been, such
as back in 2018, where it was an
8 and 6%, that was a.
occurring for pre-medicare and
supplement. You will see over
the last years, we've really
tried to be conscientious,
trying to really work with our
members, and we've had actually
lower than trend as far as
premium increases. So we're
trying to find that balance and
really trying to help our
members. We know the impact that
these could have as far as
having that compounded amount,
hitting them over and over again
in regards to those premium
increases.
OK, transitioning a little bit
to investments if we move to
slide 19, uh, you will see as
far as the trust fund and the
work that's been done over the
years, this is a 10 year look as
far as our May of 2015 where we
were at 429 million, where we
stand today as out of our last
report that we received for May
of 2025, we are now at $1.7
billion. Um, so this is a, a
great thing that's been a slow
and steady process as you can
kind of see where the grade it's
been continuously slowly going
up.
That's really been through the
investments, it's been through
some of the contributions that
the organization has been able
to put into these investments,
but it's really helping, and as
this continues to go up, this is
one of the biggest indicators
that really helps us in our
unfunded liabilities. So that's
where we've had those increases
that we'll talk about in GASB,
where we seen we we moved from
22 to 33 to 44 to about 46.99 is
our current standing, and it's
really been through these
investments, so it's been the,
the hard work of getting those
returns as well as the
contributions that have gone
into that.
various sources that do help us.
On slide 20 that's gives us a
little bit as far as our
investment performance. This is
gonna be the latest quarterly
report that we did receive from
the uh SIC who utilizes RVK for
this reporting. So it is as of
March 31st, 2025, there's a
slight delay. We'll be getting
the one for the end of June, uh,
probably, uh, uh, mid next, uh,
middle of next month, and we'll
get a little bit more indication
as far as where investments are.
Now, when we look at this, we
can definitely see as far as our
long term strategy, uh, which is
a little bit different than the
pension systems because we don't
know.
necessarily need the liquidity
right now. So we really have
more of a uh outward approach,
um, and, and probably just
making sure that uh we can
hopefully hit our 7% target is
where we're looking at. So for
the years 10 and 7, we are under
that 7, 7%. However, if we look
at year 5, we're above that 7%.
Uh, unfortunately for years 1
and 3, we are lower. However,
when I went back to December
because of the way the snapshot
is taken on these investments,
uh, on your one last year or in
December, I should say, it was
actually much
Much higher for us and it
actually closer to that 7%. So
it does vary a little bit in
regards to the timing of it, uh,
but overall, our strategy is
once again to try and maintain
that 7%. Uh, the way we do this
is we actually do it through a
bi-annual asset allocation
review.
Um, this was, was, was done
regularly through a special
contract that we had as of July
of last year, I was happy to
report. We actually did bring on
an ongoing consultant to assist
us with this evaluation as well
as provide ongoing updates
quarterly to us as well as
helping us stay attuned to what
exactly what's happening in the
market. So if we do move to the
next page, our next slide, we on
slide uh page 21.
Uh, this is another little look
at our investment performance.
Uh, the group that I was talking
about that did come on to
provide these services is
Makita, um, with Mikita, they
actually did this uh back in
December where they were looking
at all of our different
investment pools.
Um, and they also kind of put
with the inception date was
similar to what some of what SIC
does, but you can see as far as
this total fund, they started
looking as far as the inception
date around July of 1992, which
is in the top right corner. They
looked at our total fund as far
as we're, uh, we, we've, we've
been as far as inception, which
is about 7.4%. They do compare
this to another benchmark that
they've used either to RBK or
using their own industry
standard practices and so we're,
and so the benchmark that was
showing there was about 7.6, so
we're just a little bit off from
it. And as
You continue to go down on that
right-hand side, you'll see many
of our other pools as far as
that inception date, ranging
from either May of 2011. We got
some in 2021 that we made some
changes when we did a review
with our consultant as well as
other ones on the next page that
we will see on slide 22, uh,
some changes that we made back
in 2018 for some of our pools.
Um, so this really does give us
an indication of kind of when
these pools did start as well as
what the returns have been
looking at since inception, um,
and for the most part I think
we've been pretty close on
target. There is going to be
some variants, uh, between those
funds as we do see, uh, but it
gives us a good insight and
outlook uh for it, uh, coming up
here in our next week for our
annual board meeting. Uh, once
again, we'll be going through
this with our board. Uh, they'll
be providing some uh
presentations and just education
to our board, uh, once again
regarding this, we know this is
an
important decision, important
part that a work pays in is the
asset allocation, and once again
they'll provide some different
options available to us and to
describe a little bit about the
different risks and returns that
we could get, which I know
you've probably been hearing
through the other pension plans
uh today as far as their
different strategies that they
go through, uh, we'll be kind of
going through the same uh uh
process in, in determining that.
OK, moving on to slide 23, uh,
once again, kind of circling up
all the information we've talked
about between the revenue
between our expenses, looking at
our solvency. This is a, a, a
governmental accounting
standards board requirement that
we do have to actually file for
our GASB 74, and so we do work
with our actuaries for this. And
this is where they're really
taking into our different
liabilities of our current
members and future members as
well as looking at what our
assets are, um, and what we need
as far as our funding. So we can
definitely see from
2006 as an indication early on
where we were only at 3.62%.
When we look at 2017, we were at
11.34%.
As we look at 2024, we're at
46.99%. So you can see that
there has been growth. We are
moving in the right direction. I
think it's being done in a slow
and steady process. I mean,
obviously we would love to get
more in returns, um, but we also
want to make sure we're
conscientious in how we're doing
that, um, because we also want
to make sure that we're also not
putting any additional burden
where we can on our members who
we know are getting their, uh,
you know, pensions and many
times it's on a fixed income, so
we want to be conscientious in
how we're moving slowly through
this process.
But we are moving in the right
direction, uh, hopefully, our
hope is that maybe we'll cross
the 50% this year, uh due to
some of the investment that we
have as far as the returns,
contributions, and we maybe in
expenses. However, that's a
report that we probably won't
get until about November, uh,
for our Gasby 74.
Uh, but with that, Madam Chair,
members, and we do stand for any
questions or contact information
is on the last page. Should you
need to get a hold of me or my
deputy director mistend.
Thank you, Mr. Kiefer and this
Attencio with 2 minutes and 21
seconds doing great.
Um, OK, so we're gonna do about.
Uh, about 40 minutes of
questions if the board, um,
Oh, you've got.
OK, we've got Representative
Lujan.
And then Senator Stefaniks and
Senator Antoinette Dia Lopez,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, man. Uh, thank you
for the presentation and really
getting to
Looking at some of the numbers
and what's going on. Um,
And I may just ask him.
Basic questions here, but um.
You are part of the um of I
back, right for the state
Mot represented Luhan, that is
correct. We are one of the four
entities that is part of IBAC.
Because I, and I'm bringing this
up because you, you, um.
Said that you're looking at for
other.
Groups to join and that would
for increased enrollment, am I
hearing that correctly, madam
Chair.
Can you just clarify that for
me?
Uh, oh, as far as some of the
groups, uh, I'm sorry, when I
say groups that are
participating, some of the
different local uh entities as
far as like Southwest College,
they were not a part of our
system, I think they were
actually under NMSU, I think
they broke away because they
were their own college. So they
were looking for somebody to
participate to provide retiree
benefits to their retirees. So
they actually have petitioned
our board to join us. We did
provide an analysis of what the
buy-in cost would be to join our
program. So they actually become
members directly under us when
they do that. So that's one of
304 entities that participate,
which is the state of New
Mexico. We have all the schools
are required by statute to
participate with us and then we
have many of the cities and
counties that participate with
us. Uh, so that's where they
joined us and so they bring that
population of their actives, as
well as once they become
eligible, then they would allow
for their retirees to start
utilizing the benefits that we
provide. So that's where we get
a little bit of growth and where
we get other membership, uh,
outside of what we have today.
Thank you. That's my, that's the
clarification point that I was,
I was looking for.
And, and just one of the, the,
the question, it goes into um
the reasoning of, you know, we,
we've had to.
On on.
Um, LFC and finance, um, we're
listening to, you know, the, the
different concerns regarding IBA
and and just really keeping uh
or growing those populations as
we heard from the other pension,
um.
Uh, groups today, uh, so I'm
just wondering how, how healthy
that is, and if there is, um, it
was brought to my attention,
there might be some kind of
concern of breaking away from my
back and I just wanna to get any
kind of clarification there,
Madam Chair.
Sure, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Luhan. So in
regards to IBAC, we work very
closely with IBAC as far as our
entity, as well as with uh
Mexico public schools,
Albuquerque Public schools, as
well as the new healthcare
authority, which used to be the
state of New Mexico GST RMD, uh,
before that move. So it's always
been something we've worked very
closely. It is through the
healthcare purchasing Act that
actually does require that we go
out and purchase, uh, medical
and health benefits together. So
as uh was stated by my
colleague, one of the recent
ones that we went through, uh,
was actually for a consultant to
assist us in our.
pharmacy management RFP, um, and
that's once again trying to
leverage all those enrollment of
those lives that we have through
the different groups so that we
can take it out for more buying
power. I'm also happy to
announce that you and I who had
joined us in our last RFP is
actually joining us this year
again once uh once again. And
that's so that they can take
advantage too of the larger
group and trying to get that
buying power. And it's really
looking to see that we can get
one more, uh.
Uh, PBMs that want to respond
because they see like, oh,
there's these 5 entities,
there's this number of
individuals that they have as
far as this population, so that
they want to come in, earn the
business, but we also want that
competition where they're
wanting to give us their best
rates, you know, and making sure
that uh the other elements
they're coming in with are like
customer service, quality
clinical care options. Um, and
that's where we're able to kind
of leverage this through the RFP
and leverage it with the size
that we have as far as
organization. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, thank you. You, you
really clarified that for me and
I.
I'm glad you're you're letting
us know that and just, you know,
the the base of growing that is
really the potential for us to
have the lower rates just as
influenced by the number, the,
the bigger number of individual
individuals we have.
Um, participating. So thank you
for that information. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Our next
Question is from Senator. Thank
you. um, thank you for the
presentation. Um,
I was wondering what is the
overhead that for your agency.
Um, in other words, what exceeds
the benefits that you're
Your, um, constituents received.
The
Madam Lopez, uh, so as far as
what our er our uh I guess
program support, you'd see where
it's about 4.5 million, but that
I've told of our total budget is
typically about 1%. I do know
that was on slide number 7, I
think what our current budget is
for 11, so our, our program
support is at 4.5, so you can
see where we're, we're
approximately that.
So about 1%, and that's in
addition to the overhead for the
insurance companies that you
contract with?
Uh, madam, uh, Chair, uh,
Senator Cia Lopez, yes, so there
is going to be a component in
regards to not the healthcare
benefits, but the ones that help
us with administration. So when
it comes to uh maybe the legal
firm that we work with, whether
it be uh also our consultants
that help us with their
expertise within the benefits
area, um, so we have a few
different in that category, some
IT specialties that we have
consultants would be in there.
However, when in regards to our
health care benefits, you're
gonna see that's going to be in
that other category of the
healthcare program, which was.
The 46 billion I believe is what
what we had quoted in our
Um, 6.7 million, and that's
really going to be all of our
healthcare plans. That's going
to be the Blue Crosses, the
Presbyterians, the Humanas,
that's everything that we're
paying in those administrative
costs as well as the ones that
were self-insured, those claims
that we pay dollar for dollar
when one of our members goes and
they incur a claim, that's where
we got to pay that $1 for dollar
for, but it's the opportunity
that we get to utilize their
networks, their discounts, and
those administrative fees is
what we pay for those.
And and those programs like
Presbyterians overhead is about
16%.
Um, Presbyterian, specifically,
I apolog chair Sen see Lopez, I
don't know exactly specifically
what Presbyterian for their cost
would be within that 406 million
um, I could say.
We do break it out. I know for
our pre-medicare, there are
probably about 46 million, and
then as it relates to our
Medicare where they have the
advantage plan.
Uh, they're gonna be probably
about 20 million, so they're
about 65, 66 million probably
out of that.
So 60 million out of what was
their total?
Um, so, Madam Chair Cerci Lopez,
it's probably gonna be around
60 6 67 million out of that 46.
Now it doesn't necessarily mean
that we would spend all 406
million, um, there's been times
where we're actually, we're many
times we're below that, but that
is where we have our budget set
for right now.
It's even higher than 16%.
Yeah, it could be, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Senator C Lopez with
Blue Cross and Presbyterian,
they are going to be our highest
ones because they're providing
the pre-Meddicare benefits, um,
where the other ones are just
specifically to Medicare. So
with Medicare, we're a secondary
pair. And so you're gonna see
where, of course, you know,
United, Humana, also based on
their membership is much lower,
so they're receiving a lot less
as far as those dollars, uh,
when it comes to Presbyterian
and Blue Cross, they, they have
the pre-medicare where we're
going to see a lot and then uh
with Blue Cross on the
supplement plan, even though it
is a supplement plan,
are actually self-insured for
the 20% that Medicare doesn't
cover. Medicare will be primary
for 80%, we pay 20%. So even
with Blue Cross, there are a
large portion of what our budget
is as well, what we pay for our
membership. How does that
compare with the cost to
individuals who get on the
exchange and, and, and, uh
buy insurance under the
Affordable Care plan.
Uh, Madam Chasenia Lopez. So we
actually do do a lot of analysis
with the board, kind of, you
know, gearing up for annual
board meeting. So in January and
February, we actually put some
different comparisons out of how
our plans on the pre-medicare
side compare against to the
exchange, uh, as far as the out
of pocket, we know that ours is
uh much more benefit as far as
when you go to the doctor, what
you're paying copays, what you
would have in, you know,
different amounts like that.
We're fairly confident in what
we offer. As far as where the
premiums, that's a little bit
difficult to, to know exactly
where we fall if
It's somebody that's not
receiving a subsidy. We believe
that we'd have the lower
premiums. However, somebody that
may be receiving a subsidy on
the exchange and we really don't
know what those percentages
would be. It's a little bit
difficult to compare that, but
overall we're confident in, in
the plans that we offer that we
do when looking at them. In
addition to that, we do also
compare our plans against our
IBAC entities, as I mentioned
before, just to see exactly
where our retiree plans falls in
regards to the active plans as
well.
So, um, if so.
Do you know how many people
within the group of people lead
you sure would be eligible for
subsidies.
those are going away, but that's
another.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Lopez, I
don't know exactly how many as
far as in our group would be
eligible for subsidies through
the exchange. I mean, it is
income-based, um, obviously I
know the subsidies that we, we
provide, you know, to our group,
we provide the same subsidies,
so they're getting a discount by
the years of service they
provided with us. So we know
that we're bringing it down. I
don't know exactly for sure what
some of those individuals may be
able to find on the exchange,
um, one thing I do say that to
kind of keep in mind and even as
it relates to our Medicare
because this question comes up a
lot of times is looking at our
supplement.
where sometimes we have a newly
aged 65 year old who just became
eligible for Medicare and they
sometimes do wonder like, well,
why is the individual rate I'm
getting for the supplement plan
lower than what you guys offer
and the response for that is, is
because we actually pull our
total membership and so we got
individuals who are 65 all the
way on up to over 100. So we're
actually able to keep a more
consistent premium over the
years as far as what those
increases would be. Some cases
they could be a little higher,
but for that 65 year old who may
see the discount today as they
continue to.
they're gonna get re-rated, and
I would almost bet at a certain
point because as an individual
who's not in a big pool,
eventually those rates are going
to be more expensive than ours,
and they would probably come
back looking to our plan to see
about joining.
Thank you. In a future
presentation, I'd like to see
what you provide your board, um,
that is the benefits that you
provide compared to what
somebody could get on the
exchange. Um, the only reason is
I want to really know because
this is expensive.
And I just really want to know
what the benefit the retirees
are getting, how much, how much
of a benefit, um,
They're getting by by choosing
to enroll in your plan versus
going out um into the exchange.
And, and I was intrigued. I'm a
little bit concerned about the
law, the differences that are on
the bottom of page 9, cause it
sounds like your membership is
going down. I was happy to hear
that you're getting other
entities city or a county or
whatever joining because with
insurance, the more people the
better.
But when it, when it looks like
you're shrinking, that means
it's going to make it more
expensive.
Uh, Madam Jason Lopez, we're
happy to provide the comparisons
we actually have them in our
board books, those are on our
websites, public information.
We're happy to forward those to
you, um, and, and that way you
can see some of the comparisons
that we put together not only on
the exchange, we also did it I
think regionally this year, um,
and we can also, uh, which we'll
be putting a new one for the
annual board meeting, um, in
regards to the other statement
as far as our membership, um,
our membership, I think for the
first time in total, this is
actually the first time we've
actually seen a decrease this
last year. It had actually been
on a steady increase.
Um, now it's been a little bit
different, so this isn't a
trend, so it's not, it's a trend
with with pre-medicare, yeah,
with pre-medicare, it is a
trend.
Uh, the overall population when
we take into account our
Medicare as well as our
voluntary benefits, such as
dental, vision, life insurance,
um, because some of our
individuals, they may not pick
medical with us right now. They
may join their spouses, uh, you
know, benefit plan while you're
in active participant because,
you know, as an active
participant, it's just going to
be a lower premium when you have
18 year olds, you know, who are
part of that pool, you're gonna
see lower. So some of our
retirees choose to be on maybe
their spouses or if they return
back to work, we do have a uh
return to.
provision that they pick up
those benefits, um, and, you
know, we'll be either be
secondary or you can rejoin us
if you lose that coverage. So we
do have some different
provisions as it relates to
pre-Medicare. Pre-M Medicare has
been the trend that we've seen
decrease. Those other groups
coming in may help a little bit,
um, but it's not gonna be a lot.
It's probably a little bit more,
especially the last couple of
years due to the
The rule changes that we had
taken place to to really kind of
help shore up these this
elements to the program and the
one trend we've seen is really
undependence kind of decreasing
uh over the years, um, with more
and more of them.
But is, is it a concern that the
pre-M Medicare enrollment trend
going down is going to affect
eventually the Medicare
enrollment and also have it go
down, or do you think that
people will come back to you for
the
Medicare supplement.
Uh, Madam Jason Lucia Lopez, I
do believe if somebody is, is
getting alternative insurance,
they are going to come back to
us. Some of the ones that maybe
aren't age 55, once they turn
55, they're going to join us. So
we're just kind of waiting to
see where that number kind of uh
plateaus based on the rule
changes that took place in 2021.
I think we're getting close to
where that's gonna hit, and
then, of course, it's probably
going to be much more stable,
um, for it. Um, the one thing I
will say is I think with
Medicare we'll also see where
maybe sometimes members may
leave, they'll come back to us.
As far as the, the
The uh cost that we're worried
about. I worry a little bit more
about adverse selection. I do
still think 10,000 isn't a bad
number. I've seen much smaller
groups, uh, but you look at it
to really see that you're you're
having adverse selection of
having that small population,
meaning are we only having
individuals who are maybe not as
healthy and so then that's going
to be driving up costs, but we
do a risk analysis as well
through our actuaries which
we'll be presenting uh uh next
week to our board. More than
happy to look at it to see
exactly where that falls. Uh,
ideally, our population looks to
be in line. I think there may
be.
One category we're just a little
bit off. um, and the other way
we control costs is even though
we only have maybe those 10,000,
11,000 members is we're going
out to RFP still with the other
IBAC entities, so they're active
population is still helping our
10,000 members because we are
able to pull it together with
all of them. So when we look at
some of our administrative
costs, they'll give us lower
administrative costs because
they're looking at all of our
population as well as they're
going to give us some of the,
you know, better discounts that
they can, uh, for maybe some of
their networks. So we're still
being able to leverage that
buying power together and that.
does still help us. A few years
ago, um,
Nonprofits wanted to join with
uh state insurance pools, and
it, it didn't happen, uh, but
that may be a place where you
look for other
Um, other participants in your
plan, because what they wanted
to do and what I think they're
looking at is maybe aggregating
themselves together.
Um, to, to reduce insurance
costs, but that may be another
pool you look at, um, because
the larger the pool, I'm not
telling you that you don't know,
the, the lower the cost and, and
this pool appears to be.
Well, we don't know what the
trend, where it's going to
stabilize, but it appears to be
shrinking, and um, you know,
What I'm interested in getting
as many people covered as
possible, as cheaply as
possible.
Um, you may be aware I'm
actually hate the idea of all
these people, all these.
Entities making money on health
care. I, I really just
In one of these Medicare for all
people, cause I, I do believe
uh.
Health care is a human right,
but in the absence of that, try
to ensure as many people as
possible for as cheaply as
possible. And so that may be
another place you look.
To reduce the cost for your
members and as well as get the
efficiencies for, for their
members. Um there are lots of
nonprofits.
In the in this state, I think
they'd be interested.
Uh, manager, uh, Senator Lopez,
uh, I do know there would
probably be some changes to our
statutes, but something we could
look at. I will just say kind of
dovetailing a little bit off
that we've actually talked to
other states that are uh also
looking where maybe we could
combine purchasing power, um,
some of it does have to tell how
we go through procurement, how
do we manage this, how is it
decided, uh, but we have had
conversations there. We are
looking uh at those various
opportunities where we believe
we can leverage it. So if
there's something that we could
join to maybe get lower, uh, you
know, uh, pharmacy benefit
management service costs.
Uh, that's something that we
want to explore and see what we
can do. So we have been looking
around, uh, we do believe though
too, unfortunately in some cases
too, it's really good to stem
back to looking at the
manufacturers. We are trying to
make our voices heard at the
federal level. We're part of uh
another organization that brings
many of the state public
entities together and we like to
express a lot of our concerns to
some of the things that may be
happening federally that may
help uh may hurt uh members in
our public sector plans and so
we really worked together on
that too, because we know a lot
of things too as far as some of
the patents, some of the things
that happen at the manufacturer.
level, uh, those need to change
a little bit too to really help
offset some of those costs that
we continue to see increasing.
You're right, this is a public
sector plan, so is it possible
for you to have nonprofit
organizations which are not
private sector exactly, but
they're not, right, they're not
public sector.
So, so is that even a
possibility?
Uh, Madam Chair, said Escia
Lopez, we do have some criteria
that does like for like the
irrigation district, some of
those that are either considered
a kind of quasi governments that
do have their entities,
depending on how they're set up,
which we do have within our
statute and in Mac, uh, we could
look at it, it just depends on
exactly how they're set up. OK.
Um, I, like I said, I think
that's important to look at
because that would bring you
younger people.
Into the pool, um.
Anyway, that I'm just
brainstorming, um, I appreciate
the presentation. It was very
comprehensive. Thank you.
Our next uh questions are from
Senator.
Thank you, man. I just have one.
Where you're uh board retreat.
Would you be having any
discussions on the
Legislation, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator Gonzalez, uh, yes,
we are gonna have some
discussion, of course, about
this meeting. I always like to
keep my board apprised of any
committees that have come
before,
uh, but they say what that
legislation was. Oh, sure, but
uh as as that part of it, as far
as the update, we are going to
be talking about our
legislation. This will be
whether or not they decide if
they want to bring that up now
during the short session or if
it's something that they want to
look at the following session,
uh, it will be a little bit more
discussion. I don't know if the
decision will necessarily be
made by this one, but it's
another topic.
that we will be relaying in
regards to some of the
conversations that I know I've
even had, um, uh, with other um
entities and individuals um to
see where, you know, as far as
support or not for this
legislation where we can go with
it.
Oh, and the high power, and this
is just to bring a little bit
more into
What we have with our other
plans.
And uh to have a constitutional
and uh and I see this as a, as a
protection.
You know, and uh especially now
more than ever.
Healthcare is so important and
what's happening.
So that's what it would do.
Madam, uh, Madam chair and, uh,
you know, vice chair, um, um,
Connor Gonzalez, um, yes, no, it
is something I know the board
has brought up. It's something
that they've seen as far as the
trust fund growing, uh, that
they've just wanted some of that
out of protection. Uh, I know
we've tried for the last two
years and we appreciate your
efforts as far as being a
sponsor, as well as the chair
that assisted this last year in
being a sponsor for it. Um, we
know that it is important
legislation. We're just really
trying to see how that path will
be and I know that the the board
will be discussing this a little
bit as well as I'm sure.
will have more ongoing
conversations with our
legislative committee, uh, in
regards to this as well.
Yeah, very well, thank you.
Um
So I have next on the list is
Senator Thornton, and then I'll
go back to senatoridia Lopez or
just a quick.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I truly not a question. It's
really, um.
First of all, I wanted to thank
you for help and, and it's just
a critique in terms of chart
chartsmanship here. Um, there's
almost too much information and,
and I know you you had a lot of
information here and, you know,
from a
A novice point of view and, and
looking at this, I was trying to
figure out, well, what do I need
to know here?
And, and so when I went through
it just sort of looking at it,
like one of the things that one
of the assumptions in yours
solvency model, your growth
rates and retirees and no change
in the Medicare, uh, growth rate
in retire. I don't know if
that's a good assumption or not,
but based on what I heard
earlier earlier from sinners to
be a Lopez, um.
Looks like we're, we're going
down and we're, so therefore,
That's probably not a good
assumption. So I'm just curious
about, uh.
I, I did want to question the
assumptions going into your
solvency model. I just wanted to
make a point that it's a lot of
detail here and, and probably as
legislators and given the fact
that we're seeing lots of
information all the time.
It it's key that when you make a
a chart for us to review.
You know,
Be very concise with what it is
you want us to know about,
because it's hard to gather all
that information from these
charts. And I go on to pages
like 18 or you talked about the
board actions, and you went all
the way back to 2017. You know,
I think a 5 year review is
probably enough. We don't need
to go all the way back to
historical, you know, BC type of
activities and so this is just
recommendations and maybe the
chair has other, uh, views on
how she wants to look at this,
but um,
page 20. Again, a lot of
information there, uh, on
investment performance. I, I
didn't have a sense of what's
particular that you really
wanted us to get out. You have
lots of different things there
and so it's um.
Less is more. It's my point.
It's what I'm trying to make
here. And so, and the same with
21, um, and I understand there's
a delicate balance between
keeping us informed about
everything that's going on and
at the same time, informing us
on what it is we need to know in
order in good policy. So, uh,
and that's all I really wanted
to comment on, on this, it's
just, um, it would be helpful
maybe because I'm new, so all of
this seems a lot, uh, for my
first time through, uh, and for
others who've been here for a
while, it's probably, they're
probably OK with it, but just
some.
uh, Senator Thor, uh, more than
happy to if you ever have any
questions to go through with
this. Uh, thank you for the
feedback. Uh, I, I know the
assumptions is really hard. In
fact, I used to not actually put
it in there, it actually came up
one time they said, well, please
put it in there. So uh we'll
definitely try and figure out
maybe there's a way we could
structure it a little bit better
though, so it's a little bit
more easier to read or kind of
see the flow, so thank you for
the feedback, we'll take it
back. We'll definitely see how
we can kind of maybe restructure
some of these slides and maybe
give a little better uh
indication of what we're
focusing on. So, so thank you.
Senator CD Lopez.
Thank you, as you know, um,
becau because of
I think the the IPO session
before you did the
constitutional amendment, and
then the session when you did
the constitutional amendment, I
was very concerned that that
constitutional amendment
provided more protections for
the retirees' pension plans than
it did.
Or, I mean, for the retirees.
Health insurance plans than it
did for the pension plans. I
don't know if you recall me
staying staying on the floor,
going through the provisions and
how it was actually more
protections than were offered to
those um and stronger, which I
think was a big concern. One of
the things that I said on the
floor and I really believe this,
I would support a constitutional
amendment providing health care
for all New Mexicans before I
would have supported that that
plan enshrining the retirees
that.
that special case, and I, I'm
just gonna repeat that again so
you're aware, um.
It, it was a very big concern to
me then, and I just wanna be
clear that I still feel that
way. And I, I really would like
to see uh what you're thinking
about with the constitutional
amendment, um,
Like I said, I'd love to give
insurance to all our citizens.
I did not grasp why it was
important to, to give that
constitutional, that level of
constitutional profession uh
provisions to this group.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam,
said the Lopez, I know the first
time we did bring the uh
constitutional protection of the
trust fund. Uh, there was
actually a sentence in there
that uh we understand kind of
maybe would have felt like it
tied the legislator's hands. It
was not our intention. So we
actually took a lot of the
comments and feedback from the
first year we ran it, so this is
this last year when we ran it,
that provision was actually not
in there. So we actually saw it
again we actually made
unfortunately, it got to the
first committee and then then we
didn't get through the, the
second committee that it was
assigned uh.
as part of the Senate Finance
Committee, um, but with that
too, uh, unfortunately, I know
that, you know, where your
stance is in Medicare for all,
uh, what we're really looking at
unfortunately, that's probably a
bigger effort.
Beyond my scope wheelhouse I'm
not at all.
But what we're looking to do
from my perspective, what we're
trying to do for the 1.7 just
for a little on that too is all
the individuals who have
contributed over the years,
we're just trying to protect the
money that they contributed as
far as any of those additional
dollars, how they would be
reutilized or anything like
that, that's probably at a much
higher level, but we know for
that 1% that everybody as far as
employees put in or the 1.25
that they enhanced, that's
what's been really driving that
trust fund.
That was the part that we're
trying to protect is all those
people that put that percentage,
that little percentage in there,
that we are protecting it. And
so that's where this
constitutional protection came
not to, to, to lock anybody in,
to create any additional
payments that the legislator, I
mean that the, the legislator
still retains the right for
employee employer contributions.
Uh, they would sell the Ryan
Texas suspense tax fund. What we
really look at is premiums. We
try and keep those in relation
to our expenses and then the
employee and employer
contributions, that's the part
that really
is for the future of this
program and holding you down. So
the question was always back in
the day that when this program
was struggling more, what was
the plan B option if we ever had
to roll this out? Well, we also
want to make sure now that we've
got into a better position, what
is the option that if this funds
that every individual has put
money into that has built this,
what do they get back in return
for? And that was part of that
protection is making sure we
secure it just for those
individuals that had it in
there.
Madam Chair, I appreciate that.
Um, the, the last one would have
created a liability for the
state indefinitely. And so I,
I'm glad that you've uh changed
the language. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. uh.
Cooper and Cooper Cooper, Keeper
and uh Mittensio, um, I think
those are all the questions that
we have. I had some questions,
but I think I want to ask you
some of the questions I have
offline, so I'm gonna call you.
Um, you answered my big question
about advocacy cause you said
you go to DC and you work on
some and, and you guys see you
around the roundhouse, so I, I'm
a big proponent about advocacy
to keep our healthcare costs
down as much as possible,
especially in light of the fact
that we're not getting cost of
living and all, you know, our
colas and all of that kind of
stuff, so I.
I, I appreciate that you're
doing that, um, and uh, and then
the other thing that the one
question that I'm gonna have for
you offline just so everyone
knows is with with regard to
Medicare, um, and we can talk
about that and it's in some
length.
Um, and then, and how it's
affecting
How the national
Bill that was just signed is
going to affect
And I imagine that your board is
gonna be discussing that as
well, and that that's gonna be
one of my questions regarding
when we have a conversation, so
you may or you may wanna not
wanna call me before or after
your annual meeting, um,
depending on what you think, um,
and then, um,
My last sort of question was,
um, your investments on page 19,
um.
And I know that the trend on
these on these investments, and
I, and I kind of, and, you know,
I heard Senator Thornton, you
don't have to go all the way to
BC, um, but it's important to
see these trends and what
concerns me a little bit is that
in March 2025, it's going up.
And then I know that there's
always a spike down, and I
looked at the two spikes here
and there's
February 2020.
And about uh.
2023, around there, there is
little, there are two spikes,
and I know how these things go,
and I
Anticipate
Sometime in the future and maybe
what concerns me is that that
next spike.
doesn't happen.
When
That, that one.
Tart where you said you're gonna
be underfunded.
That it doesn't hit at that
point.
I think that it's important that
I know we don't have any control
over that, but
It's important that we be
cognizant of that.
Um, if you know what I'm talking
about, Madam, I do recognize
that, and I do believe I'll call
you after the annual board
meeting. I think I'll have a,
you know, a little bit of
picture in regards to uh the
bill you're you're referring to
as well as even some of the
updated information we get from
our actuaries, uh, because these
are always kind of moving a
little bit, so we may actually
see where that deficit spending
may move after they do their new
analysis, uh, up or down, and
that may give us more time or
not, but we'll, I'll be sure to,
to get back in touch and uh also
happy to to come back at any
later time to the Thank you all.
I think this has been a really
great presentation, um, a lot of
information, a lot of stuff for
us to digest, but these are the
things that we have to digest
and we need to be cognizant
about the future.
Um, I appreciate your
presentation, um, just for the
board, um, we didn't put on
here.
Um, our public comment on the
agenda, so I'm gonna go back
just and I'm only gonna give
like 15 minutes for uh, but I'm
only gonna give each presenter
like 2 to 3 minutes, and so uh
we're gonna move forward. We
have one person that signed up
to speak, and that is a pair
board member Adolph Zubia.
And Mr. Zubia, if you would come
forward please, and you have 2
to 3 minutes.
And by the way, if anybody wants
to take any food.
Take some
I think it's gone. No, there's
One of the things that I wanted
to
Thank you, Mr. Zubia, and we
look forward to hearing back
about the uh about your retreat.
Um, thank you so much, uh, does
any other board member have any?
And they want to bring up, uh,
do we have anybody online that
wants to give public comment?
If not, our next meeting is
August 13th, and it
Well, thank you. We are
adjourned.
