OK, everyone, let's go ahead and
resume our Indian Affairs
Committee meeting.
And we have
item number 7 on the agenda.
Canyon Seto Band of Navajos
Health Center.
And Tohagila chapters Community
health provider, and we have
with us Derek Watchman.
And Kimberly Bruce, and please,
uh, introduce yourselves.
And you may begin.
Thank you and uh good afternoon
Y A
Thank you and uh good afternoon
Y
uh share Derek Watchman.
And um I'm Shilan born for
Tohana.
Uh, originally from a little
town called Navajo, New Mexico,
and so.
Um, one of my claim to fame is
that I follow in the footsteps
of my late father, Leo Watchman
Senior and Leo Watchman Junior,
who represented McKinley
County's, uh, and, and other
counties from 1967 to 1993, and
so, um, I'm very fond of the
Roundhouse and started as a page
and moved up and, you know, now
I'm here in front of you
obviously representing uh
Knyitto Band of.
Naval Health centers and so I'm
the interim CEO.
For the health facility and so I
like to turn it over to our
chair.
Madam Chair,
OK.
Good afternoon, Chair, Senators,
representatives, everybody here
today. My name is Kimberly Bruce
and I am the Kenneto Band of
Navajo Health Center, Board of
directors, chairs, I appreciate
you guys, um, allowing us to be
here today to listen to what we,
our concerns are and what we are
requesting at this time.
Thanks. Thank you.
Um, as, as I indicated, uh,
Chair Bruce and, and myself, we
are the, the leadership.
Uh, but I also would, I, I'm, I
should also introduce, um, I
have some team members here as
well. And so in the back here I
have uh Harrison Poro, a board
member, Lester Sero, two of our
board members, I have Doctor
Carol Morris. She's the head of
our behavioral health.
Um, on this side, I have Ophelia
Mace, our administrative
secretary, and then I'm also
delighted to introduce members
of of our Tatra chapter, Norah
Morris, vice president,
and Francesca Abea, our
secretary treasurer, and so
we're we're all here to, you
know, to uh, bring greetings
from the community of, of Tjola
and so, but you know, we'd like
to get into our presentation,
probably talking about the
services that we provide, uh, to
not only
Uh, you know, the, the, the
Kangita members, but a lot of
natives and Navajos who reside
here in this town, um,
Albuquerque and Bernolio, and
so, you know, our, our, our big
thing is, you know, how to
provide health services, uh, and
we're focused, we try to focus
on the younger generation, but
we're also what we call a
patient-centered model health
provider. Next slide, please.
Um, a lot of folks, you know,
like I'm actually from Bundaka,
Navajo. So when I came out here
and I talked to people, they
didn't realize that there's a
Navajo community just over the
hill.
And so we we're part of the
Tonjala chapter.
And I have this, I have this
little arrow here we're actually
one, I'll just call island for
lack of a better word, the
Navajo Nation is obviously quite
large in the four corners area,
but there's 3 islands of, of
Navajos including uh Kenya see
the banner Navajos, which is a
Tjola. We have the Alamo ban on
Navajos, which is south, and
then the Raymond Navajos. And
so, uh, because we're isolated
from what we call Big Navajo,
that certainly brings a lot of
challenges.
If you will, on many regards, on
many regards, including,
including the delivery of health
care and so, uh, and yes, we're
right close to and we're in Bern
Leo County in Sandoval County
right next to Albuquerque, but
there's still a divide and we
still have a lot of challenges.
Next slide, please.
Um, our, our goals, we, um, and
I get this a little bit later,
but our goal is to expand our
access and services, uh, build
and sustained partnerships we're
happy to, to be here, um, as a
health provider in Tatula, we
also work with our chapter, and
we also work with uh the Tjale
Community School.
If you go out there, there's
only 3 main entities, you know,
that are quite involved in
providing services to school,
the chapter, and the clinic.
And so as, as with anybody else,
you know, we're a health
provider but we're also a
business and so one of our goals
is to attain the highest level
of patient satisfaction and so
for many of us that are, are
familiar with, you know, the
healthcare, uh, especially on
any health service site, you
know, it's always a challenge,
you know, and my joke is, you
know, when I was growing up,
when I went to 45 and go get
your chart, you know, so you
have to go to walk around with
your chart. In some cases you
have, you know, so that's the
joke I have, but you know, we're
Trying to move past that to
become more electronic focused,
and so,
In many cases, you know, not,
not to, and I guess I, you know,
not to, you know, uh, voice the
concerns, it's always a
challenge to get into Indian
Health Service facility. And so
we're a little bit different.
I'll get into that next slide
please.
Uh, officially, the Kitto banner
Navajo's Health Center under
under the direction of the the
Tola chapter, we were
established in September 29th,
2003. So this past week we
actually celebrated our 21st
anniversary, so we had a good
celebration. We had our elected
leaders coming and talk about,
you know, what we're doing on,
on the health side. Uh, we're
actually a 93 638 health service
provider and I think that's what
Governor Armijo talked about.
Earlier and so, uh, we could
probably spend days on any
healthcare delivery, but you
have your typical Indian health
service and then do as a result
of public law 93638. Many tribes
can opt to use this law to
contract to be a healthcare
provider and so out at the Taj
Lake community, we through the K
Cto Health Center we provide
health services to to primarily
todulate community members.
Uh, we have 12 programs. We're
at 75 personnel strong.
So we're actually also a good
job creator, you know, when we
talk about economic development,
so the 638 process allows us to
do that. Uh, we're a Navajo
Nation chartered nonprofit
through the chapter and through
the nation, and this is unique,
you know, I talked about Big
Navajo, the Navajo Nation does
have they're under the Navajo
area of the Indian Health
Service, we, because we're so
close to Albuquerque, we're
actually uh serviced by the
Albuquerque.
In the health service area. Next
slide.
Uh, one of the things that we're
really focused on is just trying
to be a patient centered care.
So when a patient comes in, you
know, we, we not only look at
that particular need that
they're there, but we also are,
are the other challenges dental,
you know, I have Doctor Morris
here who's in charge of our
behavior health. Do we have any
behavioral health issues and so
were patients. We try to be
patient centered, comprehensive.
We have a team base. We talk
about warm handoffs, you know,
if we have a patient that comes
in, we see other challenges, we
hand it off to another.
provider. We were coordinated or
accessible once in a while we
get folks from here at
Albuquerque, they say, well, we
like coming here because it's
quicker, you know, we have to
spend days trying to get through
the Union Health Service and we
try to focus on, on quality, you
know, just, just like a business
and just like many healthcare
providers are, are working to
do. Next slide, please.
Um, we're a full-fledged
business, medical, dental,
pharmacy, behavioral health,
community health
representatives, diabetes,
transportation, audiology,
pedology, autotry, psychiatry,
you know, we have our back of
house, you know, our accounting,
uh, revenue, IT financial
management, and facilities, and
so.
You know, being a contractor, if
you will, through the 6:30
process, you know, we're
responsible for all these
different departments. Next
slide, please.
Um, our, our goal and strategy
is to serve all of our Tajole
members and so in many cases,
even though we're next to here,
we do have a lot of our members
that are remote, we still have,
you know, dirt roads during the
winter time. We have muddy roads
and sometimes our vehicles get
stuck and so we do have
challenges in delivering health
care to all of our members, uh,
in the community, especially our
elders and seniors, you know, a
lot of them are, I'll say
homebound and so.
You know, try to serve them as
best we can. Uh, we were
basically primary facility and
so a lot of our specialty care
actually is, is conducted out
here, but we'd like to at some
point, working with the nations,
how do we provide special
services on Navajo, so we're,
we're obviously looking to
expand operations. And, and the
biggest thing that we're trying
to do obviously is to address
and decrease the health
disparities and inequities, you
know, and so if you look at the
the the data.
On, uh, Native American health
we're still higher than the
averages on situations and low,
you know, we have high obesity,
high, high levels of uh heart
disease, high levels of mental
health trauma and so, you know,
our focus on how do we address
that so that obviously we can
improve the quality of life of
our of our members and their
families and children to come.
Next slide please.
Um, pathways to population
health equity, you know, our,
our biggest thing is how do we,
how do we reach all of our, our
members in the community? How do
we empower ourselves. One of the
things, the reason I'm gonna cut
to the chase real quick we're
here to see if we can seek your
support because we want a
wellness center. I'll get that,
get to that at the end. But one
of the things, you know, healthy
mind, healthy body, is what
we're looking at. So how do we,
how do we address and look at a
wellness center. And so what we
want to do is we want to create
conditions so.
That you know, we have families
connected, everybody working
together, you know, so that you
can walk the talk. So we want to
walk the talk of living good, a
good, healthy life.
And so the things that we, you
know, like, for example, I heard
the food bank issue. We have
challenges at Tola. We have
water, we have food issues, we
have housing, you know, all
these things create, you know,
major disparities.
You know, in, in our community,
so, you know, we're here to try
to adjust that next, next slide.
We do have many, in many cases,
water disparity. I, as a, as a
CEO, I'm always challenged with,
you know, I have dirty work,
sometimes I have a because our
water system is antiquated. um I
have a break here and there, so
if I have a break in the system
in the community, I have to shut
down because the water's dirty.
I had to make sure it's
sanitized and properly
chlorinated and so almost twice
a month I have to address that
and, and shut down and figure
out how to deal with the water
issue. And so we do have a lot
of food issues and
I think I heard earlier that in
the Charger Lake community, the
food pantry folks that talked
earlier, they worked through the
school. Road Run does work with
the, the, the Tawa Lake
Community School. So, but for
us, I think we need to also be a
part of that so that we make
sure that as many of our members
are
Uh, do have food issues, so they
don't have food insecurity
challenges. And so next slide,
please.
Um, the, the, in the, in the
health industry, in the health
world, we always talk about
social determinants of health.
What are those challenges that
provide these inequities and so
as we know, income and social
protection, education, in many
cases education standards in any
country are lower unemployment,
on average, on many
reservations including Navajo,
unemployment is as high as 50%
food insecurity that we talked
about housing, it's always a
challenge.
Represented a little talked
about many of us have to move to
populated areas because they're
just limited, even lack of
housing.
Um, early childhood development,
we have those challenges. I know
that our school right now is is
looking to grow, but they didn't
get funding for early childhood
center, so, you know, we, we're
gonna have to work together to
make sure that they get that so
you have a complete school
system.
Um, and then also social
inclusion and
non-discrimination, you know,
there's there's still those
challenges out there, you know,
um, Native Americans, you know,
we have this weird certain brand
of certain things and so how do
we get past that, um, and next
slide, please. Um, for, for us,
our primary purpose here today
is to talk about our planning
for the future uh we're busting
out the same 75 employees we're
doing roughly about 24 to 25,000
encounters.
So, you know, that's, that's to
me when I got here, that was
amazing for a little community,
but 25,000 encounters means that
you know we do have, you know,
a, a, a significant amount of
health issues that we need to
address. So, uh, if you look on,
on the ICIP we do have a
provision there. Thank you.
Oops, go ahead. You jump right
to the point, right.
Thank you.
And so in, in, in working in
concert with our leadership, um,
at Navajo, the Navajo Nation,
and our chapter. I just, we just
want to point out that, you
know, there is a line item there
for roughly 10 I can't 10 point.
I can't even see now, um.
Um,
10.8 million is, is what's on,
on the list here so uh we are on
a campaign here to see how we
can work in concert with our
other entities at the at the
community to see how we can
push.
And, and bring a facility where
we have wellness and
administration, because right
now, um, many of our, well, the
school, for example, they're on
the verge of having to shut
down. That's why they have, they
have to relocate, so the
facilities that provide health,
they're just very below
standard. And the chapter house
recently was just condemned, so
in our area we just don't have
facilities to offer things like
wellness.
And so, you know, since, uh, you
know, we're a part of the state,
you know, we want to obviously
raise this to your attention,
so um the previous to us, our
leadership was able to put this
on the list here, so next slide,
please.
Um, you know, with, I always
feel that it's best to be
prepared and so we've done some
renderings. We've talked to
folks and so, you know, just
trying to generate the idea our
campaign is, you know, we need
some modern facilities and so I
just wanna show some pictures of
some architects, and these are
some pictures that of other
Indian or native facilities
around the Southwest and so, you
know, when I show this to our
community, say, wow, you know, I
said we can get there, we can do
this if we work together. This
is the goal that I have Next
slide please.
Uh, we do have, we're, we're
right on the southern part of
the Lake community and so, uh,
we're in an area called the
Tugela Industrial Park, and so
all this land here has been
designated, well, except maybe
the EMS that's under that one
nation, but the Kings Ceta
Health Center with Hodgeley has
the land set aside for us. So,
um, I know that's, that's one of
the big questions that when you
fill out the capital LA, do you
have access and so we're, we're
good there. Thank you. Next
slide.
Um, you know, I'm trying to
figure out what does it cost
inflation certainly has has
hammered many, many projects and
so, um, I, I estimate that, you
know, for, for a 400 to 50,000
square foot facility. We're
looking at about 30 million.
And so one of my jobs is to, you
know, layer all sources and so,
you know, conceptually New
Mexico, I'm, I'm also talking to
our Naviation leadership. Uh, we
also had a representative from
Indian Health service and so,
uh, so they're looking at one of
the challenges if you're a 638
entity is that you only get so
much money a year.
And if you have needs beyond
that, you're kind of on your
own, so, um, but we think that,
I think that as a, as an entity
working with our leaders in the
community, we could get a
project done in less than 24
months and so that that's,
that's one of my goals. Next
slide, please.
Um, I, I'm a former banker, so I
always like to put sources and
uses and so, um, you know, so if
I look at conceptually sources,
I'm gonna layer, you know, New
Mexico to be determined, Navajo
Nation, um, I just learned the
other day that there's, there's
potentially financing
opportunities that you can look
at by using Indian Health
Service dollars and there's a
program called 105L leasing and
so.
I just learned about it the
other day, so my thought is to
layer all of that because I know
that, you know, as, as, as, as
leaders, we try to make sure
that, you know, how do you look
at all sources available to get
the project done.
And so on the youth side, of
course, it takes money to plan,
design, and for construction, a
wellness center admin, so we're
looking about about 30 million.
I haven't had time to see
whether or not, you know,
inflation. I put this together
about a year ago, so inflation
certainly has kicked in, so
we're probably a little bit
higher. Next slide, please.
Um, here's a just a rendering of
what we think this building
would look like. So that's the
Sandia Mountain behind us,
behind there, and so that's a
rendering looking from west to
east, next slide, please.
Um, we, we have an existing
building. We're at 22,000 square
feet. We're looking at roughly a
40,000 facility to service and
meet all the needs. We have been
talking to some, uh, designers
who, who are very familiar with
Indian Health Service facilities
and so we're trying to size up
our population with our
encounters and availability, so
this is what, this is the result
of all that work.
Next slide please.
Um, again, you know, we, we
would like to, and our vision is
to have a very nice facility
that our community, our leaders
can be proud of.
You know, so when you go to a
facility, if it looks good,
you're gonna feel good too. And
so, you know, that's so that all
gets into holistic wellness and
fitness and so that's, you know,
we're we're trying to make it so
that it's enticing, inviting,
you know, we need to, you know,
we need to get more of our
members to our facilities so
that we can work together to
improve our overall, uh, health
and wellness in life. Next
slide, please.
Um, this, again, just some more,
some more, uh, visuals next
slide.
Um
Next slide, please. um, West
entry, next slide, next slide.
Um, we also, um, our, our
existing building is again we're
busting out the seams and so I
really need to expand my
pharmacy department or our
pharmacy and our dentals, so
we're also looking at that right
now, um.
And so this house, I, I have, we
are challenged right now with
our building is about 6 years
old and we may have a crack in
our foundation and so we're
getting engineers to look at
that and so I'm trying to
understand the, the, the
challenge, but they're saying
that probably because of the
geology in our area that if you
don't do the foundation
correctly, you could see some
shifts and so we may or may not
have a, a challenge with our
current building, but soon to
come, soon to come, so it's
unfortunate.
You know, because our building
is less than 10 years old, but
um I, I can say that a lot of
chapter houses on Navajo, you
know, have, have, have been
recently built and all of a
sudden we got a foundation
problem. And so maybe it's the
geology or maybe not really
looking at closely the the
geology or the geotech reports,
you know, I was, I was
responsible for building the
Navajo casinos and one of the
things that I learned is that
you really have to take the
heart, the geotechnical reports,
make sure you understand.
The soil conditions, you know,
what's needed so that when you
do build, you have a solid
foundation, so, uh, we may, we
may have a challenge on that
front. Next slide.
Uh, again, just, you know, we
hope to expand so this is what
we're looking at next slide.
Um, so I'll end there, but I'm
gonna turn over to my chair with
some closing comments and then
of course we're we're open for
questions, but you know, I, I
thank you for listening to us. I
also thank our leadership from
the, from our board and from
our, uh, Twajale leadership. So,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Washman, for all
of that information. So I was
born and raised in Tohajale, so
I am a member.
You know, issue that has come to
there. I've seen, I've been
through, um, I do have 28 years
of medical experience. So
therefore, I want to help my
people.
I was raised by mostly my
grandparents, and they've always
taught me go out and learn.
Bring back what you learned and
help your people, help your
community, help them prosper,
and that's what I'm here trying
to do today.
We are a population of about 23
to 2500 people and you know,
everybody is wanting to move
back home.
So with all of these issues that
we're having with health care,
water, you know, we're here
trying to seek um assistance of
any kind, so we can keep that
going. We are concerned for our
elderlies. They are the reason
why we are here. They've taught
us a lot, you know, and we need
to keep them home to where
Where they belong.
Like Mr. Watchman said, we did
have over 24,000 encounters, so
that's a lot of patients that we
are seeing, um, within a fiscal
year and.
We are a 22,000 square feet
facility and we are needing at
least 50,000.
Um, we're having issues with
dental, so our kids, you know,
we want to be able to bring them
from the school to the clinic to
get them taken care of so we're
not having to send them off into
Albuquerque or other places to
receive the care when they
should be able to get them at
home. Same thing with our
seniors. We would like them to
be able to stay at home and not
have them, um, be troubled with
trying to find transportation,
especially when a lot of them
are
You know, homebound. So we do
have, you know, our SAHR people
going to their houses, trying to
get them taken care of, bring
them in to the clinic for their
appointments. So the funding
that we are seeking is very
crucial, um.
To the health of our community.
So with that being said, I
appreciate your time and
allowing us to be here today.
OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Don't leave, Ron.
Run,
don't leave. I need your help
with something. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. I want to thank
particularly Mr. Watchman for
being here today. Um, I was
elected in the House district 9
in 2003 after following the
Watchman man.
And I can tell you that uh
they're one of the most um.
Respected families in Navajo.
So I, I'm very proud to have
that district.
Um, and certainly to know the
family. So I thank you very much
for for being here. And there
was a word, Madam Chair, if
you'll indulge me for just a
minute, I'm going to ask my
husband to say because I, I
don't know how come up, please
talk in the mic. I want you to,
and this is for the benefit of
representative
or
Allison
Johnson and Senator Pinto,
because I think they'll
understand what it is. He tried
to teach me a word, uh, Madam
Chair, in that area, Fuzzy Rock
and only my husband can say it,
and I think it's, uh, when I
started to represent that area,
he would be in the audience
trying to give me that. You can
see.
The fuzzy rockwork.
Fuzzy rock.
00.
Yeah.
House fuzzy Rock, and you say it
in the Navajo language,
you want me to teach it to you?
But I think it was important
because it was important for me
when I ran in that district to
make sure that I could connect
to the people.
And they've always been super
supportive of me.
So I wanna thank you for that
and I think this is the kind of
project that is very worthy of
our, of our committee to take,
to take uh to take on, you know,
and, and, and there's lots of
funding sources for this. As, as
you know, I was the former
chairman of the budget
committee, so I know we're all
those little pockets of funding,
funding are and sometimes they
don't always bubble up to the
top so that we understand where
we can access those things and
not
All the committees are close to
it because we don't, not
everybody works on that stuff,
but I, I just think that this is
super important. I'd like to see
it done. I mean, certainly it's
outside of my area in in uh
House District 9, but if we
could, I, I don't know, uh,
Madam Chair, is there a way that
we could
Send some kind of representation
whether it's through letter or
something else to a couple of
different departments that I do
know have capital outlay funding
for this kind of thing.
And I, I, I think that if we
could.
Uh,
particularly with the Department
of Health, Human Services, I
think even with, uh, instead of
staying, instead of just general
capital outlay.
There's different pots for these
kinds of programs, and I would
like to encourage our committee
to, to try to, to try to help
them.
He's ready, Madam Chair.
That's, that's the hardest word
I've ever heard, and it was hard
for me to try to learn, but
he, he understands the language
really well and speaks really
well, so he helped me to try to
say that I, I just had to give
up when I was out there
campaigning. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
good presentation, Mr. Watchman.
I have heard you mention Indian
Health Service and uh
638 programs and then you also
mentioned you were a nonprofit
501c3 and never heard anything
about the federal government.
Are you in any way tied with the
federal government like IHS.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Ellison. Um,
we're, uh, pursuant to probably
about 936 38 tribes including
Navajo through Tarjala can
contract so our operations are
federal dollars. We're funded,
but we're an independent entity
in the Tawai community and so,
um, of, of note, I think the
Tuba City hospitals 638, um,
Fort Defiance.
I think half of the hospitals in
the Navajo are 638. Shiprock is
still an IHS facility. And so,
uh, in the, in the effort and if
you look at the federal scene in
the effort of self governance
and and um uh self-governance,
they call it, 93 630 allowed
tribes to contract, so we're not
a federal entity. We're funded
with federal dollars, but
technically we're a tribal
organization.
Uh, providing health care.
So it's, it's a big concept,
but, um, like, for example, law
enforcement.
Now her nation does 638 law
enforcement. So when you go to
other reservations around the
country, you'll see BIA in law
enforcement.
Law enforcement right now
technically is a Bureau of
affairs service, but Navajo has
chosen to 638 laws so, so you
see Navajo healthcare half a
health care on Navajo, including
what we have at Tojala is a
federal contract. So technically
we're not a federal agency.
Hope that that helps, sir. Thank
you.
Yeah, thank you for that. Um,
yesterday we had a tour.
Zia Pueblo, and they have a
beautiful building there that
said that it was fully
Almost fully financed by uh the
New Mexico.
Capital outlay. I didn't know
that they could do that, so
that's probably something that
you could look into.
And then another thing is that
uh
US congressman
Uh, Melanie Stansbury, I think
would be a good contact as well
as Theresa Leger Fernandez for
assistance from the federal
side, so I know
our congresswoman Stansbury
built a school in Thaili, so
she, she probably knows, uh, how
to go about funding for that.
So, uh, that would be my
recommendation would be to
contact them both. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Shannai.
Representative Little.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Uh, so I just wanted to offer,
uh, uh, uh,
Distinction between, uh,
the 6:30 contractor status of a
tribe,
um, just to my committee members
to help, um,
um, with the definition of the
Indian Health Service provides
can provide care directly to
tribes. That's one way of
services being provided and the
recipients of those uh services
are referred to as direct
service tribes.
The Indian Health Service hires
the IHS personnel, uh, staff
members that go out to these
facilities and provide that
service. Uh, under the PL public
law of 93638, the tribe takes on
the status of a contractor, um,
providing the services that the
Indian Health Service would have
provided if they were still
there. So they take on a
contractor role.
For the federal government to
provide those services. So what
in this situation, as I
understand it, then they will,
uh, Madam Chair, provide the
services that were there, uh,
that had been there, uh, and
received the funding to provide
those services, so there's a
limited opportunity to expand.
The next level, the 3rd level
of, of opportunity for tribes is
through a self-governance
contract.
And the, in that sense, in that
scenario, uh, tribes may take
all of the funding that's
available to a tribe to provide
health care services at every
different level, meaning not
just that facility but at the
area office level, the national,
the headquarters level, whatever
dollars would have been used to
provide that service directly.
The tribes can receive those
dollars and determine themselves
what
You take the total amount of
those dollars and program them
uh in the way they see best fits
the needs of their community.
So, um, those are the three ways
that I understand, um, having
worked for the Indian Health
Service for many, many years. So
it's um
Exciting, the opportunities are
exciting. I think it's wonderful
that this opportunity exists. It
is no easy task for certain,
Madam Chair, but um, once
successful, the tribe also, the
contractors can actually take on
the revenue source, the streams
that are coming in in in
addition to the federal dollars,
um, that are coming in, they can
receive, apply for, and receive
the designation to bill for
Medicaid.
And Medicare uh services and for
private insurance as well, so
that would allow them to be able
to enhance.
Operationss if that's how they
chose to use them or improve the
facility in any fashion that
they chose to do it. So it's um,
it's an exciting possibility. I
wish you luck on this, but I, I
hope that's helpful just to my
committee members to to expand
on what uh opportunities exist
and I would imagine that if
there's someone from the Indian
Health Service that could
explain that in more detail that
would be really
Beneficial to this committee
because we will see those
requests for, and I've seen them
for health facilities and so on,
improvements to existing
facilities, uh, services that
might be enhanced as well, uh.
requests that come through our
state, um, funds, um, in that
fashion. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Vice
Chair Pinto. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for your
presentation and the work that
you're doing out in our, our
other island.
I guess one of the things with
the funding is with all these um
different entities or different
statuses. Do you have an idea
who the fiscal agent would be?
Would it still flow through the
nation or would it, do we have
any?
Uh, idea.
In the past, and thank you, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair and Senator
Pinto, the chapter is our fiscal
agent through the nation. And so
if you look at um how funds flow
from the state to the nation, to
the chapters and the and then
the affiliates of the chapters,
and so that that's, that's where
we technically fall.
OK, so we that that that route
is still so it would go from us
to the Indian Affairs department
to the nation through the IGA
through the Navajo Nation
process and then to you guys.
OK.
So on this on the support um
letter.
I think that's also a question
of whether you
would like one and who would it
be directed to and whether you
write it, um, versus us writing
it. I mean we do have staff that
can write it, but I think the
route to go is if that's
something you would like to see
come from this committee or your
request,
um, that you generate it and
then uh your thoughts.
Madam Chair, thank you, Senator
Pinto. Um, yes, we could
certainly draft a letter uh
where
I guess we we we we attempt to
last year, but we're probably at
at the start of our campaign and
so uh we're we're finding out
that potentially many
opportunities as represented Li
points out, we've got to
identify those and so one big
opportunity is just going back
to Indian Health service and
say, you know, we, we, you know,
we, we have a need and so but
they would just say, well,
there's only so much money out
there, so, you know, so as
Represent Allison said, we're
going to have to reach out to
our congressional folks and then
of course we need
To reach out to our Navajo
leadership, you know, because
there's many, many needs as, as
because we're part of that, but
also there's a finite number of
funds out there, so but we'll
we'll certainly work with staff
to, to generate that and and
then of course, you know, you're
coming into session in in
January, so you know we want to
be a part of the, the
consideration and discussion on
appropriations, but I also like
represented Lunstrooms.
Um, idea that's to reach out to
other, other departments and so,
and so we're trying to be
expansive so we know that, you
know, we can't simply rely on
just the, you know, the, the
Native American or, or the
tribal allocation, we have to
expand on that because, you
know, we're also, we're citizens
of Navajo, but we're also
members residents or members of
the state and also the county.
So we're we're, we're reaching
out far and wide and so, uh, but
again, we're sharing with you
our plans, you know, cause.
Our our community daily, you
know, they, they're, they have
numerous requests and numerous
needs and so how do we address
that? So, thank you, we will
work with staff to come up with
uh some form of support.
Letter or writing. So thank you
Madam Chair,
on that just one more comment is
um because we tried to make sure
too that uh if you're able to
get the leveraging, leveraging
funds so that the buy-in there
is from you and then we try to
make what we can,
um, let, uh, representative.
I just wanted to make a comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, is that
the letter would be addressed to
Charles Lee, LFC director
signed by, by, by our two
leaders on the committee.
The information inside the
letter would come from.
The the
Folks here talking about all the
services that are going to be
provided, the number of people
that they serve, and then the
request to Charles is we want
you to shop this request around
to all funding sources inside
the state of New Mexico.
So the onus of finding those
funding sources falls to the LFC
staff.
But you guys would sign that
letter.
They would provide all the
backbone, why it should be
funded all the detail, but I
think that's what LFC staff is
for. They're supposed to shop
that kind of request around and
make sure because they have it
all in one spreadsheet.
Potential opportunity. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Lundstrom and vice chair Pinto,
and I don't see any more um
And my colleagues who wish to
speak.
OK.
Senator Pinto, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, we
have one more meeting for this
committee. So I know with our
counterparts here and all of us
working together that before we
agreed to have our the committee
or motion to, um, so that
there's no objection is that
they actually have the
opportunity to see what is
written in the letter. So
October 30th around that time,
through November 1 is our last
meeting, so we need to have that
back to us and then so
Our staff can go through it and
run it through our, our process
and then have time enough to
distribute it to our committee
members before that meeting so
that uh if action can be taken
at that time, so just keep that
in mind. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank
you, uh, Madam Vice Chair. I
just want to say thank you for
your presentation. Thank you to
your board, Otto Shanai, Mr.
Secretaryario, good to see you.
Also, um, I agree with you about
our elders. They don't want to
go to a nursing home facility.
They want to be cared for at
home, so I absolutely understand
that situation with our.
and just want to thank you, your
leadership, and your forward
thinking and we look forward to
helping uh propose this letter
on your behalf and we should get
that done before the 30 days.
So with that, just want to thank
you. Thank you very much. Thank
you very much, everyone.
OK, let's go on to agenda item
number 8 an update from the
gaming control board.
And we have a list of people
here, so I'm just gonna invite
you to come up and introduce
yourselves and uh you're welcome
to.
Begin your presentation. We can
add more chairs if we need to
accommodate.
Thank you.
Let's go ahead and take a
3 minute break and then we will
uh reconvene in a few minutes.
Thank you.
Stretch, get your coffee and
your water.
speak.
OK, let's go ahead and begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I
My name is Van Phillips. I'm
from the New Mexico Gaming
Control Board. I am the
Interim state gaming rep.
I am here with some of my
colleagues. I want to introduce
the two others that are included
in the office of the state
gaming rep, Tammy Archuleta.
She's a compliance officer.
And Natalia, who just recently
got married, changed her last
name to Arn, although I don't
think that's updated on the
slide deck.
Oh, it actually is. Well, there
you go. She is our tribal
auditor.
Um, per the the gaming controll
Act, we are also able to solicit
help from other members of the
New Mexico Gaming Control Board,
we have uh Tetricia Nance. She's
an audit manager.
Rainier Kaplan, also an audit
manager and Gilbert Romero are
our new responsible gaming
coordinator who is present with
me at the desk.
I wait for Nicole to start
pushing slides.
Madam Chair.
This is Gilbert Romero.
Oh, I beg your pardon.
Yeah, Rainier Kaplan.
Yeah, sorry.
He may not have raised his hand
because they're behind me. I'm
worried that they're making
faces. So the first slide.
800599,323. That is the amount
of
Revenue
Mm
Just from the.
The tribes and revenue sharing
from that, um.
It's not including things like
race tracks. It's not including
Um, other economic benefits.
As a result of tribal gaming,
this is strictly our revenue
share.
Numbers.
Next slide will show
That is an upward trend.
From again, we were, we were
stuck in the pandemic in 2020,
2021, um, we're continuing to,
to, to go up. Thank you for
that.
In the in the corner.
We have the
the breakout of how the revenue
share numbers are, are
calculated. The, the, the
Current compact that we're on
now, the 2015 for the, the 1st 3
years we started with the, with
the first column. We are
currently in the, in the, in the
middle column for for revenue
share numbers and then the
compact will continue to to June
30th of 2027.
Next slide.
In addition to revenue share, we
have regulatory fees. Now, this
is part of the compact and use
it for reimbursements for the
state costs incurred in carrying
out the functions of, of the
compact. So that will take care
of things like training.
The
Um, the state gaming
representative, the compliance
officer, the the tribal auditor.
Any conferences which we'll talk
about later.
The
The amounts there in in the
small box there on, on the left,
those are, are amounts and it's,
it's graduated based on the
number.
The amount of adjusted net winds
per the the tribes. So some
casinos may have smaller amounts
while the larger casinos pay pay
the larger amounts. You'll
notice that we've collected in
fiscal year 2024, which ended in
June 30th, 2024, um, 1.7
million.
That that's the amount that the
compact, it would be designated
to support our efforts.
Currently we do not.
Use that amount and I've I've
had questions in the past, well,
from, from the, from the tribes
when we go visit, um, well, what
is our money being used for?
What are those things being used
for and
The the short answer is for the
for the salaries for us to to
monitor and, and regulate.
The the compacts.
But with that being said, a
small ask.
There is still amounts.
Out there that could be
Moved to the New Mexico Gaming
Control Board to increase our
efforts, whether it's additional
staff, additional training.
or,
um, as we'll speak to here in a
bit, um.
Activities for responsible
gaming.
But, but currently we are, we,
we don't have those funds. The,
the revenue sharing and the
regulatory fees all get sent to
the the state treasurer's office
and at that point, it's, it's
used by the, the legislature,
um,
Encompassing the entire state's
budget.
So it's not necessarily.
Earmarked per se.
Although it probably should be,
um, but we're, we're still at,
at the mercy of the, the state
budget.
And next slide.
So
This is the slide
Of all the
The active
Gaming tribes that we have a, a
few that, that are not listed
here that are have compacts, but
But aren't active.a.
ZUNI, Nambe, and Hemes.
They currently have compacts,
but they're, they're, they're
not active.
The
Next slide. So, so the last year
when you guys
When I, when I was here.
Um, Representative Lindstrom.
As this exact question what
metrics do you have to determine
success when it comes to
responsible gaming. That that's,
that's been a big topic for us
over this last.
Doesn't seem like it's been 12
months. Has it been 9 months
since, since the last Indian
Affairs Committee meeting.
But over that time we've, we've
brought in a responsible gaming
coordinator, Gilbert Romero, who
I'll have here speak shortly.
Um, and we've done a lot of
training and a lot of research
on this exact question, um.
And it's, it's one of those
things that is more and more
complicated, the more you dig
that we have the, the, the
pillars of
Of responsible gaming whether
it's clinical.
Policies by state government
training, whether it's through
the the casinos or the race
tracks themselves and even the
signage, whether it's
disclaimers, warnings, or
assistance to get help. And
Of those 4 pillars,
Really only 2 of those we can
actually
Track success.
dealing with some of the, um,
the clinical groups, they're
apprehensive about sharing some
of their information.
One, there's a confidentiality
involved, of course people are
going in, um,
Anonymously, so they they don't
want to share that information
and, and I will, I will let.
Um, Gilbert Romero speak to that
a little bit.
Soon here, um, Nicole, next
slide, please. So this, and
again, um, Representative
Lundstrom, you had mentioned
The small amount that is being
put to compulsive gambling in
this case. It's 25% of 1% of the
entire pie. So I've kind of
blown out those those amounts
and so of.
The
2
40 million of adjusted winds.
Only 2 million of that is now
being posed to
Compulsive gambling.
And again,
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, that is a very small
amount.
Um, that's what, what was
negotiated in the compacts, and
we'll talk about the, the
comebacks here shortly, um.
But right now it's a very small
amount.
That we can work with with
moneys coming from the, the
activities.
Um, but I did mention that we,
we did have a bright spot in
that we were finally able to
bring on a responsible gaming
coordinator. I'm gonna introduce
Gilbert Romero now, um.
That's real I guess some of your
your background. I, I have it,
but I'd rather have you speak to
that.
Yes, Madam Chairman, members of
the committee, uh, my, my name
is Gilbert Romero. I'm a
clinical therapist by
profession. I hold a master's
degree in addiction counseling.
I
many, many years of a prior law
enforcement experience uh prior
to this position, which I've
been in now for 7 months. I was
the behavioral health director
for the Pueblo Vislera. I've
also managed, uh, methadone
clinics and uh founded and
started many uh drug and
treatment courts through
throughout the state.
Um,
I was real anxious with the
opportunity to take on this
position because it is the first
for the gaming control board.
Prior to this, we, we've had a
tool in place called uh
self-exclusion program that's
been, that's been around for
many years, but it was typically
run by our law enforcement
agency, um.
And now the, as you know, gaming
in New Mexico is, is on the
rise. It's getting bigger and
bigger and along with, with the
rice, so is the addiction. The
gambling addiction is huge in
the 67 months I've been here.
Um, I am seeing people coming in
on a daily basis to put
themselves on the self-exclusion
list.
Um, there, there is resource and
the purpose, the purpose is
twofold in my position. There's
a difference between responsible
gaming and compulsive gambling.
What we want to do and my goal
in this position is to educate
people, especially our, our
youngsters with things coming up
like online gaming, sports book.
It's attracting a lot of the
young people and, um, we want to
get them, we're not gonna
gambling is not gonna go to
waste. We want to teach
responsible gaming from an early
age, so it doesn't come down to
compulsive gambling. So once
you're diagnosed with a gambling
use disorder, compulsive
gambling, that's where
treatments, that's where
treatment and intervention is
needed. So there's both sides.
Um, part of my job is to ensure
that the agencies offering
treatment or the agencies
receiving money from the uh
responsible gaming funds that
they're using that money
appropriately and people are
getting treatment. We have two
primary.
Um, agencies we have the New
Mexico Council on Problem
Gambling and uh responsible
Gaming Association of New
Mexico. Those are where the
biggest portions of the funds
go. The responsible gaming of
association deals primarily with
the tribe, with the tribal
casinos, the New Mexico Council
on Problem Gambling, uh, primary
deals with the racetrack casinos
and it's pretty much the the
funds are pretty much split even
between them.
And what they do, those, those
organizations delegate the money
for treatment. They provide
hotlines so people can dial up
and say, you know, I have a
gambling problem. I need
treatment, I need help. They
will refer them to an agency in
their area, um, and there's,
there's numerous agencies that
are involved primarily here in
the Albuquerque metro area is
the evolution group and the
evolution group does have
specific trained therapists
specifically for gambling
addictions. Um, gambling falls
under.
Addiction just like drugs or
alcohol, so any license to
addiction counselor can perform
that, but the evolution group
and the these two associations
go a step beyond that. They have
their people trained
specifically in gambling to
recognize, um,
You know, different sciences
gambling is a type of addiction
and it affects the same part of
the brain as drugs or alcohol
the same neurotransmitters that
that you get when you, when you
fill in an urge to use drugs or
alcohol, you get that with
gambling.
All the noises, the sounds, the.
Just the atmosphere they trigger
those neurons in the brains and
people actually develop those
addictions and they actually
developed physical withdrawals.
Um,
When they stop gambling.
So now the point is, of my
position is to start teaching.
Staff, um, how to recognize the
signs of problem gambling cause
they're out there. You see
somebody making 3 to 4 trips to
the ATM machine, getting upset,
rubbing their machine, banging
on the machine.
Those those are times where
intervention can start taking
place like as much as walking
over and give him a card, you
know, where they can call, they
can call me at any time and I'll
make the appropriate referrals.
The one thing that we, we got to
consider.
His education with him, and
that's going to be my job
educating the public, the, the
workers.
People don't, a lot of people
don't believe gambling is an
addiction, but
There is a higher suicide rate
amongst compulsive gamblers than
there is with drugs and alcohol.
Um, in fact, in I'll share a
little story just happened
Tuesday.
I got a call from a, a lady that
Wanted to be put on the.
The mandatory ban, but she lived
in Santa Fe and could get down
here, so she told me she just
wanted to take her life that she
had just lost everything, lost
her rent, her husband didn't
know. She lost a huge settlement
and she was ready to take her
life, and I did a, I did a brief
assessment over the phone and
she met the criteria. She, she
had a plan, she had the ideation
and she had a means she was
gonna take pills.
I was as, as a therapist, my
first responsibility was to make
sure she got help, so she's in
Santa Fe, wouldn't give me an
address. Just told me where she
was, uh, with the help of one of
our agents, I was able to track
down an address and
Uh, we drove up there ourselves,
myself and the agent drove up to
her address in Santa Fe, and we
got there in time. I was able to
put her immediately on the the
self ban, which was important to
her because she was already
having starting to go through
withdrawal. She was physically
sweating, shaking.
She wanted to go straight back
to the casino and spend the last
bit of money that she had, she
knew that she would not go back
if she was on the self ban list
because she could get arrested,
she could get cited. So that was
important to her to be on the
band, so, um.
We made, we made our way up
there and we got that done and
talked to her for, for probably
about an hour and I got her set
up with counseling and for the
next day in Santa Fe.
And by the time we left, she was
feeling really, really good and,
and confident and hopeful.
And, and that's just, this is,
this is not just a once in a
while thing. This is happening
more and more often.
I, I've dealt, I spent a good
part of my adult career dealing
with with addictions, uh,
primarily substances.
But it is really growing fast in
the gambling world and I am
really glad that I get the
opportunity to get this program
going and
And working with it so we can
recognize right now, I have, it
changes every month, but I have
approximately 554.
People on active self bans from
casinos statewide.
Um, that doesn't even include
the, the tribal casinos
themselves can do their own
bands. Someone can walk into
Sandia casino and say, I want to
ban myself from here. Those,
those are separate, those are
done through the tribe. They
usually forward those back to me
so I can include them in ours.
But what we do is a full
statewide ban. We can someone
come and say, I don't want to go
back to any casino in the state
of New Mexico, so that includes
all tribal casinos and racetrack
casinos, and they can do it for
1 year, 2 years all the way up
for a lifetime.
And those, and once they do it,
it's, it's there for the amount
of time they signed up for.
My, my biggest concern, I think
it's a great tool. It's kind of
like wearing an ankle bracelet
for or wearing having a
breathalyzer in your car, it's a
tool. It helps you stay away
from it, but from a therapeutic
standpoint, we need to engage
them and, and treatment.
They need to learn to change
thinking, change behavior, and
how to deal with life.
Most compulsive gamblers are
trying to deal with something in
their life. It could be, there's
a lot of trauma. It could be you
know, recent divorce. It could
be coming off substances and
finding a new addiction and for
the most part, at least.
95% of the people who have
gambling addictions also have a
co-occurring or a primary
addiction of substance abuse or
alcohol, and it usually the, the
gambling doesn't even manifest
till you're already in treatment
for something else.
But that's one of the things
that I do different now is that
law enforcement is no longer
doing the self exclusions. They
got to come and see me so I can
give a therapeutic approach. I
spent I spent more than 20
minutes in filling out the
paper. I actually talked to him
about treatment and about
counseling and develop a
rapport.
And even though I'm licensed to
practice in the state because in
this job I cannot be their
therapist, but I at least uh
develop a rapport and try to
encourage them.
Um, because
Research has shown that the
self-exclusion is only effective
maybe up to a year after that,
they're gonna look for other
places to gamble if they haven't
treated their underlying
addiction.
And I think on the on in the
slide itself, these are the
agencies that are right now are
are paid or, you know, share the
money from responsible gaming to
provide services and.
Uh, gamblers Anonymous is just
like AA's, um, it's strictly a
support group. They don't
receive any funds.
Uh
The Mescalero Apache
reservation, they do have their
own uh specialized program and.
Um, they actually assist me a
lot. They do a lot of the
self-exclusions.
We said it's gambling is also a
huge problem even though we have
a very small Asian community in
this state, it's the, the
numbers are really high.
Again, I mentioned the the New
Mexico Council on Problem
Gambling that's also a
sub-council of the National
Council, which both have a
numbers 1-800 numbers to call
24/7.
Uh, the Pueblo of Acuma
Behavioral Health Services and
many of the other problems,
Pueblo of Acama, the reason
they're dissuing his for is
because they all also services
outside the tribe if it's
gambling related, they can
provide services to non-tribal
members.
Um, many of the other problems
have their own behavioral health
like the pueblo I worked for
Slea we had a huge uh behavioral
health clinic, but we only
provided services to tribal
members.
And again, the responsible
Gaming Association. They're the,
the ones that most referrals for
treatment come from them.
The tribal casinos will make a
referral to the responsible
Gaming Association.
And they'll sit the, the
gambling participants up in the
treatments.
And again, Evolution Group is a
private agency and they
specialize here in Albuquerque
on problem gambling.
And then once again, the
National Council is just the,
the parent, the parent council
for the, the state.
Council on Problem Gambling.
That's all I have, madam.
So, Madam Chair, I had actually
a question that that was from
Representative Lindstrom from
the last time I was here, I
wanted to post to my, my
colleague, um Gilbert, are there
state funded programs for
gambling addiction, and then
also and you and I spoke about
this in the office a little bit.
Is there gambling specific
Programs
Within
The tribes, so like in Gallup or
in Taos.
first answer about,
excuse me, about the state.
There is no uh state facility,
state-funded programs
specifically for gambling.
However, there are, there are
state hospitals that treat
addiction and like I mentioned
earlier, it's gambling is
usually a secondary or a
tertiary uh addiction to a
primary substance such as drugs
or alcohol. And so we can get
someone into treatment and I'm
talking residential treatment.
Like there's a facility in
Gallup, there's one in Santa Fe,
there's one here in Albuquerque,
uh, one down south in Roswell
and Clovis.
Um, but any treatment center is
going to treat co-occurring
disorders. So if you know
they'll they'll get you checked
in if you meet the criteria for
substance use, and then they'll
offer
During treatment they'll offer
treatment for for all the
addictions.
And now there is the only
specialized gambling treatment
that I'm aware of is through
Evolution Group, and that is an
outpatient, uh, center here in
Albuquerque.
Um, that's specifically designed
to treat a gambling addiction
and are we able to get metrics
from them?
I am, that's a, I've been
getting a lot of, I get a lot of
pushback because again of the
confidentiality, I want my goal
is to get numbers. I want to
know to present to
This committee and other
legislative committees in the
future to let them know what
what this money is going to, how
many people are getting, are
seeking treatment. Uh, what are
treatment outcomes?
Um, at this point I have not.
been able to get any any metrics
from them, but
That is, that is my goal in the
near future and I need to find
ways to
Even if it means policy or
legislative action to compel
them to provide that
information.
Thank you, Gilbert. Yeah, I
would love to have 3 more of, of
these Gilberts. He, he, he's
gone way above and beyond when
we put together the original job
description. It was more of a
Of a segment of law enforcement,
whether it's self-exclusions or
Going if there's maybe a
potential suicide issue that
that's very scary, but I was
telling, telling Gilbert today
that it can be very
intimidating.
To go to somebody that has a
badge, has a has a side arm.
And to say I, I need help
because there's this imposing
presence, but.
Gilbert is, is very, very
approachable and because he's
been in that environment for so
long.
They, they, they go into his
office and they just have
conversations for seemingly
hours on end sometimes, but
thank you very much for that.
Um, next slide, so another
question we had, and, and this
was
From Representative Block.
We were talking about, let me,
let me get the exact words.
Internet sports betting and how
could we possibly get
These increased revenue streams
into the state of New Mexico.
What would we need to do to
possibly
Modify the compacts, renegotiate
the compacts. And so we did the
research on that next slide. And
so I put together this flow
chart and and it's pretty, this
is more of a 30,000 ft view
because there's a lot more into
it that goes into this, but
basically.
Either the, the legislature or
the governor would approach the
tribes or vice versa, and they
would just have a preliminary
negotiation.
on,
on
maybe amendments or
renegotiations. At that point it
goes to the joint legislative
session, and they will go back
and forth between committees
whether, whether it's, um,
dialogues or input or or open
sessions to to go back and forth
on these, and again, and I'll
remind you, our current compact
is in effect until June 30th of
2037. So we still have another
12.5 years, um, before this
happens, but there's this
process and I won't go through
all the details before it can be
approved, ratified, and amended,
but I just wanted to put that
out there, um.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block to to show that there is a
process out there to, to get
compacts taken care of. Now I
know.
There's
Actually
Why don't we go to the next
slide.
There there are these these
other topics and so things like
internet gaming, the electronic
pull tab, sports betting.
Some of these things while
they're not legal in the state
of New Mexico, they, they are
they approved, that's not the
right word. There's an exemption
for them.
Um, on the tribes. So the, the,
the tribal gaming they can do
the the sports betting, um,
internet gambling, there,
there's some provisions there,
but recently there's been some
concerns regarding the ability
to say get a lottery ticket on
your computer or smartphone.
Is, is that considered internet
gaming, some would say it is,
some would say it's not, but
those are when, when we started
the compacts back in I believe
2001, a lot of these things
weren't even.
thought of
And so the compacts need to
continue to
to adjust to be amended to maybe
take into account some of these
things that were, were not
thought of.
Two decades ago.
Um,
So that that's um.
Madam Chair, Senator Block,
Representative Block rather.
Those are what it would take if
we had
concerns or we wanted to have
debates or discussions on what
it would take to adjust the
current compacts.
Um, next slide.
So, so with that being said,
the, in the, in the language of
the of the compacts, they say
that's going to be a tribal
state compact annual meeting.
Now this is something that
Quite frankly, has not happened.
But we are making every effort
to make that happen in 2025. We
put the, the date there, the,
um,
Nicole next slide, please.
That
The way the comeback reads, and
we've tried to outline this the
members from the, from the, the
state, whether it's it's someone
from the governor's office, some
from the the Senate, some from
the House of Representatives,
um, as I'm going through the
list.
I think every member of this
committee
would be a great candidate to be
at a meeting like this and then
representatives from each of the
tribes. This is where we would
meet to maybe talk about or or
start the process of
communications on
what the state likes what the
tribes like, what the tribes
don't like, what the state
doesn't like. Now it's not
something that's going to
necessarily change.
At this one meeting,
but
We have an
Heard the compact
This annual meeting should
happen if for nothing else just
for people to vent.
And to talk about.
Maybe a direction we want to go
or what's gonna, what, what's
gonna look like in 12.5 years
when we have to, when this
compact ends, um, is revenue
sharing too high? Is it too low,
um, table games, class 2,
anything is open at this
meeting. It's not going to be a
compact negotiation. I think
it's just going to be an
opportunity for people to stand
up and say what's on their mind,
and it, it could be.
Something
Represented Lindstrom.
We're not putting enough money
into responsible gaming, things
like that, those could be
amendments. Um, we need more
responsible gaming coordinators,
things like that. Um,
So that meeting is something
that we are working to put
together where
Current talks with trying to get
on the, on the governor's
schedule.
Um, they, they told us to just
to continue the meeting or
continue the planning for it.
So,
Save the date for everyone on
this Indian Affairs Committee.
We would love to have you guys
there.
Next slide, Nicole.
And Madam Chair, with that being
said,
That will conclude our
presentation.
Uh, next slide.
And with that, we are open for
questions and those questions
can be posed to any of, any of
the team.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'd like to thank the presenters
for coming back with some good,
good answers to questions that
we had had. I appreciate that.
Not everybody does that a lot of
times we'll get present
presentations and it's thank you
and then they leave and we never
hear from them, but I want, I
want to thank you today and just
so I understand this.
You know, I remember when I was
actually in the house at the
time when we voted on some
updates to the compacts because
they've been approved 4 years
before I was I was elected.
And all I remember the
discussion being is how much
money for us and how much money
for you. It was all about the
revenue sharing and how that was
going to be split up, very, very
little discussion about
behavioral health. I don't think
anybody ever even talked about
that.
So what I heard today, Madam
Chair, is that we have, I'm just
calling him stackable uh
addictions. You could have
gambling, alcohol, drugs, and
potentially fast food addiction.
Any one person could have that.
I've also heard that we don't
have good data in terms of uh
how many people are out there,
so it's hard to get in front of
the problem. If you don't know
how many people are currently
suffering from one from one or
all of these addictions, it
sounds like everybody's got some
kind of a multiple addiction
that you deal with?
Don't know how many are in the
queue that we're gonna be
dealing with a few few years
from now and that you only have
$2000 that split annually
between an education and
treatment.
To me, and I, I wanna say this
to the walls start shaking,
that's a joke.
$2 million for behavioral
health.
Into a program like this where
people have multiple addictions
is a joke.
You know, we had uh lots of
debate about that, um, in last
session and some during this
special session about, uh, not
supporting certain bills because
we didn't have the behavioral
health providers.
Uh, and I see that as being the
case. We just don't have the
providers readily available to
take on these.
You know, these number of folks
that are going to need help.
I think it's clearly within this
committee's purview to actually,
I, I assume it would be
requesting to the governor.
That this kind of discussion
happened that the revenue, uh,
sharing amount be increased to
help with the behavioral health
service piece.
I, I just can't imagine that
anybody would agree that the
value of 20 years ago when this
was all happening.
To today and what those what
those treatment costs are, are
even comparable anymore because
they're not.
And what I, what I've seen in
the population in New Mexico is
that these addictions start at a
young age.
I mean, we, we've seen it. I, I
get regular reports from our
sheriff's office, our police
department, our local hospital,
and other groups about young,
young people coming in with all
kinds of addictions, you know,
things that we had not heard of
when we were growing up, that we
wouldn't even have thought
about.
So I think it is very
appropriate that this committee
Take a stand to say, let's look
at this again. We need
behavioral health funding for
services for the, the people of
New Mexico.
I don't think we can say it's
all gonna be on that tribe or
it's gonna be on that tribe or
it's gonna be on the state, I
think it's going to take
everybody on this.
I mean, just a little bit that
you said today regarding we
don't even know what the matrix
is yet.
You know, that's like sending
people out to war and you don't
even know where the enemy is.
You don't know, you just know
it's out there.
I think, uh, Madam Chair, we, we
should take a very, very strong
stand on this meeting that
they're proposing is that for
next May, May 2025 to include
this committee.
And to, you know, request to the
governor and those, I, I assume
it's all the gaming tribes that
we look at changing that revenue
sharing amount to put more money
into behavioral health services.
To leverage state money and to
leverage more federal money.
And I think that would be very
helpful in leveraging federal
money now. The way it works in
the state of New Mexico, there's
a block grant that comes from
the feds into our state. We put
so much money against it, but
wouldn't it be great if we could
put more there?
And then we could have more than
just the treatment services, we
don't have any aftercare in
rural New Mexico.
The aftercare piece is a big
void for us. So somebody goes
through the treatment program.
Then what?
Either you start back in the
treatment program again or
you're in this black hole.
Now tell me if I'm wrong. You're
the professional in this, Madam
Chair, gentlemen. You guys are
professionals. I'm just a lowly
little house member that watches
this stuff. So I, I would like
to strongly suggest, uh, Madam
Chair, that we take this up as
a, as a committee initiative to
make sure that a change in the
revenue sharing amount to
include more funding for
behavioral health services
happens and those funds be
leveraged to get federal
dollars.
to help match.
a lump sum, you nailed it.
With you, the, the biggest
The biggest lack that we have,
there's lots of treatment
available, initial treatment,
um, even when I worked for the
sledder tribes we
We were able to send our people
to treatment, even out of state,
but
When you come back home, that's
where it stops. There's no
aftercare. There's no continuum
of care. We need sober living
homes. Uh, we need follow up at
least 18 months.
That's one of the reasons drug
courts are designed for 18
months because it, it gives a
process to go through initial
treatment, follow up, get
through all the holidays, get
through all year plus of stuff,
but you're right, we don't, we
don't have funds to continue
that and we definitely have a
lack of treatment providers in
the state.
Madam, Madam Chair, the
gentlemen weren't here during
the presentation on hunger.
There was a good slide that was
put up that gave some general
description, particularly of
reservation communities.
Most importantly that I saw
where the road conditions. There
ain't no way on this planet in
most of my district, people are
going to be able to travel back
and forth for counseling
sessions on a regular basis in
the winter. There's no way, and
there's no broadband
communication.
So how do people get services if
they don't have the
telemedicine.
They don't have the way to get
through those road systems and
we don't have anybody on the
other end anyway.
I just think that it's time to
reevaluate.
Uh,
how about, what was it 25% of
1%.
Needs to be reevaluated because
in I guess it'd be $2003. That
looks a lot different than it
does in in $2025.
I'd, I'd appreciate that
consideration by the committee
and appreciate you guys coming
back with some answers or at
least the best you could. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, yes, that's exactly
what this annual meeting would
be.
To discuss that's exactly what
the slide on how do we get
amendments? How do we make
changes and it has to be more
than
Maybe a senator or
representative saying I want
more money because to your
point.
Representative Lindstrom, people
think it's, it's, it's a money
grab as opposed to
Clinicians in testimonies of
people saying,
$2 million is just not enough,
and
Once you split that up, it's,
it's, it's a very small amount,
and so, yes, that number could
be
20 times higher and it probably
still wouldn't be enough, but
yes, we would have to start
somewhere.
Thank you.
Thank you represented a block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you both for
being here. Thank you, uh, it's,
it's acting representative, is
that correct?
That is correct, gaming
representative. That's awesome.
So Madam Chairman,
representative, uh, I think that
you definitely answered our
questions from the last year's
meeting, and that's really
helpful to me. I appreciate
that. First of all, I'm going to
stick to the, um,
The
Addiction
I think that's something that we
definitely need to do a little
more research in as well, as
well as funding, and I think
Representative Lindstrom's point
is spot on, you know, $200 these
days within $10 million budget
is just crazy amount of money to
think about, but, uh, on that
point in the health committee we
were talking to some providers
who are counselors and
therapists that deal with some
of these issues, but in the
state of New Mexico, you have to
get a
license in New Mexico.
And you have to physically get
that in the state and that's an
issue for providers who may be
in Arizona, Texas, or
neighboring states, and they
cannot get that license because
they're not physically here or
never were physically here
previously. So I think that's
something maybe to talk to the
medical review board or whatever
to figure that out. I don't know
if you had any, any uh insight
on that with uh just the access
to that care that we need in the
state, Madam Chairman.
Uh, Madam Chair Riverson Block,
yes, I do, I do have some
experience with that as far as
when I was running the methadone
clinic at my clinic, I had a
approximately 1000 patients
dosing every day.
Uh, those patients are required
to have counseling at least one
hour.
Once a week
I had, I had a billet for up to
22 councilors. I had 3.
Three councilors cannot see 1000
patients. So we had to go to,
to, um, mobile therapy and I had
counselors that were in the
state of Florida, uh, North
Carolina, South Carolina that
did go through a process to get
licensed in the state of New
Mexico as well as their home
state, and there is a process,
um, I didn't hire them, they
were contract, um, councilors,
but there is a process where you
can still be in that state and
get licensed to do telehealth
since COVID came around that a
lot changed as far as
Licensing regulations to allow
for telehealth. So I mean I'd
have to research more into that,
but that is, that is available.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you for that.
It's Mr. Romero, is that
correct?
Yes, OK, good. I don't want to
call you a different name,
right?
But thank you, Madam Chairman.
And then the next question, I
guess it's more of a point than
a question maybe about the
online sports betting. That's
really what I was trying to
focus on, right? I think that's
good that you're talking about
all these others in the
presentation like electronic
pull tabs and internet gaming,
but just on the sports betting,
the state of New Mexico is light
years behind a lot of other
states that have it online and I
feel, especially as we're, as
certain people in the
legislature seek to transition
to different funding sources.
For our core budget for the
corpus of the funds that we
build, I find New Mexico losing
out to other states on this kind
of thing is something that we
really need to to get in on, and
I think that it's a good idea in
the May meeting to to talk about
that and see what the tribes
want. So my question, I guess,
regarding that is, is it only
the gaming tribes that need to
be on board if we do change the
compact, or is it every single
tribe, nation, and pueblo regard
of if they utilize sports or or
gaming at all in the state,
Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair, Representative
Block, so currently it's, it's
illegal. It would need to be a
change from the legislature to
say it is now legal to to have
online betting.
In addition to that, the
compacts would would have to
change as well. Um,
Representative Block to your,
your point, I, I sit on a, on a,
on the national board of, of
regulatory gaming and New Mexico
is light years behind.
We, we, it seems like we're
behind everybody with the
exception of the people that
don't, don't game at all, and
Representative Lundstrom, to
your point, and Representative
Block as well.
People are getting younger and
younger. They're using their,
their phones, they're using
their computers that there used
to be this stigmatism about
the the the older person with a
cigarette in the corner with the
slot machine. Now you have these
22 year old kids doing parley
sports betting on DraftKings,
and it's just getting out of
control and
It's, it's hard to get in front
of something like that,
especially unless you have this
coordinated effort and that's
where we probably need to
Try to to get up to speed.
And it, it may, may take
funding, it may take commitment.
It's definitely gonna take help
from our legislatures and our
senators, for for sure.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you for that and
I I appreciate that. I think
that's good, right, as a
legislature, we need to come
with a proposal, I guess, and
then we have to get all the
tribes, nations and pueblos on
board, you know, I've seen what
states like Florida, they just
recently, a couple of years ago
passed online sports betting,
and it was, it's the Seminole
tribe which has our exclusive
access to that and the server
just needs to be on tribal land,
and then there's a certain
amount of, of taxes that need to
be paid and that was all
negotiated by the tribe and the
state.
I think if, if the state of New
Mexico does something like that
and says, OK, exclusively tribes
have total access to online
sports betting and your servers
on your tribal land is what
we're going to use, then we as a
state can access it anywhere in
the state regardless, as long as
the
The server is there, so I think
that's, that's a workaround that
we probably could do
legislatively and then and then
renegotiate the compacts. But
like you said, we're light years
away of other states. I cannot
stand saying New Mexico being at
the bottom of lists. I want us
to be at the top of good lists,
and I think this is one way we
can do it, but also, while also
investing in younger folks to
realize what the addictions are,
how to avoid them. Yeah, you
can, you can have a sports bet
on your favorite team or
whatever, but you don't have to
get addicted and I think it's,
it's a dance, right? It's, it's
definitely.
A dance and definitely something
we all need to.
To focus on, but we cannot be
hesitating on this just because
of fear while other states are
making a killing. I think
Arizona made like.
I think it was like $8 billion
in in sports bets last year,
which is crazy. And imagine what
the taxes would be for our
education and healthcare and
everything that we could provide
with that. So I, I guess that's
just a big point that I'm just
making, very good points. I
don't know if you have anything
to add, but I think it's
definitely a collaboration
between everybody to get on
board and and move our state
forward.
And finally, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, this is,
this is something that would be
a great topic for the the annual
meeting, um.
Madam Chair, if you don't mind,
we'll put you on that list if
you're not already to get
information then you can
disseminate it through the
group.
Thank you.
All righty. Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. Um,
the annual meeting you're
talking about is the one that
it's May 8th.
2025. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, yes, correct. OK,
thank you. So
It's an excellent opportunity to
look at how in my view,
The um way we've been doing
business in terms of gaming and
the compacts.
And then the responsible gave me
all of that realm.
Uh, good time to look at
everything. And I, you know,
I know that.
The whole um compact.
Came about in order to ensure
steady streams of revenue.
Um, it also, in my belief,
infringed upon to a certain
degree, the self-determination
of the tribes because by
Setting up a revenue sharing
stream or contribution stream,
however way we want to label it.
Um, we failed to recognize that
The, um, federal government and
state governments, um,
Defer to tribal sovereignty.
And
Self-determination, which was
the whole point of setting up.
These types of
Economic development.
ventures, right? So,
When this occurred, I had just
moved back to New Mexico under
Governor Richardson's, um,
leadership at that time in order
to, uh, help create economic
development opportunities.
For Sibala County. That's when I
met Representative Lumstrom.
At the time. And so there was a
There was a lot of discussion
about how we could tap in as a
state.
To
That source of revenue that was
Really
Um,
Developing really good revenue
for the tribes. So anyway, not
to get into the whole history of
it, we have
Relationships that were set up
then, Madam Chair, that are in
existence. However, we've gone
through ebbs and tides in our
economies.
Uh, which the good times have
benefited the state and the bad
times have not have been brutal
to our tribes and vice versa.
They've just been ebbs and tides
of the economy.
I think it's time, and this is a
good opportunity. Thank you for
setting this up. For us to look
at how we're going to modify.
How we've been doing business so
that it is fair.
Just and equitable.
Not to the state of New Mexico,
but to the tribes of the state
of New Mexico. That's my
opinion.
When I looked at the way that
this was structured,
It was appalling to me.
Madam Chair.
That
In 2013 when I was sworn into
office. That was the year that
we lowered the corporate income
tax.
And the objective of lowering, I
agree, the income tax was to
attract.
A large scale economic
development.
Many years after that.
Um, not sure if Representative
Lundstrom agrees, but I think we
do to a large extent.
We have failed to attract to the
degree that we anticipated.
Economic development by dropping
that corporate income tax.
That's something we have to look
at.
Because in my opinion, if we
dropped a corporate income tax
to support a quote unquote
unknown.
Then why would we be imposing
Compacts at all the fluctuating
returns to the state because
they fluctuate according to the
tribe, according to the gaming,
according to all of that, right?
The sources of revenue and so
on, but we have tribes at the,
at the time we were looking at
it midway through maybe around
2016.
2017 again, uh,
There was such inequity.
In terms of what the tribes were
contributing, some were 10%,
some were 11%, and in the future
some anticipated to contribute
15%.
We had this discussion, Madam
Chair, and it became very clear.
That there was just
Something inequitable about this
whole
What we set up, it may have had
really good intentions.
But
It, it has been more damaging to
the tribes and it has been
beneficial.
In the sense that I don't think
they've received their return.
Um, as anticipated because we
still need what you just
described responsible gaming
number one, but the services on
the tribal, uh, communities.
are not where they should be,
aging, uh, senior centers,
health centers, education
centers, all of that, all of the
quality of living.
So I think it's time for us to,
Madam Chair, uh, definitely
revisit and look at potentially
modifying.
The compacts.
How and all those processes.
It's too complicated to go into
right now, but all of those
processes.
Um, in my view, need to be
examined, discussed. We need to
hear from the tribes how best.
To modify in order to serve
their interests, not the
interests of the state.
And so that to me, um,
That to me is really, really
important, especially during
these times when we have really
good, um,
Sources of revenue coming into
the state and we're in a, um, a
really good position
economically, but we have to
prepare for those ebbs and
tights, right?
Um, and, and then we have
already proven that what we,
what we intended to do even with
the corporate income tax really
didn't come out the way we had
intended. And so, um, I just,
just.
To keep those discussion points,
but I'd like to invite the
tribes to make the presentation.
On this topic.
I think it is up to the tribes
to tell us what would be an
equitable place.
For them
To sit in the compacts for the
future.
And what would be how they view
an equitable, um,
Contribution
It's not really sharing because
it's not equitable in my view.
So we're, I mean, unless we're
gonna do it on that basis, but
anyway, that's another topic,
Madam Chair, that I think we
should add.
Uh, but I would invite the
tribes to make that
presentation.
Uh, at all of the compact tri
they're they're compact tribes.
Um, and then those that aren't.
How, how they feel as well
because they're not in the
compacts. They're not
necessarily in gaming for a
reason, and there's a lot of
reasons. So, but yet we have an
obligation to support their
needs. So how can the tribes
that are in the compacts.
Help support the non-compact
tribes, and then
How do, what do they feel is a
fair, just and equitable.
Contribution system or sharing
system, um, so that we can look
at modifying it once and I,
well, I shouldn't say once and
for all because things are
always fluid and moving
conditionally. So, thank you,
Madam Chair. That would be my
suggestion.
Vice chair Pinto. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. On page 2.
Do you have
That the
State is foregoing significant
revenue that it would otherwise
receive from non-tribal gaming
enterprises. Do we have an
amount there?
Um, or do you, do you have an
idea of what that amount is that
we're not um
I guess receiving
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, are
you talking about the the
revenue share numbers?
Well, this is these numbers are
from what the tribes pay, right?
These are so, so the 80.6
million is what we received in
revenue sharing from them. But
then you have the non-tribal
gaming enterprises that were not
receiving do we have an idea of
what that number is? Oh, you're
asking what from from like the
race tracks and and and the
nonprofits.
That's fine if you don't know
that you need.
Well, and, and, Madam Chair, um,
Senator Pinto, so
One thing I do want to say
because and, and this goes to
representative uh Royal Caviero
as well. All sides feel like.
It, it's not fair, and, and I
get that, and sometimes that
makes a a a good compact if
everyone feels like they're not
being represented of fair, but a
couple of points I wanted to to
make.
The non-tribal groups, so for
example, tribes pay the max 10%
of revenue sharing. The
racetracks, for example, pay
26%.
And they struggle that
Well, why do the tribes only
paying 10% and we have to pay 26
plus they have to pay an
additional 20% for, for the, the
racing. They feel like they're
getting undercut at all levels,
um.
Representative Royal Caviero, to
your point, the equity is just
not there. Yes, if you're in
Albuquerque or Riodosa, then
that's great, but if you're in
Taos or or Nambe, some of these
MS they've they've gone out of
business in the last 20 years.
They just can't afford it. It's
not being distributed equitably
and
For all of these answers, I
think that's exactly why we need
an annual meeting and I don't.
Really even know if people
realize that that's an
opportunity for them that they
have that, that voice because it
hasn't been there in the past.
Um, yes, somebody from, from the
tribe or the state signed a
combat 2022 years ago, but I, I
really haven't read it myself. I
reviewed the minutes when those
compacts were being put together
and I'm not offending any
lawyers in the room, but it was
just a room full of lawyers.
They probably didn't have, I
think they did have
representatives from the tribes,
but not to the
Economic
Um,
Wherewithal or intelligence
needed to say, well, wait a
minute.
That may sound good on paper,
but that's not gonna work for
Fernambe we, we, we don't have
the, the economy to do something
like this, and
15 years later, we no longer
have a casino, and I think
that's where maybe we do need to
come back to the, the drawing
block and the legislature, you
guys can put together a a joint
resolution through the
governor's office to to bring
The tribes back to the table.
The tribes can go to the
governor's office and say we
want to speak to the
legislature.
And
It starts with this meeting.
And it can be done outside of
the meeting. The meeting is just
trying to get things moving,
get.
Conversation is kind of like
what's going on here. I would
love if we had all the tribes
represented in this room while
we're discussing this because I
think it's that important, but
this meeting will do that, but
we don't need to have that
meeting in order to
Start
Discussions on possible
amendments or resolutions. So
if, if you go back to your
districts and you hear.
Hey, we have something to say.
And by all means it can be
brought back and it can be
brought back through me as a as
a liaison between the tribes and
the state or the state can come
to me and talk to the tribes,
um, or we can just go straight
to the governor's office, which
I think most people
Do or try to do. I know she's
busy.
To have these discussions.
So
The avenues are out there. I
think people just need either
the encouragement or the
knowledge that they're out
there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
uh thank you for your
answer on that. And when you
talk about monitoring.
And how.
How often is the monitoring, are
we able to
meet um
You know, are you understaffed,
I guess, in that sense.
Madam Chair, Senator Pino, are
you asking if if our staff is
understaffed, I, I would think
we're absolutely understaffed.
Now, with that regard, that the
tribes are putting extra money
to help with this situation.
Problem is all the money go into
the state treasurer's office,
and then at that point, it goes
into a big bucket and then.
The legislature decides on where
it should go and a lot of them
are not privileged to
conversations that we're having
in this room right now. I, I
know everything's important
whether it's police funding or
schools and roads. I, I, I get
all of that, but
This might be the only voice
that we have to talk about.
Compacts and responsible gaming
and health addictions and needs
like that. And so I am grateful
that you guys have given us this
platform to talk to you because
otherwise we may not ever be
heard.
I'm grateful for that, but yeah,
I would, I would love to have.
Two more Gilbert Romeros. I, I
would love to have.
More compliance officers and
more auditors.
And
Yeah, maybe some of the monies
that the tribes are putting to
reimbursements, maybe that money
goes to.
Help fund responsible gaming.
Or to target any of these things
that we're talking about whether
it's sports betting or whether
it's
Just compliance issues, compact
negotiations.
I hope that answered your
question.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, how often, so you're
saying annual meeting.
This interim
It's you've come before this
committee twice. Have you been
before any other committee or
been requested to um
appear before any other present.
Madam Chair, Senator Pino, I,
I've been invited to
The association meeting on
responsible gaming. I mean, I
mean to our, our interim
committees with the state like
LFC or um LHHS um not as the
state gaming rep. I am also the
the CPA commissioner for the New
Mexico Gaming Control Board. So
I will attend those budget
hearings, but we have little
boys there as well. So I will
review the budgets as as
A CPA member of the New Mexico
Gaming Control Board, which is
the entire board. The Office of
the State Gaming is a very small
subset of the entire board, so
while I have the dual.
Capacity
Answer your question, yes, I've
been to those meetings.
But, but not to talk about the
Office of the State gaming rep
only to talk about the New
Mexico Gaming Control Board in
general.
But not really presenting any
numbers or data or
unfortunately, no. Interesting.
I would love to be able to speak
to, to that, um, Senator, um,
but usually everything gets
classified into 200, 300, 400
categories, and it's lumped into
one big group and the office of
the state game rep is a subset
of a subset in a very small
group
under
Staff
So it's very difficult, but
yeah, I would love to have a
platform like this to, to speak
of nothing else other than
responsible gaming.
Madam, members of the committee.
I find that very interesting,
especially when we talk about
large portion of the budget, um,
especially with gaming,
especially with the platform oil
and gaskets, um, from that and
when we're saying, well, equity
and yet those money seems to be
like we're not able to draw on
it even though it's a state
resource. So I, I find that
interesting, but you mentioned
something about paper.
That you have to fill out a
paper form.
Which I'm trying to wrap my head
around that, um, knowing that
there's technology out there
that probably would really cut
that down, um.
So I don't think.
In the past since I've been in
this capacity that the
investment in behavioral health
has been addressed because it's
been underfunded and it seems
like
it's kind of iterating what
Senator Sos this says that we,
we have the money, but it's
really the prerogative of those
that, uh,
are in the budget process have
not funded or even tried to in
some sense, find those pockets
that uh
could really
expand this particular economic
resource that that's out there,
you know, that block is uh
alluding to, uh, nationally and
to bring people outside of New
Mexico here or even doing
outside money into our state.
And of those entities you listed
with the Beal Health, um,
addressing. I did not see
anything about like CYFD coming
in, um, even though that's one
of our biggest uh departments in
the state, we
CYFD has any kind of little hand
in your this particular with the
gambling addiction.
Madam Chair, Senator Pinto, uh,
no, CYFD does not partner with
us at this time. We do partner
with Department of Health
because prior to my coming on
board, they had to approve
treatment plans um by the
different casinos and training,
training plans to make sure
they're meeting the objectives
of responsible gaming. And as to
the paper, unfortunately, we
were way behind the curve in
that too, we actually do.
I have to see the person that
wants to be on the
self-exclusion. I have to see
him face to face. They fill out
a form. I notarize it in front
of them, take their pictures,
uh, take their IDs, and then I
enter it into a computer
database that goes out. Many
states are at the point now
where they can
They can go online and complete
the whole.
The whole packet online.
Um, we're, we're hoping to get
there. That's my goal is to get
there. I think you would.
You know, like the lady in Santa
Fe earlier this week, if she I
mean she didn't have a computer,
she could have done that. She
could have been totally
comfortable. I do think, I do
like the in-person contact
because you do get to develop a
rapport, um, but it would make
it, I think my number of people
on the self exclusion list would
probably be double if we had
that rapid access and we're also
in a move. I sit down on the
national committee responsible
Gaming as well, and we're on a
move to go to a nationwide
self-exclusion. Right now,
Each state does it state by
state, so I can put my name on
the list here, but I can drive
right up the road to Colorado
and go to that tribe's casino,
I'm fine, but now with this
option of going and making it
nationwide, it'll be from coast
to coast if you put yourself on
a band.
You can't, you can't escape
because addiction, whether it's
gambling or anything else,
you're gonna find your source if
you really want it. So if you
can't gamble in Mexico, you're
going to make it a point to go
somewhere where you can, and
with the.
The growing internet gaming.
That's just increasing that you
can, even though it's illegal in
the state, it's, there's a lot
of offshore numbers you can
still dial up on your phone or.
be able to get into some.
Offshore sites that aren't even
uh.
Um, regulated.
So and that's what's scary when
it comes to our young our young
people.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee's a very big concern,
especially when we talk about AI
coming in and uh you know and
all these instances too with
some of these addictions, the
harm that comes to our our human
humanity, um, in that sense, but
it was very
Interesting about how you can
get on a list and not.
Be able to be let into a casino
and then we can't even really
address liquor or um alcohol
addiction and substance abuse in
in that sense where you could
just go and, well, I've decided
today I'm gonna take this
opportunity and change my life
and yet we don't have that
available that quickly or that
easily, um, you still have to go
down the road to find a facility
and even then most of them are
at capacity where they.
Cannot be taken in or um it's
unfortunate that we're there in
the and as is it, as it grows.
Um, but thank you for the work
you do and um I think a lot of
what you do and um it's a fine
line of trying to have economic
prosperity, um, but also with
our tribes, nations, and
pueblos, there's the aspect of
tribal sovereignty.
Um, you know, you want to have
this meeting, but, uh, if
there's not buying or the
tribes, nations or pueblos, um.
It could be frowned upon that
word saying, well, you got to
come to this meeting versus we
would also they would are the
ones initiating that based on
the sovereignty and uh some of
the other things that
We
Maybe
could address, but
There's a fine line there of,
of, um,
That aspect of how far how far
do we go on this part, um,
they're willing to do it. So,
um,
Just remember that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
And Madame
Senator Pinto, one of the things
as this job came about.
Um, it's, I'm not very welcome
right right yet with this and
all across the board, um, the
racetrack casinos,
see me more as a, as a threat to
business because I'm encouraging
responsible gaming. Um, I do go
out, we do have total
jurisdiction over the racetrack
casino. So I go out to all the
different ones and I set up my
little table and says Iogaming
control board, I, I do
self-exclusions right there.
When I show up, I get people,
people will be walking out of
the casino fed up because
they've lost, so they, they
signed up.
not very popular. I'm willing to
do that too with all the tribes
that I've been introduced to all
the tribal casinos and I'm ready
to go as soon as I get an
invitation, but um I first need
that, that invitation and my
purpose is not to, I've been
referred to as the Mothers
Against Drunk drivers of
gambling. He said, having you
here in our casino is like
having mad next to my bar, but
uh, and that's not, that's not
our idea. We don't, we do not,
you know, gamings, gaming's here
to stay. It's a good revenue
source. Our hope is just to give
people that need the help, get
them to help and to keep young
people to learn how to set
limits. And the thing is
there's, I have a lot of ideas
and again we're behind the curve
from the other states, but there
are many things we can do as
tools, the player's club card
right now, it's only used to
benefit the casinos to learn
gambling behavior you know, they
offer prizes and things like
that, but that's just to so they
can keep track and they can
learn, but many states
incorporate responsible gaming
into that card which would allow
a
Now the person, the cardholder
to go in and sign in on the app
and set limits for themselves.
They can set a time limit of 1
hour, 2 hours, whatever it may
be, or a dollar limit. And once
that limit is reached,
They can't play anymore. It'll,
it'll tell them it'll shut them
down. You know, and obviously
they're in control of it, they
can go home, get back on and
change the limits, but all you
need is that time from a
therapeutic standpoint, that
time to adjust, that time to
step away from the machine, go
home, gives you time to think
about it. Those are ideas that I
would like to eventually see in
all of our casinos tribal and
the ability uh.
For the players to set their own
limits and that's, that's one of
the things that we can teach
because I I I also go to
casinos. I go to a different,
uh, like in a couple weeks I'll
be at the Bernlio County Opiate
Summit, and I'll be, um, giving
out information on responsible
gaming and I try to travel to
the different colleges and the
schools when they have, uh,
Affairs that I'm invited to just
to teach responsible gaming
because eventually we're
probably gonna go to the
electronic sports betting and
like I said it's already here
illegally, but the one thing
positive about those platforms
is they're really easy to
implement tools because those
are built into their programs,
the legal ones anyway. You can
set limits from the very start
when you, when you create an
account to, uh, online sports
betting account, you can set
your limits right there. You can
say, oh I can play is $100 a
month and it's.
Keep you to that. It's not gonna
allow you to change those, those
have a lot more opportunities
than the brick and mortar
casinos as far as implementing
tools.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I don't see any more
of my colleagues wishing to
speak. I want to thank you for
your presentation and I
absolutely think that our tribes
are going to be interested in
attending this meeting in May of
2025.
It's incumbent upon them as
tribal leaders, it affects them
on a daily basis and I think
because we have tribal
leadership changes.
At the regional level and at the
local level, our chapter level,
and our tribal level, they may
not know some of this current
information.
So I think this is a great
opportunity that um we are gonna
be afforded a seat at the table.
And uh we will help you.
Uh, however, we need to, to, to
invite our tribal leaders and
you can work with them as our
staff and do, do what we need
to.
So with that, I just want to
thank you for your presentation.
I want to thank you for your
work. I want to thank your
staff, and I look forward to,
um, working with you.
Hm
I'm checking my approach.
Yes, please. And, uh,
colleagues, we are on the last
agenda item.
We will hear from.
The Aqua, we will hear about the
aquifer storage and recovery.
And if we can have that team
come up.
Do an introduction and uh.
We'll give a couple of minutes
before we begin.
OK, please feel free to begin.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, my name is
Adrian Oglesby, and I am the
director of the Utton
Transboundary Resources Center
at the University of New Mexico
and uh with me today is
Rinterra, one of our staff
attorneys.
And uh we are, to put it in
legislative language, a RPSP
where research and public
service project of the state
legislature.
And we have just celebrated our
25th anniversary, and I think
we've been getting our PSB
funding for 16 or 17 years. Um,
and we take that very seriously.
We um do significant research on
water issues, mostly focused on
New Mexico but also the Colorado
River basin and the public
service part is the part we
really embrace. We work with
every New Mexican from the farm
fields to the roundhouse. We
work with the governor's office,
the judiciary, the legislature
as much as possible.
But we take calls from anyone
anywhere and try to help folks
understand what's going on with
their water situation in New
Mexico.
Um, the, uh,
But the senator does have some
significant involvement in
Indian water issues just to
highlight for this committee,
um, one of our major projects is
we, um, are the managers of the
national repository of all
Indian water rights settlements.
Um, we, um, maintain all the
finalized settlement documents
in our repository and do
analysis to help tribes and who
are engaged in settlement
processes, understand what
options are available to them,
what's happened in the past, and
what they may be able to
negotiate.
in the future. Um, we, we also
share a hallway with the
American Indian Law Center and
are pleased to support the
pre-law Summer Institute where
both I and one of our fellow
staff attorneys teach, um, and,
uh, over the years we've had a
lot of other involvement with
tribes. I actually began my
career with 5 years serving the
good Pueblo of Santa Ana right
here is a water and
environmental lawyer,
um, and I'm glad to be back. So,
um, let me get to the topic at
hand, which is aquifer storage
and recovery.
Start with a little story on the
Rio Pacos, um, years ago, they
built a reservoir on the Rio
Pacos and as most of you
probably know, that's limestone
country and there are a lot of
sinkholes.
And as they filled up that
reservoir, the water just
disappeared, and they quickly
realized they had built their
reservoir on top of a fractured
sinkhole area. And so the folks
who had built it went downstream
and asked the state engineer's
office if they could drill some
wells to recover the water that
was pouring underground in their
new reservoir and the state
engineer said, what are you
talking about? We don't do that
kind of thing here in New Mexico
and this was, this was, you
know, back in the 60s. And, um,
the folks involved in that back
then said that was
Our first opportunity to do
aquifer storage and recovery in
New Mexico, um, by accident and
one of the attorneys involved
was
became a 5th Circuit judge Alvin
Jones, and, um, Alvin Jones
always made the point to me that
the New Mexico aquifer storage
and Recovery Act, as it is
currently written, is a barrier
to entry. It is difficult to do
an aquifer storage and recovery
project in New Mexico because of
the rules.
We have. They're very stringent.
They're very difficult to comply
with. And, um, so Judge Jones
and I were on, um, uh, Governor
Grisham's transition team and
made this a priority. Um, you
folks are probably familiar with
the governor's 50 year water
plan. This is a priority in that
plan, um, the work of the State
Water infrastructure Task Force
that we proudly supported at the
Otton Center. They also made
aquifer storage and recovery uh
priority. And so we decided
To take a look at it.
Unfortunately, at the time there
was a gentleman who had been the
chief executive of the
Albuquerque Burnlio County Water
Utility. A gentleman named John
Sta, an engineer, and when he
retired, he came to law school.
And so we had John there at law
school and I said,
John, you built two of the only
4 aquifer storage projects in
this state. Will you help us
look at how to revise the
statute and the regulations. And
so that's the project that we
undertook, and I want to start
off by saying we're not
advocating this. We are just
putting it up for discussion.
We've created a strawman. We are
a neutral and objective center,
you know, we're not out here to
say one side is right, one side
is wrong.
What what we can tell you is
that aquifer storage is an
important option that we think
New Mexico should be exploring.
And so by creating changes,
proposed changes to the statute
and the regulations, we're
putting those out there for
discussion. So I'll run through
my presentation quickly and, um,
We can talk about the details
here. So again, aquifer storage
and recovery, um, you know, what
we're talking about is really a
pretty simple concept.
If there's space underground, we
can put water down there and
pull it out later. And as you
all know here in New Mexico we
refer to our reservoirs as the
places where we spread our water
out to dry. And so this is a
really interesting opportunity
for us to find places to store
water underground.
Now, politically, legally,
technically, it's not that
simple. There, there are a lot
of nuances, of course, you just
think about the Rio Grande
Compact and the debt we're in,
if we started storing water
under Albuquerque right now,
there would be a lot of
questions from Texas, right? So
there are details we're going to
have to work out. But we want to
get over the initial hump of
making this possible in New
Mexico so we can get to some of
those hard questions.
So the groundwater storage and
Recovery Act that we have was
passed by the legislature 25
years ago in 1999.
And there have been 6 aquifer
storage and recovery projects
permitted in the state, only 4
of which have been built.
Two of which are, um, just south
of, well, 3 of which are just
south of us here. Rio Rancho has
a direct injection well in
recovery system. Albuquerque has
a direct injection while in
recovery system. And then
Albuquerque also utilized the
Arroyo at the Bear Canyon uh
golf course where they've
created an infiltration project
that stores water underground
that can be recovered later as
well. I'll talk a little bit
about those.
Big issues we deal with in the
statute as is currently written,
is to put a sort of bluntly, you
essentially have to build your
whole project before you get it
permitted. And these are
multi-million dollar projects.
And so to give you an example,
the direct injection well that
we have at the Albuquerque
Burnleyo Water Utility Treatment
Center. It's just a big well,
puts water underground and can
take it back out. That was an $8
million project. It took 6 years
for them to get it permitted,
and $1,000,000.
And permitting costs. So they're
$80 million project that cost 1
million bucks in 6 years to get
it permitted and this is a
really simple aquifer storage
project, right? So I just wanted
to set that stage for you. Um,
The other issue that we have and
there are a number within the
statute that we'd like to clean
up. The other issue that that
we've identified is only
government entities in New
Mexico are allowed to build
aquifer storage and recovery
projects.
There are not a lot of
government entities in New
Mexico that have the
wherewithal, the engineering
capacity, the time and the money
to do this. Um, and so if we
want to get private investment,
philanthropic investment,
nonprofit investment in New
Mexico water we would like to
change that so that others could
engage in aquifer storage and
recovery.
Clearly regulated like any
government entity would be. We
don't want to cut the many
breaks, but we want to give a
private equity money to a chance
to come into Mexico and help
with this problem.
Um,
The, the other thing and, and,
and this will be a little
trickier to deal with, we, we
have a two-headed regulatory
beast here.
You have a water right
situation? Who owns the water
going underground, who owns the
water that's getting pulled out,
uh, whose water is it
commingling with down there?
And then you have a water
quality situation. You know,
some of our groundwater is
incredibly high high quality,
it's ancient, you know, ancient,
ancient ice water,
mixing that with treated modern
water. You may have chemical
problems. You may have
impurities that are getting into
good water. You may have bad
mixing, and so the Mexico
Environment Department wants to
make sure that the water you're
putting back into the aquifer is
suitable. And that's totally
acceptable. But it does create
two
separate regulatory processes
that folks have to go through to
get aquifer storage and recovery
projects built.
And we think that both of those
can be streamlined, um, when the
when the when the statute was
passed, there, there was a lot
of concern about this, and
there's a lot of negotiation
that went on that created these
restrictions, um.
And now the 25 years has gone
by, I think we've learned quite
a bit, but mostly what we've
learned is these restrictions
are just keeping this from
happening here. And so we want
to really take a hard look at
how
How we're doing this and how we
can make it better.
Um, another issue that we have,
um, is that the state engineer
is letting people only store
water underground if it
essentially is recognized under
a court order or a license. So
unlike the water rights that are
managed under active water
resource management. Um, if you
have a permitted right in the
state engineer has vetted it.
Um, you can't store that
underground. Um, that's not a
sufficient proof of your
ownership of that water. And we
would like to allow
Of the same standards that we
use in active water resource
management where the state
engineer can use permits as an
indication of an ownership. Um,
for aquifer storage as well. We
think those standards should be
equal. You shouldn't have to
have a higher standard for your
water right to store it
underground versus putting it on
a field. You know, it's a
private property, right? If, if
you can do one thing with it,
you should be able to do the
other in our mind.
Um, the water monitoring, uh,
fees, the application fees, uh,
are all pretty significant and
it's understandable when the
state engineer set up their
permitting process, they set the
fees to pay for the program.
And that's admirable. That's,
that's sort of how NMED works
generally, generally not how the
state engineer works. Uh, those
fees are just high and
restrictive, and we think
they're going to have to be
supplemented a little bit by the
agency. We need those, those
fees to come down a little bit.
Also the long-term monitoring,
um, really adds up. Uh, the Bear
Canyon project, um, their annual
discharge plan that they have to
provide to NMED to assure them
that the water quality is good
that they're putting
underground. costs them about
$50,000 a year, um, to submit
that plan. That, that's adding
as much as $14 per acre foot to
the amount of uh to the uh cost
of the water that they're
putting underground and
recovering, which is, which is
really significant when it comes
to water. Um,
Over time we think that those
permitting requirements could be
lessened because essentially
you're putting the same quality
water in year after year after
year you're using the same
source, the same locations,
nothing's really changing from
year to year. And so we'd like
to see NMED become a little bit
more relaxed about those
regulations.
another element to the, the
statute that we'd like to see
changed is that if you want to
do aquifer storage and
regulation, you have to build an
engineered facility to do it.
Now I told you earlier that
we've got a reservoir in on the
ecost down there that if we pour
water into it, that water is
going underground. That is an
aquifer storage facility. It's
already built. It's not really
well engineered, to be honest
with you. Um, but that, that's a
pre-existing facility that could
be used. But if we wanted to do
aquifer storage right now in
that exact same place, you would
have to build an engineered
facility next door to the
existing uh sinkhole
essentially. So they're natural
features.
There around New Mexico that can
be utilized to infiltrate water
underground that don't require
A lot of engineered
infrastructure and we'd like to
open the door for people to
consider those locations as well
for aquifer storage.
And um,
The other limitation that we'd
like to loosen up in here is the
state engineer is able to put
limits on the amount of water
folks can store underground. So
that $8 million facility, the
water utility has down south of
us here in Albuquerque. They're
limited to storing 5000 acre
feet a year underground. They've
got in some years, much more
than that, that they could be
storing underground, but they're
limited. Uh, it was, you know,
administrative decision, uh,
based on, you know, conditions
at the time of their permit.
But from year to year they may
have a lot more water. They
could be storing underground and
saving from evaporative losses.
So
You know, the big picture here
in New Mexico is we have, you
know, significant surface water
storage. But the purposes and
the amounts of water we can
store in those reservoirs are
limited mostly by federal law.
So you go up to Heron Reservoir,
for example, you can only store
San Juan tama water up there. If
you go to Elvado back when
Elvado was online and let's all
keep in mind that Elvato is
offline right now. That was just
farm water and a little bit of
silvery minnow water. You, you
couldn't store city water there.
You could only put your farm
water there. Go down to Abicuu,
that's where the city water is.
Well, now we're making
concessions to allow for the
farm water to be stored there
that now that Elvado is offline.
Uh, Coche, you can't store water
at Cocheti, you know, it's, it's
recreation and flood control
only, right? So our, our surface
storage is really, really
tightly controlled. We don't
have those conditions laid on
aquifer storage. Now, we will
have to figure out, you know,
how to deal with the preexisting
rubric of laws and the compact
and all the other pressures as
we do this, and I'm not claiming
that's easy, but it'll be a
whole lot easier if we open up
our statute to allow people the
to try.
And so
Um,
So yeah, yeah, I, I think, I
think that's really all I've got
for you folks. I, I did want to
mention um that one thing that
um uh Mr. Samp pointed out in
his work for us, um, and I'll,
I'll admit that he, he was
taking my Indian water law
rights class at the time was
that, um,
We could create aquifer storage
accounts for Indian water rights
settlements that, um, aquifer
storage accounts off Pueblos uh
could be created by the state to
create pockets of water to
satisfy future Indian water
rights settlements, which is
kind of an innovative idea,
something that's worth
exploring, but not something
that we're going to spend our
time exploring until we've got
statutes and regulations that
allow us to do this in the first
place.
So, a secondary part of this
project, um, of course, because
we, we, we don't want to just
foist this down on our friends
at NMED and the state engineer's
office. We, we know the people
on the ground who have to do
this work and when they see us
mucking around with the
legislature, they roll their
eyes and think you guys are just
creating work for us. We're
talking to those people and we
have drafted revisions to both
the state engineer regulations
and the NMED regulations. Those
changes, those proposed changes
along with the changes to our
statute.
are on our website.
Um, RI has been put in charge of
disseminating this to our
groundwater experts around the
state. We've been getting
comments from folks at Bureau of
Geology, um, folks and at MSU,
um, we've been getting input
from the state engineer's
office. So, so we're trying to
make this a collaborative
community effort to develop
statutes and regulations that
will work not only for the
people who are trying to build
these things, but for the people
who are regulating them as well.
We want this to be as easy
It is possible for NMAD and the
state engineer's office and I'm
excited to see that we've got
the people in those offices
starting to talk to each other
exactly about what we're doing
here now and how they could
better, you know, help make
aquifer storage possible here in
New Mexico.
Um, so that, that's essentially
what we've got for you here.
Just wanted to let you know what
we're up to here. I'll be frank,
we don't have a sponsor for this
because again we're not
advocating this we're putting it
out for public discussion.
If anyone wants to sponsor this,
we'll be happy to serve as
expert witnesses and help you
all get the process, uh, going.
I, I think this is something
that would be really interesting
to have as a discussion point
for a 60 day session. Um, I, I
suspect it would take a couple
of years to really hash this out
because this is complex and
important, but it is important.
This is our water and this is a
great opportunity for us to
conserve a lot more water than
we have been in the past.
So I'll leave it there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Water can get pretty, pretty
deep.
So, so you were talking about
this water storage.
Is it because we're pumping
water from one place and storing
it at another. We're buying
water.
To and and and you mentioned,
uh, something canyon or
something where you're doing a,
a water storage, uh, we're doing
that now, right? That's right,
Madam Chair, Representative
Samoa, yeah, thank you for the
question. Um, the, the majority
of the water that we're seeing
being put underground is San
Juan Chama water. Um, and so
that's, you know, federally
contracted water delivered to us
from the Colorado Basin. It's
supplemental to our native
system and so that water is a
little bit easier to put
underground because Texas
doesn't have their eyes on it.
And because it's set to be used
to extinction in our valley.
And Madam Chair, and
Presenter. So, so we're taking
water from the river and, and
storing it underground. That's
right. That's right. OK. OK, I
got you on that. And, and I have
something out of left field.
That I heard at a meeting in
Portais here a while back.
This man made a statement, and I
never had thought of water in
this manner.
But he made a statement and he
said that
Every drop of water that was on
this planet.
1000 years ago is still here on
this planet.
How do you look at that, Madam
Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair Representative
Zamora, I think that's generally
speaking true. um, you know, we
may have had a few asteroid
strikes that brought a little
extra water to us over the
years. But yeah, for the most
part, you know, the amount of
water we have on this planet is
is what we've got.
And that's that's why we should
be taking care of it. And, and
Madam Chair,
and Adrian, yeah.
I, I always thought that water.
was being used up.
And when you think of it that
way, you think, well, we drink
it and then.
Body uses it for whatever and
and then.
We don't expel as much water as
we drink, so, so, and I see, I
always thought of it that way in
farming.
That the plant used it and then.
And then we grew this plant, but
I never, I never imagined in my
head never thought of it in that
perspective or that all that's
water some is still somewhere.
It doesn't leave this planet.
So then you wonder, is it in the
oceans? Has it come, become
saltwater? And, and I'm sure
some has, but is, is that what,
where the balances are off or?
No, that.
Yeah, Madam Chair,
Representative Z Amori, it's out
there somewhere for sure. You,
you know.
to turn to climate change, you
know, a hotter, hotter
atmosphere holds more water,
right, you know, just like your,
your, your, your laundry machine
does. Um, and so, you know,
Part of our problem is we have
more water above us now, right?
The atmosphere is holding more
of our water than our oceans and
our rivers are. Um, yeah, but
it's a remarkable thing. I, I, I
remember, you know, my, my, my
first day working as a
construction worker in Santa Fe,
you know, drinking a full gallon
jug of water and I wasn't
sweating, you know, I didn't
really have to go to the
bathroom. I thought heck, I was
transpiring all that water out
because I was out there with a
shovel all day in the sun,
right? So it, it comes one way
or another, but, but yeah, the
balance remains.
the same.
Thank you for that as we go
forward and we think about these
things and try to understand
them. I think that's, that's a
perspective where we have to
look at and
It'll it'll be interesting as as
we go forward.
How we solve our water problems
in the state of New Mexico and.
It, it'll just get more and more
intense.
And uh
I look forward to this. This is
a very interesting subject to me
and.
And then the rights of the
people that own the water.
That's, that's very important
also because because that's
their.
They
Rights that they buy with the
land and they purchase the water
rights, so.
Thank you for your presentation,
uh.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Yeah.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative.
Oh
Allison, Shanai.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You said to store.
Water underground
How do you do that? I mean, uh,
I just was talking with a
gentleman who said that they had
whales and the water that
they're uh pumping from the
wells contains a lot of clay and
other sediments. So how do you
cure that?
Madam Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair,
Representative Allison, thank
you for the question. This this
gets to the, the tech technical
complexities I was referring to
earlier, um, not all places
underground are good for storing
water. Um, especially here in
New Mexico where we have a lot
of volcanic rock that may have
levels of radionucleides or
arsenic in it, those are areas
we might avoid storing water.
So, so we have to be very
judicious about where we choose
to store our water. To, to your
first question.
And how do we get it down there?
Um, there, there are a myriad of
ways and, and, you know, you
might just think about how our
aquifers came to be in the first
place, you know, here in the
Sandia along the foothills,
there's great recharge zone. Um,
so there's the potential to
recharge the Albuquerque aquifer
up in the foothills. Um, in some
areas, uh, say in the Coachella
Valley in Palm Springs area out
in California. They, they've
been doing this for over 100
years. They just have big areas
where water sinks.
Into the ground and so they've
just put reservoirs above that
and they fill them up and the
water just sinks down into the
ground and they pump it out for
the next golf course down below
and they sink it in again and
pump it out for the next golf
course. Um, so, um, you know,
we, we do, we need to be careful
about where we put the water
underground, the quality of the
water we put underground, and we
want to make sure the water that
we're mixing with the water
that's down there is not going
to contaminate that water or
have chemical, you know, uh.
Incompatibilities. Um, so we
don't have all the, those
technical answers. We certainly
don't have the political
answers. Um, we're just trying
to take that first bite of
making it possible, uh, for us
to have these projects which
then will force us to answer
these questions that you're
raising now.
Thank you for that,
uh, Madam Chair.
In my district we have a big
project, Gallup Navajo Water
Line.
And there was plans at one time.
To
Install some kind of a line to
pump water from the flatlands of
let's say around Sanosti and
pump it up on top of the Tusca
Mountains.
We've got several lakes up in
the Chuka Mountains. Would that
Plan have worked to replenish
the aquifer.
Madam Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh, Represent
Allison, um,
you know, it may well well be a
good place for it. Um, you know,
the Triskas, uh, have some
really remarkable wetlands and
fens, um, you, you, you know,
they're, they're much more lush
than I think people realize. Um,
and so there may be some great
places up there for storing of
water. Um, you know, we would
want to do the, the analysis to
make sure that those were good,
safe, you know, good water
quality areas. But yeah, I would
think that Chesa.
would be an area that would be
ripe for that, given, you know,
type of watersheds that they
have up there and again, the,
the, the myriad of sort of the
fens and wetlands that occur up
there, um, for sure.
Yeah
OK, uh, Madam Chair, uh, that's
something that I'll continue
looking into thanks for the
answer. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Shanna,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Adrian. Uh, good to
see you again and, um, get this
presentation. Appreciate the
information. Uh, Madam Chair,
um, so I'm looking at these two
documents. I see the proposed
changes that are here in this
document in the multi-page
document.
Do those include the, the, the
red insertions.
Is that what these are?
All of these are
On the document, the solution,
uh, that you propose, Madam
Chair Representative Little, and
I think this is the first time
I've been before you as a
representative, so it's so it's
good to see you. Um, it's, it's
an honor, um, uh, yes, um, we
have tried to capture in our red
lines in our modifications here,
solutions to all of these issues
that I've raised.
Thank you. And so, Madam Chair,
my follow-up question with that
is, um.
Whether
These are, there's an
opportunity for priorities to be
established of all of these
solutions that are in bullets in
here are there
I'm wondering if these all come
together, which they may, they
all intersect and so, uh, all of
these are Ans. They're not this
or that. So my question is, are
these, are there priorities that
you can see that you can
recommend in this list of
bullets.
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Little, um, you,
you know, we took the approach
that if we were going to try to
get the statute modified, we
would want to get it all done at
one shot. Um, just recognizing
the legislative process. Um,
however, um, once we had done
our initial work, as I've
mentioned, we now have opened
the doors and are trying to get
as much input from
Regular citizens from agency
people from groundwater experts
to to make sure that what we've
done here is right, um, and we
have been getting some
suggestions to modify a little
bit what we put forth, which is
great. That's really what we're
looking for here, um, because we
don't want to come to you and
say the Utton Center says this
is the way to do it. We want to
come to you and say, New
Mexicans say this is the way to
do it.
Thank you, thank you for the
response. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. That's all of my
questions.
Thank you, uh, Vice Chair Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, and thank you
for your presentation. This
particular uh these proposed
changes, has it been introduced
just this past session or vice.
No, no, no, this is, this is all
fresh to the legislature.
OK, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it's going to take 10
sessions. I'm just kidding.
Uh
Um,
they, you know, reading through
this too, I, uh, actually I lost
the page on the front page.
Um, because you know, this being
the Indian Affairs committee and
then the tribal entities. So if
this is new, have the tribes,
nations or pueblo's been um had
access to this.
You know, we've done outreach.
Um, I don't know that we've
gotten any commentary back from
a driver Pueblo yet, but we
certainly made it available to
them to comment on, um, uh, I,
you know, given my background as
a former tribal water lawyer,
um, uh, I think it's sort of
incumbent on me to reach out to
the legal community as well and
make sure they're plugging into
this. Um, so I think we've got a
little bit more outreach to do
on that front. I mean, as you
know, it normally takes a little
bit longer to get feedback from
the tribes and pueblos, but
we're
Continue to work on that and
we're 100% open to it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
Do you, do we have an idea what
committees this would probably
be referred to? I mean.
And
Like 2,
but I mean,
Madam Chair, Vice Chair, you
know, I would expect judiciary
would probably take a peek at
it, you know, certainly Indian
affairs, um, I would imagine,
um, you know, water and natural
resources, 10 years might not be
long enough.
I'm just kidding about that, but
um, so I'm here to I don't know
if it was the last page, but
there was something a little
bit, so say you're giving,
you're taking, you're saying the
Engineer.
Shall establish a storage
account but it's um
Then you're saying, but they
don't limit it or they don't
have that's why I'm saying, but
I mean we don't have to get real
detailed in it. I'm just that
that it's uh
interesting Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, yeah, the simple
answer is, um, you, you know, we
want to be able to establish
potentially counts of water
underground to help with Indian
water rights settlements and we
would like the state engineer to
reconsider the limitations they
put on how much water you can
store underground.
Because you can imagine if if we
built an $8 million injection
well to build an Indian water
rights settlement account
underground, and we could only
put 5000 acre feet in a year.
That's not gonna do us much
good, right? Um, so, uh, you
know, we want to be thinking
more expansively and really be
able to address our water
issues, you know, head on, not
just in tiny pieces.
And I think that's probably
where they some of this, uh,
when you're saying like
evaluating where this is going
to take place, especially if
you we know you put water
somewhere, it's not going to
stay there. If anything, if
there's any any kind of uh that
water is gonna go where it's
gonna go regardless of over time
that even if there is a storage
account.
Establish or how much the
You know that water can probably
still be um
pumped into depending how how
much the loss is. So I think
there's still has to be some
education then basically.
Thank you. And I think I was
trying to get her to answer
something here yeah hasn't said
anything yet, but that's all,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Roal
Caballero.
Thank you. uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much
and nice to see you. It occurred
to myself and
And others that uh uh in looking
at your, this was great, by the
way, the way you uh on the left
hand column described, um,
Climate change and its
relationship to the problem.
Um, and what we need to do for
the future and then your
proposed solution with just the
legislative, uh, modifications
of the statute, which
All kind of made sense. My
question though is, um, what is
your, what, what is your, what
is the sense of urgency related
to um making these modifications
in this upcoming legislative
session or what is the general
sense of urgency in terms of
what we're facing.
If we don't, uh,
Modify based on your
Last sentence in the left-hand
side column, uh, unfortunately,
there have only only been 6
permitted and 4 built ASR
projects.
How is that relational to the
urgency?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Roybal Caballero,
I think the critical thing here
is we understand we're losing
water evaporative losses and
reservoirs, and we understand
that within the next 50 years
we're going to see what some
experts estimate is a 25%
reduction between groundwater
and surface water availability.
So increasing the number of
potential projects for aquifer
storage and recovery that the
state can engage in is one way
to shore up our water future.
Does, does that answer your
question?
Um, go ahead and take off your
mic.
That's exactly what I was hoping
to hear because there is an
urgency because how we do
business and legislate is for
the future.
So if we don't take action, then
what we're doing is we're
exposing our state and our youth
and our other generations to
much more peril in terms of um.
Water resources and then I also,
I think we need a whole class
and not to be answered today,
but, um, in my studies at UNM
and geological studies, it
interested me to understand the
connection between
The deep groundwater.
And surface water and the
science behind um.
How that regenerates itself.
That's, that's intriguing to me.
Um,
But even more intriguing is how
climate change, the climate
crisis is affecting that
replenishing of, of, of what you
described briefly in this. So I
would encourage everyone who has
some spare time, um, to really
look at that.
Research that because they're
very valuable charts. I learned
even more.
When I was introducing the
geothermal bill that was
incredibly.
Um, more important to me to see
then how we have to untap those
sources of um.
Energy
So and water in order to keep us
replenished for future
generations. So thank you so
much uh for your presentation.
I, I don't remember. I haven't
been able to time, Madam Chair,
my, um, interim committees, but
have you made a presentation
before before water and natural
resources on this.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Verro V Caballero. No, we
weren't able to get on their
agenda. Um, we did do um a
couple of presentations to the
Water Leads workshops. Um, and
so we were able to get some
limited exposure there and and
seemed to get some good
enthusiasm.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
It's very important to lead this
effort so maybe someone between
all of us, those that serve here
and.
Water and natural resources
might look at this for, uh,
2025. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you very
much. And Madam Chair, on that
note, um, I, I should say that
the part of the genesis for this
was that when we completed the
state water task force report
and it was first presented to
the water interim committee. Um,
I, I, I think it was
Representative Steinborn who
said, Hey, this report is great.
Now what do I do with it? And we
thought, well, someone's got to
write some legislation here. So
we, we just picked what we
was one of the most important
things in, in dug into it.
If you all have other things
like this that you want us to
help draft legislation, do the
analysis, look at the pros and
cons. Let us know. That's what
we're here for.
Thank you.
Thank you. I don't see any more
of my colleagues wishing to make
a comment. I just want to thank
you for your presentation and,
uh, as a person who comes from.
A district where we are still
hauling water on a daily basis
to to live life. I know how
important your work is and how
valuable your work is, so thank
you for your work and uh we will
see you next time. Thank you.
All right, we have 2 people
listed for public comment.
Francisca Abeda.
OK. And then after her, you can
come up and what's our time
limit? Uh, usually about 5
minutes, about 5 minute public
comment.
I.
Good afternoon, Chair, members
of Indian Affairs Committee,
thank you for allowing me this
time.
My name is Francesca Abeta. I am
the secretary treasurer for Tale
Navajo chapter. I also do sit on
the toddle or I'm sorry,
Kenniittoun School Board of
Education.
Um, today I come to you with a
request to be on the next in an
affairs agenda.
To see if it is feasible to get
a few minutes of your time to
address some needs and some
concerns regarding our pre-K at
Todley Community School.
Um, I'll give you a little bit
of background history.
We did, yes, we did, um, get
some funding with.
That went through legislation
through um congresswoman Melanie
Stansbury.
To build our K through 12
school.
We do have a pre-K program that
is funded by the state.
However,
We've never
Obtain or got in a building or
have had a home for pre-K. It
used to be under Navajo Nation
Head Start program.
Hadley Community School Board of
Education went ahead and took
over the program, provided
in-kind services for a year, and
then applied for the state
funding program through New
Mexico, um, early childhood
development.
We are currently receiving a
3-year grant under New Mexico
for, I believe it's like
$905,000.
But a lot of in-kind services
for transportation and food
service and
Um, speech therapy, like a lot
of programs are funded through
go through our federally funded
program and are considered in
kind to the pre-K.
Right now, um, we are in the
construction phase or are um K
through 12 school.
But we do not wish to leave our
pre-K behind. Right now they're
in an old portable building that
we have renovated a few times
that we've had issues with
flooding, we've had issues with
Um,
our, you know, our bathroom, our
sewage system.
So when we go ahead and go into
this new uh facility, we just
would like to see a home for our
pre-K. So if you would please
allow us that time, we could,
uh, make a full presentation at
that time.
OK, thank you. Next.
Is the Harrison Plaro.
And good afternoon.
My name is Harris and Platerra
out of Canaan of Navajos I just
have some questions that was
explained uh throughout our uh
presentation this morning.
There's 3 of them.
Uh, uh, presenters here this
morning and I just like to ask
the question that was or ask a
question to the previous uh uh
previous uh presenter here in
reference to the water
situation. The issue of can you
band of Navajos we presented our
program of what we're trying to
do in the community and at the
same time we are getting uh
Having uh issues on water which
we are very grateful to to have
coming out of Albuquerque to
Canaito.
And one question that was uh
bothering me is is.
One thing this morning, the, the
Route Runner Food Bank, they're
delivering water like you
wouldn't believe the different
communities who have are
struggling with water issues, so
they're bringing their barrels
of water to the communities
in along with the, the, the food
that's being distributed to the
to the communities. Here, we've
got
Water that are being saved and
Just waiting to be used in one
way or the other being in fact
uh waiting for the to be
evacuated or or evaporated or to
be used one way or the other, so
there was.
How can there be some
coordination of working together
to, to bring those.
issue to where people are
satisfied with the water quality
to any reservation.
Do we need to submit something
like uh uh uh.
steady or uh a research.
Uh, portion of that to
communities where the
communities across New Mexico,
Indian Country can use those
waters and what was being saved
under under ground.
Could that be brought up to
using the space.
Technology as far as visual from
satellites to see if we can use
some of those waters that could
be seen.
To where we can.
Fine water for the communities
that need water.
And that is almost like a
question for the presenter. Are
they using satellite.
Imagery to find water for
communities that really need
water if we request that.
Thank you.
Thank you. We will talk with you
off the line.
Thank you for your public
comment.
And uh colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, staff that concludes
our meeting for today. We will
recess.
Until tomorrow morning 9:30 a.m.
we will reconvene here in the
same room.
Thank you so much.
