Of our students take a dual
credit course before graduation.
Um, we have 122 uh certificates,
students who receive certain
college certificates in 2023.
Um, the school overall has
continued to build upon the
historic and monumental efforts
of previous leaders and and
investing in the development of
dual credit opportunities,
native language classes, um,
culturally based and relevant
instruction, um, gearing the,
the our students to the
investments that our tribes want
from from our students and that
is to return back building
capacity.
in our tribal nations.
And so we, we, we take that
responsibility very seriously
and we, we hope to see more and
more students come through our
doors and achieving at the same
rates. So with that said,
Um, I want to speak to our
request of you today, for which
we hope to receive your
endorsement. The Santa Fe
Indian school is requesting $3
million for the school's phase
one construction or the
renovation reconstruction of the
SFS amphitheater on the caps of
Santa Fe school. Phase one
construction will include the
construction of the existing
portion of the amphitheater
which seating capacity with
seating capacity of 4000, which
will
the current capacity loads
experienced by Santa Fe Indian
School.
Through phase construction, the
SFIS will renovate the Pollo
Amphitheater into a
student-based.
Performing arts center on the
San Fe Innisco campus. Very
importantly,
The school will more more than
match the state's 3 male million
with 5 million of internal
funding to complete phase one of
the project.
In closing, we would like to ask
the committee this morning to
please consider the specific
capital outlay requests of the
Santa Fe Indian School for the
upcoming legislative session and
to please forward a letter to
the legislative Finance
Committee stating that the
Indian Affairs Committee has
heard the school's request.
So that the LFC may consider our
capital outlay needs for the
upcoming year.
For the past couple of years,
the committee has provided this
outlet for our school, and we
appreciate it very much.
We also appreciate the
opportunity to make such a
request again this year.
Thank you, Madam co-chairs and
the esteemed members of the
committee for taking the time to
listen to our presentation
today. I will stand stand now
for questions. Thank you.
Thank you.
I have Senator Rodriguez.
A little bit, whoops, there we
go. Good morning,
Superintendent and um your
staff.
Uh, everyone here today, you
know, this letter and this
request takes me back to more
than 20 years ago when we first
started this process.
And the process was not only to
come before this committee to
request support.
But the process of ensuring that
we continue to show our
commitment, a partnership that
we have always enjoyed with the
Santa Fe Indian School.
And we so appreciate the fact
that you have never wavered in
your commitment to continue the
phases that you come to show us
that you're working on, for
example.
Um, understanding the need for a
lot of money here that's
necessary because there's a lot
of needs at the Indian school,
and because you understand the
need to do it in phases to be
able to accommodate that part,
complete that part, start it,
finish it, and then come for
another phase that's very
responsible. We see different
requests here. We see a request
now and then the money hasn't
been used for different areas
and then more comes and gets
requested and so on.
In your case, um, you not only
have completed or and working at
completing the design parts
first of the amphitheater, which
many of us know as the
Paloceleri and um this here will
show your commitment also in
this partnership we're talking
because um as we hopefully will
support this letter requesting
funding for the 3 million that
you need, um, we see that you
will be contributing.
million, probably at the very
least because at the end they'd
always cost more. So, um, yes,
isn't it true? Yes, so we've
seen that too, so, um, I very
much appreciate that, um, Madam
Chairman, and I, uh, I think
it's incumbent upon us, uh, in
responsible to continue to
support this project and and
other projects that uh the
Indian school um is proposing in
the future because we uh we need
to continue to show our students
we're here for.
and for the school. I appreciate
that very much and um I, there
may be others who want to speak,
but if not, I will move for uh
that we pass this letter is
presented, but others may want
to speak, so I'll d.
Yes, discussion's fine if others
want, before we um
Well, I guess I'm the only one.
Yeah, if there's any discussion
on the motion.
There's no objection, then the
motion is adopted and um the
deliverable, I do have some
questions
about in school.
Um
Because
The school does open its doors
to events.
And I want to make that
something known to those on the
webcast and the members here
that they posted several events,
even our annual.
Um, legislative basketball game.
So I think that's very important
when you talk about bringing
community together along with
the with our students in the
public school education and the
um
Even the surrounding community
and all our, our public.
All the Native American students
that attend the school.
That is
Very essential, especially when
the
Talk about this about vision
being created in, in a lot of
avenues.
So I'm very much appreciate
that, that the school does open
its doors and it's recognized um
within the state as one of the
places here in Santa Fe that uh
people know exists because of
that.
And it creates this atmosphere
of community. So thank you very
much for doing that all these
years, and even being very
Um
Who would you say, giving in
that sense of
If there's anything we can do, I
think they do, we do reach out
to you in, in that sense and uh.
You know, there's are, there can
be limitations and restrictions
sometimes, but it's always been
helpful.
You don't know if you,
thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you for bringing up those things
because um they're all very true
and and it really hits our, our
heart to, to know that we have
the Santa Fe Indian school here,
so.
Always so vibrant and committed,
your staff and Mark is always
ready to give us the information
we need when it comes to not
only the amounts but
descriptions of projects and
everything else that we need
when we're getting ready to make
decisions and so on. So your
entire staff is just wonderful
and you do a great job too, so
thank you. That's all.
Thank you.
So there are no, would you like
to make any closing comments.
You know, I, I just want to
reiterate how, you know,
appreciative we are, you know,
Santa Fe Indian School is Santa
Fe, you know, we do serve Native
American students and we take
pride in the quality of
education we're providing, but
we also want to be good
neighbors, and we want to
support the grower Santa Fe
community and in any ways that
we can moving forward, um, so
this consideration is greatly
appreciated on our behalf. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Would you like to
say.
Yes, I thank you, madam chair,
Madam co-chair, um, members of
this committee, um, Gary Lujan
from the Pablo of Taos, very
appreciative of the words that
I'm hearing today. It has always
been a commitment to Santa Fe
and in school, pick the
resources that are given to us
and have uh the best fiscal
responsibility outcome that can
be made kind of that school has
always delivered on the projects
that it's promised to to build
and has always been able to uh
utilize uh the entire amounts of
the resource.
is our goal has never to return
to our projects always on time
within within the time that the,
the, uh, the amounts have been
provided uh before uh uh they
are expired, so with that, you
know, my role for Santa Fe and
the schools to see these
projects from vision to
conception to construction, to
turnkey operation and I get to
appreciate each stage of of of
these projects from the
beginning.
of these meetings with your
support through your support
during the legislative uh
express my sincere gratitude to
all of you for your support of
Santa Fe Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I didn't
wanna, I just wanted to add a uh
something uh on a.
From communities, uh, in terms
of the generational um
contributions at Santa Fe Indie
School has made.
Into tribal communities, um, the
Students
Who come from Santa Fe Indian
School, um, have had the benefit
of learning in an environment
that uh acknowledges and
celebrates their
Uh, contributions Native
American contributions to this
world.
To this country and to the
state.
And so I've seen many who are
now taking the lead in these
communities uh who have received
Uh, found their foundational uh
education uh in the public
schools and in Santa Fe Indian
School from wherever they've
come. But um the
Contributions are noticeable.
Uh, we see them, um, talking
from a, uh, a generation now
where I'm the grandparent and
I'm watching either my uh our
grandchildren or our.
Or nieces and nephews and so on,
um, others coming through that
system and I uh
I'm so appreciative, one that
really, one program that you
have that is um
Displays, gives students an
opportunity to display what
they've learned is there a
capstone projects. Uh, I've had
the good fortune to be able to
be there to hear and to learn
from these students and it's
pretty amazing to see them.
Um, prepared to make
presentations in the way that
they do to propose actions that
may require um legislative city,
tribal considerations and um
I look forward, I think that
this venue, the improvement at
the venue will enhance that
again, um, because I did hear
that it's going to be for the
students and kind of looking at
a theater, um.
The opportunity to get into that
medium, um, that will be growing
even more because the state is
experiencing a lot of of uh
opportunities for um the movie
industry, things like the movie
industry, so I think having that
to help prepare them to get into
that field, um, at a higher
level is gonna benefit them very
much, so thank you. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
It is always good to know, you
know, from the business sense
that if you make an investment,
You expect a return on your
investment.
I think uh the investment that
you're asking for is gonna be
very, very beneficial because of
the end product.
Looking at the nation as a
whole, you know, we need more
Deb Hollins.
We need more, let's say that
Peggy Flanagan's. What's to say
that those future projects and
products are not going to come
from Santa Fe Indian School or
Navajo Preparatory School.
So that's
To me, this would be a good
investment, and I look forward
to working with you and just uh
congratulations on.
The product that you're
producing each year. So thank
you for that, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
think our senator here will have
some time on her hands. She'll
probably be in one of those
seats in the front row
that you guys have something to
keep that invitation open for
her and we,
but thank you very much,
yeah move on to our next sliding
item, um, on the agenda.
We have the thank you
Superintendent, thank you,
director. Thank you, Mark. Uh,
line item number 9, update from
the public education department,
so may I please come up and
set up.
Nobody's joining us by Zoom, are
they?
You're all present.
He physically, OK.
I'm sure you've been here
before, so just remember the
green light and then try not to
move the mic when you're talking
or the.
Like whenever you're ready.
I
Kwai kaita will help us dry
trash so I might say that
yakukuya Qwawizaea kohayehanoa
the
the
way
Kwai kaita will help us dry
trash so I might say that
yakukuya Qwawizaea kohayehanoa
the
the
uh good morning everyone, uh,
chairwoman and members of the
committee, uh, my name is Katie
Anne Waniko and I'm the
assistant secretary for Indian
education at the New Mexico
Public Education department. Um,
I do identify as a tribal member
from the Pueblo of Akima and in
my introduction did say my.
Indian name. I am Bear clan. Uh,
my mother's name is Marietta
Winiko and my father is Melvin
Winnico and um of course my
clients are representative of of
their lineage and so my big bear
clan and little yellow corn and
super happy to be here, uh, to
share updates on behalf of
Indian education division, but
also the New Mexico Public
Education department as a whole,
um, and so we've provided you um
A presentation that I'm going to
reference, but mostly my style
is um to speak um as well as I
know my division, um, always so
thankful for your support of me,
my team, and all the work that
we're doing for Native American
students, um, as well as PED as
a whole, uh, so the first slide
slide I'm looking at is number
um I'm sorry, there looks like a
number 8 on the slide that I'm
looking at. Uh, so Indian
education funding proposal, um,
and before I began, I
want to share, um, that we did
host the fall 2024 government to
government Indian education
summit last week on October 16th
and 17th at the Buffalo Thunder.
I'm so per statue, um, the
division is required to create a
space for tribal leaders, as
well as state education leaders
to discuss um important topics,
um, and also hear from tribal
leaders about their priorities
of Native American students, so
that happened last week. Um, a
lot of what I'm going
To share today is a recap of all
those topics and some of the
feedback provided by tribal
leaders.
One of the main topics we had on
the agenda was the Indian
education funding proposal.
And so this proposal, um, of
course it aligns with our Indian
education fund, it really is the
Indian education fund. Currently
we're funded at $25.5 million
and thank you for your support,
um, as we are divvying out that
funding to publish tribes and
nations, we are also supporting
our local education agencies
that have high numbers of native
students. Um, we also fund, uh,
universities, um, who are
embarking on teacher preparation
programs, so.
Again, 25.5 million for this
fiscal year.
This Indian education funding
proposal in front of you, um,
would be an ask of $50 million
and I want to highlight the
unique characteristics of this
proposal. So this proposal
again, um, the main objective
again is to continue to think
about you know innovative ways
to increase um outcomes for
Native American students and in
doing so, allowing the
opportunity for Pueblo's tribes
and nations to take the
initiative.
An advantage of controlling um
what those innovative programs
look like for their own
students. And so the main
component of the proposal is
that a portion of the $50
million would flow directly to
and so I also want to
acknowledge that we have done
tribal consultation in many
ways, um, and during the
government to government summit,
this topic um was open for
tribal leader feedback. Um, we,
I also want to acknowledge that
we are in the phase of.
thinking about how we integrate
tribal leader feedback from the
summit, um, but also building
scenarios that we can present to
tribal leaders again, um, I want
to always acknowledge that the
voices of our tribal partners
are important to this work, um,
and we continue to ask for their
feedback and their guidance. So
again, flow through funding to
publish tribes and nations. If
you turn to slide the number on
the slide is 10.
You'll see the allowable costs
on how the portion that's
awarded to publish tribes and
nations could be used. So it's
sort of like a menu item uh list
there, and again, this was all
based on what we've heard from
tribal leaders already. So they
want to see things and support
for academic tutoring funding
for credit recovery, um, funding
to support transportation that
students need. So again, the
published tribes and nations
would decide on their own, how
they would use.
that funding.
I also want to acknowledge that
we are working hard to integrate
eligibility criteria to include
tribally controlled BIE schools
and so this funding proposal
would be part of that tribally
controlled BIE schools would be
eligible to receive a portion of
this fund these funds as well.
And Again, not to stray so far.
I want to also acknowledge our
local education agencies with
high numbers of native students.
We are also integrating their
feedback as they would also
benefit from the 50 million.
Um, currently, if I can think of
the numbers and just at a high
level, 31% of our funding right
now goes directly to public
tribes and nations with 70%
mostly going to our local
districts and charters that
provide services to our Native
American students.
The other thing I want to
acknowledge about the proposal
is based on tribal leader
feedback and also the feedback
of our tribal education
departments, um, one of the top
requests is to reduce that.
And so this proposal would not
require an application. Instead,
allocation to each pueblo tribe
and nation, they decide how that
funding is going to um be used,
um, but we still want to include
some accountability measures, so
we know that it's working, um,
we can do that in the way of a
mid report, which we currently
do a final year report, which
all of our grantees are held
accountable to, um, and then,
you know, we can use that to
assess the process and see how
we can grow in the future.
But really, again, looking um at
integrating the feedback from
tribal leaders is where our
attention is right now. Um, if
you turn to slide the, the
number on the slide is 12 at the
bottom.
Um, there's information around
our next steps and so we again
we did share this information
with tribal leaders during our
government to government summit,
um, they did provide feedback,
mostly around uh the amount of
funding that would go to each
bubble tribe and nation, um,
it's exciting that we would love
to include a factor that
increases the student, uh, uh,
that increases the amount for
students who identify with
special needs, and so they are
receiving.
a little bit more funding right
to offer the services that they
deserve.
So the next steps include, um,
again, gathering documented
feedback from tribal leaders. So
currently my uh division is
working on a document that would
solicit more feedback and
examples from tribal leaders, so
that would go to the 22. I, I
realized there are 23 published
tribes and nations, but only 22
are eligible for our funding,
uh, for sale is not eligible for
our funding due to where their
students are located.
Um, once we gather that feedback
again, we're going back to the
drawing board and seeing what's
most effective for the students
in the communities. Um, we will
also do a presentation to the
All Public Council of Governors.
I hope to get on the agenda for
November, uh, to get some more
feedback and discussion from
tribal leaders and then of
course, never leaving out our
hickory muscalero and Navajo
Nation doing some more, uh, 1 to
1 virtual discussions with them
to gather their feedback, in
addition to the documented
feedback um that we're.
We'll be releasing very soon.
Again, those are their next
steps and just want to thank the
tribal leaders as well for their
support, um, of me, of the work
that's happening of PED, um.
Cannot tell you how important it
is to acknowledge the role that
our tribal leaders play in
identifying their own needs, um,
of their own students as the
content experts, um, I'm always
very proud to acknowledge that I
was raised on the reservation.
I'm a product of public
education, uh, graduated from
Grant's high school. And so, you
know, I, I, I really want to
turn our attention also to the
local education agencies, there
are a lot of bright spots out
there, um, and I.
seen them and they would be part
of this proposal and so again, I
just want to draw attention that
the local education agencies as
well as the public's tribes and
nations would benefit from this
proposal.
I'm going to move on from uh the
Indian education proposal and
the slide I'm looking at has the
number 13 at the bottom at the
fall government to government
summit, one of the other topics
that we, um, discussed with
tribal leaders is uh the regalia
legislation that is led by the
Indian Affairs department, and
so we did have secretary Joette
Monet share the information with
tribal leaders, and I know that
you can imagine that we have.
support from tribal leaders.
This is something that is long
overdue and it's almost a no
brainer that we need to move
forward with this. And so tribal
leaders had really great
feedback, um, talking about.
Um, again, it's long overdue.
Our students deserve this type
of legislation, and so we're
moving forward on that in
partnership with the Indian
Affairs Department.
Um, I am now going to turn to
slide, um, the slide number is
15 that I'm looking at. So the
public education department, um,
my colleague Deputy Secretary
Amanda Di Bell and her team um
have provided you information
around proficiency rates, um,
that you can look at on your
time, but I want to highlight
the celebrations. Um, I'm always
excited to sit beside Santa Fe
Indian School, which we know is
a great model within the state.
Um, and super excited to
celebrate them as well, but also
to celebrate all the
Celebrations that are happening
within our local education
agencies of the public that the
public education department
serves, and so we continue to
work on closing the gaps for our
Native American students across
the board and we do that in
different ways, uh, meaningful
ways and innovative ways, um,
CTE programs, right, high dosage
tutoring around our literacy
efforts and so we're seeing
growth, uh, for literacy rates
for Native American students,
um, we're also seeing a decrease
in chronic
absenteeism, so an increase in
attendance rate. Again, I think
any incremental um achievements
needs to be highlighted and so
that information is provided to
you, um, at your leisure. Um,
when you have questions, please
feel free to share those with us
and then we'll be sure to get
those answered.
Um now I want to turn it over to
my colleague, deputy secretary.
Doctor Cage.
Good morning, everyone. uh,
Madam Chair.
A committee, thank you for
having me here today. It is
always a pleasure to be able to
highlight, uh, for you, the, uh.
have going on in the office of
special education, um, I too am
a product of public education
and I have 3 children that are
also products of public
education. So have been very
close to education for over 25
years now. I'm very passionate
about all students, but
especially students with
disabilities, um, and their
families alike.
Uh, so I am here and I am on uh
what would be page 27. I don't
see uh the number here, but
definitely, I'm sure uh we're
just resharing with you that the
Office of Special Education has
been in existence now for about
a year and a half.
Um, I just made my one year
anniversary, uh, with the public
education department and the
Office of Special Education and
by way of executive order, uh,
that was placed uh here in New
Mexico by our governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham. Um, so definitely
wanted to highlight some of the
components of the executive
order, which we've been working
in, uh, for the last year, and
those are definitely setting up
the office, which uh grassroots
efforts. It took us
Uh quite a bit of time and quite
a bit of consultation and
collaboration uh to be able to
set the office up, uh, to hit
the road running with all of the
initiatives and things that we
need across our state, um,
outlining the duties of the
special education office and
actually sharing that with all
of our leaders across the state,
I too have been a part of our
government to government and was
able to uh present uh for our
tribal leaders last week.
Well, and glean some feedback
from them on some things that
they really want to see happen
in the relational pieces and the
educational pieces and the
cultural pieces or uh Native
American students and especially
those Native American students
that are students with
disabilities. Um, also, uh,
highlighting, um, that we have
recently received money, um, in
our last legislative session to
increase the number of
Certified special education
teachers in our classrooms
across the state, um, and I
personally took on that
initiative initiative myself as
representative Allison, uh, said
so eloquently, uh, when you
provide funding, you definitely
want a return on your
investment. So trying to be good
stewards over that uh particular
set of funding and ensuring that
it is reaching the hands of our
educators that work so
tirelessly to
Uh, support our students with
disabilities across the state.
I'm gonna move on now to uh
slide number 29, slide number
229 um definitely supports the
work of us revitalizing what
special education looks like in
New Mexico. Uh, one of the
things that I know we all can
attest to is that it took us a
long line, a long time, excuse
me, to get here where we are. So
to unpack all of those things
that have happened and those
things that
Have not happened, um, it's
definitely gonna take us some
time, but we have to have a plan
to be able to get that done. Uh,
number one on this list is
rebuilding trust.
One of the things that I learned
very quickly is you have to have
a subset of skills of cultural
competence, but also a
relational set of skills where
people understand um that you're
there to support without us
against them um mentality, but
definitely there to support in
all areas, um, accountability
and compliance. We have been
working the last year with our
technical assistance partners in
OSEP, the US Department of Ed,
um, RPB.
cabinet, our governor governor's
cabinet, our executive huddle
also is a part of strengthening
that accountability and
compliance piece through
monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of special
education program, but also
special education funding, which
is a lot of our indicator work
that we have to report up uh to
USA as well.
Making sure that things align,
as you see here, structural
alignment, making sure that
there's a vision and a mission
and a set of priorities that are
objective and not subjective and
actually taking into account um
partner or which we used to call
stakeholder feedback and
involvement at all levels, uh,
from the educational spectrum
all the way down to the parent
spectrum.
Investment in the workforce,
which I talked about earlier,
um, that investment is sometimes
monetary, but it's also
providing professional
development in the areas that
are much, much needed across the
state from leaders understanding
that parents have the right to
advocate to teachers
understanding best practices
with interventions and
remediations for their students
and which students understanding
that there is a subset of skills
needed uh to be successful not
only in the class.
room, but outside in
post-secondary education and or
careers. I can tell you that I
could not do this alone. I
definitely need every single
person that is in here, but the
people that are closest to me
are my staff coming in and
reorganize reorganizing and
repurposing what our
organizational chart look like
was very meaningful for the
people that we support across
the state, because what I, what
I heard so
clearly was that we don't know
who to call. We don't know who's
over what. We don't, we can't
get in touch with anyone. So
ensuring that the titles of the
staff and the work that they
that they produce every day.
Definitely align with the needs
that are across the state and
are supporting areas such as
professional development. We
have created a a parent liaison,
um, all of those specific
positions that uh we need.
To outline in order to support
the work.
I have now moved to page 30, um,
just to share with you a few of
our special education
initiatives, uh, some I
inherited since I've been here,
but definitely tweak the
processes and also have a
completed those processes as
well, uh, definitely an IEP
project that IEP project
encompasses an IEP template that
will be a unified approach
across the state of New Mexico,
and also
An IEP infrastructure where the
information will be housed where
it will be easier to be
accessed, uh, for teachers and
leaders across the state and
also reduce the effects of
students not receiving their
accommodations and modifications
that is outlined in the IEP
immediately upon transferring to
a new school or entering a new
school, uh, our school district,
uh, that will definitely, um,
help that process.
has come along a whole lot
faster than what's happening
right now. Um, we, we just held
a month ago a law conference and
I'm very, very proud to say, um,
that that law conference was one
that was highly um encouraged
and asked for uh from members
across the state in various
areas and we started off with
having a um participant list of
200 people and we had to keep
it.
increasing because of the amount
of people that was on the
waiting list, and we ended up
with over 400 participants. We
went as far as the uh the space
would allow us to go.
Unfortunately, we had to turn a
few people away, but we will
have it back by popular demand
in the spring. Um, there was a
wealth of information there. Uh,
we have also decided to take
that law conference and um
promote it for our upper level
leadership.
school boards, superintendents,
uh, high school, elementary and
middle school, uh, principals,
assistant principals, um,
because every time we put
something or have an opportunity
for special education, uh, we
definitely have special
education leaders, advocates,
and directors in the room, um,
I'm ready to have our
superintendents, which we just
had a meeting with them and uh
during our um outreach
activities I have seen more and
more.
of them in the room, so I'm
really, really proud to say that
we are definitely uh working in
areas to increase participation
at all levels to ensure that our
students have exactly what they
need. Uh, right now, and I'm so
glad that I made copies for you,
uh, that I will pass out after
your questions in our uh
presentations since our
technology is not working today.
Uh, we have embarked on a
statewide professional
development and parent
resources.
spa tour.
So the whole month of October,
we have been out and about
across the state of New Mexico.
Uh, we have been um at in hops,
we've been in Las Vegas. Uh,
we've been in Farmington and I'm
just getting back yesterday, um,
from, um,
Where was I yesterday? I've been
so busy places. We were in hos
yesterday, but I forgot to say
was we was in Las Vegas as well.
Um, I, I'm barely keeping up
with the days and the times
because I am making myself
available across the state. I am
not sending my staff. I am going
in person because I really want
to have uh that outreach and let
my uh
Partners know that I am here for
them. Uh, one of the big things
that I also want to talk about
is our huddle, our working group
that executive level working
group. Um, we do have our Indian
Affairs department, uh,
secretary Josette Monette, who
is present in those working
groups. We also have assistant
secretary, uh Juanico who is
there in those huddles is where
we uh inform practices that are
gonna best meet the needs of all
of our
students across the state,
especially our Native American
students with disabilities. Um,
I would, uh,
I love to say that this huddle
has been a saving grace for me,
uh, coming in from somewhere
else quickly teaching me the
competencies um that I need to
be able to interact with the
diverse uh population that we
have across New Mexico.
Our future initiatives we have
just completed our office of
special education state plan,
uh, that has been through
several iterations, um, and that
state plan will hopefully be
released really, really soon.
Uh, it encompasses all of the
priorities of the executive
order and best practices, what
we're supposed to be doing
anyway for our students with
disabilities across the state.
Uh, we do have, uh, we are
embarking upon our
Native American working group
and I am very, very proud to say
that we have a very, very
diverse staff, uh, working in
the office of special education,
we prioritize hiring uh to
ensure uh that we have all
levels of input, uh, one of my
leadership members who is not
here with us today because she
has a ceremonies, uh, going on
within OK Owen. Uh, she is the
deputy director of our data and
finance and that Charlene Mar.
I hope I said that correctly,
um, also we have uh devoted
staff uh for our monitoring and
our special education, uh,
program side of the house, uh,
with monitoring and professional
development and uh that staff
member is actually from Santa
Clara, uh, from my very first
week of being here a year ago, I
started conversations, um, with
our 23, um, pride.
Excuse me, are 23 tribes in
Pueblos, uh, I have been to
Sania and Zia, um, and also, uh,
working with Navajo. Uh, one of
the things that I will ask of
you, this committee is uh that
you helped me to reach into uh
our tribes with our tribal
leaders even more so, uh,
because we are embarking upon a
Native American working group
for the Office of Special
Education that I would like to
Um, implement in January of next
year.
I have uh been speaking to a few
uh of our Native American
educators and leaders across the
state that have an interest in
this happening, uh, so that we
can continue to expand our
reach, um, and provide resources
across the state in these areas.
Um, I would just like to share a
few highlights with you as well.
Um, we have indicators, um,
compliance uh and accountability
indicators that we have to
report up every single year to
USA.
And 3 of those indicators we
have seen some growth in our
students with disabilities. Um,
that's indicator 5 as you see
here, uh, the percentage of
students with disabilities that
are in regular education
classrooms. Uh, that percent is
growing. Uh, we went from 49% in
one year to 53%. So we have
increased the number of students
with disabilities and in regular
education classrooms that
students with
IEPs that are actually in
regular education classrooms.
30.
looks like this.
Yes. Um, we also have indicator
7, which is the percent of
preschool students with
disabilities with early literacy
skills master. So we are
measuring, uh, as our students
transition through school,
whether or not they're mastering
certain skills. We went from 37%
mastery to 44% mastery in one
year. Indicator 14% of high
school students transitioning
into higher
education,
or to a career, um, that number
is really growing fast. We do
have a special initiative from
our office that we are working
with our high schools with, uh,
that number has, um, risen from
69% to 77%. Uh, 1 of the things
uh that we have uh done with our
schools is we have a uh college
um.
Program that we are having with
our school is called a stay in
school project.
That stay in school project, we
offered the first year to uh to
schools, um, that stay in school
project, uh, focuses on
attendance, interventions for
failing grades, behavior, uh,
there's work study opportunities
there, job exploration
opportunities, um, and we have
seen a 30% increase with the,
with the schools that actually
pilot it and those areas were
Farmington and
also so dimming.
Because of the success, uh, with
that pilot, I, uh, allocated
some funding, uh, to be able to
reach many more schools. What we
did is opened up the opportunity
to all of the LEAs across the
state, and we actually had 17
LEAs that decided to participate
in the stay in school project.
And I do have those names if you
would like for me to share them
with you, uh, please just let me
know, but indemning the
graduation rates with this
particular project, increased
for our students with
disabilities from 42% to 74%
with that graduation cohort.
And our increases in Farmington
went from 32% to 63%. So
definitely uh wanted to make
sure that we increased funding
in that area to increase our
students with disabilities
graduation rate. I have moved to
slide 31, and that is the flyer
that I made with you. We have a
very unique opportunity coming
up, one of the first things that
I talked about, uh, with the LFC
upon my arrival.
last year in October was
creating a space for parents to
learn law, opportunities for
advocacy skills, opportunities
to be heard, opportunities for
panels, opportunities for
experts to come in and train
best practices, how do I work
with behavior, how do I focus on
autism, all of these things will
be presented at our parent
university. Uh, we have made
space for 500 participants, uh,
up on my
last check yesterday, we have
over 300 people registered.
We are paying for the 1st 200
families, uh, their lodging to
be able to stay at Buffalo
Thunder, that is through an
application process. We do have
um
Partners that will be providing
breakfast and lunch, uh, for our
families that are coming down,
we're very, very proud of that.
Uh, registration is open. We are
still accepting uh registrants
through that process and just
yesterday we secured a
partnership.
Uh, with a nanny organization,
so parents are free to bring
their children with them, and we
will be providing nanny
services, uh, for our parents,
uh, that are free as well.
Um, however, if they don't want
their children to go into the
nanny services. They can't bring
them in and throughout the
conference with them.
So these are just a few of the
highlights that we've had in the
office of special education. I
will share with you at the end
this flyer, this flyer also has
QR codes if you are not a part
of our uh monthly newsletter
where we also have jam-packed
information, professional
development, best practices, um,
highlighting good things around
the state and also we have
office hours every 3rd Tuesday
of every month, where we
provide.
a space for question and answer
sessions, and we also provide
opportunity for continued
professional development.
Thank you so much for your time
today.
So chairwoman and members of the
committee, I'm gonna move on to
slide 32, um, and want to first
acknowledge a deputy secretary
Amanda De Bell and her team for
providing the information for me
to speak to. Um, so, uh, uh,
jumping back to full government
to government. One of the other
topics that we showcase with
tribal leaders, um, was the
outcomes of the summer reading
literacy program. And so if you
turn to slide 32, I think the
one pager gives great examples.
of the outcomes and impacts that
were made over the summer and
that we continue to focus on
moving into summer 2025, um, so
we did have 7 tribal sites, um,
providing opportunities for our
Native American students to
increase their literacy skills,
and you'll see um a list there
of those seven sites uh during
the government to government
summit, we did a showcase um
individuals.
That, um, hosted sites within
tribal communities and if you
turn to slide 33, you'll see a
bullet point that says
noteworthy impact, so we did
have an individual from the
Pueblo of San Felipe, as well as
uh OKing share some of the
outcomes and impacts that they
saw just within the summer uh
time span of which they
integrated the literacy program.
So again, always working with
tribal leaders to learn more
about how we can integrate
language and.
culture into the literacy
programming, as we know that's
all super important and should
always be at the forefront when
we think about identity related
to our Native American students.
And so we did talk about um the
portunities that will be
available for summer 2025. So
again, working with Deputy
Secretary Debell and her team to
continue to increase the
opportunities um of literacy
efforts within tribal
communities. Um, there are
supplemental slides there. There
are some quotes from um, the
community members who.
Felt uh very excited about the
impacts that were made over the
summer, um, there's additional
information from Deputy
Secretary Debell's team on what
they are doing to also uh
include tribal voices as we
continue to work on and develop
curriculum for our Native
American students. Um, I would
like to now turn it over to my
colleague
Sarah Cordova.
Tashapo wing.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sarah Cordova, director
of school Budget Bureau, and I'm
from Santa Clara Pueblo, um, me
and my sister attended Santa
Clara Day School back when it
was called that uh for
elementary grades and we uh
transitioned to public schools
in Los Alamos and graduated from
Los Alamos public schools. So
I'm here today to talk to you
about our open books portal. Um,
so
part of the 2021 regular
session, Senate Bill 96, um, the
Open Books Financial
Transparency portal provides
access to school and district
financial information from
across New Mexico. The portal
provides the ability to see
financial supports for at-risk
students, bilingual services,
and special education services,
as well as salaries and
administrative costs and average
spending per student.
This can be drilled down to the
school site level.
Unfortunately, we plan to show
you a live preview, but with the
technology difficulties here.
Um, we provided you the link on
the slide below the logo, um,
and I'm happy to hand out my
card if you'd like to plan to
see how the site works, um, but
there is a helpful link on the
right hand side when you access
a learn more and there's some
how to videos, um, that you can
drill down and look at
different.
School sites, districts, you can
even compare, uh, different
districts and how they're
spending for at-risk students,
special ed students, bilingual
services, so on and so forth,
um, with that said, I'd also
like to make a note that um we
collect actual expenditures on a
quarterly basis, so that's every
3 months. So there is also due
to PED the month after the
quarter ends, so
In, for example, quarter 1 is
not due to us until today. So
you will not see financial data
for 2025 until probably December
when my budget analysts in our
bureaus uh start reviewing and
approving those financials. So,
um, Kuntawaja with that we stand
for questions.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. We have a couple
of members that um have joined
us. We have Representative Luman
and Senator Pope, would you like
to introduce yourselves,
representative.
OK, sorry, I thought there's
another,
uh, uh represent House District
48 here in Santa Fe. I really
appreciate all the information,
um, that we're going through and
happy to be here. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Gail Chasey, my district is in
the area of Albuquerque, where
the main campus of UNM is
located and I'm really happy to
be here. I used to always know
the special ed director and um I
realized now I haven't known the
special ed director in a long
time, but I used to be in that
field.
Thank you very much. Glad to be
here. I'm gonna be going back
and forth across the hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Harold Pope Junior. District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque, um, I
have the petroglyphs in my
district and actually go pretty
far out. I'm almost to Laguna,
but not quite um go all the way
up to the Rio Porco, so there's
the uh gas station in Laguna
burger, right before Route 66
casino. That's actually in my
district, goes up that far, so.
Think that one is the main so I
like that one better. It's
better. I like, I like the
burgers there.
So, uh, just happy to be here.
I'm in the other committee as
well, but just popped over.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, first on
the list, we have Representative
Lujan.
Thank you. um, thank you for the
time, uh, Madam Chair, just a
couple of quick questions and
thank you, Doctor Cage. I really
appreciate all your work and
what you bring into our public
education department, um, in
regards to uh the focus on
special education and our
And our diverse population of,
of kids with exceptionalities,
uh, so,
When you, um,
One question, when you refer to
the neurodiverge, you didn't say
that. I'm gonna say that. Um,
when you refer to the increase
in population for our children
with the exceptionalities, you
said 49% to 53%. Is that due to
neurodivergent uh diagnosis and,
and, um,
In that growing population, I'm
sure.
Madam Chair
Representative Lujan.
It is not in a response to that
growing population is the
overall data of our students
with disabilities. We haven't uh
broken it down to any specific
subgroup of information.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And the
reason why I'm bringing that up
is because we are seeing more uh
children, uh, with
neurodivergent, uh, diagnosis
that I'm, I'm, I'm aware of. And
with that, I'm wondering where's
the training and the
Um
I guess in in the schools with
our teachers, with our
principals, with our staff.
If parents don't always
recognize the traits.
Where's the training with within
the program and how are you
addressing that, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair,
Representative Lujan, are you
referring to the training with
the neurodivergent children that
we have been experiencing. Yes,
ma'am, definitely it is on our
professional development list of
training, uh, we have had to
offer, which I've seen you out
in the field as well, uh, very
basic level training in the
beginning to get everybody
aligned and on the same page of
what special education and those
services and best practices look
like.
Uh, we are starting to specify
here, um, especially starting
with our special education
directors academy and Les
Academy and other opportunities
for professional development,
uh, in January would specifying
specific and targeted behavior
such as what you outlined in
autism and some other ones that
we have on the spectrum that is
really showing through in our
LEAs. Thank you so much. And
again, I just wanna thank you so
much for, for your um
Focus on on what is going on
because so many of our kids do,
do not get identified and then
therefore do not get the
services and then they move into
um growth patterns and, and
issues throughout their lives,
so the earlier on we catch and
we identify uh traits of
exceptional uh or exceptional
children, then we are able to
help them and not just them, but
their family. So kudos to you on
the the parent university. I was
just texting with some of my
My group of uh families. I don't
know that all the, the schools
are getting this out, so please,
please emphasize that that is
happening. Um, I haven't yet
seen this doesn't mean I, they
haven't tried, but I have not
seen this in my own school, my
own public school, um, then my
next question and last question
will go to page 10 of the
presentation.
And, and before that when you,
you asked that the for the
additional funding for our
schools.
Um
And you said there wasn't going
to be an application process. Is
that
How are you going to prioritize
the, the funding for the, for
the different schools. Is it
through your process that you
mentioned on page 10 by the, by
engaging with leadership and
communities. Can you explain
that just a little bit more?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Luhan, thank you
for the question. Um, so.
The, the Indian education fund
right now funds are published
transations as well as our local
education agencies. What would
not change in this proposal, our
applications required by
districts and charters. The
districts and charters will
still be required to apply for
the funding. What would adjust
is that published tribes and
nations would not. It would
simply be allocated and flow
through to them. The process
wouldn't change much for
districts and charters, um, and
to be more, uh, specific to your
question.
Currently, um, we fund local
education agencies based on
student count, Native American
student counts. And so when they
fall into the criteria of being
defined as a historically
defined Indian impacted school
district. They then become
eligible for funding. And so
each year, our division based on
student counts for the previous
school year, will identify those
historically defined Indian
impacted school districts, we
then advertise you are now
eligible to receive.
funding, they submit an
application, uh, for our
districts and charters, they
know ahead of time how much they
will receive for the upcoming
year and with the support of my
permanent colleague Antonio
Ortiz, we've have established a
planning awards system so they
can predict how much they're
going to receive for the next
school year and begin their
planning. Um, so two separate
processes coming from the same
bucket of money.
OK. So you're essentially just
asking for the flexibility for
each of those, those districts
to make those decisions, which
I, I, I think is a good idea. I
really liked on the listing and
I, I didn't take it as a a
prioritization, but when you're
talking about out of school, um,
funding and for extra.
I didn't see summer programs,
but for summer, summer school
programs, anything out of
school, I just want to commend
you for that and putting that on
the list because to me that's
one of the most important things
that we were missing. Um,
In some of our schools, but I
think it's a really important
way of spending our dollars.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madame Chair and Representative
Luhan, if I can comment, um,
I'd, I'd like to acknowledge the
tribe tribal partners, right? So
that is their work, that is them
saying this is what we think
will work for our students and
so again back to the proposal um
in alignment with all the
feedback that we've heard from
our tribal communities, that's
their list, um, and so I'm super
excited to elevate their voices
based on.
I think you representative
represent our Senator Lopez.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentations
and Senator, I mean, I don't
want to elevate you there
representative. I was gonna say
Senator Lujan, but
It's, it's an inside joke that
we have between the two
chambers. If you call one
senator, then they go, oh my
God, they call this
representative like, oh my God,
so it's just that that's what
was happening. Um, again, thank
you for the update.
And um,
I guess just to ask for
clarification from the question
that represented Lujan asked,
and this is on page, just
reflecting on page 10.
Um, so the money's then that
we're talking about, um, that
can be used for
Uh, native indigenous students
who have an IEP, is that
correct? OK, and is this being
targeted primarily so that um
smaller school districts can
access the funds.
And the reason why I asked that,
uh, Madam Chair is because such
as in Albuquerque. If you look
at our huge population, right?
It's like this little small
percentage, but yet if you look
on the west side of Albuquerque,
we have a larger number of
indigenous students who attend
um schools in my district and
along the west side and Senator
Pope's district also, um, so.
Is there any, in other words,
how is it working with the
larger school districts too?
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, um, and Senator
Lopez, thank you for the
question. Um, so I want to do a
better job, um, explaining the
proposals, so, um, what would
remain the same is the funding
for our districts and charters.
Nothing would change. And so
really what we're um talking
about here is the adjustments
that will be made specifically
for published tribes and
nations. And so to answer your
question a little bit uh more in
depth.
It would not affect local
education agencies, the special
needs factor would not affect
our funding in that way,
although I think the suggestion
is great for me to think about,
um, but for now we are primarily
thinking about the funding that
will flow to those tribes and
nations. So the special
education, special needs factor
would be available to that
population separate from our
districts and charters.
OK, and Madam Chair, which leads
to my next question, then too,
would a larger school district
then be able to apply for extra
funding if they are going to be
targeting um our indigenous
population.
So, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, yes, so that's
already how it functions. Um,
we, the Indian Education
Division released this awards
based on student counts, and so
the largest district that
receives the most money from our
division, of course, is
Albuquerque Public schools. Um,
we also have, you know, high
numbers of uh navel whose
students who identify as Navajo
of around 27,000 at the end of
last school year. So some of
those districts central
consolidated Gallup McKinley
also received high numbers um of
awards from our division.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
that was my next question. So
who are the larger school
districts that are receiving.
Thank you. Um, I did have
another question, Madam Chair,
and
I thought I highlighted it, so
my apologies.
Um, and this was just in regards
to uh page 13 and Senator Pope
did point it out, so I hope I'm
not taking your question. But
were you talking about the
regalia legislation. I know that
we passed, of course, the um an
an act a few years ago, um, that
dealt with, um,
Um
Instances with regards to hair
um issues uh and of course, not
just with our um black
community, but also for Native
Americans where we've had some
disasters happening with hair
being cut.
Um
So I know we amended that
legislation. Is this more
specific for um
You know what it's been used
like during graduation? Is that
what the
Impetus is behind it, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, um, and
Senator Lopez, yes, um, the
short answer is yes. The draft
proposal that was provided to
tribal leaders at the government
to government summit, um, is a
page and just a sentence, um,
but it is specific to Native
American students for sure,
specific to commencement
ceremonies, um, graduation um
across the board throughout all
grade levels.
A little bit more specific, um,
and in depth.
OK, and, and Madam Chair,
because um some of us were on
that subcommittee that was
working on that particular on
the Crown Act.
And in the discussion we had it
where we expanded it to include
Native American or, you know,
indigenous communities also. So,
um, as we also know too, not
just in our indigenous here in
New Mexico, but there are
indigenous from other
continents, you are African
Americans, you know, black
communities also have certain
Contributions that they'd also
like to have maybe with their
graduation with this cover it
that you see at this point, or
I, I'm just questioning that,
Madam Chair, because those were
many conversations we had, um,
when we were working on the
Crown Act.
So Madam Chair, um, Senator
Lopez, I appreciate the question
and so I, I would be happy to
provide a a a copy of the draft
provided by the Indian Affairs
Department, again, who is
leading the initiative. Um, I'm
going to read a verbatim from
what I'm looking at the draft,
actually, um, the definition of
objects of cultural significance
means any tribal symbols, beads,
and eagle feather or eagle
plume, um, at public events and
so currently, as I see it now
again led by the Indian Af
Department.
OK, and Madam Chair, the only
reason again why I bring that
up, there may be some
As we know, during the session,
everything is open to amendment
and such, but that may be, um,
A suggestion that may come from
community about inclusion so
that it also covers other
cultural aspects of many within
the state of New Mexico.
Um, just because I know that's
what, that's what happened with
the Crown Act and Senator Pope
remembers that and some of the
others here on the committee, so
FYI.
And then Madam Chair, um, I have
one more specific question and
maybe this is just for further
information, and this is going
back to page 9, and the
objectives of the Indian
Education funding proposal. And
I know that um on one of the
bullets it says increased
funding will be provided to
students with special needs.
Um, and is that meaning, Madam
Chair, someone with an IEP.
OK. Um, and Madam Chair, again,
when we look at um funding and
again I don't know, I don't see
a proposal in front of us to
look at the language, but when
you look at all the different
federal language and such and um
ADA and others, I, I, I'm
curious to see how we can single
out one particular group of
special needs students.
Um, was not looking because when
we look back at the Aussie
versus the state and the
Martinez versus the state
lawsuits, um, Yazi, I know is
more.
Explicit looking at our
indigenous communities, but
Martinez was covering everyone,
um, specifically because they're
consolidated, but there's still
two separate lawsuits, and I
remember the Martinez lawsuit
was looking at um all students,
which of course was mostly the
students of color. So I'm just
curious as to how we would get
around with singling out one
particular group and not looking
at all the others, um, because I
think that may go against what I
think the initiative was for the
Martinez.
is the state.
Um, because again, it's not a
consolidated, they're two
separate, and I remember because
I sat in on the Martinez
presentation and district court
down here in Santa Fe, so.
Um, a concern, if maybe you have
an answer, but if not, um, those
will be questions asked. I know
during session, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
I have a number of questions,
but I'm gonna try to.
Oh, sorry about that.
Um.
But try to, um, uh, rule them uh
and and ask a few.
Um, so, let me begin by saying
that as um I recall being in a
governor's office as I was a
tribal administrator.
And we had a presentation for
the school in our community from
the leadership, and it was
actually um a line officer.
And I remember this was on the
3rd grade progress, uh, report.
And what I recall very, very
It's hard to forget was I was
presented or we were presented
with a uh a um like a
spreadsheet.
Uh, folded up into like a little
accordion.
And I remember being presented
with this and it was regarding
student achievement levels.
And as it was open to us to
examine, um, it was limited to
this particular fold.
Uh, and we were told.
Um
Like
Several others, uh, I found out
later several other schools were
told as well, here's how your
students are doing and look,
they're doing so much better.
They've made great improvements
from being at this percentage in
the teens to now they're in the
20s or the 30s.
Well, that seemed fine. That
that is progress to, to
acknowledge and applaud.
Madam Chair,
But what we asked was where are
the our students in the entire.
I want to see, we wanted to see
the entire um document.
And so as it was unfolded.
We gasped. I mean, there's no
other way to put it. It was
shocking.
And um what that showed me and
as the team there was and the
tribal administration was there
was a lot to make up. There was
a lot of room for improvement
celebrating do not want to
minimize the, the, the um
advances that were made.
But certainly what
The long term goal of our tribal
administration was we have to,
we must.
We ask that these um
Scores these achievement levels
rise over the long term because
all that did, what we saw was
that they're not ready at the
3rd grade going into 4th and 5th
and 6th and so on.
We were going to continually,
our students would continually
being having have to make up.
Have to do remedial courses,
have to be sent into
Um, special education classes,
which also leads me to another
thought about um can we maybe
change the name of Special ed to
something else. We know what it
means for certain, but my, my
question then, Madam Chair, is
that um
I again, I applaud this changes,
but when you, when I'm looking
at these pages.
And uh looking, this isn't, it's
a chart.
On pages 1716, 1718. It strikes
me that there's still are Native
American students are still
consistently at the bottom.
How
Uh, what
plan. How, what plan do you
have?
With the allies that uh the
partners that you have
established Mature, what, what
plan is there to close those
achievement gaps, and I
recognize that this is a long
term process. This is not
something that's gonna change
like next year, the next quart
to school years. But if you
could lay out
What that plan might be.
Uh, we're looking at, I'm
thinking of 3rd graders by the
time that they uh get to high
school.
Where do you think that would
be, so that would be.
Do the maths speaking of
proficiency level, uh, in those,
uh,
Several years in between when
before they get to high school,
how, how might that be closed?
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Little, I would just like to ask
or if you're speaking to the
data that was provided by our
CNI department, or me
specifically.
OK
Sorry, uh, and referring to the
data that's presented in these
charts within this presentation,
so.
I'm not sure who provided that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
thank you for the question. I, I
do want to acknowledge, um.
Representative Little
You know, as a native bubble
woman.
Totally understand the question.
And you know, when I look at
student data myself.
We should be explicit in sharing
with tribal leaders and parents.
When compared to.
Um, and I hope within my
division to do a better job at
that. Um, I, I definitely think
it's not fair when we don't uh
say those types of statements,
right? um.
I share the passion and if I
look at myself and I go into a
community.
It's a great example of where I
am right now.
When compared to my colleagues
who are non-native. How can I
perform?
For sure in my community can
perform well.
I know that. I know how to be
Aima, but when I come here,
It's a learning curve, for sure,
and I think it relates to the
data and the examples that
you're providing, so I, I, I
wanted to first to acknowledge,
uh, the appreciation of the
question. Uh, the plan, I think,
is a loaded question for sure. I
think I can only speak to my
division and don't want to speak
for my um colleague who provided
the data, but we can for sure
get a clear answer and response
um to the question, but within
the Indian Education division,
uh, what we're currently working
on is looking at the Indian
Education Act.
Um, and what I'm going to do
with my deputy, and I want to
acknowledge I have a new deputy,
uh, Damian Werzicki, who has a 7
years of working at Santa Fe
Indian School, super excited to
have him on my team. One thing
we're working on is a crosswalk
between the Indian Education Act
and what our division is doing
currently. So if you look at the
act, right, there's the student
needs assessment, there's the
systemic framework all built in
the act for the reason of
partnering with tribal
communities to ensure that they
have voice in the plans for the
districts and
One thing that we're gonna work
on, my team is going to work on
is being more building capacity
within the local education
agencies, talking about the
data, when compared to and
starting those difficult
conversations, but also, um,
encouraging tribal consultation
and the importance of that, um,
again, I can only speak to what
my division um is doing right
now, but for sure can get a
clearer response from my
colleague around how we intend
to close the gaps for Native
American students.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Um.
And so, following on along the
because what you're describing
now, Madam Chair, if my question
would be in as it regards
funding, then um we actually had
a moment, I hope I'm not taking
a question away from anybody I
wanted to ask it, but, uh,
clarifying this $50 million.
It is supplemental.
2
The current budget, but I
noticed that the the language at
the very beginning was recurring
funding.
So
And this would be, uh, I, I just
would like some clarification.
It is.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, it is not
supplemental, so it would
actually be the Indian education
fund, which we currently have,
right? So currently uh we're
funded at 25.5 million. So they
ask for the Indian Education
Fund for the upcoming fiscal
year is 50 million, so not in
addition, it instead would be
the fund. Uh, so we're looking
at it a different way, it would
be around 25 more than what we
have currently.
All right, thank you. I think
there will probably be more
questions following that, but I,
I would like to see how that um
how that's laid out. That would
be really helpful. Um, one of
the other pieces that you were
describing, uh, Madam Chair, I
was in.
The
It was age 10 and 11, um, 0,
that's right, on the uh
proposals that were um
And I think it's really um
intriguing to to to uh approach
it in this fashion that's,
that's actually uh helpful. I
think that could be helpful, but
you made mention also and their
accountability, which truly we
want to know that what we're
putting funding towards is
actually resulting in uh a
positive outcome for lack of
better words, but, um, on this
one you made, you indicated, uh.
Uh, regarding accountability
that um
PD would be doing the evaluation
creating the evaluation um
criteria for uh measuring
whether these were successful or
not. My question was, uh, is
Madam Chair, whether um in this
you described, uh, groups,
partners and allies that have
been part of this process
already, you're working with
tribal communities. Is this also
one that's going to include
those coalitions as well as
these groups.
to, if you're in order for them
to know, uh, Madam Chair, what
they're working towards, what's
being expected of them. Will
they also be uh contributing to
the to the um language that or
to the
Expectations that are going to
be established.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh, thank you for the
question and so, uh, I wanna
start off with saying, um, again
acknowledging representative
Allison like uh Doctor Cage did
as well, um, you know, when
Representative Allison said we
have high expectations for the
students at Santa Fe and in
school, well, I would hope that
we have those same expectations
for the students in our public
school system, right? And it's a
great.
Thought mindset to have for our
students, um, you know, when I
think about accountability
related to this proposal, um, I
think our division is making way
in how we hold our tribal
partners accountable to the
funding that we're receiving,
um, I think it's no question
that in previous years, we have
identified how do we support
them in spending down. How do we
support them in meeting their
outcomes if they're receiving
the funding. Uh, so currently
within our division, we've
incorporated quarterly.
check-ins and so my team just
finished a first round of
quarterly check-ins, which we do
face to face with each of our
grantees. That's over 100
grantees that we're meeting with
face to face. I, as well as my
deputy, um, we've shared the
caseload of Pueblo's tribes and
nations, and so during their
quarterly check-ins, what I do
is I show them their drawdowns.
Remaining balances and ask them
to set a goal for the next
quarter, how much they intend to
be spent. But the other
questions we ask for
accountability are what outcomes
and impacts have you achieved
within the first quarter.
Um, and what support do you need
that we can help you with. Um,
and an integrating voices such
as the Indian Education Advisory
Council, which is part of
statute, right? They would be
involved in these conversations
for sure. Always looking to our
tribal partners to integrate
their feedback. Our division
also has uh hosts monthly Indian
education calls with our tribal
partners. That's also a space
where tribal education directors
can provide feedback, and I'm
always present at those meetings
to hear so I can begin
initiating some of what they've.
just it, but secretary designate
Padilla is also present at those
meetings to hear the voices as
well. So, uh, yes, we intend to
include all the voices. It's um
and I and I don't want to
disregard the local education
agencies as they are the ones
providing the, the instruction
to our students, and so I have
the opportunity to also be
available in the schools and ask
to speak with superintendents
present the information,
teachers, staff, our Indian
education division directors
within the local education
agencies.
So, um, I think it's a combined
effort and I'm super excited
about, you know, continuing to
build trust him on tribal
leaders. I feel so supported by
the tribal leaders, and they
have acknowledged the process in
the work and so I know that when
we bridge that, right?
It'll be great.
Thank you. Would you um make
your answers um clear and
succinct. We have several, uh,
more people on the list, and we
were on an agenda. So, thank
you.
Representative Allison and then
Senator Pope and then Vice Chair
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, the first part of my
question was asked by my
colleague, uh, representative
Little. It's in addition to the
uh $50 million grant on your
slide 9.
I didn't really understand your
answer, if that was, was a
supplemental.
In addition to uh
What is figured into the regular
formula.
That's my first question.
Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair, again, the way I
can explain it, I guess is.
50 million would be the ask
total for Indian education
across the board for fiscal year
26.
OK, um, so you would consider
that a sole source investment
into Indian education.
I would, madam chair, respond
and say it's the fund. It's, I
know it as the fund that we're
currently working with. OK, um,
I have a little bit of a problem
with that because from the
tribal community.
It is felt that as long as
schools and tribes are dependent
on supplemental grant funding.
To address native student needs,
services and programs for native
students will always remain as
add-ons and afterthoughts.
So that, that is my first uh
concern against uh the 50
million, although it says the
funding will be recurring for a
minimum of 3 years. What happens
after 3 years and the results
have not changed.
Do we go for more supplemental
funding?
Oh, I, I think there's quite a
bit oft uh question that still
remain unanswered.
And then
Yesterday, there was a
presentation from LSC and LESC.
And I told them that in the past
6 years I have served on the
House Appropriations.
And it seems that PED every year
is asking for additional funds
to address a certain section of
the court order that was
mandated.
And it seems to me that we're
just throwing money.
At a problem that
We hope it solves itself or or
whatever.
How long are we going to do
that?
As
DED have a plan yet as to what
to do to address the contents of
the court order. I have not seen
that yet and uh there was a
graph also on a recommendation
by the two agencies that uh
presented to us yesterday as to
say,
Oh, LFC should, LESC should,
there's a lot of shoots.
And there's no, this is what we
have done.
So what I'd like to see is a
report card saying this is what
the problem was. This is how we
addressed it, and this is what
the results we have seen thus
far, so I'd like to see a report
card like that.
Um, and then I'm gonna refer
real quickly to your uh slide
12.
Oh
The Indian education.
Your government to government
meeting that I was unable to
attend because I was in another
meeting in Albuquerque, and
anyway, I have a concern with
what
The comet
That was made by my Ne Nation
government.
And whenever you say that you're
gonna have one on one meetings.
I'd like to be involved in it,
uh, because I don't think uh
most people understand a lot of
the legislation like I was a
co-sponsor with Mr. Lenty on the
last one, and I thought it was a
good deal, but
Uh, some of my constituents
think otherwise, so I'd like to
be a part of that discussion.
And then slide 13, my last one
is, uh, there's gonna be a
legislation on the regalia.
I think that is very, very
appropriate because uh
Farmington High School made the
news this past
spring when they singled out an
individual for wearing beads on
her mortar board, so I'm glad to
see that. So those are just my
comments and questions, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Allison Shana. Now we will go to
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll try
to be quick. Um, I apologize. I
know you read what the regalia
legislation, the draft, uh,
would this also cover folks in
higher education graduating from
any of our community colleges
and universities. We know that.
Madam Chair and Senator Pope,
give me one quick minute to scan
through, um.
So I'm going to read the
statement verbatim of public
event means an event held or
sponsored by a local school or
charter school board, including
but not limited to graduation
ceremonies and sporting events.
Uh, I don't see any clear
mention of higher education
institutions. OK. Uh thank you,
Madam Chair. I just think we
want to make sure we, we do that
as well. Um, we haven't heard
maybe some incidences, but maybe
there's some instances that we
don't know about, and we want to
make sure folks are protected.
Um, I, I just want to end and
say that.
um this is legislation that
needs to happen, uh, the intent
of what we did in our hair
discrimination bill, uh, making
it really inclusive.
Um, our indigenous communities,
folks from everywhere in our
state, even religious headdress,
that's really what we thought
that this would cover.
Um, but this needs to happen. I
would just ask, uh, whoever's
sponsoring this. Let's consider
making this bill inclusive as
well to make sure that we don't
leave anyone out and no one gets
discriminated against and at the
end of the day, um, we're all
protected. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Vice Chair
Pinto.
Thank you, madamarian members of
the committee. Thank you for
your presentation and what you
do for our students, the open
books, um, I really want to make
sure weiterate that, especially
with those on the webcast and uh
all those involved in education
that it is available, and much
of that came around because of
the impact aid monies that we
did not see, um, we weren't
really being transparent enough
to see that the, the money was
flowing to the classrooms and
even our parents and communities
were asking us about those.
budget, so that was the biggest
reason for having that there and
that even we see how we are
spending the money. And one of
the biggest issues in that was
not mentioned here was about
transportation because we're in
a conundrum with that, we still
have not gotten a handle on it
since I've been in office and
even our tribes nations and
pueblos have been asking, um,
you know, uh, some of this money
that we're asking to put in
there, uh, that they include
transportation in there and I
was like yes and no, because I
I think it was the right, um, my
understanding is that once the
students leave that door, we are
responsible for them getting to
the school and back home through
that door.
So, um, that's um the thing on
that.
The, this money that we're
asking for, the reason my
understanding is the reason we
started our one of the for the
tribal trust fund was that it
accrue interests.
Does the education they need
education fund accrue interest.
No, OK, so I wanted to make that
clear to the committee. Yes,
that 50 million is there, yes,
we put it in there, but if you
try to um
Divide that uh with our tribes
nations and pueblos, uh, one of
the things is some of our
pueblos do not have enough
students for it to even to make
a dent, so I have not heard of a
floor mount, but I know there
was one mentioned at the G2
summit of 300,000.
And if that is the case, that 50
million would not suffice
divided among the 23 tribes,
pueblos and nations to be
enough. So the math needs to be
done on it.
The regalia.
My understanding is um being in
contact with the family is that
they're moving forward with
litigation.
And us being the lawmaker is my
understanding is that if there's
a case in litigation, we don't.
And tell the so the
What we put forward in the crown
Act will be tested if it isn't
sufficient, then we amend it.
But if it withstands the court
case and a precedent is set,
then we're OK. But one of the
comments made by the elders too
at the G summit was that there
are some artifacts or some
cultural items that they feel
should not be.
Um
Born in that instance. So this
still is a situation that I
think we, we are sovereign
nations, um, have to step in and
I would just kinda put that out
there when there was the
insurrection at the Capitol. You
saw the gentleman with the big
buffalo.
Um,
So that is uh
You know, how do you kind of
May I know we want to be
inclusive in that sense, but
Hopefully this doesn't turn into
a mocking issue in which it it
becomes a very negative impact,
especially on our students. Some
of the data in your um packet
here. I did not see McKinley
County listed as one of the
schools with the highest
population serving the Native
American communities. So, um
concerned about not seeing those
numbers in there, um, that are
presented.
And even with the regaliate too,
I feel like um there's been
times with Senator Lopez and the
state personnel office in our
Prior secretary of Indian
Affairs Department on diversity
training.
And cultural sensitivity in that
sense, but also not just to say
Those that are serving Native
American populations, but all
our state employees that they
become a little bit better in
serving our people with
disabilities that they recognize
those things and, you know,
Don't become rude in that sense,
and I don't know if that's
really been put forward since.
Our secretary of state personnel
moved to transportation and Lynn
has, you know, left IAD.
So that was one of the other
things that we wanted to um
Put in place and I don't know if
the where the work is on that as
far as the presentation from our
Indian Affairs secretary
yesterday, only 89 employees.
have gone through the training,
which is very disappointing
because I think we also have
that authority with our
Our state personnel, like I
think goes along with the
teachers, right?
There was a
Conference about your students,
your districts, in which state
or federal money is put out
there for students doing credit
recovery and also for tutoring
and I did not see anything in
here about tutoring even with
the special education
presentation, you know, how do
we move that forward in a very
aggressive manner and also uh
matching the funds with that as
those allocations, my
understanding is they're matched
that is necessary if those
districts choose to move
forward, but I think it's
something that's very um very
much needed.
Within our districts.
The plan
I was hoping that our liaison
would have some input a little
bit more, not just about um
special education state plan,
but the plan for the Martinez
Yazi lawsuit and um what,
because that is where the
hindrance is is our some of our
tribes, nations, and pueblos
feel like NMPED has not been
responsive, um, to moving
anything for it on that case and
who's responsible for it. Um,
but that's
Our education department, so I
feel that's where it needs to
be.
I did not see anything about
workforce numbers and growing
the pipeline either in either
presentation. Are we at a
deficit? Are we close, um,
especially in special education,
our students.
We have students that have very
specific needs.
In there and it's not cheap to
provide that. So we really need
to make sure those are
incorporated in the budget. And
even with um the reading, I did
not see a T so, um.
We don't require it here.
I think some states do, uh, they
even pay a little better and
even if a teacher comes in, they
give them time to go back and
get the education um for
identification for those
students to make that
achievement gap, even smaller, I
think it is the evidence is
there, um, how come we're not
and using that.
The LEAs.
In some of our tribes nations
and pueblo's expressed that
there is a disconnect with
communication to move forward on
with our Native American
students.
On that, um, some of the
addressing even in the sense of
what happened at Lybrook.
And to walk out.
They are students felt like
there was nowhere to turn. The
community felt like there was,
they were ends meet, so they
walked out.
Where were we? Where was that
MPED?
You know, it shouldn't take it.
Get to that point. Um,
especially when we say, yeah,
we're serving our students, but
if our door is not open,
technically we're not.
doing that.
Um, the measurable outcomes.
How do we tie that to the data
we're we're, um, getting in.
And really be consistent across
the board. I need, I need
something that's really gonna
tie to the funding that you're
asking for or even if we get the
tribal trust fund put in place,
what measurable outcome are we
gonna use to make sure that
we're being efficient and
effective with that, um,
allocation. I think those are
more comments because we're in
lieu of time, um, we'll be
having more discussions in the,
as we move forward. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um.
Um, well, I think the data.
2 from special education, and
you're saying, well, it's broad.
It, I think it does need to be a
little more detail. I think we
do have the um technology and
to, to break some of that down a
little more. I, I think it's
necessary for to come up with a
number, especially for those.
in special education that have
specific areas that they can
provide to our students.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that, but I don't need a
response.
Thank you, Vice Chair. I have uh
one question and then 2 comments
um as quickly as possible. The
big elephant in the room is uh
what is the status of PED and
the plan to finally comply with
the Yazi Martinez court order.
And then I am still very, very
sincerely concerned about our
special education programs
within our schools.
And then I noticed that you
sponsored a parent university at
Buffalo Thunder.
Just wondering if you provide
those statewide.
Um, and offered that opportunity
to our rural parents.
Such as Northwest New Mexico and
those areas. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
questions and your comments. Um,
I work hard every day to uh
provide answers and
opportunities and um the
sentiments of my heart echoes a
lot of the comments that have
happened today, and I am working
very hard to provide not only
support and opportunities for
our Native American students and
our students with disabilities
alike, uh, but also provide a
space uh where there is feedback
sessions and
Professional development so that
we can increase student
outcomes. I have done a lot of
work with our regional
educational committees, our
superintendents, our special
education directors, our
external and internal partners,
uh, various secretaries, um, and
entities that have their hands
in with students with
disabilities, uh, so that we can
bridge some gaps there, bring
some conversations to the table,
braid some funds, and actually
put out the best product that we
can.
To give our students uh the
support and the information, the
knowledge, uh, just to be in the
space where they can thrive, uh,
not just thrive in one grade,
but thrive in life, um, so to,
uh, answer your questions, uh,
as for providing opportunities
out and about in the state. That
is one of the things that I
pride myself on and also my
staff, especially, um, I have
with me today my deputy, uh,
director.
Doctor Tyree Jenkins and my
assistant deputy director Ria
Gill, uh, with me today as I
shared with you and the members
of the committee earlier that
professional development tour
where we have been across the
state in the last month, every
week somewhere, uh, one of those
days is devoted to a parent
resource fair, and I have to be
very transparent and honest with
you that we really don't have a
big turnout at those parent
resource fairs, and I have a
plethora of uh information that
is there. I have a plethora of
partners that are there with
wraparound services that are
available to answer questions
that are giving out information
and free items to be able to
support our parents with
students with disabilities, um,
so that is an area that I'm
gonna pull real hard on this
committee, um, and also other
legislators and senators because
it's an area that I'm very
passionate about. I am there at
every single one of those. I
don't care if it's a 5 or 6 hour
drive, I am there. And
I want those parents and you
alike because every single
person in this room either has a
child with a disability or know
someone in their family or in
their community with one. So one
of the things that I've been
pulling on with those
educational leaders,
superintendents, school board
members and every opportunity
that I have to speak, is that if
you first show up in the room
and bring somebody with you,
then they will know that you
support the initiatives that's
going on and that it's a safe
place and that is the place that
they can begin to open up.
trust. Um, so what those parent
resource fairs, we have one
more, which is Monday, and that
will be in Albuquerque, but the
parent university is the big
event, and that's one of the
reasons why we are providing
opportunity through funding to
pay for certain rooms and food
so that our parents that do live
far off, can't have the
opportunity to come. But we have
already made plans and those
plans are in the motion to do
the same thing that we did with
this professional development.
mentor is to be somewhere every
month across this state in our
smaller school districts, uh, to
be able to provide those
resources. That is one of the
things that um I really love
doing. I am a teacher of 25
years, boots on the ground
experience uh with educational
and organizational reform reform
and turnaround. And Madam Chair,
with your permission, uh, before
we leave today, I would like to
provide
uh, the committee with these
flyers because I did hear uh
Representative Luhan said that
she has not received this
information, and it is not for
lack of us putting it out there.
I just recently, uh, provided uh
funding so that we can put this
on our, in our newspapers and
also um in our, at our local
radio stations because I really
want this to get out, but word
of mouth is very, very
important, no matter how far.
technology has come, it
definitely means a lot when
somebody depends on your voice
for you to be able to advocate
and support things like this
that we are providing across the
state. So if you would not mind
taking a picture and texting it
to everyone in your phone. I
would really, really appreciate
that. Again, thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak
today.
Madam Chair.
Senator
may make just a short comment.
Oh, as short as I can. I want to
say thank you very much for um
the parent universities. I
didn't see the information until
too late.
Um, and everything is local in
New Mexico. So if you contact
those who are on the committee
and others, we can help get the
word out to those that we know,
um, it, it's just, it's, it's
the way, as you know, many
communities we all know the
grapevine, and I think that will
help in many more respects. Like
where is this event on Monday in
Albuquerque? Is it at 8PS or
where is it located, Madam
Chair?
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, it
is at the University of New
Mexico. What we try to do uh
with our uh parent outreach is
have it at a neutral site, so we
didn't, we didn't have any of
our tours at a school, so
they're all at neutral sites,
but it will be at the University
of New Mexico, and I can
definitely get you the exact
address. OK, no, I appreciate
that because again, I'll get the
word out and I know many of us
who are in the Albuquerque area
will be able to do that.
Um, and if I may say one more
thing, madam chair, you've
started this parent university,
if there hasn't been.
It hasn't been attended very
well. I would hope that you
would still consider doing it
again this next year, because
it's the continuity. Sometimes
communities are used to you
coming in saying, oh, I'm here,
nobody showed and you never come
back. Um, so I hope that
You, um, would consider uh doing
this again next year and letting
us know so that we can get our
folks there.
Madam Chair, Senator Lopez, I
truly appreciate that one thing
about me is I'm a fighter. I
will never get up until I pack
the room and I have shared that
across the state. I want there
to be standing room only so that
we can end up uh having to build
a place to house the people that
are there, and I'm probably
noticing my staff from my
backwards eyes, they're probably
shaking their head because uh
definitely I make sure that
we're everywhere and that we're
being hurt because our topic.
is one that is very, very
important.
Representative Little quickly, I
think we both have the same
question. I was actually follow
up to yours. I, I was just
hoping, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, uh.
Deputy secretary, um, I'm very
curious about uh to find out
when the status of the plan is
to, for the Yazzie Martinez
plan. Um,
What is it? What's this? Where
is it at right now?
Madam Chair, uh, thank you,
Representative Little. I can't
tell you on behalf of our
cabinet staff, uh, especially in
the presence of secretary
designate Padilla. We have been
working tirelessly for the last
5 weeks to release our strategic
plans
short of time. Just get to the
we are almost done with the
plan, uh, that will be released,
uh, to support our Martinez Yai.
I don't particularly have a
date, but we can get back with
you with that information. Sure.
Thank you.
Committee members, any last
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. Uh, I will be
following up with you personally
with other questions, uh, maybe
we can have a meeting.
Thank you so much.
And then colleagues, please stay
in the room.
