With that thank you for helping
us call this meeting to order
next we will do introductions so
let's go ahead and begin with
senator schendo
good morning to do you should
don't think today that's great
from amus those are my help
hames relatives that are here as
my excuse me people
and other many of them around
here
good morning state senator
benning schendo from hames weble
representing
this trick twenty two and this
is kind of the heart of my
district crown points of but we
large a sir never who chapter
and community that
representative thank you again
uh president guy for wholesale
good morning manager and
colleagues and and others i'm
bill soles state senator from
los crucis always find this one
of the most fascinating in
interesting committees I drove
across through uhm torio is it
today and just spectacularly
beautiful and parts of new
mexico that I would not normally
get to and so I very much
appreciate being on this
committee as an advisory member
and the incredible places I get
to go on people I get to meet.
Good morning thank you madame
here members of the audience I
am anthony allison I represent
district district for which is
the northwest quadra represent
nine never who chapters and the
smaller communities of fruit
limit
waterflow in northwest
farmington that beer thank you
madame chair.
Back just in day thank you
madame chair I have
representative and the sale
I represent this street six
hundred despite the civil
machine in the county in my
district they have a nine no
chapters I also have the public
ad the leader milan city agreed
and somehow locally I don't have
any of group of gallop but I do
have the county thank you very
much.
Thank you good morning madam
chairman based here members of
the committee members of the
audience and i'll of you thank
you for your hospitality and
having us here today my name is
bethley sierra balkatta I
represent albucker district in
alba kirki thirteen which is in
the forest southwest part of all
the correct and i'm always happy
to be here and be a member of
this committee thank you so
much.
Good morning madame chairman
john block house district fifty
one and other county is a
beautiful long drive yesterday
but i'm glad to be here and I
i'm excited for this committee
thank you madame chairman.
The.
Let's go head and have our staff
introduced yourselves please
stand in.
Morning everyone i'm nicole
wages back in am a researcher
with the legislative council
service.
And let's go ahead and go out to
the audience and quickly
introduce yourselves will start
with you sir.
Thank you madame chairman which
is a committee i'm selling to
share a pinto kiani instantly
cheating bush's cheering must as
you charge it need I should
check philippine or deshina
tragicial a represent district
three which is right here at
standing alternative having
gallop well which is for corners
the southern ute indian
reservation just outside
apartment and can tell you that
chapters I don't have any more
but represent thirteen chapters
fifteen with lembase thank you
expect to be here and thank you
for hosting us for and to use
northern work that's going down
out there thank you.
Thank you good morning and I am
representative wanted johnson
shades that are doing each long
key are only bushes team none
asked as touchy and industrial
cheap traditional adore your
today be hold.
Uh deak needs national heart
added attraction on this issue
or yeah
one g
I this is my eleventh year going
to be in my eleventh year in my
six term and i'm honored to
represent house district five
which and hills escalate and
fifteen now the whole chapters
in eastern available agency and
that is begins from church rack
pine deal crown point
dalton pass standing rock kyoto
can twin leaks to had she knew
nash to the sheep springs and
asd crystal and two gray hills
and i'm
I don't know who I missing but I
do represent fifteen hour
chapters I am honored to be here
I was born and raised in this
community and um I look forward
to our meeting here today and I
respectfully appreciate hosting
our meeting here for several
years now and uh we appreciate
very much and we look forward to
hearing from you today so with
that let's go ahead and begin
with um a welcome and standards
update by doctor guy.
We are
good morning now
madam chair members of the
indian affairs committee
and your staff
like to welcome each and
everyone of you too um now the
technical university
there are four tribal colleges
and universities and new mexico
and we now hotel we probably are
the largest of the more
we have the day college and ship
right then you call to have a
rules of sight here as well and
then we have institute of
american indian arts and
southwestern and in polite
institute
I just made to let you know that
we also have
depending secretary to health
visiting us today as well
we have
a food safety grant that we got
from new mexico so were very
appreciated we appreciate that
very much
um
tarpatero is our board chair
he's here in the room as well we
have six board members they
represent each agency on naval
so mister poter represents for
defiance
and then we have the student
senate
president as one of the
important members as well
I just wanted to
thank
the committee
for supporting us and getting
the additional two hundred
thousand last year for dual
credit program and
representative hours and
really help us with the initial
requests.
And we are
we work very closely with the
high school students
so
we really appreciate that and
that we also got nine hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to
demolish an old dormitory over
here and has been sitting there
for some time it's really unsafe
and down so that will be a be
coming down here shortly and
then we also
hopefully will be getting one
million dollars for
architecture and engineering
services for
an academic building and that's
the go back and there were out
in the community
educating members of our
avoiding
public.
Hopefully that will they'll vote
and support of the group on
the other thing you know we
provided the written copy to you
if you look around their
building when you're coming in
to crown point
you've seen some buildings that
are.
Are here.
Fairly new
all of them have been supported
by by members of this committee
and from new mexico including
this building here
this is the on back here we have
three hotel rooms
the only hotel in crown point is
those three rooms
and many times the the doctors
over the and in health services
they would stay here and then
they provide services at the
hospital and that you'll see the
building over here two stored
building of the wellness center
that's also supported by new
mexico and inside that building
is a as a german asian it has a
basical court.
That basically court is entered
collegiate size court so we're
able to.
Create AAA college
basically team
we have we now play big schools
and last year I don't know if we
want to game or not but then we
got beat pretty bad
but we have a basically team in
addition to a rodeo cross
country
rodeo trust country
archery and they did we we
compete well erodio we had two
students what to the college
finals three consider beers
and so we were aware of
competing quite well.
And then we have this new
building that's going to be
opening up here shortly this
semester it's a silver lead
building.
And we're almost done with it
and we're making a request
tomorrow to the
hearing we're asking for one
point five million to finish
that facility and albeit our
first silver leap building maybe
the first on the available
so it's we're really looking
forward to that the building.
One thing I want to bring to
your attention is the early
childhood education program
funding.
Governor michelle grisham are
sign house bill eighty three
into law and that provided
two hundred and three hundred
and twenty million dollars
and for some reason tribal
colleges were not included to
to benefit from that are
program.
We have a wonderful
early childhood program here a
lot of students in the program
every year with graduate
students who have a partnership
with an apple head start program
and there's a lot of interests
in this program we have quite a
few students and so we're kind
of disappointed
not able to
get any of those resources to
support our program.
The other one that I want to
just put out there is that.
Now will take all the university
we've been here since nineteen
seventy nine
as start out as a skill center
to prepare a word force.
And now we
we are offering back a lot
degrees.
Four masters and one phd
so we are growing
up the four masters degree as
and
now the whole language culture
leadership program
and we we have
and my s.
Electrical engineering degree
that started in january an
electrical engineering degree
dell start discoming fall.
So we are creating programs that
are needed not only on naval but
new mexico and then anywhere in
the united states.
And so we're not going anywhere
but yet we're growing
and so we would really
appreciate some support from the
state to give us operational
support we don't get any today
we're only get cap out there
support which we really
appreciate but if there is a way
to
give us
operational funding that would
really be nice to support
or some of the programs that we
have entered to sustained them
the other wonder with i'd just
like to bring to your attention
is that we applied
for
a
lot of it
indian education technical
assistant center that was
announced earlier we applied and
the department of a higher
education department extended
the application date on that
and
so additional institutions could
apply we have an application in
there and
they are reviewing the proposals
and hopefully will be one of
those and they will be funding
to them and we would like to
help
not only
tribal communities but
k twelve institutions we have a
sight in zoni
so we can prepare teaching
materials for teachers
in naba whole language and
culture as well as and zoni and
other peblo
schools and students so
if you could the members could
check on the status of those
technical assistance center
grants we're appreciated hold of
the old.
Put it forward.
Other than that
they just want to extend my
appreciation for all that the
members for your support that
you've been given to an
available technical university
and we are in the process of
getting
ready for fall or class will be
starting here in august
nineteenth
and we are out in communities
recruiting students and we want
other note is that we we have a
really good partnership with
sandy and national laboratory
we were on under
and there are lab laboratory
last week and one of the things
that were working with sandia
national purpose they're putting
together a certificate and micro
electronics
and down that wall help students
that they pursue a feel in an
idiot in any of the engineering
fields mechanical electron
industrial and others and this
is a certificate does that exist
nowhere new mexico
and there want to work with us
will have a little lap to do
that.
And you know sandy at the design
and develop something that give
it to programs and that's what
they will be doing with us and
so we're just want to let you
know that we work well with lost
almost national lap as well
so thank you a members of the
committee for given us a time to
give you some updates of what
we're doing that into you and
you're welcome anytime and there
and those of you who are running
for reelection good luck and
hope you stay stay on in the
continued to work with us thank
you very much
I don't know if here any
questions thank you doctor guy
do you have any comments
so now technically university is
unique in the fact that we
really focus on offering
standard type programs not to
actually provide that that that
type of education opportunity to
charge students you know we have
to stand stay focused with
regards to how we provide the
infrastructure to support that
in I just want to share with you
that we are we are working with
the with the state broadband
network as well in fact we've
been asked to be a node on the
state education network so there
are number of various sum
community schools across eastern
naba home and we built a
capacity to bring a hundred gb
seven of a broadband capacity
here we're going to be that
notice actually start to work to
serve the various schools around
eastern naba hole in in fact i'm
the
the program for era was
essentially a forty two only
catherine twile but new
legislation that at a federal
level now a kites are allows so
i'm travel colleges to
participate so we're going to
utilize that relationship as
well.
To coronate and see how we
effectively get the bar bank
capacity to order case with
twelve schools in in in eastern
alho I just want to share that
with you thank you.
The.
Thank you committee members
senator soul thank you madame
chair and and thank you so much
for hosting as what a beautiful
area the country to to get to
drive through
first lemme let you know we
share some of the frustration
with the early childhood
education and care department
not pushing out what's up the
money it's a lot of areas where
it's not going out where people
are plammering to try and get
some of that but certainly the
the need for the early childhood
programs here in the the need of
american areas are our
substantial but yes we are were
continuing to try and push that
they get more of those moneys
out of.
Martin is yazi lawsuit I cheered
the senate education committee
the martians jazzi lawsuit one
of the main findings is that we
have a lack of native american
teachers in the state of new
mexico to meet the needs of out
in tribal lands.
You sounds like you're starting
or working with an early
childhood education program as
their benefit thought about
putting in a full blown ca
twelve teacher preparation
program here at nava hotek this
seems like a natural place to
have it and would attract people
from the area that get the then
stay in the area as teachers
have you worked on that at all
and if you're interested in be
very interested in working with
you all on it and particularly
because you've got to focus on
stem secondary stem teachers are
particularly difficult to find
much less hard to find in native
community so i'll be quite
letter responded several things
I ask.
The.
Madam chairman members of the
committee
senator soles
thank you for your
question
we are in the process of
developing math education at the
secondary level
we met with the
the the pid department yeah we
have to
make they want it as to make
sure that one of our factory
members what we would need a
certification at the high school
matter certification so or just
make insurer that we are factory
leaked that requirement but
that's what we see
receiving students from high
school is that they're not
really prepared and mathematics
they're not prepared in sights
and as well there's reading and
writing.
And so that's why we do quite a
bit of a dual enrollment program
so it's with high school so they
would convict provide some of
those instructions at the high
school but that we should we see
a need for math teachers as well
as sites teachers and it
teachers and so we're trying to
now look into providing those
opportunities so you're right on
the or your questions that's
right understood we're trying to
to do senator.
Manager and and thank you and
certainly within the technical
areas
the with those programs are
those part of UNM as the base
university or new mexico state
case typically teacher prep
programs you have to have the
the full janet courses as well
as the teacher courses so when
you talk about math teachers is
that
taking one with another
university or is that
independent.
A madam chair members of the
committee that would be
independent
are jennifer programmers
good here
we since we offer
engineering programs like and
electrical industrial mechanical
so we have quite a few factor
members that are very strong and
mathematics now we also offer a
biology chemistry animal sites
are early childhood education
so we are for of acquired a few
of stem education program here
and we work well with the mexico
tech we have a partnership with
an investigated techno we are
researching water filtration
units and you know you go to
some of the communities here in
the area you'll see
well sell say
not for human consumption
animals only
and we eat those animals I don't
know why it's safe for animals
to drink but we eat them right
and so we're
testing water and before we take
it through though those filters
and then to see how much of it
of the contaminants will be
clean so we want into
bring it to a level to where we
can sell those and another one
that we're working with our
centers on
we like to manufacture renewable
batteries
you know the
we have a letter vehicle here
that we bought we have an item
ordered program so we see lot of
collaboration with different
programs or left congeneration
and so forth so we want to
you know when they have this
electric vehicles.
The batteries are so heavy and
so we want to make the battery's
lighter and to where it can they
can charge faster and that kind
of thing so that's what the
research that we're doing with
santian national lapsel there's
quite a bit of research even
though or small institution
we're very strong and stim and
that's why those research is
important and that's why we want
to make sure that students that
are will hope to get when
they're out of high school that
they were prepared and and now
we're now beginning to look at
how do we help those schools and
there's technical since
assistant center will really
help us do some of that and then
we will continue to look at
providing
other teachers
that badly need it in rural
communities and so we go to be
stand alone but wist we we work
with other universities quite
well university in the mexico as
well.
A manager thank you because it
just seems natural that we ought
to have a full pay twelve
teacher preparation program on
right here in the center of
november country to prepare
teachers and independent not
part of new mexico state or UNM
it's a long term goal it's going
it would take many years I
talked briefly with the
secretary about it and thinks
it's a good idea to and so if
you're interested in in looking
at seeing whether that's
feasible I certainly would be
happy to help because I think it
solves a lot of our programs in
your strong
technical portion in stim areas
is particularly helpful and
helpful all the way down in k
twelve that all of the teachers
coming through janet are getting
a strong
science math portion of that as
they're going through so if
you're interested in very
interested in working with you
the programs manager in the
president the programs that you
have here are they full do have
caps on them are there waiting
less you know what is the the
enrollment outlook for the
different programs that you
have.
Thank you
madame chairmans of the
committee and the senator sold
the early childhood program we
have is very popular here high
enrollment business program the
largest students in that program
weldings another one are welding
programs up to capacity that's
why we're wanting to expand the
trades program the construction
program were really up to
capacity as well so
for example
they the welding program we only
have fifteen stations and their
followed their full and so we
can only take fifteen students
at a time where we have them run
through those programs and then
the other programs are
there about their growing as
well the the engineering
programs are.
They're a good size a good size
program
some of them are small
like a like computer sites
program it's a fairly new
program and we're trying to get
students into the field and seem
like.
The high school counselors don't
really understand some of these
programs that are needed not
just on the available but state
wide and they're not really
advising students to go to some
of these fields and so
when students come to visit our
institutions and they get to
talk to the professors and they
get to see what's under labs the
what's puts being developed and
there with with that they really
they
they get to know more about
those careers the one that is
really
that we see a lot of students
enroll in is a nursing
assistance program
and so we're starting this fall
on rn program but the challenge
there is
pain
nursing faculty he gotta pay
them hundred and twenty thousand
dollars and they're so hard to
find and we don't really have
the resources to do that and
that's a real challenge but it
i'd students want the career
in the health fields so now
we're beginning to do something
we we offer nursing assistance
and and that kind of thing and
but the r and we're really seven
a hard time finding factor that
will teach the nursing program
at the master's level everybody
wants them there's a shortage
nationwide for everywhere at
them too and for assistance a
little bit more challenging
because we're in a role
and their rather you know teach
and albert cricket that kind of
thing so that's another one that
we
large students want that program
thank you
some of the things I always have
concerns in our career technical
education areas.
You did the kid that you welding
program is full your
construction program is fall and
we hear regularly from
businesses wanting to move to
new mexico you don't have a
trained work force and yet we've
done have the capacity to train
up more and so certainly as
you're looking at requests of
the legislature this next time
make sure through capital that
you're asking for
the the additional welding sites
or spaces or things of that sort
so that we can start meeting the
need because if you're at
capacity on every single program
there's a shortage of not and
we're not meeting the need for
it tend to my last question
madam chair
do you all
work mostly towards getting
students degrees individually
credentials or both how do you
get measured for success by
outcomes
a man chairman of the committee
sent their soles
it's a combination of those
are
our engineering program the
electrical in industrial they
are a credited by a bett
and having that a creditation
gives our students and
opportunity to work with some of
the national labs like send the
year lost alamos
nasa bowing honey well this huge
companies because because they
require
students to intern or for them
to hire a graduate they have to
attend an ebay credit at school
which we are so that really
opens up opportunities for our
students and when they intern we
had send the last week we met
one of our graduates
and she's a electrical engineer
and student.
Where can it send the and sandy
a paid her
for her school to get her
masters agree and the civil
engineering and though she is
really interested in developing
software and now she wants to
study physics and so
when we reach out to these are
entities like that the their the
really what my nordie students
lost alamos last year we had
seven interns over there
and they really
want more and we can you know
give as many as we can the army
research they're here all the
time looking for students
and and so we are doing the best
we can to provide the demand
part and so need it we kept
looking to nab honestly to tell
them look we have you know young
smart you know educated work
force but many times
they would want that they should
have twenty years experience or
something like that but some of
these energies they they they
they crap him you know one day
in turn some of them are they
already have a job before they
graduate and that's how the need
is and many of the fields that
we offer is like that many of
them are gaining employment
right off cdl program I only saw
one graduate the last twenty
five years here because they're
already hired but they don't
come to the graduation
throughout their working as all
you know many of the feels that
we offer or that way so many of
them are still in new mexico
thank you thank you think you
manager
manager if I could also provide
an another example person to
solve.
And we we actually had a student
who first came to you and rolled
us in the automotive program and
then the pandemic hit and he had
to go back and take care of his
grandparents and those with
those who are his own family and
fact the pandemic took his
family both his grandparents he
lost them then he came back
through ntu and enrolled in our
biology program now he's
actually doing a internship with
some harvard university so he's
you know the those are examples
we have many more examples you
know such as that you know
students are you know being
exemplary you know they're all
getting the the the education
that's necessary to come back in
and serve the greater nable
nation so that's just one
example that also the pandemic
afforded us the opportunity to
embark upon them online programs
in fact the higher lenny
commission were the only trouble
college right now that offers
totally online degrees in back
we offer top thirteen of them so
you don't necessarily have to
come to our campuses you can get
your degree online and then the
number of them are are
stimulated as well thank you
thank you senator souls and
thank you committee members any
further
questions come as she know
representative allison
thank you madame chair thank you
doctor guy for an excellent
presentation.
This is an excellent right up
you gave out to us and for my
own colleagues if you read
through it at the intervention
point there is a suggestion or a
request I suggestion in the
forum request how they can help
us
i'm glad that I was able to help
you with
additional
deal doing credit being a member
of the house appropriations I
was able to fight for
resisting the reduction and I
see now how much it has helped
to tribal universities travel
college so I would encourage my
colleagues to continue fighting
to keep what's allocated for
dual crediting so it doesn't get
reduced a couple times they ask
for reduction but we were able
to fight for
a restore to the original
allocations so good job on that
and the
I just think that oh what you
wrote up with a suggestion at
the end of it is good for
my colleagues to nope where they
can help you with that thank you
for an excellent presentation
thank you matter of chair
thank you representative
representative little
good morning thank you madam
chair
good morning president I am
charlotte level I represent
house district sixty eight in
northwest albuquerque and cnm
westside campus is actually in
my district as well
sorry that I missed the urb your
presentation from the beginning
but I really appreciate this
nice synapsis of your
presentation today and the areas
that you're looking for support
mine is the follow up question
madam chair I would I am curious
about how aai.
Is important is incorporated
into the curriculum and and
specifically in the technical
areas and
such as in welding for example
what what is available now where
do you look to go to because as
you were describing madam chair
the
need by industry to have
individuals who are ready and
ready to hit the ground running
basically so i'm wondering how
if you didn't already cover it
how that might be incorporated
into the curriculum here
thank you.
Thank you
madame chairman was the
committee
and representative little
as that american ending or
there is something that we are
working with
we have to develop a policy to
make sure that students don't
cheap using ai
but we use quite a bit of it
with or but that's manufacturing
program so if it's really well
there.
And
last week
where we were meeting with arm
doctor james perry and they
created their own software to
use a ai and they have the
fastest computer there at sender
and so he was telling us that he
used
his system to help him with her
performance evaluations
and so you can use a I in many
ways and how you can ask for
information then and help you
get what every is that you're
trying to help you get
and so many of our students have
access to technology here
and sometimes we were little a
bit about
its like a pandora pandora box I
guess what's the information
gets out you can't put it back
in and so if you're trying to
protect something
that put its out there that
information that you're trying
to protect you may not be able
to get it back and there could
be misused so that's the only
thing that we're concerned about
on the under negative side of ea
but it is something that can
benefit
and we're using that with our
advanced manufacturing at this
point thank you
manager and just curious do you
can you give me a couple of
examples in advance
manufacturing where it's used
i'm just trying to get an idea
of
that
so how that might be used thank
you
representative or maria chairman
representative little as an
example on the u is right now
as loud as resources that coming
to the university are through
grant the various grants and
we're working on how we can
actually sustain.
The programs that benefit is to
through grant opportunities and
are advanced manufacturing has
benefited greatly from
essentially getting the
infrastructure or the investment
initial investment from with
national science foundation nasa
in others but it's also given
this an opportunity to to look
at one developing a holding
company and spinning tech
transfer opportunities that are
studies are working out in
research and investment
factoring one particularly
example is fashioning parts were
bowing in and and we're looking
at additive manufacturing and
the the product itself now if
you incorporate the arm are
official intelligence or aai you
can actually correct as it's
being profit developed the price
it sounds correct impurity so
that you can move for beforehand
would actually have to go to the
whole process of creating it
testing it and then the product
type fails were right now with
the use of a I can actually
adjust you the just sit so that
the end particular is more on
beneficial so our students are
actively learning that that
capability in that capacity and
in fact some of our students are
directly employed by loss almost
national labs and they conduct
their research in their work
here on on our campus at our
advanced manufacturing center
and
lannel was actually developing a
product where they were looking
at developing a heat pace since
her and they couldn't get the
heat to distribute the
adequately across that that that
that you know area but
they send it to our students to
try and replicate but our
stealance actually were able to
actually add to the research and
in provide feedback to them and
they chose to go with and you
use students from design and
they've been incorporated is
that and now it's a product
that.
Landlord provides so that's
another example of how we're
using incorporating ain are in
our technologies.
The.
Thank you representative senator
shandow
thank you medicare president
for your presentation
president guy you mentioned
something about
additional support back upgrade
support what is your breakdown
of your operations right now you
know
the vice presidents talked about
a grants and so forth
can you give us maybe a quick
snapshot of
how your budget is made up what
percentages.
I'm chairman
thank you madame chairman of the
committee are operational
funding
is through the
department of the interior
and that we get about four
million dollars from there
probably one of the law was of
all of the tribal colleges and
universities
and
and then we also get funding
from carl perkins since we're
vocational which says we provide
locational programs
that we get about the same about
four million so that's what we
use for operational funding and
we get a four million dollars
from the nomination on it
and there we use that to support
many of the programs as well
specifically are now a language
and culture programs and that's
how we're running or basher's
masters and phd programs and the
next studies
and then the rest will come from
tuition which is very low or
tuition is that the seventy five
dollars for credit hour
and
so that's what we
work with and that's why we do a
lot of grand writing to to buy
to to higher additional factory
members to buy equipment
to do some research and there
that's all we do has looked for
additional support from federal
grants and that's why it's
really important at the state
the support is with calp out
there and then if there is any
way to support us to with her
operational funding that were
really sustained what we're
trying to do here now
that we see a need we see need.
I'll novel
with for example are we see need
and biology so we do a biology
lab with hard growth and one
semester where do a chemistry
lab the same way we are growing
and so every time when we build
something we are growing no time
because there the need is a so
huge
and so I don't know if I answer
your question and senator but
I resource or very limited thank
you
thank you mister president I
think a matter of short not this
is helpful and I think is me an
idea of what the refunding
sources are and in so forth and
so
it will certainly be thinking
about that is within four I know
that the capital ali you know
you are part of the consortium
with before tribal college is
part of a capitality process
which is good and so her perhaps
maybe the next step is trying to
find some operating dollars and
we'll see what we know
come up with
pretty sure thank you very much
senator madam vice chair pinto
thinking about him chairman
visit the committee thank you
for your presentation of that
you do for communities in our
children
the early childhood education
trustpilot my understanding is
it's more of an economic driver
but I understand there was a
bill to that allowed the tribes
nations and pleblos to enter to
a again with the department
daily childhood department for
programs so I am not sure if
that has actually put every
day's a proposing has to be
supported by nable holdination
so that it's
I think the bill for the igas
was came in to make sure there's
like cultural relevance year and
some kind of language.
Um encompassed in the program
this so we'll try check into
that little bit deep burn out of
the last our secretary to
exactly
how that can be put forward
d
operational funding
it's what i'm curious about too
well actually back to the early
childhood too
cause one of the things we
didn't want to do also was to
jeopardise in economic had start
funding and actually start
discompetition between um and
glitch did the nation with end
up losing their finding because
they see that we're finding you
know so that there's no overlap
so that we just try to make sure
things were separate and
so that the nation wouldn't lose
anything I understand but not
just donation I think public
traps they should some problems
that have received that kind of
money from the federal
government so it's going to be
careful on that one
the
higher education operations and
they equal running into this
with a couple of several
institutions
on operating on the naval when
and i'm not sure with our other
tribes nations and public is we
can build that but after that it
comes becomes
you know the up to the chapter
or some other entity to for the
operation to maintenance so
it member of our set hired
secretary is very very good
roundary guess or let's see if
we can get some more answers on
that one and how we can move
forward that way we actually
know if there has to be
legislation or if it's just
policy or where we can find a
way to
how that works and exactly how
much but I think that shanda was
asking is probably one of the
answers we're gonna need ahead
of that too i'm not just from
ntu but probably donate college
and maybe ebay and th.
I
is how much would they need
whats their operations are
projected how far ahead you know
it's it didn't go into the red
or are the able to be sustaining
on that but I really think are
hired
secretary would be able to
also see how we can as far as
faculty
because I know there was
submissions with that but it was
some of our universities I think
I really became something
internal that the for the
regions are never processes
would have to support two direct
debt pending in particular for
that but I think there was a
short fall there especially when
we talk about our nurses and our
teachers
but thank you for and i'm glad
to make the comment about online
because I think that it's a
central especially after we got
out of covered it is difficult
because we want to make sure
that our students are risk
actually you know getting the
education they need it
a tough one to justify because
we feel that they need to have
to be in the classroom
especially for certain things
with the hands on
I
your romant has gone up
spokeswee and they are really
caution are a higher education
institution to because i've seen
been out to some events and I
seemed at a state schools coming
in sander they're about to open
campuses within the state in the
aid I don't want our our own
institutions within the state
start to lose students to these
schools so I just want a really
make sure where we're meeting
the needs and the at least get a
cheaper head in and the maintain
that better I don't know if you
have any questions for me but
that.
What will I try to do so we can
get some answers back to you and
then it does anything else the
personal
thank you president thank you.
Madame chair members of the
committee sent a repental thank
you for your carmets and
questions
with the headstone program not
the headset program but the
early childhood program
we were hoping to
provide classrooms for students
to be a place to you can
observe them teaching so they
can do a better job
than
with whatever does they're
trying to deliver to the young
and stoop young students.
And that's what we were hoping
to do so to improve our early
childhood program
then the valuation heads though
we know
they need teachers
but they were shut down by the
the head start bureau because
they were didn't have qualified
teachers a few years back and so
that's why we developed the
early challenge or the childhood
program to help them have a
homeless so we have a
partnership with
with the head start program and
that on friday state designated
friday as a teaching day so
that's when
they're staff will come here to
learn about and pursue their
degree and early childhood
education
but we don't really
I don't think we would qualify
for any other headstart funding
it goes to the nab onation so
for us to go it's not a
duplication for us
to
to help us with
to build classrooms that are
needed to prepare our students
better
and then the the online program.
Never hold is not up to capacity
with their broadband
and so we even though we may
have an online program some
communities are not they don't
have access to internet for
example so they have to go to a
nearby community and get online
and so that's why we offer here
a combination some could be on
line that they could have faced
a face class
is a hybrid model so some of the
students are having trouble with
online they can come at least
one day a week and then do the
hybrid course
but some students are fine there
there they they have access to
internet at home and that the
thing is
some of these telecom carriers
their fees are so high to wear
under affordable and for
students especially if they're
not working the fees are very
expensive and that's what we
find and so we try to help
students that pay for some of
their costs so they stay in
school and finished her programs
I then that are romant we we are
saw a drop during covered
and we're now beginning to see
the numbers coming back
last year or romantia was
what alone higher than
precovered numbers so we're
looking forward to this year I
think we'll see an increase
again this year but we really
didn't lose too many students
and
we we kept during the cobud we
kept as many program says we can
open
and
one of the things that really
help us is that our biology
program.
Which is like a premade program
here are biology degree
the curriculum was the
the university of arizona
medical school help us put that
by
program together so it's a
premium type program so
the biology department did all
the cover testing for us
and when the
ice s over here they will not
take non naba holes right so
what we were doing to our own
testing and are at a time when
the the the testing was required
when it was at a peak level you
wait like a week before he get
the results we were getting ours
the same day and that kept our
numbers down and so that's a one
of the benefits I guess of
having different resources like
that on campus you have
engineers you have lawyers your
site so here so it's a really
good resource to have and it
really will look at issues like
that broadband we're trying to
help now and they see with a
broadband plans and that kind of
thing the bottom can be but can
be getting off but
we
were connected you know
operational funding would really
help any any support that we can
get to to pay
for to run our institution
they're like our finance
department or students services
counts the advising that kind of
thing financially you know
always need people in those in
those areas
thank you
I can also expand upon question
central pinto post about online
and how the the resources are to
some degree right now inadequate
across the reservation.
We are working with the narrow
nation in the various carriers
that are within our communities
in fact we found out that really
is the the the electronics
that's already in there in the
infrastructure that these to be
upgraded or enhance and we've
demonstrated that and that's how
we're able to get a hundred gig
here to our captures beforehand
the electronics only supported
one gig but we were able to use
research tied to the front range
getting a pop out of university
of colorado which now is our
sponsor for research education
network since we're higher
education that's a unique
resource affordable to a higher
education so the armony
institutions like you and them
the issue you will be the all
benefit from having access to
internet too and weren't
actually going to be sponsored
in the veteran become in any two
members ourselves but that
allows us then the resources to
a greater extent in those who
know that armond institutions
guiding us to get that capacity
the industry we're trying to
share with the greater now
nation to state like I mentioned
the state education network
that's the gonna be the resource
that's available for the schools
and then around our campus here
the the local and company
carrier actually put a bundle of
fiber into our facility here and
we're gonna actually utilize our
band with to offset costs or
faculty in our students and so
that type of relationship were
collaboration with the carriers
benefits the communities and
then with the various federal
programs you know of the
students can attain the
broadband capacity to the
federal programs that pay for
the majority of the of the
resource so it is it works well
where everyone in is there a
demonstration and it's getting
more more understanding in the
nation is willing to perhaps
grew that.
We're actually working and
doctor guy mentioned our sister
colleges within the state I
suppose the college they they
intern need access to the
research education network and
we will sponsor them we will
provide them that capacity were
working right now to get sippy
you know integrated to that
resource as well as I
and we're also looking to extend
up to saintly and to ship the
connectivity for that for that
cause right now they're only
utilizing commercial internet
and that's very costly through
the incoming carriers but
through the research education
that weren't as way more
affordable so if that's an
example of how we're happy the
nation road to get into their
communities and we do have a
number of assets across the
reservation we benefited from
donations that allow us
infrastructure and that those
assessment turn allows the
ability to collaborate with
income with that once a colo
cade on a tower and then we can
you know help to serve the
greatest student community in
those areas and that's a whole
intent is to get education in
into or the the reserves into
the educational no thank you
the tuitions and fees and books
vice for students that does not
include internet costs.
And there's that category
separate funding when you have
your scholarship money do you
see tuitions books fees but it
does not include internet as we
know and you guys don't have a
day chair here on site or
childhood early child car center
here at interior.
Madame chairman members of the
committee and senator pinto we
have
a a daycare program available
for students and they dropped
their children off and then pick
him up at the end of the day or
when there are a class but the
financial late that students
apply for
usually covers tuition fees
books meals transportation that
they don't really put internet
in there but student support
services we
help students with
transportation and and if we
have resource then we also pay
part of their right internet
fees especially those students
that are taken on line courses
so what we try to do as we try
to accommodate students and
we do programs and between
sessions we call the
intersection courses so that
they fall behind and so then we
have these intersection courses
right after the semester ends
they take a one class to catch
up to stay with her scheduling
and so try to get them graduated
then there so we try
multiple
things and ways to try to
support students to get them
across the finish line and
are staff or
very helpful and trying to
figure out ways to help students
in the best way we can
thank you madam vice chair
representative robot couple
arrow we are getting fifteen
minutes behind schedule so if
you could just wrap us up real
quick thank you.
Thank you madam chair and think
you doctor guy and bice
president for your presentation
I always like to
which i'm he bring your amount
you make the phone closer thank
you
always like the come here
because in to any of our tribal
colleges because they exemplify
our right to self determine and
I think that's really important
I think we need to have more
colleges in university is under
our umbrellas so but I did
notice I have one just one
recommendation not a question
in because it's often ignored
and i'm laughing because
with the noise in the background
and then being hearing impaired
it's not a good combination so
if I look at you and i'm with a
blank block it's because I don't
area so does to let you know but
the reason i'm bringing this up
is because you're making an
improvements for ada and one of
the things that often gets
ignored and I appreciate the
conversation I had with a
hsideology which is the provider
for my hearing arm is that you
have more and more younger
students are having hearing
problems so when you're doing
your ada madam chair are perhaps
and in the new buildings one
thing that gets overlooked even
in our round house and stay
capital and other buildings is
that they are not tea coiled
prepared tea coil is the arm
process that helps individuals
that are hearing and pair that
where here he needs be able to
hear in those buildings without
having to do anything else so
it's already part of the
structural design and it gets
often
very often missed because.
Hearing and pyramid is
associated with all the age or
aging process but hearing
impairment actually is
congenital in some cases
hereditary genetic and so it's
effecting more and more very
under population and if we want
increase so our ability to
provide arm our education to on
a grandeur scale we need to be
conscious of that so I just
wanted to make that
recommendation only because you
did say you were upgrading
aren't to meet
the ada requirements it's it's
not it's written in that it must
be hearing
heariness and sight appropriate
but the teak oil part of it is
not written in and that's
something that gets mouse to and
I would be remiss if I didn't
bring that up because you're in
the beginning stages of doing
all those designs and and
rehabilitation thank you
appreciated and thank you for
your hospitality once again.
Thank you representative did you
have a response
no thank you for the
recommendation that I I guess
it'll work in a home too
it take oil yes the
in housing and new homes that
are being
built that is one of the
considerations it's not really
expensive it's just a mechanism
or process that's built into the
wiring system that makes it
accessible thank you.
Thank you thank you
colleagues and I think doctor
guy and think you jason for your
presentation on behalf of
navigate technical university I
am very proud of our campus here
and I want to thank you for
providing the home for technical
career treats because we know
that our children are community
members are very skilled
talented meticulous and hard
working and they combine their
uh skill with a native american
thought for last fee and
artistry
and also in addition to the app
I see a lot of our students
moving on from this university
to harvard and are those I
really universities so thank you
for doing a good job we
definitely will take note of
your letter your recommendation
you're request and we will do
the best that we can
think you're very much.
And next one our agenda
now the whole dot tom mr one and
only tompli terror and team.
Now
i've been around the tribes so
long that even people that have
met only a few times no me now
so so it happens when you work
for the tribe for almost forty
years
good good morning everyone my
name is tomplatero
touching you start comparison
usually by but are near the
success here the number I am
originally from a small
community in arizona color round
rock I now reside in
outside of gallop in james town
and I work in windors so this is
my second round with the
navigation I was there in the
late two thousand two thousand
eight two thousand ninety
thousand ten and then there was
a change in administration then
this position is the political
point the position so it's not
like you stay as long as you
want to it's as long as whomever
is in charge allows you to stay
so
first of all thank you for the
including the sign your agenda
I wasn't sure what all you
wanted us to present on so we
kind of put a some some slides
together for you
so what I wanted to do was kind
of introduced ourselves to you
and some of the work that were
undertaking I returned back to
never do a t on january first of
this year so we've been there a
little over almost seven months
now
it's been an interesting return
back to come back to something
after you've been away for for
quite a while so it's it's a
little bit different but certain
things are still the same I
think that's true for anywhere
that you work anything that you
do is that something's changed
but some things don't and so
the first light that we have is
just a little bit information on
myself we had our public
information put there I read
this as they this makes me felt
like I could do anything
whatever I want to does that
this sounds waiting nice but I
did work for for the nab honest
and I started out with the heads
up program.
And then I moved on to
work of
community development for a few
months and then answered
transportation and then from
transportation they went to
legislative services and then I
returned back to general
services and then I went to the
arpa office and then i'm now
back a deal team I think one of
the things that having that work
experience with the nable
condition has allowed being to
do is really understand the
administrative side of
operations for the nab whonation
and so a lot of my work has been
in the administrative feel and I
have gained some knowledge of
technical areas
but that's where the next page
are deputy shall be daisy she's
our technical person and so
we've divided it up where I
handled the majority that
administrative functions are
budgets planning
community outreach and she's
more the person that works with
the technical side of it we also
have a were very fortunate to
have a engineer that has been
there for a number of years at
he seems derrill bradley and he
handles all of our federal
highway projects and so
we split it up and one of the
things that I think are the
deputy are missed easy brings is
really a concerted effort to
make sure that the work that we
do
is cognize it of the environment
that we work in or disturb and
so we have her on staff and we
have engineered owns on staff
that are always reminding us
when you're going to do this you
all you have all these
compliance requirements that you
have to do
we just had a resent
question that came up in and I
cut myself incorporating that
into the presentation that we're
doing to send one county utah
that we want to do all of these
projects we want to make sure
that our team
in the compliance section is
aware and make sure that we stay
in compliance with the rules
that are in.
Place so it's it's a really good
cohesive group that were
developing when I came there it
was if you go to the next page
we kind of want to give you an
overview of of where we are
right now and kind of where
we're going i'm the division
person at a deputy a daisy is is
the next in charge we we have a
highway safety section a lot of
that what they do right now is
compliance and out of compliance
but
they issue the the permits for
the travel vehicles of operators
so there's a whole element of
defense of driving that goes in
there what we want that we are
adding a safety officer in that
that that section so that I kind
of permeates the whole
organization and one of the
things that from an
organizational standpoint that
we look at is you shouldn't self
government yourself it should be
somebody else looking from a
different unit not within the
same unit so that's why we
replacing the safety officer
within the highway safety
because a lot of the reviews
that are going to be happening
are going to be in the field
worked as coming so we separated
out so that it's not you're the
boss you made the mistake i'm in
the same unit as you so that's
kind of how we're approaching it
as a separation of duties so
that we make sure that people
are able to freely speak and and
provide the analysis that they
need to without without the
fully late that's my boss and
that's my co worker how am I
going to do this so that's kind
of how we're setting that up the
transportation planning thing re
have recently been able to hire
additional planners
previously there have only been
three planners for the entire
name honest we've doubled that
now to six we have one vacancy
that's left over that's the
section that takes care of the
inventory information which is a
direct correlation to the
federal highway funding that we
receive and so we're updating
all of that one one of the
things that we've learned in the
last six months is there is
really a lot of
funding availability out there.
But we have to kind of work a
little bit on internal capacity
to get the right kind of
technical knowledge that we need
so that we can go after these I
think our biggest hurdle right
now is trying to get a pass the
complaints section of it so one
of the things that i've re
learned is that a real project
that you want to do you have to
start with the planning side of
it then you move into the
compliance side of it then you
go into the design of it then
you go into the construction of
it than after the construction
you go into the maintenance of
it and so it's been a challenge
to try to get past that
compliance section i'll show you
slide a little bit later on that
kind of kind of
picture provides a better
picture of where we are others
projects that happen so the
planning section has really
becoming a long wait one of the
things that we did within the
first four months of us coming
to nab is with it and outreached
to all the one hundred and ten
chapters so we actually had a
meeting where i'll all the
chapters within nable who were
allowed an opportunity to meet
our management team
and also to kind of introduce
ourselves we were very fortunate
that we got seventy five of the
hundred and ten to come so that
was the high percentage I
thought for some for our first
time effort it also was an
opportunity for the community to
express themselves on this is
what we are expecting some of
the needs that we have some of
the challenges that we have and
it really
provided us a good basis to go
back and
analyze some of the needs that
the community level I think
sometimes when we get into a
position where we're in the
winter rock level we just
concentrate on up here but we
actually went to the community
and so one of the things that
really came out and surprised me
was we placed so much emphasis
on school bus routes yet there's
an equal name for making sure
that the transportation for the
elderly are addressed.
And so we have a lot of older
people that need to get to the
food places that need to get to
the social limits that need to
get to doctors appointments that
we have never formulated in
which is now something that
we're going to be reworking on
the planning side of it to say
instead of just concentrating on
the schools let's concentrate
also on how we can collect the
data from the services provide
to the elderly within a one
hundred ten communities so that
becomes an element of it so that
becomes an element of what we're
doing if I if I love of the dog
allowed you to have not a little
bit so I can I can speak up a
little bit i'm i'm horrible at
that time you get queues from
everybody and stuff like that
you guys kind of remind me of
the first time that I was at dot
I went to go meet with the
arizona dot people and does that
come down to sit down with us
and I walked in it was a victim
and as at that point he was a
director for dot and he brought
all his department heads and I
would like but twenty people of
the room for so to do a t like
show up by myself so i'm
learning so I brought two people
with you this time so we're
actually tending to learn learn
the dynamics are presenting to
these type these type of
to these type of events so the
next one is the transit program
transit right now our biggest
challenges trying to recruit
drivers
we transition over from what I
understand it used to be on
charter services and set routes
now we were basically said it
just was set routes but one of
the things that we wanted to
incorporate is we want to set up
routes to support access to
higher education so we want to
make sure that people that go to
sound one college that goes to
naval technique first to go to
the net college that go to
northern piner college to go to
cooking you know community
college have access to go back
and forth from home to the
schools so that's one thing that
are new transit director coven
castell he came over from b I a
is working on setting up those
mechanisms so that we support
education without transit system
and one of the things that we
want to do and we'll be footage
talking to him about is.
When we get those routes went up
we need to make sure there's
internet available on those
buses so people can do their
homework on the way or read up
on some things that the way so
that doing the transit thing
rather than just sitting there
they have access to internet
services to do with different
types of work that could get
there and we kind of model that
after how you guys have the the
new mexico dot has the the
trains I lived in all the cookie
for a while night we used to
just write the train to get out
of town you know go up there you
get offered the train thing and
you go a little ways have some
dinner and take the train back
just to get out of alba cookie
and so do that how at that
wouldn't be kind of cool if they
had internet on here so you
could have all of that so we
kind of transition that over to
their transit system to say the
students that are there the
people that are going to work
they should be able to internal
access to internet so that it's
it's a working
invitement for them while there
is instead of just sitting there
time to get somewhere so that
was one of the things that we're
trying to put up in there one of
the things that were working on
really is this that's what the
executive were china transition
from working in sailors to
working across sections within
dot and one of the things that
we're doing is the executive
because a high concentration of
the work that we do is with a
federal highway money that we
receive we're putting a lot of
the underneath here so we have a
federal highway money here and
all of the other pockets of
money that are here but we
centralized it within the
executive side of it because
what we learned in meeting with
our main contractors which is
neckar that's going to be per
providing presentation next we
have a contract arizona with a
devil that's our engineering
firm a contract with a wilson
out of new mexico was our turn
around time in making payments
on invoices we were about
during twenty days past two we
are now less than forty five
days and the reason that we
needed to bring that down was
because the never hose there are
subcontractors to these prime
contractors.
Don't get paid and tell the
prime contractor gets paid and
so when you're doing a hundred
and twenty days who wants to
wait that long to get paid for
the work that you do so we've
really been were able to work
internally and with the nab
honestly finance section to
bring it down to forty five days
where are goal is to stay keep
it there is so it's a lot of
creating systems in place to
make sure that we get to where
we need to go faster and more
efficiently than we've done it
in the past so it's a lot of
partnering a lot of meetings a
lot of sharing of information a
lot of reaching out the people's
we need these processed a little
bit faster so it's been a really
good partnership and the really
cool part about it is now
finances beginning to understand
this we're going to be the very
first trip that they're going to
experiment with them direct
purchasing for amazon I have a
meeting at three thirty so we're
kind of excited we're like the
first time will department
that's going to be able to order
things with amazon without
having to go through the whole
tribal process and that was only
done because we're able to meet
with these people with the
finance people on regular basis
nearly you're setting internal
controls you're implementing
separation of duties all of
these things that are needed to
make sure that you comply with
the financial section of it so
they're actually using us to
test pilot that project so
that's kind of call that we have
the federal highway section of
that's going to be expanding
within the next year to be on
one or mister bradley to
additional staffing for him
we've separated out the federal
highway projects from the non
federal highway projects which
includes a state funding that we
receive are through the
appropriation process for new
mexico we receive funding
through the internal fuel excise
tax program we receive funding
through
we did receive some arpo money I
was I read your arm new
Which is kind of called because
that's the money addition to the
base money that we get we were
also very fortunate to get
twenty million additional
dollars in general fund money
this year so I appropriate this
is going to be eighty nine
million which has been kind of
an are you time high for us
working with all of these things
that are there so the cool part
about it is we are we are
getting the funny thing in there
now we just have to create the
internal mechanism to support
those so there is a more
efficiency in the process to get
these funds expendite so I also
look at your roger the you guys
have made so dealt he has two
hundred fifty two thousand five
hundred employees your annual
operating budget is about one
to one point eight billion you
have ninety active projects at
one point two billion so when
you look at new mexico and and
never hook the t guys are like
that would you collect that big
jay again david and galley you
guys have a alliance where david
here so who you compare it's
it's kind of it's it's it's a
interesting to try to interest
understand that dynamics of it
one of the things that we also
separate within the re
organization is administration
what we want to do was set it up
so that everybody needs
administration to push certain
things and so we're trying to
set that out we're trying to set
a counting section their
personnel section of finance
section a property section of
fleet management all of those
within that section to go across
the whole nab when the roads
department is going to be the
majority of my presentation I
know I have forty five minutes
i'll try to go through this is
quicker than I can but I think
it's it helps you to understand
our organization so that when
you ask you know we need help
with this you understand how it
fits in that whole dynamic of it
so the roads department the big
thing that we're doing is we're
trying to we will these
centralise that operation then
we judge if it had come out of a
few locations but we're trying
to decentralize it so then it's
for closer to the community so
one of the things that we heard.
From a communities were we did
the outreach was that it takes
so long for your people to get
there by the time they get there
they only work for a little bit
of time and then they have to
get back so if the work site is
closer to the communities it
will allow them to spend
additional time on there and if
we concentrate if we need them
to work at the showers it's less
costs actually to have them
closer to pay them the few hours
of extra over time than to have
them travel back and forth so
that's going to be that the
section that will be presenting
you on the airport management we
do have airports in count point
and
shiprock under new mexico we are
going to be expanding services
in that area so we have a full
time person at each of those
airports right now all of that
is handle through window rock
but we want to make sure that
somebody's available on site at
each of these airports so that
we're excited about that that's
going to be coming with our
twenty five funding the last one
is the compliance section this
is the part where we really need
to partner with the
schools a hotel education things
are we actually have a bottom
graduate student on intern with
us for the summer so we're
trying to ask all of these
things about what it what should
we do the western we do that and
I think they kind of getting
excited because they get to go
out and actually do fill work
with some of the staff that are
there the recruitment for that
is going to be difficult because
everybody's trying to look for
those staff with the technical
experience and education
qualifications so that can be a
bit of a challenge for the next
one if you go to slides over
because running out of time is
that this is the total mileage
by ownership that would do with
the navigation this slide here.
So what never hodot has to work
with is northern agency as a new
mexico western agencies and
arizona eastern is all in new
mexico are central is majorities
in arizona forty five is
participant arizona new mexico
new lenses on the artist on a
side nip is
outside of farmington so the
total mileage that we work with
would be a six thousand fifty
two miles one of the things that
we identified during our
community outreaches the the
pave rules that are maintained
by ba haven't been striped in
four years or seven years so
when the communities were
presented to us the elderly
people were like we drive by
those stripes you need to work
with ba to help us get those the
costs to restrict the roads on
the navigation excees the entire
budget allocated to be a for one
year it gets about eight million
to restrict all of these is is
is a little bit more than the
eight million dollars and there
so if we took the entire ba
budget just to restrict the
roads on the navigation it would
take their entire budget
so that's what the cost
challenges that we're working
with we did me with a couple of
individuals washington they're
trying to help us to remedy that
because we want to come up with
a plan where the roads are
restrict at least every two
years because the stuff that
that really works is the one
that doesn't stick as long and
so we we that's one of the areas
that we are trying to work with
the next route that we're
working on is this five thousand
one hundred and sixty five point
seven miles these are the roads
when people on the outside I
tried to explain to them it's
what dirt road do I get to a
county road so they can get from
the county road to the state
paved or be a paid roads so it's
an interconsistent i'll try to
maintain those and the majority
of the tribal roads either roads
that we need to get there and
part of our education when we
did the community outreach was.
Each part of the reservation has
different challenges
what we found that is the
settlement there's certain areas
of the reservation that are
settlement when the dirt when
the water moves it actually cars
away the roads that are there so
we're constantly here's the road
we got a really good range yeah
we got reading we need it rain
that is like oh crap our road is
gone now we have to move it
about thirty feet this
when you move thirty feet that
way that then requires a whole
new steady of that too actually
put those in there so the real
limit of roads is where the
compliance portion of it comes
into play so that's where our
biggest change is within the
next year is going to be to
locate closer to these so that
we can get people to the rose
that are going to be there the
state routes that are there is a
one thousand six hundred and
fifty nine point eight miles
county roads one thousand five
hundred and two other roads of
one hundred thirty so we work
with fourteen thousand five
hundred and ten miles for the
naval honest new mexico dot has
twelve thousand two hundred and
seventy two miles so never hope
little never who here remember a
little david they don't david is
dealing with four thousand miles
when galiath has twelve thousand
wales which is two thousand less
with the budget that is in the
billions where we're talking to
low millions here a navigation
tea so I think that I kind of
help you I understand the
challenges that we work with to
try to get the services that are
out there the next slide is is
by it by agency again it's just
a graph of it the next slide is
there I think that maintain that
that we are asking for your help
with as we really need to
develop road maintenance yards
and so for new mexico were
proposing where working on white
horse lake which is a little bit
out of town here going to go
back to alva cookie you'll pass
it it's right there we're
looking at not easy.
Or looking at newcome we're
looking at breadsprings and mary
on a lake so all of those
communities are scattered in
places so what we did is we
actually provide you guys a map
this is a thirty air miles from
each of those locations to see
how many miles that would
actually cover so if you take a
look at the very first one
which is white horsely there's
nine hundred and ten nine
hundred and ten point zero or
nine hundred and ten miles
in that area if you look at now
easy there's nine hundred and
sixty seven miles when you look
at mary on a lake
or new com i'm sorry that's one
thousand four hundred and sixty
four miles so one of the things
that we had to look at and so
this is where the gis analyst
ports and came in as where do we
locate these so they are located
closest to that and so again the
system of the dirt roads to get
to a county road to get to a pay
ba or road so but you have to
remember all of these are school
bus route children all of these
are senior citizens that live
way out there to try to get to
the services that are there a
few years back when when I was
with deal to the first time one
of the things will be trying to
get funding for four ninety one
was the chair of the
transportation committee goes
now the whole you don't pay
taxes why should we find your
foreign nineteen and so I took
it in we had we had a really
smart kid on on on staff that
did the research new mexico did
a
commission the university of new
mexico to do research are never
hose impact on the economy for
new mexico and that research
found that the communities of
gallop the communities are
farming ten and to a certain
extent the community of alba
cookie would not have the tax
base that they have without the
naval dollar so we don't pay the
the tack while I peer car they
live off the reservation by the
majority of our people that
because where else are we going
to buy certain things.
Where are we going to buy your
cars where are we going to like
that yours your sale that's
coming up next week you know
where are we going to buy the
close for the schools where are
we gonna buy the the classroom
materials as school supplies
there are kids need this time of
years those are all located in
new mexico communities that are
economic centers where that
navigate tax dollar comes from
so the steady found that those
communities would not have the
economic position they have
without the now nation dollar so
the that's that is pretty much I
ask I think i'm running out of
time my time keeper over there
is like you only have a few per
minute set up so
the last thing that I wanted to
share with you is this
this sheet is the might federal
highway money that we get this
is for the projects one of the
things that I had to learn what
relearn what when I came back to
the oties this finding is from
two thousand and fourteen to two
thousand twenty three now
remember your annual
appropriation for projects for
infrastructure is
one point two billion a year
between two thousand and
fourteen and two thousand twenty
three nab honation as a toral
got three hundred and forty nine
million
that is years new mexico dot in
one year gets one point eight
one point two billion so there's
a vast difference of what of
what we need to do there will
you appreciate the work that you
guys do are from the state we
just need to kind of work
together to kind of understand
each other and that's where I
think part of our job is how do
we get people in a position to
help front of these projects to
really understand the
environment that naval who has
to deal with so that's where our
ask is we will not will ask you
for your support to help us
develop these wrote maintenance
yards with we think we have the
money to sustain it long term
you know after we build it how
will they maintain it that we
can handle it's just getting the
up.
Front cost of start up costs two
get these wrote meeting as
programs into operation so I
wanted to make some time for
questions they know you have
questions so i'll go on head and
them yield the floor back to the
chair for any questions you may
have
thank you mr
representative allison
thank you
a number of questions
in my district district for
which is
northwestern mexico
i've had three major projects
highway projects the first being
the intersection and ship rock
the intersection going towards
court is farming and then north
that was over first big project
the second project is the
deceleration and accelerate the
lanes
the casino in hard back right
now the project that i'm working
on his highway sixty four
highway sixty four has been an
eye and I opened her and
experience it itself
I have learned that
I have learned about the
bureaucracy of the never who
nation
government and
it has not been a place and
experience working with an evil
homation government on the
highways
we finally got got the highway
sixty four have started
after experiencing
no companies to bid on that
highway project and then the
second time they been on it it
was highly overbid so we had to
break up the project in order to
get any work started but before
we got there we went through so
much
I could put the record see.
Right of ways leases getting
those clear it took so many
months maybe even the years it
took me years i've been in the
legislature for five and a half
years now and we just barely
start working on that highway
sixty four
and
in your need my older fee there
was a key word that jumped out
at me in your biography that key
word is participatory approach
i'm glad to hear that you have
that participatory approach that
means you're willing to work
with everybody
okay i'd like to share with you
and not that I can from new
mexico dot I worked very very
closely with new mexico dot and
they cooperate with me well
because because I would be house
appropriations committee and
they know that they're going to
ask for any funds they are going
to have to go through me so
whatever they need help they
usually contact me
I would like to share with you
and email work for word I am
some of the projects that is
pending
in my constitute and see
people are always asking for a
road
construction road improvements
one of the big projects that
i'm on a reference to is the
road way around ship rock high
school
and bad weather we have students
that are treading in the month
and they're forced to work walk
on the road way when they see
oncoming traffic get back into
the month okay so we put a big
priority on that project and i'm
on a share with you that the
limit that i'm facing with this
is a word for word oh
emails from the mexico dot.
It says good afternoon
representative allison
two years ago you kindly help
near mexico dot obtain
environmental permits from two
unresponsive never whom they
send regulatory agencies which
allowed us to finally make
headway with a rate away
acquisition and construction of
the us sixty four arizona ship
rug high reconstruction and
improvement project
once again I am reaching out to
you for a similar assistance on
the mexico dot sixty four chip
rock schools project that's
around the high school
which will make
needed improvements to sidewalks
per trainers lading and roadway
congestion and safety
for this project we have
repeatedly
And left message and several
numbers eventually somebody
eventually reached someone who
said
david may sec at the never home
nations zoo was filling in and
we should call him call david
and left message no return
response
on march the twelfth call david
again and left another message
again the response parts of the
twenty first call david again
and left another message no
response
april the fifth received an
email from catherine kathleen or
visa at never who
natural heritage program
indicator cf is ready and but
they needed fee payment although
we submitted a proof of fee
payment with our original
application and are repeated
emails we send it again
again they'll respond
never when they send historical
preservation department november
the tenth twenty twenty two
the mexican dot initiate
consultation where the richard
began tribal history
preservation officer
january twenty second twenty
twenty four
new mexico dot e mail and
updated cultural report and
formal consultation requests to
richard began no
For assistance and environmental
agency concurrence please
contact me and this was
submitted to me by a stephen
giesler then it mexico tea and
where a middle bureau
I hope with your participary
artist victoria approach you
will respond to some of the
cause is people have been asking
for
I think some of the delays and
the projects is because of the
bureaucracy and the
sixty four process that nation
has
maybe that could explain some of
the funding issues that you have
or you are not getting a
what you feel is adequate
sending maybe the issue is with
our now who mission departments
so I just needed to share that
with you because when I called
mr gistler he had not received
too many responses here and he
still waiting and in the
meantime my constituency and the
ship right area want to know
what's going on when are the
same is going to be installed
around the ship
chip high schools the kids don't
have to walk and went during wet
weather you're in the winter
weather and so forth
that is my first question my
first comment
okay and then also my second
project is the northern edge of
intersection or three seventy
one and in thirty six me we were
supposed to install oh traffic
lights there
we install the powerful new
mexico the ot installed a power
three years ago
Started experiencing issues with
cattle guards cattle guards
filling up with dirt and some of
them they even show pictures of
trees growing out of cattle
guards and the state according
to their statue cannot do
anything for cattle and
maintenance so whose
responsibility is it can the
network on this is the ot help
the land owners because not
every land owner has as a bank
hold to
clean up the count or itself
just a few questions and I know
it's probably going to take
your answers is probably gonna
take us all the way to lunch
time so thank you for allow me
to question his matter of chair.
Medicare members of the
committee
representatives of also on this
first part
we are beginning to make headway
with those processes because
even internally were
experiencing the same thing you
were but we are now able to get
water permits out a lot faster
than we were before so that's a
fusion of the two individuals
that I had talked about the new
deputy and the new director of
department manager for
compliance we are more than
willing to work with you to get
these through on the bat last
page is our contact information
forward me that and I will sign
somebody on my staff to assist
you with that process so we're
more than willing to help with
you in fact while years back
when but I was a deal the first
time there was the flooding
remember out of side of tohati
going towards gallop and we're
able to work with natural
resources to allow new mexico
dot to disturb an area outside
of the right away so they could
make those corrections for the
water cut flow and agree that we
meet with natural resources was
that we were complete the
compliances after its done but
that the repairs need to be done
right away so we are more than
willing to help with that and
doesn't contact me and i'll have
somebody on my staff assist with
that on the northern education
i'll governments have processes
that they have to work with in
this case that not northern edge
three seventy one thirty six
there had to be a
reappropriation process which
isn't just a decision that the
department makes you had to and
act legislation to do that
process so that it was a real
occasion of the fuel excited tax
for the never honest which was
sponsored by delegate are danny
simpson it was approved and now
that the the money is being
moved from this account into
this account once that process
has completed then we have to
internet to an igamilar to the
iga that we have to into when
you appropriate those moneys to
naval.
For us to get the money to new
mexico so we are in that process
of changing the accounts we are
in contact with the
gaming has really been pushing
this I think my third day on the
job this was the one of the
first projects that they came
the finding is situated as soon
as that transfers made then we
entered into their agreement
with it and then we can transfer
the funds to new mexico so
that's the process for that on
the beer a versus never who
routes question a lot of it is
and inherit its system
most tribes at some point had
complete control with the bia
that's transitioned over
never hold now has all the
control over the construction
which is the funding that I sold
it the federal highway money
that might be that we get has to
be stretched up between road
improvement reconstruction of
existing roads and construction
of new roads so the if we want
to run fed thing along a route
it's considered
construction if we want to
install lights it's considered
instructions
construction we can't take
maintenance money and put it
into a construction project
because the federal highway
money is restricted to
activities on it for roads that
are the inventory fuel excess
taxman is restricted to roads
that actually meet the
definition of the public road
within the parameters of fuel
lexis tax so it depends on the
source of the money and how that
can be done but the three
seventy one has done the ba
routes are done of the
construction forces often
transferred to naval we are we
just met with the b I a two
weeks ago then the acting
regional director that
surely and she is willing to
work with us to improve
relationships on that on the
cattle good question it's really
a question of who has the right
away I know that about a month
ago you had an incident on five
fifty I where somebody worked
out like seven or eight.
Oh cows on the road and it was
because of that very incident
that's on a state route so
really never who can't go onto
the state route unless we have
some sort of agreement that
allows us to insure those i'll
give you an example I worked at
general services a few years
back and write the interest into
windork we were trying to clean
up the trash in the weeds done
with the the tree that you're
talking about we're trying to
clean it out from general
services because we're
facilities but we got chase off
of it because it be a that's our
route you can't touch it so
there has to be agreements that
are mate that will allow for the
provision of this manager thank
you mr representative block and
then representative i'll come
we're behind schedule so
represented a block thank you
madame chair and thank you so
much for being here today I
proceed
so I just have one question real
quick I don't know how quick
it'll be I I try to be quick but
The vision is that we will like
include it in the transportation
of your authorization that
that's about two years out but
were preparing those contacts
now to allow that the majority
of why were in the situation
where and is doing the last
transportation reauthorizations
there were revisions made to the
distribution of formula before
never almost received double the
amount that we received now but
through the changes in the
distribution formula of that the
distribution form and all honest
is is is is rolling numbers
multiple times so it is
something that we're already
approaching and that we already
trying to get the changes made
so it's it's a legislative the
rules are made within the re
authorization act so that's
where we have to begin the
process of making those changes
sir
thank you madam chair that I had
thank you thank you represented
a black representative allison
represented a welcome my good
neighbor thank you madame chair
representative of the took how
my time anyway my question is
the slip possible who nation can
work with the schools to get the
school bus route chipped and
feel like the country to do.
The.
Medam chair members of the
committee it is possible it's
just finding the resources
available to do those projects
chips silly on the nab honest
and runs I believe about four
hundred thousand a mile so if
you have a school bus route that
has thirty miles you take that
thirty towns or that's
twelve million dollars for
twelve miles of road and so it's
it's a cost
the difficulty and doing
projects are naval is the
majority of the materials or
important from after reservation
so that's where one of the
things that were concentrating
on right now is expanding our
ability to get materials closer
to home which includes trying to
develop aggregate material sites
within the nab so it is possible
because I know that don't mean
care I do rule that the
country's they apply to the
state the state gives the money
said they can chip and see all
the but suburbs routes and
believe it or not the
disless campaign
over up my truck roaring through
the never home nation that was
pretty bound to
happen everything that shook up
as we were driving around but I
just thought about that because
a lot of those router
school worses are over all over
the place so that's just by
thinking thank you very much
thank you representative alcohol
I don't see any more of my
colleagues and listed to to ask
questions I just want to thank
you mr clinton for your
presentation
madam vice chair has a question
thank you
actually matter metal chair
members in the commute not
because more of a comment
because I think we're here
really when to try to help you
so we can help the people within
that affected with their roads.
So hopefully i'm gonna request
if we can't have you come back
especially with what allies
since concerns are and then we
can probably take some questions
off lane and send you a little
memorial about what other
questions we have are concerned
and then we can come back and
you can probably help us assist
cause I know that it's public a
million dollars a mile now that
we're not in the thousands but
think you thank you for your
presentation
thank you absolutely so we will
will work together will work
with nicole and uh will schedule
another meeting and then have
you back to present ended once
again thank you so much
lees ladies and gentlemen we are
scheduled now for a lunch break
and tell one fifteen I believe
we are hosted by and you
and other housekeeping
announcements
this evening they're now the
honest is sponsoring or dinner
at fire rock casino at five
thirty so that's a just keeping
you fed as we go along
