Actor and investment advisor of
the Small Business Investment
Corporation.
and uh we'll go ahead with uh
Mr. Cummins.
Madam Chair, is that too loud?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
inviting me to be here today and
I'm very pleased to
provide an update on what we're
doing.
I'll jump right into the
presentation, I believe, I
believe you have the handout,
um.
and um
um, so we're talking about the
small business Investment
Corporation
Um, it was formed in 2001 by the
small business Investment Act.
and uh Senator John Kidd was the
sponsor
and uh that was in the 2000
legislative session.
Um, and we go by, we go by the
um New Mexico small business
Investment Corporation or the
NMSBIC.
Um, we are a nonprofit
corporation created by the
legislature.
So we're not an agency for any
purpose.
and um it's a unique structure,
I think that gives us some
flexibility, I think that is
helpful to us.
Our purpose is to make
investments and loans through
cooperative partner agreements.
to create new job opportunities
and support new and expanding
businesses in New Mexico.
And and something about the the
NMSBIC. I sometimes I refer to
our organization as a virtual
company.
Um, we don't have an office. We
don't have any employees. I'm an
independent contractor that
works for the organization.
and, and the idea is to try to
keep our overhead low, and then
uh, the taxpayer dollars that we
get, we want to pass those to
the small businesses without
having a lot of, a lot of
organizational overhead.
Um, on page 3, we are funded by
an allocation from the severance
tax permanent Fund.
and um Senate Bill 10 and the
2019 legislative session was
sponsored by Senator
Carlos Cisneros
What uh, what that did is it
doubled our allocation. It had
been 1% before.
and in 2019, our allocation was
doubled and increased to 2%.
of the severance tax permanent
fund. Now, we, we don't get 2%
every year. That's a one-time
allocation of 2%.
Uh, but what happens is if the
severance tax permanent fund
grows and it has been growing,
then we get 2% of that
incremental growth in the fund.
And so it's a, uh, it's a
one-time allocation of 2% of the
severance tax permanent fund,
and our current assets we are
currently at $184 million in
assets.
Um, if you turn to page 4,
this is our board of directors.
and uh you can see the uh state
treasurer, Laura Montoya is on
our board, the state treasurer
has a permanent seat on our
board.
and the other um 6 board members
are appointed by the governor
and confirmed by the Senate.
Um, over the years, I'm on page
5 now, over the years, we've
developed and refined a lending
program.
for small businesses that don't
have access to traditional bank
loans.
and uh we may venture capital
when we started in 2001, we made
venture capital, equity
investments. We don't do that
anymore. Our focus is on small
business lending.
and uh we feel that there is a
tremendous need for small
business loans throughout our
throughout New Mexico.
chart below, it shows the red
bars, which are very small, you
can see those are old venture
capital equity investments.
that have been declining, and
then the blue bars are are small
business loans, and you can see
they have been growing.
um a little bit of history of
the organization. It started in
2001, and um for the first, uh,
about 6 years through 2007, the
organization made about $32
million in venture capital
equity investments.
and the organization lost about
half of its money in those
investments.
Uh, very big losses
and um uh in 20 2010 and 2011.
the uh state Investment council
made a recommendation to the
governor, um, Susannah Martinez
at the time, who, um, the, the
State Investment council made a
recommendation to replace the
entire board and to hire new
executive director, and that
that is in fact what happened.
And so 2011, the organization
got an all-new board of
directors. Now these are, these
are new directors even since
then we've had some turnover
since 2011, uh, but we got an
all new board of directors and
then in 2012, the new board
hired me.
and so that's when I started
with the organization and the
task they gave me was to
increase the organization's
lending program, and so that's
what I've been focused on, and
when I started in 2012, we had
$8 million in small business
loans, and now we have
$108 million in small business
loans, so we have been growing
the small business lending
programs.
Um,
page 6
um, you know, the
we
the, we had the Great Recession
that started in 2008.
and um when that happened, we
saw banks across the country and
in New Mexico, yes.
Did you send this to our staff.
I did.
We
take a minute to see if we can
get this up.
Estock.
Just give us one second.
Just give us about 2 seconds.
to see if we can get it up for
the public's view.
Pardon me.
Oh
page 6, manager.
OK, folks, looks like we're back
in business here.
Um, we're on age 6.
Go ahead, Mr. Cummings.
Madam Chair
Um
on page 6, there's a chart. It
shows that uh
uh after the Great Recession
that started in 2008.
that uh
uh the banks, um loan to deposit
ratio declined, so there were
less loans for every deposit
they took in. You can see it was
over 88% back in 2008. It's
dropped to around 60% and has it
still has not recovered and we
believe this is created a uh a
lending gap for small businesses
in Mexico and uh we are, we are
working to try and help fill
that gap.
Um.
on page 7.
um,
so, uh, the NMSBIC, we are not a
direct lender.
Uh, what we do is we work with
lending partners.
to originate and service small
business loans.
the lending partners are
primarily community development
financial institutions, uh,
commonly referred to as CDFIs.
Um, just, and, um, so some of
our CDFI partners include the
New Mexico Community Development
Loan Fund, known as the Loan
Fund.
uh Vanama Fund, Clearinghouse,
Dream Spring, which used to be
Axion.
uh Homewise and West.
the CDFIs, they're mostly
nonprofit corporations.
and they receive their CDFI
designation from the United
States Treasury.
They received some grants and
loans and charitable
contributions, but that funding
is, is substantially less than
what they need.
to meet the demand for small
business loans in New Mexico,
and so what we've done is we've
partnered with uh the nonprofit
lenders around the state.
provide them with a source of
funding that they can use then
to do the hard work of helping
these small businesses get
started and grow.
I think it's important to note
in that last bullet.
that our CDF5 lending partners.
they are not competing with
banks, and in fact they are
partnering with banks, um, most
of them have bankers on their
board of directors.
and uh most of the loan
referrals.
of the CDFIs receive are coming
from banks, and so a customer
might walk into their local
banker and want to get a small
business loan and the banker
realizes they're not quite ready
for traditional bank loan.
and they refer those customers
to CDFIs to help them get
started and grow.
Um, what happens many times,
they're a customer of the CDFI
for 2 or 3 years.
and then are able to go back to
the bank and get a bank loan,
which is exactly what we want to
see, we like to see, like seeing
that happen.
Um, on page 8.
uh this shows our different
lending partners and the amount
committed and the amount
outstanding and so I you know
I'd like to explain the
difference between those two.
Uh what we do is when we receive
additional funding, and we've
been receiving additional
funding each year from the
severance tax permit fund
because the fund has been
growing.
seeing funding, we then um make
commitments to our different
lending partners, and, and what
we're doing is we're meeting
with them on a regular basis and
we're looking at
what's their track record in
deploying funds and what
resources do they have and and
um
uh and and so we're making
decisions about how to allocate
funds to our different lending
partners
We make commitments to them, and
then once we've made it a
commitment to the lending
partner, those lending partners
can go out and start taking
applications and um
um underwriting loans,
originating loans, and so they
get the commitment first and
then they work to fill up the
commitment when they get close
to 90 or 100% of filling up the
commitment and we look at
allocating more funds, and so,
uh, these, these commitment
amounts and loan amounts are
growing, but the commitment is
always larger than than the loan
amount.
Um, you can see that uh at the
top of the list, we have the
loan fund with a commitment of
37.5 million, they've got 31
million in loans outstanding.
um, Ventana fund is our next
biggest partner with 34 million
committed and we are, they are
coming back to us, uh, they said
they'll be ready in October to
come talk to us about asking for
additional funding.
Uh, they're getting close to
their, their, uh,
um
total commitment amount, uh
clearing house CDF 5, we just,
they, they, uh, we had 20
million committed and they
filled that.
up to the top, and so we just
allocated another 10 million to
them and they're working on
filling that new 10 million that
they've just received.
Uh, we have, um, RVC Global
Asset Management. That's a
different program. This is not a
CDFI, um
RBC Global Asset Management has
an impact, um, infesting.
uh division, and what they are
doing is they are acquiring
small business administration,
SBA loans that are in BPOC areas
and with white po borrowers so
they're creating pools of SBA
loans and that we are purchasing
those pools of loan. So that's
a, that's a different type of
investment that we're doing.
Um
Is uh has a uh is, is uh uh um
CDFI based in Santa Fe. They
also have an office in
Albuquerque and, and um we've
got 16 million with them and
then some, some and drink Spring
is one of our original lending
partners. We've got 7 million
committed to Dream Spring.
They've got 3.5 million
outstanding. Sore brings a
significant lending partner with
the dollars aren't as big
because they do very small loans
to help small businesses get
started. And so, you know, this,
if if a landscaper needs a
lawnmower to to start a
landscaping business
that's, you know, they'll
they'll look at that type of
loan, so that's why you don't
see the big dollars, but there
are lots of loans, and, and I
think a very big impact
happening during spring.
And then um we have some other
investors um at the bottom. I,
I'd like to move on to page 9
and talk a little bit about some
of the differences
in uh what our lending partners
do.
At the top of page 9, you can
see the loan fund, they're doing
small business loans
These are, these are mom and pop
loans. It might be.
you know, a restaurant, it might
be a trucking company in in
Hobbs, it might be, uh, you
know, it's a very wide range of
companies, uh, their average
loan size is about $130,000
and um and I think what's
important to note about all of
these CDFI partners.
is they're not just providing
loans. They're also providing
these businesses with technical
assistance, and I'll, I'll go
into more detail about that, but
they're helping these businesses
get started with the technical
assistance as well as loan
dollars.
We have a Ventana fund. Uh, we
started with a relationship with
Ventana Fund in 2019 in Tanafon.
is a spin-off from the New
Mexico mortgage Finance
Authority.
and uh the uh refer to housing
in Mexico now is their new name,
and Housing New Mexico felt that
there were some loans that were
too small or outside of what
they could do. And so they
created this spin-off CDFI.
um, in, uh, around 2014 and we
started doing business with them
in 2019. You know what, Ventana
Fun's doing is interesting they
are um locating rundown,
multi-family properties that are
5 to 20 units. So that's smaller
than what housing New Mexico
will do.
And there are lots of these
units around the state. There
are lots of these properties
around the state a lot of times
the the owner and landlord that
had it before, they were, they
were collecting the rents, but
not putting money back into
keeping the property livable.
And so Ventanaun is working with
landlords who are purchasing
these properties and making
significant improvements, not
just a coat of paint, but really
significant improvements,
including energy efficiency in
energy efficient improvements.
and um really making these
properties livable and uh and
what Ventana has noted is taking
these existing units and
bringing them up to livability
is a lot cheaper and a lot
faster than trying to build
something from the ground up.
And so they're um they're really
making an impact in providing
affordable housing and also
workforce housing around the
state. Uh, we currently have $34
million commitment with Ventana
Fund, and they, they, their
estimate is that the demand for
what they're doing is well over
$100 million for these uh these
types of there's that many of
these properties around the
state that they could be working
on rehabilitating.
I concurring how CDFI, this is a
very large CDFI located in
California. Uh, we only fund
loans that they do in New
Mexico, but they are doing real
estate uh loans, historic
hotels, hotel conversions, and
they also are involved in
charter school construction. You
can see their loan balances if
they do about $3 million loans,
which are much larger.
Um, RBC Global Asset Management,
I've talked about them, they're
purchasing, we are, we are
purchasing SBA loans that are uh
uh in Blackhawk neighborhoods in
Bapo and Bapo borrowers.
Um, home wise, we partnered with
Homewise a few years ago on this
program has really been growing,
and, and they are working on two
different things, but they have
a program to do downtown, it's
it's to do redevelopment in
downtown Albuquerque. So we have
a downtown Albuquerque
redevelopment program. And then
also Homewise is very
experienced in in real estate
development and construction,
and so they are partnering with
charter schools that need to
build a facility.
and what they do is they bring a
lot of their expertise in in
building and construction to
help these charter schools
through that process and um you
know, the, the funding that we
provide, um, to, to Homewise for
the charter schools is really
for the upfront construction,
and then the school gets funding
from another source for the long
term financing and may get paid
off, so we're really just
focused on the the upfront
financing for charter schools.
Street Spring, you can see their
average loan balance 21,000, and
uh they're doing small business
loans again, these are mom and
pop loans.
Same thing for West. West has a
um
a really robust training program
in offices around the state,
and, and typically what happens
is if they have an entrepreneur
or small business owner that's
going through their training
program.
and they feel like the, the
business, there's a need for the
business to expand the ability
for the business to expand and
they'll provide some financing
for that business owner.
um, MFA now, now known as
Housing New Mexico. Uh, we've
had a relationship with them for
several years, and uh we provide
funding for their low income
housing tax credit projects
referred to as like tech.
and and what we do, similar with
the charter schools, um, we are
providing funding for the
upfront land acquisition,
development, and construction,
and then MFA has long-term
sources of funds that they use
for and they, what happens when
the construction is completed,
they get a different source of
funding that pays us off and so
we're involved in the upstront
upfront construction of these uh
multi-family projects.
Um, Lift Fund is a CDFI in
Texas, but they're, we are
funding loans that they do in
New Mexico. They do small
business loans and they have a
program for lending in in
unincorporated areas referred to
as Colonnius.
Um.
RCAC is the rural community
acceptance Corporation, so CDFI
based out of California doing
business in 13 western states
including New Mexico, um, and
they focus on US on water and
wastewater and, and also some
small business loans.
And then B-side is our newest
lending partner, and I'll talk
about them here in the next
slide so we can turn to page 10.
Uh, these are some of our new or
also uh potential new lending
partners.
uh beside Fund is our newest
lending partner partner. This is
a brand new CDFI newly created,
but it's a subsidiary of
Eastside Capital, which is a
well established nonprofit
lender in Colorado and they are,
they are um Eastside fun is is
very active in New Mexico and
the side Fund is recently formed
a partnership with the
Albuquerque Hispial Chamber of
Commerce.
to offer loans to businesses
that have completed.
the unrened Rs program, and we
have provided a line of credit
to Bside Fund to support this
500,000 line of credit too so
that they can make loans to
small business owners who have
gone through this program.
Um, Rasa Development Fund. This
is a CDFI out of Arizona. They,
they have done business in New
Mexico for a long time.
Um, and, um, uh, it focuses on
small business loans, charter
school construction, and also
construction of medical
facilities in rural areas and um
I'd like to, I'd like to mention
Senator Figueroa, um, we, we
were in Taos a year ago.
at the at the IPPOC meeting in
Taos, and I made a presentation,
and you were the one who said to
me, Madam Chair and Senator
Figuero, you, you, Senator
Figueroa, you're the one who
said to me that you felt there
was a need for construction
medical facilities in rural
areas of the state.
And
um I really appreciated that
feedback. I took that to our
board and we have been looking
for a partner to try and help
fill that need, and we believe,
we, we, we haven't pro, we don't
have a relationship yet. We are
in discussions with Razafund,
but I think there were
discussions are going well, and
uh we are considering a $5
million line of credit, um, and
we are very interested in seeing
them develop uh rural medical
facilities. Um, hexagon housing
fund, um, I mentioned how
Ventana Fund was
a spinoff from Housing New
Mexico.
Mexican Housing Fund is a
proposed spinoff from Ventana
Fund.
uh Ventana Fund, I mentioned
before is really focused on
affordable housing, um, hexagon
housing fund is focused on is
focused on developing housing
around our military bases and
the people involved in this have
told me that.
that uh they feel that there's a
critical need to develop more
housing around our military
bases, that that goes into
decisions about uh what happens
in our military bases
and what they've said is, is a
lot of people talk about, you
know, making sure we don't have
base closures of what people
don't talk as much about is how
many missions you get assigned
to our bases, and more missions
we get assigned, then the more
jobs and economic development,
and they feel like we are
missing out on having missions
allocated to us because of lack
of housing, and they want to try
to uh to to um to correct that.
And so we're talking with them
about print
ating a new CDFI to uh do
similar to what Ventana Fund's
doing, but to do that around our
military bases. And then also
these are very preliminary
discussions, but I've been
having discussions with Dave
Castillo at Community Capitol
Laguna, and also Roland Wood at
a Native Partnership for Housing
in Gallup.
Uh, these are two native CDFIs
and uh they uh they're well
established and they've been
doing, providing support for
residential housing. Our funds
can't be used for loans to
individuals or funds have to be
used for small businesses, and
so we can't do any loans to
individuals for residential
homes, but they've been doing
this and we're having
discussions about expanding
their programs to start offering
small business loans in their
communities. Um, page 11, um
we're getting, you know, we're,
we're, we're past the pandemic,
but I, I still wanted to
highlight a couple of programs
that we came out with during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Um, the first program was our
COVID-19 lending program, uh,
that was a program for
businesses impacted by the
pandemic, and they might not
have been eligible for an SBA
loan or some other type of loan
and uh the rate was at 3.75%.
and um uh and so we partnered
with the loan fund to make uh
COVID-19 program loans, the loan
fund generated.
179 loans totaling 13.7 million.
and supported over 1000 jobs
during the pandemic.
And then we also partnered with
Dream Spring to provide um
paycheck protection program
loans, PPP loans, that's a small
Business Administration program.
You know, this was, this program
was a tremendous benefit because
the loans were forgivable. It
was like a grant for these small
businesses, uh, as long as they
kept a number of their
employees, uh, employed during
the pandemic.
And so, uh, having access to
those funds was really important
to small businesses and what we,
what we saw happening is that
there was so much demand for the
program and the banks were at
capacity and the banks were not
able to meet all the demand for
the PPP loans and what some of
the banks were doing was they're
saying, we'll only make PPP
loans to our own customers, or
they were focusing on the bigger
customers because they were
thinking that will support more
jobs.
And so what was happening is
some of the smaller, small
businesses were getting shut out
and didn't have access to PPP
loans.
And so what we did is we
partnered with Traspring.
and uh we provided them with
funding to make uh um these
lungs to the very small
businesses. They made over 1500
loans totaling close to $50
million during the pandemic.
and supported uh over 7500 jobs.
Uh, on the next page,
um, this is a report that came
out of the SDA's New Mexico
District Office.
Um, you can see here that this
was during the pandemic.
The number one SBA lender in New
Mexico was was drink spring with
funding from the NMSBIC and you
can see that they didn't, uh,
they didn't do the largest
dollar amount of loans. There
are other lenders that did much
larger dollar amounts, but
they're number one on the list
because they did the largest
number of loans, so they were
helping smaller, small
businesses get access to PPP
loans, which was critical for
them during the pandemic and,
you know, the small businesses
were getting shut out from the
banks
and so we stepped in to help
fill that gap.
Um, on page 13, I mentioned
earlier, I'd like to talk a
little more detail because this
is, this is
so important about the program.
Um, in our small business
lenders are not only providing
loans to small businesses, but
they provide a lot of technical
assistance in what I'm referring
to is they are working with
these small businesses to
develop marketing plans,
budgets,
um help them setting up
websites. They help install
computerized accounting systems,
they get them out of the shoebox
and in onto a computer with
their financials.
Um, they do referrals to CPA
firms with assistance in in uh
their financial reporting. You
know, this, this bullet here is
what we hear from the banks is
this is such a key part of the
program.
because sometimes it's, it's a
very viable business, but the
business owner can't provide
financial statements to the bank
to fill out the loan
application.
And so they just need help with
their, with getting their
financial statements in order so
they can, they can then um uh
fill out a loan application so
the CDFI is really helped with
the with that part of the
process. And then also over the
past several years, there have
been a lot of issues with
pricing of products and
services, you know, these small
business owners who, uh, they
know their customers, they have
close relationships with their
customers.
Uh, the prices of their supplies
have been going up.
and the cost of their labor's
been going up, but they're
really reluctant to increase the
price to the customer and so um
that's a balancing act that the
that the CFIs have been helping
to provide some consulting on um
on pricing for products and
services.
Um.
if there's more extensive
planning, even though if the, if
a small business owner comes or
entrepreneur comes and
and and needs to start from
scratch. A lot of times what
will happen is the CDFIs will
refer that business owner to a
um one of our small business
development centers around the
state for for developing a full
business plan, and that's,
that's a tremendous resource
that we have here
in Mexico.
Page 14, um,
impact of the program since
origination, we've generated uh
over 7300 loans.
and um $26276 million loaned in
total jobs supported over
25,000.
Uh, we provide these loans
throughout the states on page
15, uh, this is a presentation,
um, uh, legislative finance uh
co LFC staff.
asked me for this presentation a
few years ago, and I liked it
and so I like, I, I keep it in
the presentation because I think
it's a good presentation. Um,
what happens is on the table on
the left,
uh these are the number of loans
that are lending partners have
originated.
uh, the second column is the
population and these different
counties.
and then what you what you see
on this chart is how many loans
per capita are lending partners
have done so to try and
normalize it for the population
of these different areas. And so
we certainly, our lay partners
certainly do a lot of loans in
Burel County, but what this is
doing is normalizing for
population and you see the chart
on the right that shows how many
loans are being delivered. How
many loans have been delivered
to the different areas around
our state on a per capita basis.
Um, on page 16.
um
the, uh, the lungs that are, are
lending partners make.
Uh, we're still collecting the
2005, 2025 data that uh last
year, 57% of the loans were to
minority owned businesses and
45% of the loans were women
owned small businesses.
Um, page 17
um, this is, uh, what we do is
we track our cost per job.
And so page 17 is going to be
our, our old venture capital
lending program and, and then
we'll get into the lenning the
loan program on the next page.
But for the venture capital
equity program. I mentioned that
we, you know, we made about $32
million in loans we've lost
close to half of that.
Um, and, um, what happened, we
made $32 million loans, $32
million in loans, we got about
13 million of that back. So
there were some successful
repayments.
But then the net investment was
19, about 19.5 million, you see
that on row 11
The fair market value of those
investments today is about $5
million and so there's about a
$14 million loss on these uh
venture capital investments, and
we still have some of these on
our books that are that are
running off.
about 348 jobs were created, and
so that's a cost per job of
about $41,000 per job.
Uh and that was
these, these, these are not good
numbers and, and I, I mentioned
that in
2011, uh, the governor, uh,
replaced the NMSBIC's board and
it was, it was primarily because
the results you're seeing on
this page.
Turn the page
to 8 page 18, uh, starting in
2011 and 2012 and I was hired.
We wanted to start developing a
small business lending program.
uh, the top of the page is
showing since inception, since
inception with the lending
program, we've generated 199.2
million in interest.
We've had $1.6 million in
charge-offs. We've done things
in recent years to limit those
charge-offs of the charge offs
used to be much bigger. We had
really done things to limit the
number of charge offs that can
be passed through to us, but
life to date, uh, positive, uh,
this is income of 7.5 million
over 25,000 jobs perored uh
25,000 jobs supported, and
that's, that's not a cost per
job, that's a profit per job of
$295.
Um.
per job
And then on the bottom part of
the page. This is for the most
recent 12 months, most recent 12
months we've generated 107 in
interest income.
Uh, you can see the losses are
much smaller because we've,
we've curbed those in recent
years, only 39,000 in losses,
1.69 million, 3000 jobs
supported a profit per job in
the most recent year of
$556 per job, and so we really
feel like the small business
will.
lending program is working well
and um and on page 19.
um I think this is important.
The, the amount of interest that
we earn from our lending partner
is greater than our overhead,
and so we self-sustained, uh, we
generate, we're a nonprofit
organization, but we generate
more revenue than we have in
expenses and um also what's
important is as these loans are
repaid, then we turn around and
loan out again. And so there's
recycling of the funds, which
then creates even more jaunts.
Um
page 20, uh, in 2017.
um, you know, we, we, we have,
um
we have impact reported from our
lending partners, which is good,
and, you know, they report the
number of jobs being supported,
which is how many jobs that
small business, how many people
that small business employed
when they made the loan. They
wanted to get a little more
information about the impact and
in 2017, we hired the Bureau of
Business and Economic Research
at E&M Beaver.
uh, to, to conduct an impact
study.
and they looked at loans made
from 2011 through 2015.
They took a different approach.
What they did is they looked at
the opportunity cost of our
program.
And so what the second bullet
explains that what they did is
they said, OK, what, when the
NMSBIC makes a loan to the
lending partner, we're typically
loaning them money at 2%, so we
loan the lending partner money
at 2%. The lending partner might
lend the money out to a small
business that 56, 7%.
um and what Weaver did is they
said, OK, we're loaning the
money and we're earning about
2%.
If the money stayed in the
severance tax permanent fund and
was not allocated to a 7th tax
permanent fund as a long-term
investment return at 6.75%.
And so there is an opportunity
cost of about 4.5%, but the
program's costing the state
about 4.5%.
And so what Bieber did is they
took a look at that and then
they took a look. Here's the
other thing that was I think was
really important that Bieber did
is they didn't take a look at
how many
jobs or how many people were
employed at these small
businesses. We took a look at
how many new jobs got created
after that loan got made.
They have access to Department
of Workforce Solutions database
and so they can see
if the loan was made on this
date and they can go on DWS
database and then you can see
how many new jobs are being
reported to the state after the
loan was made, so they were able
to track
new jobs created
And so what they came back with
here is they took a look at the
opportunity cost of 4.5% that
it's costing the state and that
the number of new jobs created
and they came back with an
opportunity cost.
of about $4700 per job.
And then what they noted in
their study that the opportunity
cost of 4700 job, um, and they
used JTE and Lita figures for
the same period of time, 2011 to
2015, and they felt that our
opportunity cost number compared
favorably to Jip and Lida, which
were, you know, around, um,
um 594,200 per job. And so they
that that's how, that's the way
Bieber took a look at our
impact. I thought it was an
interesting approach.
Um, the other thing on page 21
that beaver did.
is they showed, and again, this
isn't total job supported. These
are new jobs being created in
New Mexico. And what they showed
in that study they did in 2017
is that for every million
dollars in in MSBA funds that
are put out there.
There are 12 new jobs being
created in the New Mexico
economy.
And um there is a similar study
that SBA did for the small
Business Administration lending
program throughout the country.
Um, the study, the SBA study
showed that for every million
dollars in SBA loans, there are
5.4 new jobs, and so we felt
that the 12 jobs per million
was, was a really good metric,
you know, and it, it just made
intuitive sense to us because of
all of the technical assistance
and help that the CDFI partners
are providing. It's really
helping people grow their
companies and create jobs. And
at the bottom of the page, I've
noted here that um
we have engaged fever to do an
update of the impact study, uh,
in 2025, and they're working on
that updated study right now. So
we're gonna update these numbers
this year.
Um, page 22, part of our
legislation is, uh, we have a
requirement.
for uh to return what are called
net excess funds to the
severance tax permit fund.
And so um it's interesting
common realize gains minus the
operating expenses. So basically
if we make a profit
the money goes back to the
severance tax permit fund.
And so what you see here on page
22 are the profits we've
generated and returned to the
severance severance tax permit
fund uh in 23 through 2025.
And um and then if you look on
page 23 at the top of the page.
um, there's each year, there's
money that comes to us. We get
an allocation from the severance
tax permanent fund.
but then we pay money back, and
what you're seeing at the top of
page 23 is the net number.
Here's the net number between
what we receive versus what we
pay back. And you can see that
um now, in 2010 when Senate
Senate Bill 10 passed and it
doubled our allocation. That's
why you see that the 57 million
in new funds coming to us. That
was because we went from 1% to
2% in 2020.
Um, but then you can see the
allocations that we've been
receiving um over recent years.
And, uh, and then on, on the
bottom of the page, and this is,
you know, um,
a treasure mine twice sits on
our board and she asked me about
this. This is important to her.
She said, OK, if the money that
we're receiving, are we
deploying it? And so that bottom
chart shows as the money's been
coming in, which is the blue
bar.
what our loan commitments and
the red bars the loan
commitments, and so you can see
that as our assets have been
growing, we've also been growing
our commitments and deploying
the funds to small businesses in
New Mexico.
Um, the charts on this page.
are looking backwards.
And now I want to look forward,
if you turn to page 24.
Uh, this is something, uh,
legislative finance council
staff.
um, uh, their, their economists,
so, uh, Ismael Torres and
Brendan Gray at LFCs on LSC's
staff.
Um, they contacted us in um uh
November last year, we've had
several meetings November and
December.
and um they asked us for a
forecast of what we thought the
program was going to look like
going forward. And so I sat down
with each of our lending
partners. I'm not gonna go
through every number on this
page. There's a lot of detail
here. I've sat down with our
lending partners and, and we
talked about what they thought
was reasonable growth for the
next 4 years.
And um uh and so we what these
projections are, are what our
lending partners are saying,
their demand is, and I think, I
think they made reasonable
projections that these are not,
these are not um overreaching
these are, these are realistic
projections. I added some
projections at, at the bottom
for new possible new growth.
and just a couple of things
that, that I want to, to
highlight here.
is that our projection of what
we think the demand is for small
business loans in New Mexico
with reasonable projections,
reasonable projections from
Millennium Partners on row 20
total loans committed and
outstanding, currently 157
million. We think that can grow
to 340 million by 2029 over the
next four years.
and then our total assets, which
are 184 million. I'm on row 27
now, total asset's 184 million.
We think total assets can go to
358 million.
and then on page on, on uh row
29.
What we're showing here is we
think realistic growth as we can
grow by about 40 million a year
for the next 4 years.
And, and I think our lending
partners have the capacity to do
this.
Um, now
if, if we, if I, if I go
backwards,
uh back to page 23 on the top of
the page, net funding that we
received in 2024, was 27
million.
net funding in 2025, 24 million.
I think, uh, we don't have final
numbers yet, but we've seen the
state investment council's
investment Holdings report so we
know what the, the growth has
been the severance taxerment
fund. We think we're gonna get
an allocation this year of about
27 million, we're going to pay 4
million back and so we're going
to receive net about 23 million
this year.
And so this coming year, we
think we'll receive that 23
million, and we feel there's
demand for, for about 40 million
per year going forward and so,
um, you know what I mean the
discussions that what we're
doing, what we're talking about
are possibly having to scale
back on what we think our
lending partners, you know, feel
they have opportunities to do.
uh going forward over the next
few years.
Page 25, um, just a, a recap, we
feel that our program
builds a critical gap in lending
to new and growing businesses in
New Mexico.
Um, we, we, uh, we demonstrated
that we provided significant
assistance to small businesses
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Uh, we have, we uh are projected
demand will likely allow us to
deploy all of the new funding
we're expected to get uh over
the, over the next 4 years.
And uh we are a self-sufficient
program that supports job and
economic development through the
state.
And uh Madam Chair, members of
committee, that's, that's my
presentation. I'm happy to
answer any questions. Thank you,
Mr. Collins for presentation.
Um, before we go to questions,
um, I just wanted Senatorose to
introduce himself, please.
Not that you need that
Thank you, madam Chair. I'm
George knows that representsbola
McKinley and San Juan.
Thank you for joining us
OK. Questions on the right, uh,
questions on my left, uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, page
10.
and I'm gonna butcher this. Uh,
what is the
impun theorra program.
Um.
Mancha and Representative
Duncan, um, that is a, a program
to
take um entrepreneurs who are
interested in starting a
business.
and take them through a training
program.
to teach them the things that
they need to be, need to do,
need to be thinking about how to
develop
financial statements and
marketing plans, and it's, I, I
think it's similar to um
business planning that might
might happen at an SPDC office
or Lake West, but it's, it's
very hands-on and it's a program
where um they provide, you know,
um.
very hands-on support for these
small business owners looking to
to start a business. Big man
here so it's like this is 101.
3.
They walk you through it, they
help you with technical issues
and everything else.
I that's great. Thank you
Senator Gonzalez
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um uh page 9.
um
you have, um, on Homewise, you
know, you charter schools
So when uh
if the loan is presented to him.
do they have to have any
collateral
uh man and and senator um
the um
um
when the charter schools are
developing properties.
Um, the, uh, they are public
schools and they're not allowed
to enter into contracts beyond a
year, and so what happens is
they create
a um nonprofit foundation.
And then the foundation
um is the organization that owns
the property and then leases the
charter school.
And then, uh, to answer your
question, um, yes, the, the,
the, uh, the property itself
that's owned by the foundation,
not by the charter school, does
serve as collateral for the
lung.
the the metal chair also within
uh.
on page 9
So does any of this allow for uh
the construction of tries.
Mature and and Senator, I'm not
familiar with that program,
that would be, you know, for um
a district.
would actually build living
quarters.
or staff
and the district owns the
buildings and.
so it's for areas where
it's very hard to get.
individuals to
be in those places without a
proper housing.
that I see and madam chair and,
and senator, um, you know, we,
we've entered into a partnership
with RCAC on this list, that's
the rural community's acceptance
Corporation near the bottom, and
RCAC, I'm I'm getting to your
question, um, RCAC is making
USDA insured loans to
municipalities.
um to do, they, they do those
loans to municipalities and also
to nonprofit cooperatives
associated with municipalities.
Um, our legislation
um limits our funding. Our
funding can only be used for a
small business.
And so when we do business with
our CEC, one of the, one of the
features of our program is that
they are doing a loan to a
municipality for water
wastewater. We can't provide
funding for that.
because municipality is not a
small business.
If RCAC is providing money to a
nonprofit cooperative associated
with the municipality, then we
can make a loan for that.
Uh, and Senator, what you
described, I believe, uh
district would, would be a
district would not be considered
a small business, and so I
believe our funding wouldn't be
eligible to be used for that.
Very well.
And on page 12, um, you have,
uh, Nya.
as as their credit union.
Is that the only credit working
with small business, um.
Madam Chair and Senator, I don't
believe so. Uh, this, this page,
this report,
was several pages long, and I
just took an excerpt of the very
top of the report, but I believe
there are, there are several
other credit unions that are
working with businesses.
Very well, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Senator Lopez.
Yeah, this is um an impressive
portfolio of small business
loans. Do you
also is small, the small
business include nonprofit
organizations.
Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
yes, it does.
Uh, uh, uh
typically a corporate, it is a
nonprofit corporation, and that
does, that does qualifies as a
small business.
So, um
so like a social services.
um provider
entity
Yeah, Madam Chair and senator.
So in our lending partners have
made several loans to nonprofit
corporations, so they're, I
wouldn't say there's a lot, but
there are, there are several
loans to nonprofit corporations
uh in the portfolio. I would say
most of the time that those
loans are for a nonprofit
corporation that wants to
purchase the building they've
been leasing, and then the the
building serves as collateral
for the loan.
and um um but, but the answer is
yes. Um, uh, they do qualify
for, for lending from
from this business because one
of the things when I was a
director of the Lasico Meario is
um there was a period of time
that we were getting slow paid.
from one of our funders
And so I wanted to establish a
line of credit so that I
wouldn't have to sweat it out
every week about making payroll
while we were getting slow paid,
and I couldn't, I couldn't find
anyone who was willing to do the
line of credit, even though I
could demonstrate.
not only the history but
actually has signed contracts in
which these, these uh grants
were going to come in.
and I just couldn't get that.
And it made me think during your
presentation with this, with one
of these organizations be
someplace where something like
that.
Madam Chaing Senator, I, I think
it would be worth looking into.
Um, now, um,
that may be happening more and
more, um, because I know several
nonprofits are hurting now
because of slow pace from the
federal government.
Senator.
I, I think it would be worth
looking into and um just, just
some features about the, the
CDFI lending program is that
they, they do require
collateral, and so, but, but,
you know, um, receivables and
inventory and equipment, those
things can can serve as
collateral for, for a small
business loan or a nonprofit
loan. Uh, they also require
personal guarantees, but that's
waived for nonprofit
corporations cause there's no
owner.
And uh it would have the
directors right, but they're so
they're, they're similar to bank
loans, uh, so they do require
collateral or small business
owners that require personal
guarantees, but I think that
the, the CDFIs have more
flexibility in being able to, to
in the way the underwriting
loans to do loans that banks
can't do, and I, I think it'd be
worth following up on that. I, I
think it would be good to get
the word out because we have
quite a few nonprofits in this
state, um, and, you know, like I
said, I had to sweat that out
and
we did and established a solid
reserve and everything it got.
got out of that, but that period
of time was really
really stressful and um I
didn't, I was never able to get
a line of credit.
uh, from a traditional bank, so
this might be a good option.
Thank you. Senator Thornton.
Thank you, chair. Um, just a
quick question regarding um
page 15 where you showed the
loans by county for 1000 in
population.
Actually, I liked it. I was
gonna ask you the demographics
of or geographically where where
you're giving the loans. So this
is a perfect.
I was just curious as to why
Moura.
with a small population is so
high, is that due to the fires
or something like that and they
need that they're recovered from
or what's the rationale for them
having such a high number of
loans and then similarly for
tos.
Um, Madam Chair and senator, uh,
I'll be honest, I don't know the
answer to that question. I,
you know, our lending partners
are much closer to these small
businesses that then
I am, um, you know, in, you
know, just anecdotally, um, you
know, Taos has um uh it's 10
program, the Tasconomic Network.
Uh, they have a very active,
robust entrepreneur community
and um, you know, just, just
anecdotally one of the, the um
um
uh programs that got started
with, you know, with a loan
from, from the loan fund was
House Energyard and uh which
then they moved to uh to another
county because of a, a great
deal they got, but um, you know,
in terms of, of specific loans
and why there's some.
I, uh, as opposed to, you know,
one part of the state as opposed
to the other. I, I don't know
the answer to that.
OK.
Thank you. Um
so I was also curious about the
um page 10, the loss of
Development Fund, um,
we need a hospital in these
mountains. So I would love to
get a, I'm, I'm actually started
a conversation with the city of
Edgewood and, and surrounding
areas to see if we can get some
kind of an urgent care uh
facility there as opposed to
having to drive all the way into
Albuquerque, um, and so if we
were to find uh an organization,
you know, would they be able to
pursue because I'm, I'm not
quite sure presbyterian we
considered a small company, so,
uh, I'm, I'm trying to figure
out how they would help, how,
how we could help fund something
like that to get a rural
hospital.
in the area.
in Madam chair and Senator, I,
I, I can't, so, so when we make
a commitment to a lending
partner, we look at their loan
policies, we look at their
financial statements, we look at
their track record of delivering
services, small businesses.
and then we let them make their
we get out of their way and let
them make their lending
decisions. And so, answer your
question, I think it'd be worth
the conversation, but I can't, I
can't speak directly for our
lending partners or potential
lending partners about what they
will or won't do, but, but I
would certainly, I, I, I think
it'd be worth a conversation.
Thank you, that's all happens
here
Well, Senator Figueroa
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Cummings. I'm so
excited that you're talking to
folks who can possibly be part
and facilitating instruction and
medical facilities, and I would
ask that you ask the partner to
consider
the
regional needs and the strategic
plans that are currently being
developed right now under SB3 to
make sure these efforts are
coordinated and where they need
to be, or at least ranked as
priorities.
if possible, but Madam Jere, my
main comment is for you, um,
because I would like to see Mr.
Clark.
come back
Um, he mentioned this morning in
his presentation, the difference
in the returns between the land
grant permanent fund and the
severed Tax Fund.
and the attributed attributed
the lower returns from 7 tax
funds.
to projects like this.
in New Mexico that are getting
lower return but maybe producing
jobs.
and
Mr. Common's presentation has
been very clear and very
enlightening about
her they are getting
with the money they are given.
um at the loans they're making
both in, in the financial return
they're contributing to the
general fund, but also to the
jobs and costs for jobs. Um, and
I would like to see Mr. Clark
do a presentation of the
additional funds.
is 2% is for the NMSBIC and it's
statutorily mandated, but we as
a body passed a law that said
they could increase funding to
New Mexico companies.
up to 11%, and I think they're,
they've gone up to 4% is what
they're at now.
Uh, but I wanna, I would like to
see a presentation on the return
they're getting.
of that money, that's along the
lines of clarity of Mr.
Cummins's presentation this
morning.
If, if you could set that up
someday. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator
We'll definitely consider that.
Um,
Mr. um Cummins, um,
and
might be beneficial for you to
have a conversation with Mr.
Clark
on that issue and maybe follow
up with myself.
um, to see.
if that's something that we
could
squeeze into one of our agendas,
Mountain Sha and Senator Figua,
I, uh, this is.
where I'm
going off on a tangent a little
bit here, but um
uh we had some really good
meetings with the economists at
legislate at LFC and
November, December
um, and, uh, we provided them
with the beaver study that had
been done in 2017, and um uh and
and uh
we are currently undergoing a
new beaver study
and we have invited and they,
they've accepted the LFC staff
is going to participate in the
vaper study
in um
um helping to provide comparison
of our economic impact to some
of the other programs that
you're referring to and, and,
and uh and so that is part, part
of the beaver study that we're
working on now. We're going to
include LFC staff, and we want
to provide a comparison of the
impact of our program and other
economically targeted
investments in the state. And so
that's part of something that
we're working on, and um, when
do you expect that study to be
complete
d Um, I'm expecting Madam Chair.
I'm expecting that study to be
completed by the end of this
year.
Um, um, and our agenda, of
course, only has a meeting a
month.
So I don't know if that would be
something, uh, senator that we
would be able to get in on our
agenda. But if you have a
conversation with uh
um
Mr. Clark
and
you know, at least a
hypothetical discussion. Yeah,
Madam Chair, I, I speak with
with John Clark and I saw him on
the hall as he was leaving and
yeah I speak with him.
you know, and uh I I'd be happy
to have a conversation possibly
we can get you on our agenda in
November.
as a follow-up. I think, uh,
what I'm hearing from the
senator,
is that
he's, he alluded to 11%.
um
you know, cap, I guess, and
they're only doing up to 4%
right now. So there's still
capacity. Is that what you're
suggesting, Senator, there's
still a capacity in there, too,
there is, there is capacity, um,
although we saw be able to raise
that 11% to 14%, even though
they haven't hit the 11% yet,
but my concern or my interest is
seeing
what they're getting out of the
4% they're investing.
So we can determine whether we
want them to hit that gap or
not.
possibly in November, if, if
the discussion alludes to that.
I'd like to know that. I'm sure
I'd be happy to follow up with
John Clark, um, in, in the
discussions we had with LSC
staff that the economist and and
LFC staff.
um.
they told us that they would
like to see this type of
information for other
economically targeted
investments in the state, and
they were considering
doing, maybe not the exact same
type of study, they were
considering doing, you know, an
impact study for other
economically targeted
investments. I don't, I don't
know that, I don't know that
that type of impact study has
been done for other economic and
we can't I can't speak to them.
I won't speak with the senator,
but at least
let us know if that's something
that we could
possibly
entertain
Yeah.
I'm sure, thank you, and I'll be
happy to follow up with Mr.
Clark. Mr. Cummings, we
appreciate your presentation. It
was very clear, very concise.
Um, we're gonna move on because
we are running almost a half an
hour behind.
Uh,
soodam Chair, thank you, uh,
just very short into, uh,
respond a little bit to uh
Senator Thornton.
is so, uh, well, one thing that
with moon.
there is a lot going on because
of the fires there is.
But uh also like within houses.
and many other parts of the
state, I
mean, uh, 97% is also small
businesses.
and uh
I myself have had 3 town hall
meetings just on this topic.
and we had one last Wednesday.
and I had like 22 participants.
So getting the word out is thank
you.
I also wanted to make a really
quick comment to Senator
Thornton's comment regarding uh
the lack of healthcare
facilities in the area that
you're discussing cause my
nephew lives in that area. Um,
when I was a city planner, I was
interested in a site, and I'm
just gonna throw this out. That
is at UBank in Central. It's an
old shopping center site that's
vacant.
um, as a healthcare facility
because when my nephew's wife
had a baby, they had to go all
the way downtown to Presbyterian
from the East Mountain area. It
was quite a long distance, but
there is a definite gap for
healthcare in that area. Um,
thank you, Mr. Cummins. Uh, we
are going to move on now to Mr.
Roper.
Economic development funding as
a strategic state investment,
and Mr. Roper, I hope you, uh,
were able to repair your flat
tire
without calling an emergency
vehicle.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, and,
and yes, thank you for your
concern. I was able to repair my
tire and still make it on time,
so.
so thank you for uh thank you
for asking.
On behalf of Secretary Black,
who is out of state and uh
deputy secretary Romero, who's
out of the country, um, you, you
guys get me today, uh, division
director, uh, Mark Roper of the
Economic Development Division.
Uh
I'll be here on their behalf. I,
I want to thank you guys for uh
the committee for having us here
today, uh, to talk about
investments. Not many people
uh, think about what we do as
investments and I'm and I'm glad
to, uh, I'm glad to see you in
the committee.
uh recognizing that and asking
us to be here.
Um.
I hear many times in front of
legislative legislative
committees.
when they talk about a cost per
per a job when they talk about
job creation.
But I think it's important that
we look at it as an investment.
or job, and how, how are we
getting
a return on that investment.
Uh, to quote, uh, former
representative uh Kiki says
that's Savera.
who had great respect for. He,
he once told me that the
greatest social program was a
job.
Um, and I couldn't agree with
him more. Uh, so the efforts
that we make in investing in
jobs are critical to the success
of the Mexicans across the
board. Uh, so I thank the
committee for taking the time,
uh, to listen, our presentation
is very short. I, I'm leaving
time for questions, um, because
I, I think the committee as well
versed in the number of things
that we're doing and the, and
the legislature has been very
kind to the economic development
department
and creating new divisions, uh,
one of which I'll talk about
today, um, but during the,
during this administration,
we've seen the outdoor
recreation division, the Great
Industries division, and now the
technology and innovation
division all become new
divisions, uh, within the
economic development department,
and so the legislature is um
recognizing that investing in
job creation across the board,
uh, is critically important in
those investments to pay
dividends as uh they create a
better economic opportunities
for New Mexicans, and they
create a better tax base for New
Mexico in general, and it's
definitely helping us on, on our
road to diversifying the
the economy. Uh, so again, thank
you for the opportunity to be
here. I'll go to
uh, the first item and, and we,
we tend to start with this one
because it's our longest.
uh incentive on the books in New
Mexico established in 1972.
um, as the implant training
program and is now the job
training incentive program.
and the job training and
studying program is simply a
reimbursement to the employer of
wages paid to an employee.
uh during their initial training
period from 2 to 6 months.
reimbursement will range from
50% all the way up to 90%,
depending on uh a couple of
factors. One, the location of
the business.
Uh, if it's in an urban
location, the base reimbursement
rate is 50% in a rural location,
um, which is a community.
that is an excess of 15,000 and
under 60,000.
the base reimbursement rate is
65%, and then the rest of New
Mexico, which, to be honest, is
the majority of New Mexico. It's
what we call frontier in the
base reimbursement rate is 75%.
Uh, upon those, the way we can
get to 90% is each of those have
a potential add-on of 5% for the
high wage.
uh if the company makes the high
wage threshold, they get an
extra 5% reimbursement on those
wages. If the company hires a
veteran, a recent graduate of a
New Mexico Institute of Higher
Education.
or a person that has aged out of
the foster program, they can
also get an additional 5% added
to that reimbursement.
And then the final way that they
can get an extra 5% if they work
with the New Mexico Department
of Workforce Solutions, or an
independent third party, uh, New
Mexico business to help them
with recruitment of the
positions that they're
advertising and hiring.
We added this, uh, because we
have noticed, especially in the
r
ural and smaller companies that
don't have a dedicated uh HR
department or don't have the
sophistication. They were having
trouble in today's world of
navigating, how do you recruit
to for your jobs. It's not a
case of um just put it on the
Department of Workforce
Solutions website and put an ad
in the newspaper anymore.
There's
it's more complicated, it's
deeper, and so we added that uh
extra 5% to really encourage
them.
to utilize the additional
services that DWS or and the
alternative of hire somebody to
make that investment to help
them recruit, because
uh a successful recruitment
process gives them a better
opportunity of finding a quality
employee that's going to stay
with them and, and reduce
turnover.
Um, so we added that uh 2 years
ago as part of as part of the
reimbursement stack. So that's
how you could potentially get to
90%.
As you can see since uh since
2019, we've awarded 590
projects.
at an average wage of $24.
and of those 2800 of them were
veterans.
Uh, so you can see it's very
successful program. Uh, it's, as
I mentioned, it's been around
since 1972.
Uh, the other thing I will
mention, uh, and we're
constantly looking at that. We
addressed it at the last board
meeting, uh, last Friday.
is that we're seeing that uh
companies are having a harder
time
uh filling positions.
uh pre-COVID, we saw um
recruitment rate of between 65
and 70%, meaning that companies
would, would fill 65 to 70% of
the positions that they
requested from the projective
funding and then they'd have to
come back later to fill those
other positions. Post-COVID,
we've seen that percentage drop
to to around 50%.
Uh, so we're seeing, we're
seeing, uh, we're seeing
companies struggle in filling
the positions initially. Um, and
so we're trying to, we're,
we're taking looks and we're
looking at it on a, on a regular
basis to see one of these
problems. That was one of the
reasons we helped with the
recruitment, but there's
obviously some other things that
we can do. And, and we're trying
to define what those issues are.
Is it because the skill sets
aren't there, or is there, are
there other factors? Is it the
wages that aren't, uh,
attracting the correct people
again, we're, we're not, uh,
we're
we're studying it, but it is
something that we're noticing
and we're paying attention to,
and we continue to work through.
the local economic Development
Act was established in 1992, uh,
as a constitutional amendment to
Article.
9 Section 14 of the New Mexico
Constitution that allows local
governments to invest.
into land building and
infrastructure for the purpose
of economic development.
Again, it's a reimbursement
program. The companies have to
make the investment, uh, and
then they get reimbursed for it.
and it's to, uh, it has to have
a job creation component. It has
to be to an economic base, uh,
entity, uh, there's a list of
those in the statute, but
ultimately it's those that
manufacturer make something for
those that bring in revenue from
outside of the state of New
Mexico.
Uh, the legislature did, uh, 3
years ago expand the retail
component of Lita to allow local
governments to invest in, in
retail projects that they saw
unnecessary uh for their
communities.
Uh, as, as you know, most, most
cities rely heavily on grocer
receipts tax and the retail
sector is the collector of that
grocer's deeds tax.
Um, so many local governments
see uh
retail as, as a means to
improving their budget
situation.
Economic development standpoint,
we look at the base economic
businesses as I described,
because those are the ones that
are going to generate the people
and the income and the resources
that have the ability for that
excess income to fall into the
retail category.
I do the local economic
Development Act, uh, the current
administration has given strong
support to projects that have uh
significant capital let uh
capital expenditure.
that really focused on the
quality of jobs.
uh, meaning the jobs that are
being created by the company
that's receiving LEA is above uh
at or above the average wage
that in the region that they're
uh creating these jobs and, and
I talk about the region because
we're, we're not going to
compare a job.
and more accounting, for
example, it is the same as we
would in Albuquerque. We're
going to look at that region.
What's the prevailing wage in
that region, and how do these
jobs compare to those, uh, and
focus on that. We've also uh
tried to focus.
on those that uh have are
um
environmentally friendly
and then they have a strong
sustainability, uh, and, and
longevity uh in New Mexico.
And the way, and, and uh
we talk on what I started out
on. It's Lita is, is an
investment. You're, it's like
you're uh
managing a portfolio for a
venture capital firm and you're
investing in this company.
But instead of a
venture firm where you're
expecting to get out in 3 years
and take your return on
investment. But you're looking
for in this investment here is
uh is how much uh is the state,
the city and the county going to
benefit from a tax collection
standpoint. So how much grocery
seats tax activity is this
business activity going to
create? How much personal income
tax is this business activity
going to create? How much
corporate income tax this
business activity going to
create, and how much property
tax
re ve n ue is this uh business
activity going to create. And
when we, when we look at those
things, we look at just those
things specific to the business
and those employees graded.
Usually when you do an economic
impact analysis, you're looking
at the overall economic impact.
You look at the uh spin factors
which will vary on business
about the uh uh uh ancillary
jobs that are created on that.
But when we do this analysis on
a leaderA projects, we only look
at the direct fiscal impact that
is made by the activities of the
company, none of the none of the
other extraneous activities that
are made.
and uh we, we've seen that, that
we have uh
data that we've been able to
collect.
uh for projects over the last 8
years and our return on
investment is in excess of
1,000%.
So when you think about this as
a venture firm or like you
putting your money into a 401k.
It's a very strong investment
that you're making into New
Mexico, into New Mexicans, uh,
you're getting a huge return on
your investment as you, as you
make these investments simply
appropriate.
I'm going to thank the
legislature and focus on a
couple of new pieces of
legislation that you passed this
past year.
Senate Bill 169, uh, that we
call the site readiness bill.
is uh is going to be cha is
going to be a game changer for
New Mexico.
And uh
it's really going to help us
focus and understand what our
infrastructure needs are.
Uh, and I know that's been, uh,
long been a desire, uh, from the
legislature
um
from the LFC to really make
sound investments and improve
our infrastructure. When we talk
about infrastructure across the
board. It's not just roads.
We're talking about water, we're
talking about sewer, we're
talking about electricity, we're
talking about fiber. Uh, we're
talking about those things that
are necessary to to grow and
expand and prosper in New
Mexico.
Let's Senate Bill 169 is going
to allow us to do this, first of
all,
to identify sites that are
strong candidates for economic
development, sites that we can
advertise, market, and show that
we have the ability to uh
provide the resources that they
need, whether uh at these sites
and promote these sites. So we
uh we can identify the sites
through this legislation.
Additionally, the funding that
was, that was placed in there
will help us identify specific
infrastructure needs that these
sites, while very good, may be
lacking in infrastructure.
they may need a rope, they may
need a water line, they may need
a sewer line.
Uh they may need
these, these types of
improvements. And so we can
provide those types of
improvements and really focus
our infrastructure re resources
on these sites that have been
identified that
we can really
use to market New Mexico and
improve ourselves.
And so no offense, uh, no
offense to my friends in Harding
County, but obviously we, we
don't need 100 megawatt power
plant in Harding County.
Uh, but 100 megawatt power plant
to drive uh electricity to um
major sites in, in the more
populous areas of, of New Mexico
would be a very sound investment
and make that site very, very
usable.
Uh.
So conversely, into the rural
populations that such as my
friends in Harding County.
Those basic things such as water
and wastewater are so critical
to their success, and sometimes
just a road to those buildings
can make all the difference in
the world.
And it's not going to get the
headlines
that a major project, uh, like
Meta Los Lotus gets.
but it's still going to be every
bit as important to those small
communities and to those, those
small uh towns uh to their
overall economic success and,
and on down into their school
districts because we all know
economic success and jobs lead
to more students in the
classroom and help those small
rural areas, uh, sustain their
schools, which is a key, key
part of what's keeping those
communities alive.
So again, thank you
uh to the legislature for
providing us that opportunity.
We're currently assembling the
board
uh, that will oversee and make
those recommendations to the
Secretary for those sites,
readiness which will be also uh
putting the
rule in place that is actively
happening. We are currently also
doing a study on 27 sites in New
Mexico to tap onto the sites
that we studied last year. We
did 28, uh, publicly held sites
last year at this year's study
is a mixture of publicly held
and privately held sites across
New Mexico. That study uh kicked
off this week.
Uh, it will be completed by the
end of October.
and uh we we will then have uh
those total sites uh to then
they can use those to
submit to the board that's being
assembled to say this is by our
site is important. Uh, it also
will help them as the owners of
those sites identify the
infrastructure, the needs that
they need for those sites. So
this, this preliminary study is,
uh, will not magically make them
a, a site ready, but it will
give them the, the information
necessary to see that what they
are lacking to make them truly
site ready, and it will also
help them uh move towards that
formal
adoption as we get the board in
place, uh, that the legislature
is placed in the legislation.
Now moving on to the next slide,
the
next piece of legislation that
I'd like to talk about is Senate
Bill 170. Again, thank you to
the legislature for passing this
legislation.
It went into effect on, on June
20th.
We had our first request from a,
from a um
public utility on June 20th.
Uh, it, we are currently uh
working with them on that
request. Uh, we are currently
taking public input, uh, in that
information is on the front page
of our website where you can
look at their application and
you could submit public input.
Uh, we
won't be taking public input on
that until August 22nd, at which
point then we will, um, either
make a recommendation, uh, to
the PRC that this does meet the
parameters set forth by other
legislature or does not.
Uh, and, and that will, that
will come forward. Uh, but what,
what this legislation is, is, is
really going to allow us to do
and allow these utilities to do.
is to build additional
capacities to uh not only
generation but to transmission.
without necessarily having a
known customer at the end of the
line.
And that's
it's a big difference and a big
change in how things work.
But by allowing them to have
this additional capacity.
and what I'll call speculative
build.
It will
allow them then when we do get a
known customer that is wanting
to expand or come into New
Mexico to shorten that time
frame, instead of saying, well,
it's gonna take us 5 years
because we got to study it and
then we've got to go through
the, all these processes, it's
going to cut that time frame
because we've got a 10%
additional capacity built.
uh into our generation.
So,
it's ready to deploy
And then as that 10% is done, we
can do an additional 10%. And
the other nice thing about what
this, what this also does is it
still
doesn't take the PRC out of it,
so it's still has to go through
a PRC process. It just gives it
a priority.
And the final, the final thing,
uh, that it does, is it still
protects the ratepayer.
so that you and I are not going
to be seeing higher utility
bills just to build this
speculative capacity for the
for the babies
Uh, this, this won't be
built on the taxpayer's back.
but it will help us shorten that
time frame, and it will put us
at a competitive advantage over
our competitors.
uh, when we're talking to
companies that want to come to
New Mexico because we'll have
electricity ready to deploy the
currently
uh, it's, it's a problem
nationally and not just in New
Mexico, but it will give us a
competitive advantage.
Uh, so, again, thank you to the
legislature for the forest side.
This is going to be very
critical to improving the
infrastructure across the board
between uh Cent Bill 169 and the
site readiness identifying.
um other utilities and
infrastructure needs that are
needed to make us competitive,
uh, on creating jobs in those
sites, and the additional
capacity deployment of
electricity is really going to
make a difference in New Mexico.
And so I want, I can't stress it
enough, thank you for having the
foresight to do that, and giving
the resources so that, so that
these uh these decisions can be
made.
And then as you're going through
your capital outlay, your
general fund infrastructure, uh,
desires and wants that you'll
have this information from uh
from
either these uh sight-readiness
recommendations or from the PRC
recommendations where the last
one I'll talk about from the
Tradeport recommendations so
that you can also prioritize
your infrastructure uh
priorities and
they're ultimately going to help
uh create economy in New Mexico.
The next piece of legislation
I'll, I'll
touch on is HP 19. Again, thank
you to the legislature for uh
establishing this. And this is
really going to create
designated inland ports in New
Mexico.
and it's going to incentivize
local governments to establish
distribution of manufacturing
centers.
generous and gave us $150
million in infrastructures, uh,
to get to, to use to leverage
private investment.
uh to multiply that factor and
have major investments in
infrastructure in these uh
locations.
that
are important to New Mexico.
We're currently getting staff in
place, and again, this, this has
also comes with the committee
that's being stood up and rules
for putting be put in place for
this piece of legislation also.
but ultimately it's going to
create an inland port where
goods and services that hit
Houston or hit LA depending on
which uh ocean they're coming
from.
uh, will not have to clear
customs in those points, they
will be able to come by rail or
by truck into the assembling
ports for customs at these.
inland ports and then go to
their first final destination,
uh, throughout the, throughout
the country. So it'll be a great
benefit, it'll be a job creator
within New Mexico. It will also
be a great benefit to those
companies wanting to do
business. And with these uh
inland ports established in New
Mexico also create additional
opportunities for ancillary
businesses to locate near these
ports and create additional
opportunities for these
companies. So again, thank you
for the legislature for
uh providing
uh that additional insight and
additional funding to create
those inland ports.
And then the final big thank you
to the legislature goes for
this, uh, newest division that
you created the technology and
innovation Office.
that came with an additional $92
million in grants and funding.
This has been an amazing
transformation.
When I started with the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department in 14 years ago.
We had
0 people
employed
in technology
0 people employed in technology.
for the economic development
department.
This is a state with 3 national
lands.
This is a state with uh with uh
3 research universities, and we
had 0 people employed
in technology and economic
development. When I started with
the department 14 years ago.
Now I'm happy to say that, uh,
you know, uh during the uh
initial administration that I
worked with, that they saw the
need and they were able to get
one person in that office, and
during this uh during that
administration, we were also
able to see it grow to two whole
people.
Uh, we now currently have a
staff of 3, and thanks to this
new innovation office, we have a
staff of 8 by the end of this
fiscal year.
So thank you to the legislature.
Thank you.
for acknowledging how important
technology and innovation is in
New Mexico.
And thank you for putting the
resources in the economic
development department.
Uh
I'll go back to even farther
from what I've been in the
department for my adult life.
I've heard about how we need to
do a better job of taking the
technology out of the labs and
making it uh job opportunities
in New Mexico.
Well, we're finally putting the
resources in place to, to see
some of this happen. We've had
small successes
such as NTXile.
and, and a few others
Um, but we haven't had great
successes and not consistent
successes. This dedication of an
entire division.
to this
to not only talking about
bringing uh technology out of
the labs, that are research
university, but bringing in new
technologies, new innovations
that even come from outside of
New Mexico, such as the quantum
activity that we're just
finalizing the final touches on
the qua the first quantum brand
to establish a quantum uh
innovation center in New Mexico,
uh, and it's going to be a
venture studio innovation that
are specifically dedicated to
Quantum, but other activities
along new energy, uh, new other
opportunities along
bioscience and other things that
we probably don't even know what
what what they're talking about
or inventing it.
But having that this dedicated
staff
to be able to focus on those
specific region.
resources and, and interact.
and do the things necessary to
promote this is going to make a
huge difference in New Mexico
into the future.
Uh, I mean, we've seen it in our
lifetimes, uh, you know,
especially Senator Wood and I
that have been around for a
really long time.
Uh.
we've seen a lot of changes on
that technology front. Um, and
that's, that's only going to
accelerate as we're talking
about quantum and AI and these
things that that's only, we've,
we just thought it went fast.
It's about to go really fast.
And for us to be the leader in
those technologies and being a
part of it and having this
dedicated staff to be able to
support those is going to be a a
really great thing. So
yeah, I know I spent most of my
time
justifiably so thanking you.
because you're the ones that,
that created the passed the
bills, you're the ones that
created the budgets, and you're
the ones that have done this.
But the thank you for your
investment. And as I started
this up, I want, I wanted
to address it. It is not a cost.
It's an investment
and that investment has a
return.
That return is a better New
Mexico, a better tax base, and
more economic opportunities for
every individual in the state.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I will stand for any
and all questions and thank you
for your time.
Thank you, Mr. Roper. Um, we
have, uh, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Stefanis
uh
Senator
Cydia Lopez.
OK.
Senator Deans
Thank you, ma'am Kira. Thank
you, Mr. Roritz. I'm glad you
mentioned Senator Woods, not me,
being around for a while, um,
OK, so I would like your advice,
uh, Mr. Roper, uh,
it says you've been involved in
many aspects of your department
and your division.
So, I have a community, uh, I'm
gonna be very specific. Torrance
County used to have the Esconcia
Valley Economic Development.
Area.
I don't know what the A was,
and, and when they went away.
there are individuals who want
to start up a chamber of
commerce.
The question is, are we now
positioned to do
regional
um
chambers or we positioned to do.
individual community chambers
that we go after specific funds
just for their community versus
because, for example, when
Estancia Valley
oh
was in existence, they would
work with banks and um
large national entities to come
in with the idea of regional
businesses.
and now, are we changing our
focus from large regional to
small.
community ones
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Stefanis.
um,
thank you for the question, as
you mentioned, um, I'm, I'm old
like Senator Woods, and I've
been around and, and I've worked
initially in this economic
development world.
and a uh chamber slash economic
development.
Um.
private not for profit
organization.
And
it's been my experience that
there are two different worlds.
OK, the chamber has a very
specific and good function.
uh working with existing
business, most of it retail.
a little bit on the banking
side, and they have a very
specific uh need and, and
things to, to do in the
community, uh, you know.
uh, lobby legislators to make
sure that they don't do negative
things towards the business
community.
uh, to maybe help promote
tourism, if that's part of their
uh part of their nature of
their, of their community. Um,
and those are all very important
things. I'm not saying they're
not important, but they're not
economic development.
Economic development is very
focused on the growth of
economic-based jobs.
and uh doing that, and so,
personal experience, I can tell
you it's hard to work for two
masters.
because they have two desires,
and I think when you're in a
rural community, that's the
that's the desire because
you have limited funding
resources.
And so you're like, why are we
doing an economic development
group and a chamber.
And so I understand the desire
to do that.
In your particular example, the
the Santia Valley Economic
Development Association.
um, was held together by Myer
Pangrazio for, for decades. Um,
and upon her departure, it, it,
uh, it
it no longer exists
Um
it's a great concept
taking the resources from all of
all of Torrance County, all of
the Estancia Valley region.
and
marketing them all together as
11 group, not having uh not, not
being so myopic and, and
telescopic and your views about
just my little space and this
regional output.
I think
there's some good about
individual chambers. Again, I,
I'm not disputing there, but I
think from an economic
development standpoint,
in the rural areas, yours is a
perfect example. You've got
Moriarty, you got Edgewood,
you've got stancia
You've, you've got a nice little
valley there that has great
assets as a collective whole but
individually.
not as compelling
Uh, so
I would, you know, from this is
just Mark Roper.
I would say that a regional
approach, uh, to economic
development is better than
trying to stand one up for
Moriarty stan. Great. Thank you
very much, manager. I had a
constituent who wanted to do
something much further down.
and um the valley. And so I
think this is uh great advice
that you're giving, and I
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, I'll add one more
thing. Um, while, while that's
being, don't ever hesitate to
reach out to our office, our
regional reps, uh, and it, and
it's funny because Edgewood's
actually in Santa Fe County, so
you get the benefit of the two
regional reps out of Santa Fe
County, and then uh Torne County
is the, is in the region of Prey
have the benefit of the two reps
there, but don't ever hesitate
to reach out to them, uh, to
help facilitate with the
constituent issue.
Um, senators.
Thank you, thank you for that
presentation and this certainly
is important. I, uh, I agree
with what was said about one of
the best social programs is a
job. However, it's not a great
social program if it is poor
wages, no benefits.
um, terrible. So I, my question
is, you know, then I think it's
worse. Um, you know, a bad
social program cause it.
it leads to hopelessness. Um, so
my question is, how, I, I know
this on page
um
well, I think what you talking
about priorities given to
projects with higher wages and
job creation.
How do you evaluate that cause
it's says priority is given.
I would suggest you shouldn't
give LeA funds to
to someone who's gonna come in
with low wages and no benefits,
but it, that that's just not
economic development, that's
economic exploitation, but I'd
like to hear how you, how you
evaluate these, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
Senator Sio Lopez. You're
absolutely right.
Um.
and this, this administration
specifically has put a high
priority on the jobs must be
above the average.
that's in that region
uh, in order to get Lea funds.
We have a, uh, if, if you go to
away from but J tip has minimum
standards that are well above,
well above minimum wage that are
required. If you don't meet
those standards, you don't get
HD funding. So we absolutely
agree with you. Um, if anybody
that has sat in a JE meeting
that I chair, you'll hear me
beat on the companies about
providing health care to their
employees.
I commend the ones that do
uh, and I strongly encourage if
there is a company there that is
in their startups and they're
not quite there yet, but I
encourage them that that's the
first thing they do when they
get on their feet as a company,
is to provide medical benefits
to their employees. It's the
greatest benefits you can give
your that's better than any
rings.
That's tax-free money in their
pocket.
That's the best benefits you can
get your employees to have
healthcare, because if they have
healthcare, they'll stay
healthier, they'll be on the job
more and everything else. So I
completely agree with you that
we should not
uh
incentivize low wages, uh, and
not to take shots at any
previous administrations or
anything else, but you'll notice
we haven't done any call centers
in the last 8 years, and that's
why.
That's exactly why
because those, those were low
paying jobs with very little
benefits.
Um, I appreciate that. I think
that's really important to keep
that policy in place, um,
because, like, like I said, it's
just economic exploitation and I
know that there are companies
that take advantage of states
like ours because they can pay
less.
and, and that doesn't help our
state at all. Thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Roper, I just had a very
quick question about your trade
reports.
and how you all plan to sort of
or what criteria you're using to
identify a future trade reports.
Madam, uh, members of the
committee, it's a really good
question, and, and we're still,
we're still building that
airplane.
Uh, the board is being appointed
as we're speaking
in which
and then, then the rule
s will be put in place. Uh, so
to say, I know exactly how
that's going to look, um, is a
bit premature, um, but I think
some of the key components of
any trade work, whether it be
inland or or not, uh, it has to
have some very key components.
It needs to have the opportunity
to be a, a foreign trade zone.
It needs to have
sufficient access to rail.
It needs to have sufficient
access to interstate highways.
any of those three components
for sure.
Um, the other, the other
component then is really comes
down to people.
Uh, you
again, you can't put it out in
the middle of nowhere.
It has to be where people can
reasonably commute to work.
Um, and, and get there. So I'm
not saying it has to be in the
center of the city because
that's not true.
Uh, but it can't be just out in
the middle of nowhere. It needs
to be close to population and
housing where those people can
get to work.
But they need to have those
three things they need to be
able to establish or have an if
a foreign trade zone.
they, because that's what's
going to allow you to have uh
those custom capacities, so that
they don't have to clear customs
in LA or Houston, whichever
ocean they're coming in from.
So you're going to have to have
that component, and then the
other two are fairly obvious.
You need to be, you need to have
good interstate access and need
to have good rail and, uh, Roper
and for the
for the
committee members
um
the transportation committee met
in Santa Teresa, and um
and
just seeing, you know, the
development that's happening out
there, and I, I was just
astounded because I hadn't been
out there and
many, many years. Um, I'm just
seeing like they're, their
industrial park development,
and, you know, the access that
they have, um
I was just
imagining as the city as a
planner.
which oftentimes we're
we look into the future, I could
just see that happening right
there, you know, is a trait a, a
trade war.
in that area. It just um
yeah, it was, it was mind
blowing, honestly.
Oh
that I'm sure
uh
you reach into into the choir
here. I mean, there's no doubt
that that
it's already an FTNC it's
already got the intermodal.
uh UP facility there. It's got
greatSI 10, which is getting
better, uh, thanks to some
investments in the legislature
is making in, in Mexico roads,
um, and then there's some
significant investments being
made on the Texas side too. So,
yeah, that's a natural remix, so
I don't think there's any doubt
about that. I look forward to
that
and the proximity to the Mexican
border, and that port of entry,
uh, is very significant too.
Uh, and so, you know, again, the
funding of the uh
uh what we call the border
highway.
um by the New Mexico legislate.
We need to finish up that
funding so that we can finish
that uh.
that loop to the directly to the
port. Um, and then the expansion
of the report's got to be a top
priority. Uh, so, uh, especially
as the Bridge of America, I'm
not sure if everybody's aware of
it, the Bridge of America's is
sinking and it's uh going to go
through some major, major, major
renovations.
and it will be closed during uh
some of that construction it's
absolutely have to close the
Bridge of Americas, which is the
port of entry between Juarez and
El Paso.
That's going to push a lot of
traffic to Santa Teresa.
Um, and so the quicker that we
can talk about board, uh, border
expansion is going to be very
beneficial to that area. And the
last we heard is that even when
the Bridge of Americas is
reopened, it's going to go
for um
personal traffic and um.
no commercial graphic
So the trucks are still going to
have to seek alternative rounds,
but the Bridge of Americas will
only be for best.
Um, so
again, um thank you for bringing
that up. It's a very critical
overall,
uh, El Paso is also widening
their freeways. So, um, if any
of you haven't been out there, I
would strongly advise taking a
little trip trip out there
overnight trip probably, um, but
it was, uh, it was really an eye
opener.
and um
well, thank you, Mr. um Oprah,
we appreciate, I'm glad you got
your, your tire fixed and uh you
were able to join us. We were
concerned. I was happy I was
able to limp into the land, uh,
so I didn't have to change the
time.
I hope it works literally would
be.
Madam Chair, thank you. Thank
you so much.
All right, um, our next, uh,
presenter, and
surprisingly all were only 10
minutes behind schedule, so I'm
actually 9, so I'll take that
extra minute, right? Um,
we have an overview and analysis
of funds managed by the Office
of the State Treasurer.
with the esteemed uh honorable
Laura Montoya, or state
treasure, and Janus Fanella, our
deputy treasurer.
and her staff it was.
Great conversations.
Welcome.
Um, so I would like to first
start off
with introducing my deputy
treasurer.
Janice Vardella and she's gonna
introduce our staff that are in
the room.
Meter
members like to introduce our
staff. So we have in the room
with us, Christina Perea. She's
our programs and outreach
director.
Christine Anaya, special
programs director.
Vira Elaferisi.
communications director
and Nathan Cedillo by and
finance manager.
And I wanted to apologize to you
all that Vicky and Anna wouldn't
be able to be here today, but
Vicky is on vacation and found
they had a prior commitment. So
we're gonna try to do our best
in giving them some justice.
Um.
so I wanna start off on page 3
and we'll go over the sto, the
state treasure's office core
function. So, um, we're your
banker. We manage cash flow and
ensure state obligations are
met.
Funds not immediately needed are
invested with safety, liquidity
and yield at the forefront in
that order. Debt service paying
agent, we manage securities, we
manage investments on behalf of
local governments, with the
local government investment
holds short term and medium
term. We purchased geo bonds and
educational technology notes for
our school districts,
administered programs and
outreach under the direction of
Director Perrea
and I serve on 13 boards,
councils, and commissions, which
by statute some of them.
I am allowed to have a designee
present. I try to be to at as
many of them as possible.
but I've prioritized the ones
that have a lot of money. So,
um,
I'll have Janice talk to you
first on page 4 of all of the
smaller. So even though the
treasure designates other staff
to sit on these boards. She's
very active in keeping up with
everything that's happening. So
the small business Investment
Corporation, we have Arsenio
Gardunio, representing the
treasurer as the designee and
Rita, which is a renewable
energy transmission authority. I
represent the treasurer on that
board.
The Opportunity Enterprise
housing renewal Board. I
represent the treasurer on that
one as well. And the state board
of Finance, of course, the
treasurer who sits on that
board.
We have the New Mexico Education
Assistance Foundation, Christina
Pereyas, the special pro uh
programs and outreach directors.
It's on that board.
We have, uh, the Capitol
Buildings Planning Committee. I
sit on that board and then uh
Martin Luther King Junior
Commission. We have treasurer
that tries to make it to a lot
of those meetings, but when
she's unable to, we have
Christine Anaya that sits on
that board. The larger boards,
councils, and commissions that I
know you've heard from today,
some of them and some of them
from the uh from the past.
are the state Investment
council, which now has 63
billion second largest.
sovereign wealth fund in the
country anticipated to be number
one in the next 7 to 10 years.
Um, that
council is statutorily required
to have certain skill sets in
order to get a bipartisan
effort, and then the two elected
officials, 3 elected officials
on that council are the
governor, the land commissioner,
and myself.
We have the state treasurer's
Office Fund. We are now at $19.6
billion.
Um, and that's the state
treasures Investment Council,
the State Board of Finances on
that council along with an
appointee from my office and
from the state board of Finance,
and then um the cash manager.
We have the public employees
retirement or pension fund is
now at 18.6 billion. Our
educational retirement board um
is at 18.5 billion, and housing
New Mexico is at 11.4 billion.
Both housing in Mexico, retiree
healthcare, small business,
Rita all use the Saint
treasurer's office to invest,
and they also use the state
Investment council to invest.
I think one thing that's really
important for
those in this room and those
listening is when there's
legislation, it's really
important to navigate.
which bucket it goes into as far
as the investment councilor and
the state treasurer's office. If
you need short term liquidity,
you have high needs, you want to
come to me, especially if you
have a lot less money. If you
have a lot of money and you have
long-term needs, and you want to
stick it with the state
Investment council because they
can take higher risk because of
the anticipation is the
longevity.
So lately
um
I know you've heard from all the
boards, but I wanted you to hear
from me as a counsel board
member
representative, and an
independent elected office. I
have learned so much from them
in the last couple of years. Um
I would say that
their leadership is competent
and capable, they listen,
they're attentive, they talk and
and respond to things that we're
asking for both as board and
council members and as the
elected, um, their team members,
um, are very
very brilliant people. Uh, we
have been very focused on
standard operating procedures,
updating of investment policies,
updating websites and tech
technology, and the constant
review of liquidity needs asset
allocation reviews and shock
analysis as appropriate
according to best standards.
Lately, I've been asking a lot
of questions and I heard a lot
of you answer some of those
questions be answered, but
there's a couple that haven't
been asked.
So I go to slide 5
and
some of those bullet points are,
are definitely questions we all
ask, but I've gotten a little
bit more into the weeds of how
much are we paying in fees? Are
we paying more or less than what
we're earning? How much risk are
we taking and does that risk
calculate to return net fees.
And I'm not just referring to
the fund.
I'm also referring to staffing
technology. I heard the
chairwoman mentioned today the
importance of having your your
staff staffed up.
have the expertise, and also the
technology to make sure that
we're not at risk.
Are we asking fund managers
enough.
How are they investing back into
New Mexico. Recently, we had to
find a couple of months ago that
asked for I think 150, 250
million and
they have on their slide deck
every state around us except our
state that they are going to be
investing in.
And I said, what do you think is
wrong with this picture? You're
asking us for money, but how are
you giving back to my own state.
And, and it's not a tit for tat
or you have to force it down.
It's just a question, do you
have internships available for
our students? Do you have a way
for us to educate our people
with being able to work with
you. Um,
is there a way that if it's real
estate that you can potentially
look at projects in New Mexico
if it has to do with wind and
solar, same thing.
So I want to ask those questions
a lot more. Can we do more to
safeguard our investments or set
them up for success. I know that
John Clark spoke to you earlier
about the new Mexico program and
basically it was not set up in a
way that was allowing for
success. We've recently changed
that. One thing that I think is
really important that we've
shifted is having these studios
where let's say you're really
good at
engineering. You came from one
of the labs, and you, you know
your product very well, but
you're not a business person to
know how to manage the business
to make the return. And so these
studios help them to be set up
for success, which then helps us
safeguard our return.
Um, diversification
and I'm not just talking about
asset class. I'm talking about
your diversification of your
consultants, of your internal
staff, of your external staff.
When you diversify, you mitigate
risk, which helps you to keep
your return.
So we go into risk, operational
risk is something that we're
really looking at, that I'm
really looking at, because
there's been so much operational
risk lately. If you don't have
your business aligned in a way
that is going to be profitable
or keep employees or keep
business moving, you are going
to impact the bottom line, which
then impacts our investment.
That matters to me.
What is our process both
external with our consultants
and internal with staff.
as it relates to how fund
managers get vetted through a
process to ensure fair and
equitable processes.
Consultants right now, because
we are so short-staffed,
have so much power
So now, I really wanted to focus
on what is your internal process
as a consultant? How are you
vetting these different fund
managers to make sure that
it's in our best interest based
on our asset class.
The liquidity needs
um, how are we ensuring that
Para? So if we can go to the
next slide,
how are we ensuring that Para
SIC MFA ERB
are not invested in one fund as
a whole in a way that would
negatively impact us, and I
didn't think about that till I
heard.
um
director Marquita Russell
because I didn't, I didn't even
realize that they do venture
cause I'm not on her board.
Um, Janice is on the opportunity
enterprise board, but MFA is the
only board I don't sit on that's
a bigger fund.
But I think when we're talking
about technology, they're all
very independent. They have
different needs. They, they
don't, I mean they communicate
with each other, but they work
very independently with their
own boards. As you might know,
Para's board is elected by
whoever they represent.
And then it has the Secretary of
State and myself on it.
Um, as it relates to educational
retirement, they have appointees
on their board, and then I'm the
only other elected official on
that board.
So,
their needs are to make sure
they pay the bills.
decrease the amount when when
the liability and make sure that
they get a good rate of return.
And I think I would add,
making sure that what they're
invested in is in direct
alignment with who they're
investing for.
The sovereign love one is very
different
Money comes from a different
place, and it has different
needs and different liquidity
concerns, depending on which
grouping you're looking at.
And as they see also manages a
lot of other agencies on their
behalf.
And so
I'm really starting to focus
because we have so much money
and we need to make sure that
these different fund managers,
let's say for example you have
fund manager ABC venture.
If they take 100 from Para,
let's say it's only going to be
an 800 fund, $800 million fund.
You take $100 from Para, 100
from SIC, 100 from ERB.
and then maybe MFA
We're already the big chunk of
the overall amount of what
they're trying to fund.
And so, I really want to have
those conversations a lot more
to make sure
um that we're all being in
alignment with one another. So
this slide
teamwork makes the dream work
I had every of the, one of the
directors and the chairs come to
the office one day because
they're all brilliant at what
they do. I respect them so much
for the expertise of them and
that their teams have.
And so they have housing crisis.
We have um
small businesses that are
frustrated because they can't
get the support that they need
to hurry up and get things done
at the local level.
Excuse me. You have
MFA who does an amazing job at
housing people and has really
figured out that skill set over
over decades. You have
Mr. Russell, who you just saw
earlier from SBIC who does a
great
amount of service for small
business.
And then you have MFA which I
can't even begin to know
everything that Marquita
Russell's team does.
She teaches me as much as she
can when I get to see her, but
I think instead of looking at
them as silos, which is to the
left.
I look at it more like what it
looks like on the right. And how
can we interchange and
interconnect in ways that
can be more meaningful to impact
the changes that we need within
the state.
Um.
Doctor Ashley
spoke to us during the State
Investment council retreat
recently. So I stole this paper
from him, and it basically is
showing the forehands, which is
government companies, financial
intermediaries and asset owners.
There's $140 trillion managed by
the investment account officers,
10,000 business schools
worldwide.
484 accredited financial,
economic, and financial
departments. 75 universities
that teach some type of
investing. And yet you only have
4 of them that have something
more aligned with investing.
So to me,
there's a huge gap
and when you look at New Mexico,
I feel that
the university level school of
investment.
should be something we should
consider because
it's not really considered
nationally to be one. There's
just not one in existence.
And so
what I really wanted to visit
with you guys today, um, outside
of what Sto does is there's 33
counties, 16 municipalities, 68
executive state agencies,
universities, schools
We need CFOs, county treasurer's
chief financial officers, um,
portfolio managers, financial
analysts, a lot of these people
will make six figures start off
100,000 easy if you're one of
the bigger bosses that does
something, you're making $400
500,000. Why are we not tapping
into this to make sure our New
Mexico students are learning
this, so that they can help
protect, defend, and take care
of our pension funds and our
sovereign wealth fund, because
we only get one chance at this.
We have a great opportunity that
many states don't have because
of the fact that we have these
billions of dollars that we
really need to make sure that
we're safeguarding, and so I
wanted to leave that with you
because all of you know all the
right people to sort of start
spreading that seed and
hopefully allowing it to grow.
You all know that I have been
very passionate about financial
literacy, financial education as
a graduation requirement. We
were one vote short of making it
mandatory in the local in the
school districts at the local
option. So think New Mexico
myself, several others in the
state who believe in this have
gone all over to different
school districts, talk to
superintendents, school boards,
and I'm very proud that we have
moved in the right direction of
having 48 of New Mexico's 89
school districts, reaching 48.3%
of all public school students in
the states with financial
literacy, but it should not
matter what school district you
live in? What zip code you live
in for you to be able to have
financial education. And so, um,
I will be speaking to the
universities about a lot of
these issues and you're the
first one to hear them publicly.
Um, so let me go ahead and get
into
um sto
So the state treasure's office
overview. We have over $19
billion. We have 7 different
accounts.
um that we manage. The local
government pulls short-term and
medium-term.
They're very different the short
term has been in existence for a
very long time, and
um
that's for all of our local
communities, our tribal
entities, and I
I
believe there are so many more
local communities that we need
to be able to impact.
So I bring this before you
because you talked to all your
local communities all the time.
If they're not invested with
LGIP, this is a great way for
them to have the safety,
liquidity, and yield. It has an
iPass system that allows for a
smaller community, um, for
example, where Dennis comes
from, there's only maybe 2 or 3
people working in an office.
They can both have the initiator
and the approver, but it can
only be one of those roles
during every transaction. You
can get your money out within 24
hours
worst case 48 hours if it's
after 1 p.m., um, and there's no
fee.
other than the 5 basis points
that you get charged for us to
do the work for you, but there's
no fee in, in taking out any of
your money.
Those who have been impacted by
fires and by flooding have
utilized this fund and have made
significant dollars on interest
earned in the last two years. If
you want information on that,
I'd be happy to share that with
you offsite.
Um, we also do overnight repo,
education and technology notes,
general obligation bonds, teen
agents for outstanding body
issues. And then, of course, we
have to be collateralized for
all of our money and right now
we're at 75% collateralization.
If you'd like to learn more
about our technology notes or
education, I offer Senator
Gonzalez because he was the
initiator of that legislation
years ago.
Um
I also would say with the LGIP
and the 5 basis points, um.
something to point out is
we are going to be asking for
our full bar authority.
It's not that we need
necessarily, I don't wanna say
we don't need more money because
we still have to go through that
whole budget cycle and make it
will hit me upside my head.
But
we have our authority from the
five basis points that we
collect from the local
governments that we could
utilize for the portion of the
funds that we need to be able to
do our staffing needs that.
um, and the girl. So, um, age
11, fiscal year 2025 highlights.
19.6 billion, largest we've ever
had in the treasurer's office.
Al GIP aids, the short term is
2.27%, largest that we've ever
had, which is great because that
means we're impacting local
communities. 1.06 billion is the
medium term, that's only the
state Investment council.
Um, they put a billion dollars
in last year. It was um a new
policy that we put together. It
gives them access to liquidity
if they need it, and they're
making a great return.
Total earnings this year was
$722 million. We serve 140
agencies, have 1100 bank
accounts and our trade volume is
22 billion.
Age 12, we've talked about
safety, liquidity, and yield.
It's on 6-10-10, which is very
different as a fundamental um
rule for us than it is for some
of the others that um
that you've heard from today
The allowable investments that
we have, which is also under
61,010 is Treasury's agencies,
mortgage-backed securities,
commercial paper, corporate
bonds, and it's only A1P1 for
commercial paper, I mean, for,
yes, for commercial paper and
then supernationals which we got
done when both Janice and I were
treasures, um, um, market
overview. So there's a lot of
data in here, but I wanted to
bring this out. Um, I asked Ms.
Anna to update it for the June
30th date. Rates have
stayed the same, um, but what I
really wanted to bring up in
this topic is something to
consider is executive pressure.
And what I mean by that is
the same way that every elected
office is independent and should
be, because the voters elected
them and they have a
constitutional duty to do those
those jobs.
is the way I still think about
the Fed.
and that bed has to be
independent.
And when we decide to change
data.
or whatever outcomes you're
wanting versus what the data
shows. You could negatively
impact all of the funds we just
talked that I'm on.
And that's nationally. Every
pension.
every government
every state agency. So, um, it's
very important that the
independence of Chairman Powell,
uh, the data including
employment is is kept intact
because
if those rates change when they
shouldn't to be anticipated to
change for whatever reason that
could impact our funds and our
liquidity.
Um.
so end of fiscal year, I'm not
gonna read through all of those,
but I did highlight items one.
4, and 5 that I thought you
would appreciate. The numbers
for the general fund were $11
billion this year. The
performance for all portfolios
outperformed the state benchmark
over the fiscal year.
The LGIP Short Fund ended the
quarter with a balance of 2.28
billion and the net yield of
4.32%.
The days of maturity ended the
quarter of 17 days for the LGIP
versus the comparable S&PGIP
index at 35 days.
But I'd like to also remind you
is that I only have 2 people in
the investment team right now.
And so we recently had an
independent investment, um.
an audit on our investment
portion and an audit on our
technology portion.
But I will say is that we need
to hire more portfolio managers.
I mean, you could see it today.
I only have 2, we were told
about this meeting last week,
and I couldn't make it happen.
Um.
they are managing
almost $20 billion by
themselves, and they're amazing
and they can do it and not that
and I.
Is it really billion dollars $20
billion and
it's important that best
practices say that every
employee shouldn't be overseeing
more than 4 billion.
And so we want to live up to
that best practice, but it,
again, it's hard to hire someone
with the type of skill set.
that you need in order to be
able to invest these funds. And
so we're doing an RFP that is
going to allow us to have
somebody else do the search to
help us to find these folks. We
have uh Girls Investment Group
that Christina is working with
for next year to help intern.
Um, I thought it would be super
cool that
um, some students can learn from
these two women. Um, they're the
only two women investment show
that I'm aware of in the nation.
Um, they both have been working
for the agency for a very long
time.
Um.
and so I think that I, I just
need to start doing something
recently, we're doing repo for
the last 4 or 5 months in-house
along with all of their other
duties, and now we're
fortunately resolved with the
contract for Repo and so that
did take a little bit of that
burden off.
Um.
so we have the investment policy
that will be updated now that we
have that audit review. We have
um the broker dealer list will,
which will align with that
investment policy, and we've
been working on a lot of
contracts that are helping with
our technology, including
something called GTreasury and
another one called Broadridge.
We're doing pre-trade
compliance, we're aligning for
pre-trade compliance instead of
post-re compliance, um, that
will also help. We'll go to page
16. Anna want
you to have the total earnings
for fiscal year 24 and 25 on a
one year, 3-year, and 5-year,
which those are fiscal years
2022 and 225.
Um, we have an LGIP newsletter
that goes out on a quarterly
basis.
and um it gives them the market
overview and it tells them a
summary about the investment
portfolio, and they also receive
monthly statements so that they
can reconcile them.
with all of the others, uh,
county or local government.
I can't talk about investments
without talking about cash,
because for every investment
that the girls do on the
investment side.
cash management has to do all of
the paperwork, the backup, the
compliance, the risk analysis,
the trait volume, um, and the
and and so you have on page
team.
the percentage of increase from
2020, sorry, fiscal year 20 to
2025 for AP uh accounts payable
transactions, trade volume,
agency bank deposits and assets
under management.
So before I go into the fun
part,
um,
I need your guys' help
We have the disability program
called the New Mexico State
Treasures achieving a better
life experience. We're number 4
in the nation right now.
and it's a partnership with the
treasurer's office in Ohio.
There are several states that
compile all of their money
together for all of those people
that are able to qualify.
person who qualifies within that
program is allowed to use their
money whenever they want. It's
sort of like having your own
LGIP.
They can purchase a debit card
that's $5 a month if they want
to use it as a more active role.
This helps people with
disabilities to not have this
mindset of use it or lose it and
instead have an opportunity to
be able to invest it and be able
to live their lives with more
sustainability financially.
This $25 August enrollment
incentive is for anyone who
opens up an account.
We will map, they will match the
$25.
And if you can get the word out
for anyone you might know, um,
we greatly appreciate it. I'm
very proud of uh Christina Perea
and Denise Valteras for how much
they have been able to grow this
program in such a short time.
If you recall, this legislative
body passed a piece of
legislation a few years ago, uh,
Representative Thompson was the
sponsor, in which allowed us to
align the federal age
adjustment, and in doing so,
January 1st,
the age will now be
46
So let's say a veteran got a
disability later in life.
they would now be able to
qualify. If someone ended up
with a disability later, they
would be able to qualify. This
helps millions more people to be
able to have these funds to
invest in them and then use them
when they need them.
Um, you'll see the percentage
increases just from this last
year, or the amount of money
within each account and the
amount of money in total, which
was 33.5% increase. We rebounded
the program with the heart on
the symbol, we asked the Pueblo
if we'd have permission to use
the Z symbol.
and yellow means friendship. And
so if there's anyone in your
communities that you'd like us
to go to your community. We are
starting a road tour that's
going to include the top
percentages of
people with disabilities in
counties in which they don't
have a staple account. And so,
you know, I, I did my job,
she'll let me eat lunch later.
Um, so I want to go to page 20.
and you're gonna be the first
ones to hear about this data.
We, um, had a piece of
legislation that we had proposed
this last year. We didn't get a
legislative hearing, and we were
very excited because Echo
Northwest is somebody that we
partnered with to do data just
on New Mexico.
And so I want you guys to be
able to use these.
data points for whatever you
need to in your communities, um,
but I'm gonna give them to you
based on where we are at today
and where we can be tomorrow.
So on the right hand side, I'm
gonna tell you some things that
are a little bit daunting, um,
but bear with me. You, you know
these numbers.
There's 50th in child
well-being, 50th in education.
44th in health
New Mexico topped a recent
Forbes list of the most
dangerous states with the
highest violent rate in the
nation.
New Mexico consistently has the
highest alcohol-related death
rate in the country and ranked
6th nationally for drug overdose
deaths in 2021.
New Mexico is ranked forty-ninth
in family and community.
With an incarceration rate of
647 per 100,000 residents, New
Mexico locks up a higher
percentage of its people than
any independent democratic
country on earth.
New Mexico is ranked
forty-eighth in economic
well-being.
suicide in 2022, the most recent
data available, New Mexico had
the 4th highest suicide rate,
24.7 per 100,000 residents in
the United States.
The state spends at least $10
billion in fiscal year 23 on
income support programs to
subsidize low wages and support
people not working.
So
in looking at all of that to the
left, you'll see other items
that are happening in New
Mexico.
that we don't talk about as
much.
People are leaving,
outmigration, outpaces in
migration.
Those leaving tend to be
younger, better educated, and
have higher income.
Wages are low and poverty is
high. New Mexico ranks 3rd in
poverty nationally, with
persistent disparities for
Native Americans, women, and
people born in state.
Educational attainment is
lagging, graduation rates are
low, especially for in-state
born residents. Many still leave
college with debt, despite
generous.
aid.
housing and capital are out of
reach. First-time buyers
struggle with affordability.
Small businesses face barriers
to financing, especially in
rural and underserved areas.
Retirement security is weak.
Most private sector workers lack
access to workplace retirement
savings. 1/3 of seniors live in
poverty, heavily reliant on
Social Security.
The state pays the price
with the $10 billion.
um, annually in, in spent of
public assistance.
And so,
I bring this to you because I
don't want to come with
problems. I want to come with
solutions, and I know we got
impacted even more with the idea
that we are going to be impacted
not only by the terrorists on
Mexico. We're gonna be and that
impacts our oil and gas
industry. It impacts our
healthcare industry.
We also know the cuts with Cenia
Labs, the increase in most so
most labs. We also know that the
tariffs are impacting cattle.
and other sources, including um
supplies that we need for
hospitals.
We know that the big beautiful
bill is going to impact Medicaid
and Medicare.
We are the number one Medicaid
recipient, um, and we're the
number one food stamp recipient.
Those are facts that we can't
disagree with.
What I need is to start thinking
about is we need to start
thinking bigger.
So,
we had a proposal
of $7000 per baby born.
in New Mexico
being invested by the state
Investment council in a
long-term manner.
In doing so, by the time that
they are 18, that fund for them,
just one individual will be
23,000 to 37,000.
At age 35 to 65, that'll turn
into 74,000 and it can go all
the way up to 568,000.
And so
when we're talking about where
are we going?
We have
2nd largest in oil and gas. We
have
the largest, I didn't tell them
who this one was, the largest
wind production, energy
production in the western
hemisphere going on in Torrance
County. Um, we just took a tour
of it. It's amazing, 550 miles
of line of energy that's going
to be used for Arizona and
California. I mean this is huge.
We have all these different
projects. We have solar or sun,
we have wind, we have all four
seasons.
and as bad as the data shows,
New Mexico is the best place to
live, and it is the most
beautiful, and it has the most
beautiful people, and we need
that reflection to show in our
data and in our numbers. So my
idea is that $700 million.
be invested
and at 18 years, they can tap
into it. It wouldn't be that
they get the money. I mean all
of us were 18, we know what that
looks like.
But they'd be able to use it for
certain things that this body
decides that they should be able
to use it for. And the check
would go to, for example, the
university or to the trade
school or whatever you guys
decide that is making sense, but
doing so
could jumpstart homeownership.
It could expand access to
education, it could fuel
entrepreneurship, it can improve
mobility and job access. It
offers long-term stability.
242 million in new household
wealth from home equity
retirement savings, and debt
reduction. $151 million in
business revenue and
entrepreneurial activity, $130
million in new tax revenues
including property taxes,
groceryceipts taxes, and excise
tax, all levels of government.
860 jobs.
860 jobs years created, and $47
million in new labor income. $90
million boost to GDP driven by
new demand across key sectors.
25% reduction in outmigration
and would keep an estimated 1500
more residents per age cohort
working and living in New
Mexico.
And so that's something I want
to leave with you all because
it's always good to look at
something from the brighter
side. The cup is half full, not
half empty. We have the
opportunity and the option, and
we also have the money. These
are things that other states
don't necessarily have.
It's time for us to also invest
in our people and our children,
and in their families. Is time
for questions.
Great,
uh thank you, madam, um,
treasurer and Deputy. Um, we are
going to start our questions
with Senator Woods.
and then, uh, Senator Cedillo
Lopez.
Thank you, ma'am.
And Stephonics, and then a
representative Duncan.
Well, it's amazing. I agree with
you.
We are
quite a unique state, aren't we?
Yes, we are
We uh
we are totally owned by the
federal government.
No.
no reason
we
we have more land ownership by
the federal government than
anybody else.
Well, back in the day,
when, when we started coming
west and you can
be criticized by the Native
Americans being drove out.
different things, but the idea
of the Spanish colonial.
coming up here
was, how do we find E's mother's
fate.
and we find that mother Spain by
settling new country.
and sending money back to Spain.
which I was looking for gold at
the time.
but
a lot of that mentality, I
believe, is still in New Mexico.
We, we
we take the mentality that
I think someone's over us.
There's still a king over us.
We, we believe that uh the king
should provide for us.
Everything should be
handed to us. We now have
what we assume is free college,
which probably cost us still
$10,000 a year.
but it's supposedly free
college.
We, we're spending all the
money.
our
citizens
and yet our citizens are still
poor.
So when you bring up the idea of
why do our colleges
teach
financial magnitude
Why can't we get a
MBA out of our universities.
to help us with her
investments
That's a good question
It's also a good question as why
can't we get
teachers out of our colleges. I
can't get.
other professionals
Market M get the professionals
that we do train to stay here.
You, you hit it very plainly,
right on the head.
adds to
instead of the
out migration
we should be able to find jobs
with interstate.
for our citizens that have
high abilities
that have those skills that we
both desperately need within our
state.
So, you know, he likes the
proposal here.
of the, uh, putting money back
for birth.
you know, and, and I'm
agreeing what
we're doing is not working
We've got everybody on a
maintenance scale.
You know, we just talk earlier
about what we shouldn't have
economic activity, if it's a
low-paying job.
Everybody on a maintenance
scale.
We don't expect them to achieve.
want them to achieve. I don't
seem like.
Yeah.
If a businessman you talked to
is looking for that employee.
When they get to be my age.
they're looking for that
employee.
to run their business
to take over
and it's, it's no different in
state government.
What do we do?
done in state government
Our people, we train them.
and about the time they learn
all the rules and regulations.
identity, private government,
private industry hires them for
3 more of the wages.
And we just did a wonderful job
of training.
And, and, and
and government, I mean, uh,
better respect.
cherry pixel, I might say.
So
what is the solution and I, I
love you having the solution.
but
to, to create
the world.
Warren Buffett's in this world.
to create those investors that
just outshine everybody.
How do, how do you do that? Is
that uh something that is
already inside of, and if it is
inside him, how do we turn it
out?
I went to a, a, a meeting.
uh in
Colorado Springs
by one of these uh CSG West.
and it was a leadership meeting
and they said that the Air Force
was trying to devise a test.
to see who had grit amongst
their officers.
and they define grit is most
people that were successful.
under any circumstance
And this is the Air Force
Academy.
You'd think that
anybody that went to the Air
Force Academy.
but already paid the dollar,
right?
But they was looking for the top
of the top.
They was looking for the
individuals.
that, that did something.
achieve great things.
in New Mexico, those individuals
are leaving and going to other
states.
Mhm
That's her problem
with
have more natural resources in
this state.
than most any state around
Everybody says oil and gas, oil
and gas.
No, I'm getting near the money
off all the gas that we could
because we can value add on that
oil and gas. How many refineries
we've got?
One.
one retirement
how much money could we
gain in, in tax, how much jobs
leave.
there was 800 jobs left when
they were finding that.
800 jobs
Those were I in jumps. The
firehouses up north.
1500 jobs
We didn't gain those jobs back
anywhere.
That's a net loss.
economy of our state, you know,
we can argue about, well, we had
to do that.
save the planet.
Look at all that
but you can't save the planet.
and not eat
not have
money for our citizens that
don't have my be good paying
jobs.
It
you talked about the energy
abundance. He talked about the
suncia.
I know a little about something
to you
That is, uh, um
a job, a industry.
that is completely exported out
of state.
I would say
Mhm.
sad to say all the way down to
the crane operators.
Where is that economic activity
for the state of New Mexico. Why
aren't we developing
the gifts of that electricity
here. So if we could use it
here.
the big rules and regulations,
guys.
The pay rules and regulations
are we stifling industries so
much.
that they don't want to come in
to New Mexico.
You know, Mr. Roper was just
here, and he told us how much
success he
that I talked to a lot of
businessmen.
that don't want to stay in New
Mexico.
because the rules and
regulations.
They are stifling
and every year there are
more rules and regulations
See, I
want to tell you that
I believe that
we
should keep
as much money as we can possible
within our state. So a question
I have.
Madam Chairman
is this
We have this money and some of
it has to be very liquid.
Do we keep that in local banks.
No.
not all of it
Um, we try our best to be able
to, madam manage chairwoman, um.
so
I also have a business to run.
and I need to make sure I get a
good rate of return off my
liquidity.
And so I get a really good rate
of return.
off of some of the banks. Now,
there's also that balance. What
are you doing within your
community that could make a
potential investment or return
that helps the overall stay
good.
That's one thing to look at, but
if I came before you and I
showed you that I was making, I
don't know.
4.1
% right now instead of 4.
35% off of $19.3 billion. We'd
have, we'd have a different
discussion. I think you'd be
pretty upset with me about.
And so we have tried our best to
work with local banks. We've,
uh, opened the doors. We've
spoken to um
the lobbyists for both banker
groups.
We're trying to figure out how
can we assist in a way that
there can be a good partnership
but at the end of the day, they
need to be able to collateralize
a certain amount of money, which
some banks have told me they're
not able to do the 75%
collateralization.
Um, others don't want the money
because they just can't afford
to have it there at the 75%.
and then others can't be or
match that rate of return that I
have on my top 5 banks.
And so
um
it's a conversation I continue
to have. I continue to check in.
We also do a risk analysis, um,
with our Sandos team does to
make sure that the bank is in
good standing.
that they don't have any issues
that are gonna be negatively
impact the bank.
And so there's a lot of factors
that go into the decision of
what banks we use and when we
use them.
If we turned around and we put
some of our taxes.
into
programs
so that we can
loan money
good the same direction here,
Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, I think we're not
talking about fruits and veg,
we're talking about two
different things.
The mission and the role of SBIC
is not to get a long-term rate
of return off of a dollar amount
of an investment, but they're
trying to do is get a rate of
return of more businesses
opening up in New Mexico, which
they have done a significantly
great job in doing with the
amount of money that they have
received from the severance tax
on funding.
That is a different role
than the comparison of what John
Clark's job is an SIC's job,
which is to take higher risks to
get heart a lot larger returns
for a long-term overall
investment.
I'm neither one of those
My job is to give you liquidity
to make sure you're paying your
bills on time. And that includes
all your bond payments, that
includes everything that we pay
out on December 30th and June
30th.
which is literally billions of
dollars.
I think if we're going to talk
about some of the issues that
are impacted, the arbitrage
issue, for those that don't know
what arbitrage is. It's when
somebody didn't get the projects
done, that this body decided to
allocate to them, and they
didn't do it on time, and I made
too much money than what I was
supposed to. I have to give that
money back.
And right now we have to open up
some account, a sluggish account
through the treasury, because we
made too much money for them.
And it's pretty significant. I
think that's, that's a big
issue. I think the technology
issue is a big issue. I think
what um
our senator said about
was getting hired in these
different positions. I think the
adequacy of the skill set of the
employees in New Mexico is not
there, and that's from the crane
operators because they're all
coming from Oklahoma and Texas,
whether it's for oil and gas, or
for suna powder or for on the
San Juan and McKinley side.
They're not all from New Mexico,
so our groceryceipts tax buddies
are not getting paid out in New
Mexico. They're getting their
checks and they're going back to
Oklahoma, Texas, Arizona,
Colorado, and they're using that
money that they made here and
investing it and and
spending elsewhere
I think that's a big issue
So when I say easy things to
fix.
financial literacy is a
graduation requirement. It's a
no-brainer. There's no reason
and now 50% of all of our school
districts already have it. We
need to add it on. Speaking to
our universities the same way
that they're working on
healthcare and getting doctors
to be able to, you know, work at
the different university
hospitals here is the same thing
we need to start thinking about,
about our treasuries, our
finance people, the people who
want to, you know, start doing
your businesses when you guys
decide to retire.
finances to me.
is more important to understand,
to make better choices for
yourself and your family, than
it is for you to know how to
read and write. And I say that
with all respect.
that money and how it manages
and works and how you buy a
house and or a business or how
you implement things all comes
from the structure of
understanding your finances. And
that's why I think that those
two things are the no-brainers
that we need to just get done,
because then we can keep our
people in New Mexico. The baby
bonds issue is a long-term
investment.
When all of you have children or
maybe you have grandchildren
now. Can you imagine if the
government told you instead of
just paying your grocery sees,
tax, paying your property taxes,
etc. But they said when you
started your family or you have,
you got pregnant, to say,
we're investing in you and you
have a commitment.
And I think that that commitment
needs to be interchangeable
between the give and the take.
So what you're saying is that
the baby bone.
we, we set aside every time a
baby comes, we set aside.
that money
and what it was,
Madam Chair, I, I'm actually
saying we get $700 million from
wherever the legislature
decides.
We invest it in total, 23,000
babies are born per year
estimated. So that will allow
you to have funding for every
child born in New Mexico that
can only use the funds within
New Mexico unless you're talking
about a university or a trade
school. And then they would be
able to utilize it after the age
of 18, after a financial
literacy component, and um
and then that would allow all of
these positives that we talked
about. So you wanted 700 million
one-time investment one time,
and that would take care of
babies from those.
until 2060
But by then you'll have shifted
all of the negative data so that
they can then start.
applying for themselves and
their families, that would allow
for that sustainable growth to
strengthen the middle class.
So
so the babies that were born
last year.
were not considered them. It's
only the babies born from today
forward or whenever that.
is initiated. Madam Chair,
whenever this legislature
puts that $700 million aside and
permits it uh with the
governor's signature, yes,
that's when it would begin the
next year would babies would be
born or whatever you say that it
would be getting trouble with
that.
that I see
is that we've got all these
funds already set up.
to do all these other things.
that we haven't accomplished the
goal for those here, but I had a
little problem.
with doing it for the next one
I see where you're coming from
I don't see
the guarantee
of something in the future. We
can't even get people.
to go up and beyond on the
retirement right now.
Thank God, because we take money
out for retirement.
today
I want.
all of the check
in their pocket right now, and
I'm sure you all heard that.
And I agree with you, they don't
have a long-term goal in her
head. I'm picking up too much
time, Madam Chairman. I thank
you for the opportunity. I thank
you for your answers.
Thank you, Senator. What's, uh,
maybe even the treasure can have
lunch together.
Um, I had Senator Sidilia Lopez,
but if it's OK with you,
Senator, uh, Senator Gonzalez
has to leave and he of course
quick question first.
Thank.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, for yielding
that.
Um, I had a few questions, but
I'm just gonna keep one remark,
and uh,
uh just in listening and seeing
everything.
And uh especially on page 9
where you have a quiet art.
in Mexico universities offering
investing.
courses
and uh one of the things that
that I see is some.
you know, we have had uh some
really good presenting.
You can't tell me that the
universities can't afford to
send one person.
as a representative to to be
here.
you know.
and just grassroots seeing what
is being discussed.
what's coming and just
good communication
and I remember several years
back that um
when I was the chairman of La
Sallemo's oversight committee,
question kept coming up that
and they said, well, because uh
they're not skilled, they're not
this, so I brought them all
together, all the universities.
and asked Los Amos, will you
tell us what you need because we
can't offer something or we
can't teach something.
if we don't know what you're
asking for.
And that went well for a while,
but then it's like anything
else, you know, little by
little, it just started to.
to not happen
and uh
when uh
the funding of what has happened
with the early childhood
education program.
and the trust
You know, there is absolutely
excuse why we shouldn't be
number one in the nation.
because now we have the
infrastructure, we have the
funding, and if it was
if
part of the university
I would be jumping at, you know,
how can, what can I offer, what
class can we do? How can we
become number one?
you know, in early childhood
education.
I think that's the kind of
culture that we need to build.
and, you know, perhaps it's our
part that we need to start
inviting people to come, but
right now, we have had some
very, very good presentations,
and not only on this committee,
but quite a few other
committees, and
there's no one, you know, to
be able to see what we're
talking about.
And yes, we do have uh
the capability now, you know,
through
but um
you know, it's a lot better when
you're there, you know, and
you're present and you can see
that and uh now I'm just gonna
say that maybe we should just
keep an eye on certain
presentations and we take the
step of inviting them.
Thank you. Thank you for
Thank you, Senator Ceda Lopez
for yielding your time. It's,
um, your question.
Thank you, thank you, madam, um,
Madam Chair, and um,
I, I will say to, to a senators,
um, when I was in Loamentadio, I
was, I always wondered why the
people who were paying, getting
paid less, did not add to the
to the match because we matched
it and they didn't
they didn't add, but the people
who are paying more did.
And then like, so I asked them,
why are you doing this? And
because they're paying less,
they didn't have it to match, so
we changed the whole system to
add a fixed amount instead of a
percentage.
and that made all the difference
and we, we found greater,
greater participation in the
retirement plan. So sometimes
you just need, need to ask
people.
what do you need to make it
work?
Um.
you know, these kids, these
people have kids in school and
they had a lot of expenses. Um,
but I have, speaking of
financial literacy, I had
a question and I always tell
people there's no such thing as
a stupid question, so please,
you know, bear with me.
What is um
what was it, um
yeah, we called
I think some early, early
retold.
something, yes
Thank you for that question and
thank you for catching me on
I was trying my best not to use
acronyms overnight repo pool. I
just, I, I don't know what that
is. So, um
so some of the cash that we need
to keep on hand if we're not
able to invest it based on what
those needs are for each one of
those pools. We also have a big
chunk of it that we do on the
overnight repo and depending on
what the dollar, the percentages
for each.
um, the, the girls will decide
what is best so it can either be
within the bank or a portion of
it, or it'll be part of the repo
dynasty.
have chairs and senators.
um, is repurchased is the repo
repurchase
So it's um
taken the option overnight.
to repurchase the trade whatever
is offered, and it's first fixed
amount that's guaranteed, and it
settles the next day. And so
it's immediate liquidity, but
overnight it's making money for
the.
for the state, or actually it's
local governments that are
utilizing it mainly of why, how
is it making money? I guess I'm
missing that.
Madam chair, uh, senator, it's
making money because alternative
would be for it to be sitting in
the bank doing that so doing,
it's not doing nothing even our,
our banks are giving us a return
on investment, but it's a higher
interest rate.
OK
OK.
Well, that's something I didn't
know before, so I'm, I'm glad
that you're in charge of it. It
is impressive, everything that
you have to manage and it's not
a huge office. I think you need
more than 2 investment people
for sure, um, and I, you know, I
hope you asked for it. I hope
you get it.
Um, because this is, as we was
we've been hearing all day. The
expertise required nowadays is,
is so deep in his um
his uh
his senator Wood said, you know,
to you or no Senator uh Gonzalez
said, you know, these, the
universities, I don't remember.
ever getting financial literacy,
every, everything I learned was
like from hard knocks, um.
and, and experience some good,
not so good, some not so good.
Um, so I, I, I think that that's
a good idea. With regard to the,
to the baby bonds. I think it's
a good idea. I'm not sure about
the lump sum. We weren't able to
even, well, uh, the goal for the
finance chair um was to have a
billion dollars put in for
behavioral health, and we were
able to cobble together 100
million and then some future
income from other
sources return, you know,
returns. So I'm not sure that,
um, especially when we're
probably gonna have to be
filling holes in our budgets
that we're gonna be able to come
up with that much of a lump sum.
So I encourage you to be a
little bit more creative because
we're not gonna be his flesh as
we thought we were
um because of the, the holes
we're gonna have to fill in to
our budgets.
Um, and so, you know, I, I would
just make that suggestion is, is
think about how to, how to put
that money together, more
creatively in, in our situation.
Um, I like the idea of the
incentive for individuals, so
that if it's, I hope that it's
not just reaching 18, and I
think you made that clear. It
that it would be 18 and they
want to go to college or 18 and
they want to buy a house.
They're 18 and you know, and
some things that money can help
them take that next step up.
And, and that seems really
exciting. Um, and then
I guess the other thought I have
is some babies don't need that.
They're already
born with, with, um,
with a silver spoon, but you
know what I mean. Some babies
don't necessarily, they're not
gonna need that 7000, so that
might be something else you
think about with regard to the
baby buns, but um I think it's a
very interesting proposal, and
it may be a way to um
to help. I mean, I'm, I'm very
lucky because all three of my
kids ended up, 2 of them went
away for school, and I was
afraid they were gonna stay
away. And after working in other
states, they did come back.
Um, and I'm really grateful for
that. But a lot of my friends'
kids have gone away not to come
back, and part of it is if
they're in finance, like they go
to Cornell, they get a degree in
finance, really not that much
they can do.
Although that's why I made the
comment earlier today. Hey, now
may be a good time to be hired
in this area because there's a
lot of disruption.
and so a lot of people are
leaving DC leaving New York, um,
and thinking about other places
to go and I know some, some of
my colleagues and friends are
hoping that they come back here.
Um, and if there's state jobs,
maybe, um, I'll go.
in most cases, it'll be a huge a
huge financial cut.
Um.
So anyway, those, those are my
thoughts from your presentation.
I really appreciate it and I
appreciate all the work you do.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
just a couple of comments, um,
off of that, but the baby bond,
I I do have a creative idea of
doing it. I would not ask for it
to necessarily come from general
fund, but something to consider,
and I know there's, there's
people on all different aspects
of this.
but early childhood fund is so
ginormous.
to just pull 700 million of it,
that's already there into a fund
that is seen safeguarded with
that compounded interest.
would be so impactful to be able
to make this program successful.
Um, I'll probably get
a lot of calls from that
because I'm not the legislators,
but I see the funds and I know
where the money's at and there's
a lot of money in different
places that we can just pull
from that bucket. It still stays
in a bucket. The other aspect
that is considered, and I'm so
happy that the senator mentioned
it, is that there could be a
tier system.
So based on your income levels,
it could be that way. Other
states do it for all the people
who are on Medicaid.
um, Medicaid recipients. So the
reason why, and this is the only
reason why I, I agreed that it
should be on their mac about it
is that
the data was showing that almost
everybody was poor. There's only
a very few portion that are not
or that have enough capital from
their family to be able to do
otherwise, but that is something
also to look at. I think if they
do the study, they do the
research, they work with DFA and
treasurer's Office and others to
come up with all the rules. I
think we could do that, but if
we can just get that money
locked in, so that it can start
making money off of itself, I
think would be very helpful. Um,
as far as jobs and employment,
I completely agree. Um, I want
to keep as many New Mexicans in
New Mexico, and I want them to
be skilled to do the jobs that
we need. I currently have, I
think, 8 positions that are, are
opened and um and it's not for
lack of trying, it's just the
skill set that I need on the
financial side that that we just
don't get a great applicant pool
to be able to do it. So this is
even more why I'm passionate and
for the students you're talking
about, please let them know SIC
is gonna be hiring about 30
people in the
next coming years, um, retention
is something that's really
important.
But there's a lot of people in
state government that are close
to the end of their retirement,
uh, timeline, and that's
important. And I think one other
thing that is really important
when you're talking about the
pension fund, is that the local
governments have to use their
vacancy rates instead to hire
people because that helps the
pension fund to become more
solvent by having more people
employed so that they're paid.
Oh, that's that 5:29 fund, um,
does your office manage it? Is
it, where is it managed to man
chair. It's an independent
office in the state of New
Mexico, Natalie Cordova is the
executive director, and that is
definitely something for people
who have the money to be able to
put it in and invest, um, and
utilize it, and you can pick
what type of investment risk you
want to take in order to do it
and other people can give money
as well for their birthdays or
gifts.
Um, and it's a great program to
be able to utilize for that.
Good, we did that for my
youngest daughter.
You inspired me to start one for
my grandchildren.
That's.
Madam
pleasure. I'm sorry, but we
still have like 3 more
questions, so we're here you're
there with us, please, uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you,
and Treasure, um,
I'll disagree with you if you
can't read or write, you can't
manage your portfolio.
period.
So, let's let's start off with
that premise and um the next
thing I'll say is that uh I was
raised with the thought that any
work that I do
uh as long as it's legal is
honorable work.
and I ought to do it
So, that my, you're optimistic
about the $7000 and what it's
going to do for our state and
what it's gonna do for our kids
and what it's gonna do for our
economy.
Is that it was its spaced or is
that your guess?
Mr. Chairman, that was
evidence-based off of Echo
Northwest's packet that they did
specifically for New Mexico.
And where have they done this
before? They've done it in
several states, they've done
other analysis for other states.
They are top leader in the
nation for doing research on
items like this for government
entities, particularly also
state treasures.
And they've come to fruition as
this 20 years that they're
studying.
period, or is this
discarded in other states? How
many, how many states has it
been done in and how long ago?
So I'm not sure how many other
states have requested for their
assistance specifically related
to baby bonds, but I know that
they are a company that does
research, analytical research
for many government agencies,
the only state that has baby
bonds currently enacted in full
is Connecticut. They are on
their 2nd year. Um, the state of
California does have baby ponds,
but only for foster
kids and children who have lost
their parents, um, due to fires
or COVID.
Um, there are other states,
there's 27 states looking at
uh certain forms of baby bonds,
depending on their state. Some
of them are doing a pilot
project similar to, I believe,
Rhode Island and Vermont.
And there are others that are
doing it through philanthropy.
There is one in New Mexico
currently, um,
Partnership for Community
Action, and Northern College is
doing it for people who are in
the trades that have a child.
I would venture I'd prefer that
you come back in and do a very
small pilot program.
Go out and find 5 kids.
drop the money in their account
20 years from now, come back to
the legislature and say, OK, it
actually worked.
Tell me where that happens
Um, so, so I don't, I don't
agree with, I don't agree with
this, um.
I think there's a myriad of
problems that we have in this
state. Um
probably first and foremost
starts with the family.
The lack of fathers in the home,
uh, with the lack of uh families
being together.
Until we fixed that problem, I
don't think we're gonna fix the
problem by putting $7000 away or
giving every social program we
give in this state.
I don't think that's gonna take
care of the problem.
So, while I appreciate the
thought,
thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam. So, Madam Chair, I'd like
to respond. OK.
So I think that's part of the
problem New Mexico has in the
idea of waiting 20 years or
waiting until everyone else
figures it out, and then we
finally jump on board. I think
by that time we've missed an
opportunity and we might not
even be around to be able to see
the success. I think if we
thought that way, we would put
our money under um a mattress or
in a coffee can and not invest
it because why would we invest
in private equity or venture
capital because there's so much
risk in it. There's risk and
then there
' s calculated risk, and
calculated risk comes with data
components that work with it in
order to make better results.
The data component that we have
for Northwest, and the data that
we have followed suit with
Doctor Hamilton has clearly
showed it that this is an
investment that would be able to
allow for our families, whether
they're single, not single,
foster kids, whatever the case
may be, the money would go with
the child to invest in
opportunities that only the
legislature would allow, which
is uh
business, um.
mortgage or a first down payment
on a house or an educational
aspect. So the data does show um
it and I'd love to have you see
it so that you could read it and
maybe
decide otherwise. I will say
reading, of course, is always
going to be something that's
important. I also think it's
important to know more than one
language. Um, my comments in
that mindset, and believe me, I
come from humble beginnings, and
I don't think that anything has
to do with work ethic or grit,
because if it was based on work
ethic or grit, I'd be a lot
richer than I am today. It's
about the idea of wanting to
teach, like my mom did and make
$65,000 after 35 years with the
master's degree
for her retirement. It's my dad
starting off at 50 cents an hour
working for the city of Las
Vegas and moving up to
Department of Transportation
Road Supervisor. It's not about
the idea of not having the grit
or the work ethic or the
capacity. It's about being able
to have the funds to Senator Sio
Lopez's point, half the funds to
be able to invest in your own
family. So the same way when you
have children, if you have the
capacity to put it in the
savings account or a 529
account.
when you make money, we know
what compound interest does.
This is exactly the same concept
to be able to invest in all
children, whether they were born
into a good situation or a bad
situation. Instead of putting
that same money that you guys
keep putting $10 billion into
services and having the same
negative impacts. So if it
doesn't work the way it's
working, then we need to look at
other ways to look outside the
box and come up with solutions.
Say thank you, ma'am treasure,
um, you're definitely humble and
uh passionate about this issue.
Um, I'm gonna move on to Senator
Thornton so that we don't get
out of here too late tonight.
Ta chair
I, I'll just have I just have a
few questions, um.
First of all, I, I appreciate
the idea of financial literacy.
I think that's a great idea, and
I know that
we still haven't gotten it past
the, the high school level.
Um.
but the idea of, of, I'm, I'm
kind of surprised that the um
we don't have an MBA and and
sort of
you know, school investment type
of thing. It seems to me that
that should be standard. I'll be
willing to work with you on
something like that, uh, since
I'm on the education committee,
maybe we can put to pursue that.
So I agree with you that.
My only concern about doing
that, however, is that uh you
mentioned the pain that these
kinds of folks get.
They're gonna get 250, 300K a
year.
and so they
we go to New York
or LA or something like that to
get the big bucks.
And unless we can pay,
and compensate folks here at
that kind of rate, the good ones
will go somewhere else, and if
that's the only concern I have
with uh
schooling folks and investments,
and they're going to say, well,
I'm going to invest in myself,
and they'll disappear. So we
have to figure out a way to, to
make up for that as well.
Um.
Madam Chair, may I respond to
that just so you don't have any
stress about it. Um,
the state Investment council
just recently increased the
wages based on them and McAllen
um study and so it is more of
the appropriate level, apparent
in the RV are now looking at the
same so that they don't lose
their people, and I definitely
have to do the same on my end.
We invest very differently than
they do. It's not an apples to
apples comparison, but we are
definitely looking at that, and
I think that's one of the first
fixes to try to keep our, our
employees here
instead of going to New York or
the private industry.
Thank you for that.
just a quick question for me and
my edification. Do, do you
handle unclaimed assets in the
in the state, or is that your
responsibility as well?
Madam Chair, um
other states do, other state
treasurers do. New Mexico does
not. It's under the governor,
under Thaksin Reli. OK, thank
you for that.
I have an idea for you. Uh, no,
I think I have one more
question.
I'm sorry, madam chair
Um, maybe not. Let me see. I
only have to be in a
neighborhood meeting at 6
o'clock, so I'll make sure you
get there unless it's an hour
away.
Um.
here at 5 o'clock traffic. OK,
that's true.
I think that's all I have. Thank
you very much. Thank you so
much, uh, Representative Rayala.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, and I'm sensitive
to the time because I have to be
at another constituent meeting
also. So, um, we'll quickly and
thank you, Madam Treasurer for
your report. We it's always very
thorough and to see a sick and
um
full of
data
Thank you. I have one clarifying
question on page 6. I just want
to make sure that we're
referring to the right body.
So you have, and you referred to
Marquita Russell a few times.
Um, are you, when you say MFA,
did you mean NMFA or is it MFA
on your charts, because
I'm uh
I just want to make sure. Yes,
so, madam chair, housing in
Mexico is the old MFA part and
MFA is Marquita Russell. So we
had Izzy, um, from Housing New
Mexico and Chairman um Preyes,
and then Marquita Russell from
MFA Russ, Mr. Russell, um, from
SBIC and then John Clark from
Singas.
I guess Madam Chair, thank you.
uh, what I'm referring to is the
acronym. It's New Mexico Finance
Authority, NMFA, and that's what
threw me off. But anyway, thank
you. Sorry. All right, no,
that's all right. That's OK. Um,
page 21, going back to baby
bonds, and you answered part of
it already. I was going to ask
you about um how you, or whether
you have been in fact um looking
at leveraging other funds, which
you already answered that
there's several funds in the
state that could um
we wouldn't have to dip into the
general funds. So thank you for
that, that we need to continue
to look at that and see how we
can visit those other funds, uh,
because I think it's all about
leveraging as much as we can
right now because we do not know
the forecast, the federal
government forecast and how we
will have to step in. So I would
say that in the final, one other
thing about that leveraging is
that we heard a report this
morning from the SIC and
they, it occurred to me as you
were speaking, that they have an
um an a very impressive
investment portfolio of
entities, individuals, all
everything, everybody that
give for specific purposes or
invest, not gift, but invest in
specific cer uh
for specific purposes, you might
want to visit their office and
maybe have someone, an intern or
someone go through that and
identify every possible source
that um we could maybe look at
leveraging uh and inviting them
to invest in our state in this,
in this arena. I'd love to be
part of this continued
discussion on Ty Bonds. Finally,
one last comment is I think that
we all have to um
I think it boils down to we all
have to have the courage to
break ground.
in new
arenas
and
we have to have the courage to
be catalyst for change. So if
that means that Mexico is first
on the map to model.
so be it, because then New
Mexico is breaking ground and
others are going to learn from
us, and as others come in and
join us.
then we will be learning from
them as well, and we continue
progress forward. So I just
wanted to say that because many
times in Mexico back to Senator
Wood's comments, New Mexico has
been made to be a dependent
state. We're not a dependent
state because we chose to be. We
are a dependent state because we
were forced you into it and then
we were psychologically
um embedded in that mindset. So
thank you, Madam Chair, for
indulging me on that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Treasurer.
Thank you. um
Representative Senators, um, I,
I have a couple of things and I
just have to say and I'm sorry,
um, madam, uh, treasure for
keeping you this late, but
um,
with regard to financial
literacy, we work with a lot of
banks, and all of these groups
that have presented to us today,
work with a lot of different
banks, um, and financial
managers and so on. And one of
the things that I always think
about, um
you know, because I did serve on
a credit union board for 13
years. Um,
is
we need to really sort of
challenge some of these banks
and credit unions to create
financial literacy programs for
our children, and I don't think
that we should wait until
they're in college. I think that
they need to be doing that. I, I
just had this conversation with
my nephew, and he has two little
kids and we were talking about
their future, and I said, teach
them how to balance their
checkbook and teach them how to
manage their money, you know,
and I think that
um these are things that we need
to really instill and I, I
appreciate your fighting for
your what your passion is. I
think it's important, um, but I
think that
we also need to challenge sort
of these public-private
partnerships, um.
not only in our schools, um, you
know, to teach our kids at an
early age how to do these
things, because I think we would
be in a way
better place today, um, you know
because people would know how to
manage their money. I mean,
instead, and, you know,
I'm not a casino, I'm not a
gambler. So I, I'd rather have
something that I could wear.
or put on, uh, then putting my
money in there and not, not
knowing where it's gonna go. Um
and that's nothing against
people that go to casinos. I
mean, I think that's a personal
choice, but I think that we
really need to think a little
bit more, like, how do we
challenge our
corporate
folks to help
our kids, and I, I know they do
that in other
big cities in the country and,
you know, I, that's one thing.
Um, the other thing
answer to that because I
absolutely.
I'm so happy you said that,
because we are. In fact, I think
every bank that we've worked
with, they will tell you they
have never heard anyone talk
about banking relationships, the
way that I talked about them and
everyone in my office is shocked
about how we do it, but we make
sure they have volunteer hours.
We make sure that they're either
doing financial literacy, or
they're doing uh women
empowerment, whatever they do
good, and then we're offering
for them to meet with certain
schools to talk to them or
different businesses to talk to
them, so they've partnered
with Bankon, um, our bigger
banks have now done financial
education for our state
employees for 4 different
webinars. We've also had them go
to the Financial empowerment
program that we did for the fire
victims in San Miguel and Mora.
We're waiting for a response
from Riaddoso so that we can do
the financial empowerment
program there, and some of the
banks have been willing to offer
their services, and the banks
were the for the first time ever
we're part of the coalition to
add for financial literacy as a
graduation requirement because
they're invested
just as much as us, and they're
also willing to go to schools to
talk to people about banking
because who better to do it than
the bankers?
And that brings me to my second
issue is that
you know, I think
New Mexico a little bit has an
image problem because we don't
brag about this stuff, and we
don't put it out there like I
would have never known this
unless I brought this up, is we
need to, we need to learn a
little bit more to our own horn
on the things that are positive
in our state, and not so much on
the things that are negative.
And I worked in the inner city
neighborhoods for many, many
years in Albuquerque, and they
used to tell us you can't turn
Berellas around.
You can't turn Martinez down
around. You can't turn himself.
All these older neighborhoods
that have so much rich history
and, you know, and we did. If
you go to Berellis now, you
drive down 4th Street, it's
completely different. I remember
when the windows were boarded
up.
and they said, oh, those
businesses will never thrive.
Well, now 4th Street is is
thriving, um, I mean, so I think
some of it is, and it's hard to
do to turn that image around,
but, but it can be done, and I,
I can say this cause I grew up
in a little small town of
Espinola, where everyone said,
oh, you grew up there? Yeah,
well, I did, but I'm very proud
of it because I know there's a
lot of good people there, and,
you know,
so what I'm saying, I guess, is
I'm challenging you know to
think out of the box, to think
more positive and to, you know,
and yes, you said a mammal
treasure, um, there is, um, sort
of, these are the facts. Yes,
those are the facts, but the
facts can be changed, and I
think that's the thing about
facts is that they're fluid and,
and we can, we can find ways to
get around them. The other thing
that I wanted to mention was
with regard to technology
because I worked through the
state of New Mexico in the 80s.
I won't say how early in the
80s, but I did work in the 80s
as an intern, and
I came back to the state now as
a legislator and I'm like, did I
just go through a time warp
because the technology hasn't
changed. There are things in the
state that we do need to invest
in.
Um, I mean, I actually did PIT
personal income tax at tax and
revenue, put them in a little
microfi containers and you know
what, some agencies still use
those, and I was appalled,
literally.
30 years later, coming back to
the state as a legislator
thinking
how do we
get all these agencies to use
new technology.
and part of that is when
we build our roads, we need to
put in our um fiber optics, but
we need to start thinking.
you know, a little more.
proactive, I guess. And so I'm
sorry guys, I got off on a
tangent, but I had all these
little notes down and I was
listening to all of y'all, and I
was thinking
God, how do we
like
turn the Titanic a little bit,
you know, to be able to start
thinking.
for each of our respective
little communities.
that
we can do this
for our state. So, um, ma'am,
I'm sorry, I, I appreciate that
you were here today and your
deputy and all of your staff.
and um I look forward to, you
know, what's coming in the
future because
we
to keep up
and if we don't have the staff,
let's provide the technology. If
we don't have the technology,
let's provide the staff.
Let's move forward together
Thank you. I wanna thank all of
you for the conversation and the
discussion. I think this is the
beauty of democracy, and I have
an open door policy, so you're
welcome to call me if you want
to have coffee or you wanna have
a conversation about anything
within the office or the board
councils or commissions I sit
on.
Is there any other business to
come before this committee?
If not, we're returned
