Are ready to reconvene we just
like to thank sheep springs
community and chapter house
chapter officials for fabulous
lunch
so with that we have department
and of environment
med and uranium mind clean up
update please
a
introduce yourselves and thank
you.
Them a little man
but don't try to have just after
the time so when this is the
thread
you got it
will good afternoon everyone my
name is daniel gilliam indeed
deputy cabinet secretary of
operations for the new mexico
environment department with me
today to my left I have jones
armstrong are director for the
office of strategic initiatives
and to my right I have me or a
homes our iranian mind
reclamation coordinator so now
for
it is our pleasure to make this
presentation to you today i'm
gonna start out with my remarks
just a little bit of an overview
of the agency and our tribal
collaboration initiatives I
might move a little bit quickly
through that in order to provide
more time form is harms to focus
on our uranium recommendation
efforts and with that I will go
ahead and jump right and you do
have some slide decks in front
of you I believe the dac that
has the water image on the front
is the one that i'm working off
of right now.
And just very briefly on the new
mexico environment department is
a mid size agency with a very
large mission across airland
water and waste our mission is
to protect and restore the
environment and to help and a
foster a healthy and prosperous
new mexico for present and
future generations and were
guided by four maintenance
through which we do our work
which are science innovation
collaboration and compliance our
agencies culture is
characterized as a scientific
and technical agency I can tell
you as someone who came from
higher education working with
undoubtedly experts and and very
very smart people from all
around the world i've never
worked in a place with so many
colleagues that I hold such
highest steam for in terms of
our scientific and technical
ability so i'm proud to be
representing this agency.
In terms of our interaction with
our
nations published and tribes
under the state tribal
collaboration act we we align
very very closely and have very
active outreach and engagement
we have a tribal liaison who has
been our tribal lease on for
several years her name is
catherine becker some of you may
have actually interacted with
her
and of course were focused on
effective communication and
collaboration with tribes
positive government to
government relations cultural
competency in providing
effective services and we often
lean on our support of policies
to ensure that the work that
we're doing resonates in the
context in which we are we are
in so we are very culturally
aware of the places and spaces
that we occupy.
On slide for you're going to see
a list of the problems and
tribes that we have worked with
very directly I can give a brief
summary of some activities just
over this past year I also want
to say that under the state
tribal collaboration act we
submitted our annual report on
time those were actually do
yesterday and uh that report is
about thirty pages long and
actually very much elaborates on
all of our activity activities
and as that posts on the
department of indian affairs
website I encourage folks to
review that but some highlights
include um
we worked with the problem to
suggest department of
environment and natural
resources regarding road
construction activities in the
santa national forest by the
hamas mountain electric
cooperative.
Environment conducted a site
visit in november twenty twenty
three with the problem to sukay
and force service and work to
ensure that road construction
activities complied with the
clean water act standards and we
conducted the site visits
notified the US army core of
engineers and matt with the
forest service so here you see
we're bringing different
entities together around a
common purpose
in conjunction with
representatives from the
environmental protection agency
and the federal agency for toxic
substances and disease registry
we held a public meeting for
santa clara weblow leadership
and residents to provide an
update on the north railroad
avenue plum super fun site and
the kay each other's ground
water contamination floor we do
outreach to all tribal
governments in new mexico
regarding the availability of
draft regional he's state
implementation plan revisions
for review and common and there
are upcoming opportunities to
engage on regional hairs we also
held two inform- information on
web hours for tribal
representatives to provide an
overview of the drive plan and
answer questions attendees on
those web and ours included the
public acamer for leap days
santa hana and the mountain
you'd try we updated tribal
environmental directors from
across the state on march
fifteenth about the development
of the surface water quality
state permitting program.
Our bureau briefed tribal
leadership about the program
including the opportunity to
serve on the advisory panel
those advisory meetings are
actually taking place this
summer and will continue on into
the coming weeks and we also
uhm work with the indian affairs
department through their weekly
calls to get information out so
that we can collaborate with our
other agencies as well
enemy do you cabinet secretary
jim kenny formally invited
tribal leaders to nominate
representatives to our surface
water advisory panel and a
letter sent to them back in june
and there's going to be more
tribal targeted information and
coordination as we move further
um through the rest of twenty
twenty four
the spring we brought together
the US department efficient
wildlife and the navigation
climate change program and
representatives of navigation
epa
the department of fish and
wildlife requested information
regarding these green house
gases and criteria air pollutant
emissions inventory program in
the meeting we discussed our
regulations policies and tools
to collect emissions and
tourists from oil and gas and
other industry sectors the
purpose of this meeting was to
solicit information to assist
the naval honation in developing
a green house gas program i'm
going to move on to slide number
five we provide a variety of
technical and financial
assistance across our programs
and many of our programs are
listed here on anything from
water quality training for waste
what are utility and solid waste
system operators very popular
program we have is our river
storeship program of course very
important would be our
brownsfield program projects I
know we heard a little bit about
related topics on recycling and
illegal dumping from the
previous presentation today and
then of course read on testing
kepts
in terms of additional work that
we've done in terms of providing
technical and financial
assistance we provided low flow
analysis and ambit water quality
data to epa to perform
reasonable potential analysis
for surface waters flowing into
waters on the hike area patchy
san francisco public policy.
Weblow and sandal defined so
problem
at the request of the problem
they slip the med process fish
tissue samples prepared chain of
custody forms and obtain
quotations for analytical
services for poly chlorinated by
finals and a whole bunch of
other pesticide analysis for
fish samples collected by the
public epa and the university of
new mexico in the middle rear
friday and if you do hosted two
transfer station in one
recycling operator certification
and training courses in the last
several months
and a total of fifteen tribal
operators attended these three
day courses with the aim of
improving operational best
management practices for
trivially operated collection
center facilities and we had
operators attend from the public
accommodate looking slept their
problem of looking at and the
public of sunny we have several
rivers towards ship programs
where we have had some continued
interaction and we have a
restoration in the today on wash
watershed fees to and three
through these projects the real
perco alliance river source oho
and sino farmers and the
ranchers committee harshabidito
and the nava host summer youth
program are improving repaired
and economic apologies that my
computer is doing something
funny.
I'm gonna say i'm gonna continue
on with a fragment at suns
isn't that fun
but what they're really doing is
they're planting and restoring
the
river ecology in order to
preserve it and constructing
erosion control structures to
mitigate settlement moving into
the real proco and some partners
for that include the real proco
alliance river source west
construction and work again with
the naval host summer use for
there is a santa clara creek
restoration product project and
that's about four point five
miles of the santa plan a creek
and sixty eight acres of the
areas within the santa clara
public practicals include
improving streamed channel
function by reducing bank
erosion increasing flood plane
connectivity and productivity
improving a quarter and roperian
habitat and enhancing what lands
by improving and restoring
wetlands function and sent a
clear equivalent working with
contractors to complete the work
by june twenty twenty five we
also have the towels probably
ecological restoration of
buffalo pasture and the real
settle project this project will
restore approximately two
hundred acres of slope wetlands
and two miles of real the settle
within tous problem practicals
include improving stream channel
function by increasing channel
stability and flood plane access
raising the water table through
increased me undering and
reasoning the channel grade and
enhancing the buffalo
pastretland by restoring the
white and hydrology and
connection to the real thing
settle telstra low as a project
partner working with contractors
to complete the work by june
twenty twenty five
very quickly i'll just go over
some brownfields projects that
we wanted to highlight we do
have an avestic substatement at
three buildings within the
former bureau of and in affairs
dormitory normatory in magdalena
that's a one hundred and seventy
four thousand dollar project we
have clean up planning reports
for the accumulated day school
property if the request to the
problem of akama to twenty one
thousand dollars project.
And the environmental site
assessment for a legacy dump
site at the request of the
problem to suit a fifteen
thousand dollars project i'm
moving on to slide six we do a
lot of collaboration and
consultation and I think you're
going to hear quite a bit about
out from my colleague here today
on the uranium front front
apologies and we do quite a lot
with water infrastructure
projects we attend numerous
community events for outreach
including the tribal water
infrastructure workshop where we
participated on a panel to
display funding opportunities
under the clean water estate
revolving fund for tribes
infrastructure needs for the
last ten years and immediate
continued to coordinate with the
navigation and the nava who
tribal utility authority on the
regulatory aspects of operating
the cutter lateral of the naval
gallop water supply project with
enemy d developing a framework
for all agencies to regulate
water from the nava hogal water
supply project as you likely
know the project is designed to
provide water to approximately a
quarter of a million people in
the four corners area currently
within the next fifty years
reaches out to tribes through
the environmental review process
for clean water state revolving
fund projects which require
compliance with the national
environmental policy act
including tribal cancellation in
the project area under the
national historic preservation
act and so as I mentioned will
cover more on uranium in your
next presentation i'll just
finally say on this slide that
are solid waste of your
recruited and appointed a
representative i've signed up on
a public serve a two year term
on the recycling and illegal
dumping alliance a twelve month
member body that sets priorities
and recommends awards for red
grant funding each year
any dears several funding
programs that we manage and some
of the ones we highlight on page
seven i've probably already
talked about to some extent
we've got river stewardship the
clean water state revolving fund
with drinking water state
revolving fund the recycling
illegal dumping fund in the
browns field.
Programs
because i've already talked
about this and I want to be very
aware of of time I just rather
than elaborate on each one of
these they did want to highlight
that our clean water state
revolving fund is a federal
grants and state match take
program with your round
availability there are low
interest rate nodes of point
zero one percent up to a thirty
year term repayments go into
loan fund and can be reloaned
for a future projects so
eligible project examples for
this would be reducing treating
managing storm water including
addressing merging contaminance
wastewater works construction
repair and replacement water
shed projects non point source
management plans and
decentralised domestic sewage
treatment systems similar to the
clean water state revolving fund
the drinking water state
revolving far fund is focused on
drinking water projects again
it's a federal ground with steep
match the interest rates for
this are a little bit different
but still quite low from zero
percent to one percent for
public systems and three to four
percent for private systems a
term up to thirty years and
these are intended to
rehabilitate or develop water
resources to replace
contaminated sources so examples
include creating a new water
system to address existing
public health problems caused by
unsafe drinking water supplied
by individual wells or surface
water sources or installing or
upgrading facilities to improve
water quality treatment storage
transmission and distribution.
As I move on to slide eight we
are still working with the
governor's office on our
legislative priorities for fy
twenty six so of course we look
forward to speaking with you
more in depth about that is that
conversation evolves but big big
things that you're used to
hearing from us were always
concerned about budget has seen
significant support from many of
you who are in this room in in
the roles and the various rules
that you serve as legislators in
your committee assignments and
work and we'd like to thank you
for that I I wanted to actually
point out that we were the
recipient of significant
investment in the last session
which allowed us to do something
called appropriate placement for
our staff appropriate placement
means that we start compensating
people according to their
education and experience and
because of the investment of the
legislature in giving us those
funds which you gave us a big
chunk of it
we actually were able to
appropriately place every single
employee at the environment
department which has been such
an enormous
it it's completely
transformative I you know we're
hearing things from people
saying now I don't have to buy
my groceries on a credit card I
am gonna be able to support my
parents i'm gonna be able to
keep my mam or dad at home with
me because I can hire help to be
there with them those are all
really life changing things and
you've made just a huge
difference in the lives of our
employees and so for that I
wanted to give you my expressed
appreciation an additional
investment that you assisted us
with was giving us some
additional funding to stabilize
funding for our twenty eight
locations across the state
because of the nature of our
funding sources being so
restricted and so silo we don't
or didn't in the past have a lot
of flexibility about where we
could put staff throughout our
offices throughout the state
because of your investment and
the work that we've been doing.
I'm proud to say that if we
needed to put someone at one of
our offices let's see maybe our
gallop offers for example I
don't have a restricted funding
source for that office anymore I
can literally put i'm just gonna
say a drinking water expert now
in gallop I could put any of our
technical scientific staff
anywhere in new mexico where we
are able to fill positions to
provide services for new
mexicans and so that's been an
enormous game
in terms of our other priorities
we are working on a water
quality act update were
inventing recommendations from
governor luhon christian's fifty
year water action plan to
support water clean up
contaminated ground water sites
and create a state surface water
discharge permanent program we
are also looking at a non
essential p fast point down
mirroring a twenty twenty three
minute so to law prohibiting the
use of and i'm not going to see
the scientific term i'm just
going to say p fast in products
for sale offered for sale or
distributed for sale the bill
would include exemptions for
items in which there are no
appropriate alternatives such as
medical devices we're looking at
hazardous was act amendments to
allow to regulate hazardous
waste not yet listed by the epa
we're looking at a solid waste
modernization extended producer
responsibilities and
environmental policy approach
that holds producers responsible
for a product management through
the product's life cycle other
states and local governments
have applied to the specific
type applied this to specific
types of waste like plastics
tires and mattresses and finally
and you'll hear more about this
this is something that we
started talking about in the
last legislative session we're
going to be bringing this fourth
again with new energy
which would allow us to do some
statutory changes for our permit
fee fund flexibility so this is
not about general funds that we
receive it's about the revenues
that we generate and how we can
make that government dollar be
as efficient as possible and i'm
happy to elaborate on that if
you are interested.
With that i'd like to thank you
for your attention and time
because that was a mouthful of
words just to introduce my
department in a few things we're
doing and with that i'm actually
going to turn it over to my
colleague meory for your second
presentation focused on are
uranium mine and mill clean up
initiatives thank you.
Good afternoon my name is merry
harms them the urania mine
reclamation coordinator for new
mexico environment department
and I said in the office of
strategic initiatives today will
be updating you on the uranium
minimum cleanup across the state
that primarily focuses on house
but one sixty four but also
mentions other clean up
activities being performed by
other agencies
if you turn to slide
two you'll see a map of a former
uranium mind sites across the
state and you can see their
widely dispersed but
concentrated in the grand sminer
all belt in the northwest corner
you'll also notice that there
are federal state private tribal
sites and mix sites and that
complexity adds a lot of
complication and coordination
required to clean up these sites
slide three outlines the
mandates of an immediate and
emnerd that's new makes
convertment department and
energy minerals and natural
resources department to
implement house but one sixty
four that was passed in twenty
twenty two so on the left column
you'll see enemy days primary
activity is on the rate you'll
see emirates activities and
where they overlap is what is in
bald there so nmedi has lead the
all of these initiatives as well
as the workforce development
side we worked with the
department work for a solutions
and economic development
department to help push that
forward as you can see it's a
lot of tasks right now we have
my self and one other within our
agency that are implementing
this
I lead
all of the activities listed
here and the other staff member
works in our minding
environmental complaints
section.
Pushing permits forward for
regulated sites where there is a
responsible party entered it
might our sister agency has lead
the effort on the technical side
visiting the old sides and
that's been important for ground
truth in our data and has lead
the technical review for sight
assessments.
Slide for shows a map of our
recently released formerly
operating uranium minor mill
site stashboard so this came out
in january of this year and it
depends all of the sites that we
have information for that
included both neglected sites as
well as permitted sites that are
under reminding environmental
complaints section as well as
all of the mill sites
so if you zoom in on the map to
where you live you can see all
of the uranium activity in your
area if you click on the diet
and start with small
if you click on the dot you'll
see basic information like site
ownership land ownership mineral
rights former mining activities
even the legislator that is
attached to that area is is
available on the stashboard
the next slides five shows all
of the coordinating agencies and
immediate can't do this alone
we will be partnering and have
partnered with all of the listed
agencies that you see here for
our uranium strategic plan for
the state so I have spent the
last year and a half
coordinating with all of those
agencies to come up with that
final strategic plan and we are
near finishing that we expect to
be finalizing it by the end of
this calendar year.
What you'll notice here the
office of state engineer is
listed that was not in the bill
but we do coordinate with them
because they are integral to any
well permitting that we do in
the state
slide six
explains section three of house
bill one sixty four that created
the uranium mind reclamation
revolving fund and as everyone
in this room knows to dance
large scale clean up funding is
required at this time no money
has been appropriated for that
find the room the balance
remains at zero dollars however
in the future when funds are
received into the account they
may be used for side assessments
safeguarding.
Clean up design efforts surface
reclamation groundwater
remediation and monitoring where
appropriate that's a there is
grown water impact
slight seven lists all of the
permitted mind sites for uranium
under energy minerals and
natural resources department in
the mining and minerals division
they implement the these permits
or regulate these permits under
the mining act reclamation
program and you'll see six sites
here all of those are five of
them are wet lines that means
that the mining activities have
made contact with the ground
water the exception to that on
that list is section twelve in
section twelve is a dry mind
shown on the next slide which is
section eight you can see
pictures taking from that mind
sight there's a hoist on the
left and a picture of the large
head frame on the right
this is a a classic
site where clean up is has been
stalled out and the remaining
funds for the responsible party
may run out before clean up can
be fully up her formed so this
site may never fully get cleaned
up at this time they are working
on the priority areas for
radiation and they plan on
leaving the head frame in place
late nine is a list of all of
the permitted sites by our
department in the mexico
environment department and it is
the same other than section
twelve section twelve of the dry
mine there's no groundwater
contact
for that
that picture months late nine
shows section two that's a state
land office
site that has known uranium
contamination on it
so moving on to other agencies
doing clean up slide ten shows.
The department of the energies
defense related uranium mine
program
there are many of these sites in
new mexico and what the program
does is go out and validate and
verify or b and b the each site
so they verify the exact
location and mining features
that are present that need to be
addressed in addition they will
safeguard if necessary so if
there's an open shaft they'll
put a great over it if there is
an open at it they'll put about
cooperation at
I did get notification that they
are requesting access to state
sites and I believe state land
office has granted that when
requested so this work is
beginning this summer in fall
for the state owned sites for
the program that the jump
program the defense related to
any minds program has completed
all federal sites in new mexico
they have partially completed
the tribal sites and they have
started the private land sites
as well
slight eleven
discusses the tronic settlement
which some of you may be
familiar with for region six
which operates in the state of
new mexico this map shows the
northern area of the semital
creek basin and the unbrother
lake area
there are twenty mins that you
read in six is cleaning up
twelve with surface expressions
i'd like to point out this not
on the right that the spencer
mind was reclaimed by eminer the
energy minerals natural
resources department they have
an aml program and abandoned
mine leans program and they
received finding federal funding
from the bureau land management
to complete that clean up at the
spencer mind.
Slide twelve shows another
site that you may be a familiar
with as well one of the tronic
sites is the coverage site which
is located on the nab honestly
section thirty two and thirty
three minds are also located on
the nab honest these are
regulated by up region nine
which has just diction on the
nobody and other areas in the
country and they recently
released an engineering
evaluation and cost analysis for
both of these sites at the same
time what the determined there
was that the preferred
alternative of four alternatives
listed was to move
all of the coverage and section
thirty two and thirty three mine
was to the red rocks for
pository location which is
located on the southern portion
of the
red rocks landfill that's owned
by the northwest mexico regional
solid waste
authority
so what you'll see in that
picture is a photo that I took
from standing on the red rock's
land fill so that I am getting
the height there and i'm looking
south at the where the error was
pointing where the proposed
repository would be you can also
see a black line in the
background and that is a tire
instead of old tires that marks
the southern boundary of the
property beyond that is a cliff
and beyond that in the valley as
I have forty going east and west
so
you can get a sense of the scale
in the scope of the location it
would be between where that
roaders and between the red tire
the black tireline excuse me
on that picture
but again that's an epa site is
the lead on that site and that
new mexico has.
No authority to make any
decisions on that matter i'm
simply putting it in here
because I know a lot of you are
curious about it
flight thirteen shows a list of
the natural national priority
list sites or npl sites super
fun sites and the superfund
alternative sites we have for
into mexico we have the
homestake mill
that's located in grants
or outside of grants to the jack
pile mine on the gonna publo you
and see churchill mill and the
last one listed there is a
central study area which is a
super fun alternative approach
and it mostly focuses on the
groundwater within the same item
creek based on
played fourteen less the other
agencies who are doing
a reclamation your land
management for a service I will
just list those here for your
reference but I don't need to go
into the details unless you'd
like me to
slide fifteen shows uranium
reltmail regulation and i'd like
to clarify that instead of new
mexico does not regulate any
million activities but that that
is done by the nuclear
regulatory commission in new
mexico we are not an agreement
stayed at this time but we do
hold discharge permits found
what are discharged permits at
two mills and that's the
embrogen lake west mile and the
homestake mill
finally i'd like to
point to something in the
buildings that's often
overlooked but it is a mandate
to work with other states to had
been serious reclamation and so
this year on april ease new
mexico and arizona governor has
signed a joint letter to the
council and environmental
quality in the white house
calling for a single point of
coordination for federal
agencies to address.
The largest roadblocks holding
back uranium cleanup
this month earlier this month we
did get a response and a call
secretary kenny and secretary of
the department of environmental
quality care in peters met with
ce discuss a path forward and we
had expect future conversations
to potentially discuss the
creation of a federal working
group that may help us
coordinate and resolve any
disputes from there
that letter was provided to you
at the table just for a rep your
reference and without a thinking
very time and opened it up for a
questions thanks
thank you records
allison should i.
Thank you thank you moved here.
I'm glad to see some of those
coming through provision because
I am the primary sponsor of a
house bill when sixty four and
one sixty four the title on it
was uranium mine cleaner.
And the contents of the
legislation is directing the
department of environment to
coordinate efforts across the
state to clean up and reclaim.
Former iranian mind and meal
sites providing duties.
Directing the creation of a
uranium mind reclamation
coordinator position in the
department of environment.
Directing the.
Creation of a uranium
reclamation coordinator position
in the energy minerals and
natural resources department
creating the uranium minimum
reclamation revolving fun
I guess your position
ms horms was a result of that
legislation and I also
saw that in your slide fired he
said no money has been
appropriated for the uranium
mind recommendation and the
legislation is distinctly set to
create mining recommends
revolving fun
what is it that the legislature
can do to make sure that a
revolving fund is established
if we don't establish funds does
that means that the uranium
minds in my district around the
red valley coverage while stay
ignored but what can we do to
make movement on those I know
there's little bit of movement
and sure truck and other areas
but the reason why I sponsored
better that legislation was
because I have people may
constituents better suffering
seventy plus years after the
minds close and they're still
suffering to the state that was
the reason for my sponsoring
that legislation so what what
can I help can my colleagues do
to help you get the necessary
funding and clean up all my
older van in minds.
Thank you mister medicare
thank you madame chair
represented balance and again
i'm john it's armstrong the
director of strategic initials
at enemy d and we've greatly
appreciate your and chair
johnson sponsorship of house but
one sixty four you are
absolutely correct that the
position that it directed the
environment department to create
is the one that me or harms is
now filling in terms of your
question on the money in the
fund
it is pretty typical for the
legislature to create new funds
but not directly for put money
in those funds that the fun
statute forward your any of mine
fund contemplates a number of
potential funding sources
including state appropriations a
federal funding and even directs
that any settlements that the
state might enter into regarding
your indian contamination
funding from those settlements
would be directed into that fund
so there are
a variety of ways that money
could get into that fund for the
state legislature it would be I
think
appropriating money into that
fund in the upcoming session or
future sessions it could also
look like advocating with our
federal delegation for some
federal funding because I think
it's
most of us recognized this
legacy contamination is not the
responsibility of the state or
our impact of communities but of
the federal government
so we have those ongoing
conversations you'll see in the
letter that we sent to the
council on environment equality
early on it highlights that
there is a massive funding need
and the states are not capable
of dealing with it.
The.
Okay thank you for that matter
this legislation was drafted in
twenty twenty two the regular
session and then the final copy
was made on what's the second of
twenty twenty two two years
later I find out that there is
no money been appropriate I wish
I had known that there was no
money appropriate because I
serve on the house
appropriations and I could have
flocked for you to get money I
wish I would have known about
the sooner
than a chair I wish my
colleagues could support it so
they can get the proposal thank
you madame chair
thank you tonight representative
garcia
thank you manager thanks for the
presentation
you mentioned that you had no
season what happens on tribal
lance my correct
yeah what i'm referring to to
some prayer and page twelve it's
like well that
might operation that we want to
bring though
the weights to red rob
and that area will be opposed to
this
and I am I had media madam chair
into room about a miracle about
this and the people who are
completely just that against it
in the epa was kind of forcing
it on the to what they're going
to do and this we that's that's
been forcing what you said
because this is what they want
to do and people the piano red
comparison to the federally p a
for the prime minister of energy
but it needs to be addressed by
these people who wanted to
get your it's gonna be
thank you representative garcia
out of chair
the
situation currently with
giving a site is that epa has
developed.
There environmental analysis of
it they've identified their
preferred alternative which is
that red rocks site that we were
discussed we have not yet
received an application for them
if they already made the point
that
we don't have the regulatory
authority over where the place
is currently because it's not on
the next delay and it's within
an alignation if that waste word
to come to the site epa has
identified as it's preferred
alternative which is within the
statement of excellent
then they would need to the site
the rhetoric slandfill would
need to apply for a number of
state permits including a couple
from the environment department
we can't really speak to that
until we get those applications
we don't redetermine how we're
gonna treat an application
you know it's important for us
that
it come to us as a proposal from
a permittee and we review it and
we assess whether or not it is
protective of human and
environmental health
thanks than one manager but the
whole problem with this is a
recall they did the same thing
that's the goal we want that was
from church rock who reminded
that the landscale and the
people from an area don't want
to they don't want to come
through your properties and yet
you're seeing you won't have to
can't make an assessment but yet
with some
state exactly what you want to
do you know the reflecting me
and that we're flagged with all
of the novel people who live out
there they don't have incentive
that you see like could the last
time work that I had then
meeting but in your life at two
weeks and it was the same thing
we're working for the cause it's
more feasible to dump it there
in the table somewhere call.
And what we need to really look
at your environmental people is
to make sure that the citizens
will be in affected have a
season not the
net the federally being worse
than we have that that'll
authority to really need to look
at this problem with the fact
that.
Okay
senator pinto
linked about and chair members
elected maybe
for your presentation
and i'm just gonna jump forward
and would like to
per
representative the allisons and
I think this committee either
was this committee all radio
active hazardous materials
committee and I think we
actually did do an action item
for a letter of support in some
sense to the congressional
when you're asking for a cleanup
to the building downs on when
make cleanings first got into
this capacity so I think we
still need to do an action item
to also draft another letter
since we do have to when they're
to receive the better offending
and i'm letting my congress not
people that are here in the
clinician leaders that are here
that maybe they can also
but now both nation pursue again
a push to the intentities that
serve the
multiple jurisdictions to
again ask for some pending two
month things for them and we do
I believe we do have forum that
we can take action
I don't
it mattered chair and would make
to make that motion
with scutching on the motion
where about come about it
repeats any mobile couple there
yes I can think you matter
charges thought of them
as we were going through this
mechanic had a flash back to why
when I came back to new mexico
and where I was located and that
was as economic development
director for simple accounting.
So I went through your aerial
site was given an aerial
overview of the whole area the
tailings and everything and this
was an early two thousand and
our immediate reaction besides
seeing graimy water
falling i'm income losing out
it being called we had to call
it and get it tested
and aren't kind of health
related in health issues related
to the environment
so it suddenly right now is
claimed back in time and
realizing how many years of come
forward and we're still in the
in the state that we are where
we have failing health people
dying namely generations passing
on
illnesses that are directly
correlated to
the activities
mining activities there's direct
correlations already been done
studies public health studies
and all that so my question is
in order to be able to light a
fire
under.
Everyone
in order to get
your mediation clean up and
everything on a fast track would
it be helpful
to provide public health steady
data that shows the direct
correlation of the generations
that have been affected the
particular cancers that have
been associated with
the correlation to the mining
and the generations they're
after that have been affected
would that
how how would we
put that front
and center
of
requesting expedient
response and remediation so it
just really worries me because I
don't mean diseases and cancers
are very high in that area
and
it it's a ring because one of
the reasons why
I moved to that area from where
I was in a border area was
because the particular item I
mean diseases that I had or
directly related to the
pollution and the border area
so that intrigued me when I got
there so anyway that's my
question can we
because we do have data we do
have the public health data so
how do we how do we put that
together to make the small
faster thank you thanks so much
manchester representative robot
cabinet I I you know
i'm familiar with that data I
think that would be incredibly
persuasive information to
include in communications to our
federal delegation seeking
support
so when I thank you for that and
madam chair so that I would
recommend is that you champion
to
I will have to have a little bit
of an offline cause I can't
recall right now.
But where the data is situated
but I think if you can do some
research initial research it was
a public health study that was
conducted in two thousand began
in two thousand three.
And it continued
it was a multi year but I don't
recall who the actual and it was
caught it was completed by what
was then called the grassroots
community organizations network
that was labeled the rainbowl
community group but I don't
recall where they were tied into
you and image they were tidy and
two on a number of other
national public health entities
but if if you could do some
preliminary research maybe and
then are if I have that recall
and and look for that
documentation I can be the two
because we need some persuasive
action as soon as possible thank
you.
You representative
now we go back to emotion
by representative
with this
emotion by wise madam chair
pinto a second buyer represented
a block to draft a letter.
Regarding the uranium clean up
per
said by representative and and
hinto
and myself.
Correct I didn't get your
rubbish but we can work on that
if the committee if there's no
objections from the committee it
can be from the all the members
of the maybe in the committee
itself
and I I don't know if we
actually want to set an amount
in there but right now we need
to kind of put something there
manager and manifice chair in
terms of the amount that is
something that we are are
looking at
the strategic plan takes a look
at it at a very very high level
but the next step is that we're
working on is an implementation
plan
that would more directly
identify clean up costs
so madam chair in because of the
plan
being
projected to be completed by the
end of the year
now insurer manifest you know
apologize the the strategic plan
will be done very soon the
implementation plan is probably
gonna take a little bit more we
just executed a contract on that
and i'm guessing it's going to
take us a year to finish that so
maybe next summer when we come
back we could have more
information on that
i'd understand if you would want
to you know submit your letter
sooner than that and we could
work to
help you with something on on a
funding amount
okay and madam chair and members
of the committee
date the invite to do something
right away and then fifty days
come before the radio active
hazardous materials committee if
it's after the strategic plan
has been put out and maybe to do
something from that committee or
so boosting it but it can get
some more about where there's
disrebarbling plans sit in your
department yes yes no mister
that was one of the questions
yeah in our budget
that we make sure that.
Dignogra that sits and then
i'm not there's any objections
on the further discussion about
the motion representative
allisons concerned I think
that's what it would address is
that if we take an action item
here.
Okay do we have any objections
to drafting a letter from this
committee to support.
Funding for the renewal clean up
seeing a nan will go ahead and
entertain that drop the letter
and present to the committee
and with that I don't see any
more names on the list for
questions just want to thank you
very much for traveling all this
way to be with us here today and
you're a continued work and the
clean up we know
you know the history you know
the devastation you know the
water life family animal lives
start planting instruction so
which is continue doing the rest
that we can thank you
thank you manager thank you
members.
Thank you okay next on the
agenda mr johnny johnson
president of sah chapter
update your in the hot seat.
Housekeeping announcement after
we hear from mr johnny johnson
we have three names on the list
for a public comment and then
our council deligate and chapter
community would like to take us
on a tour to the community
center
okay mr johnson.
Okay now
again good afternoon I don't
think a house with the touch
will new johnny johnson and
I stand in wrotch up the
president
but that is little towards the
as much as tune the condition no
that's a cheaper diet and then
in the foremost is that i'd like
to think
representative of the chair
johnson
also made him by
president pento read or share
and then the rest of the members
of the senate committee and them
affairs
door representative
modeling the honourable
delegates that are present then
you're stuff and all members of
our staff and guess thank you
today
i'm here before you
honored and privileged to give
you update and report santator
how chapter as well as eastern c
water loan projects
are very briefly
I also charge the eastern our
whole agency council
represent a membership thirty
one could comprise the thirty
one chapters read also knowns
but i'm here to perform you to
to to give you a little bit of
update before I do my request
first of all is um
we later thank you for all your
contributions in kind as well as
monetary through great or other
form of measures capital
outlanes senior.
Councils as well as the tiffans
and other measures of funds that
need to provide for another
honation on a new mexico ports
are not only eastern but as well
as northern in there's fifty
four chapters that i'll become
before you requesting for these
funds
so if you look at standing room
we have a project we have a
project
we call bb and known which is
this time become
nine and nine stands for the
road that runs down from them
for ninety one to complete.
So we have a water loan project
coming off the never hold gill
up water supply project.
Which
is going to twelve chapters and
primarily
the first chapter is carried a
canyon
and then it goes to stone in
community as well as the discuss
crown point the center little
water.
Big valic white rock and it's
gonna extend onto customer smith
like
tour of the roo as well as
bucket chapter these are the
chapters there are going to be
the recipients of these water
again that will go up waterload
project.
They're all in different my
multiphases.
We have first.
What we call is supply loan
which is the main line that
comes off
gill upwater supply our projects
and then when it gets into the
community then it's a
distribution line so we have two
projects that were talking about
this one can components both of
them
we have other fundings from
another honation certain we have
other funds from
our pa as well as capital from
the previous small plan desiring
projects are tif to support this
and we are still on a shortfall
to complete not complete but to
help with these projects alone
for the community that I mention
and there's other phases coming
in from go up
through church right a humbato
into the room
as well and those
are still in the
planet status so
we are going to be asking and
you have a resolution before you
that the chapter asked some
question under the first.
Help on
nine point three million
to to get these projects moving
for the supply line as well as
the
distribution line
and so I checked her has been
receiving these funds that I
mentioned from the state of new
mexico as you see on the
handouts there's some reverse
there's reversing this how you
don't see it on there and we do
stay behind ours schedule
and I follow these projects that
i'm asking for
then i'm not sure that these
funds don't get reverted
it's somewhat challenging within
the whole novel nation
government to get these through
one sixty four what we do is the
right behind and push in
question question that does it
does happen so we were asking
that we have a regional project
in the new requesting and a
favorable consideration that we
get these funds.
For those communities venture.
I don't think
these other chapters
but was quite aware of these
present so I don't have most of
them with me well what i'm doing
is wants to came before you
today i'm gonna get the support
in resolution and their project
status from these chapters to
to.
Give me an update as their chair
so that we can move forward
now and support providers
details
if there's any detail questions
I don't have the detail
information right now data was I
can provide those at a later
time and
as requested so I went home only
appreciate that you also have an
attached to the resolution
I see which is the draft one
that they touch.
Uhm the update of number one
priorities the
and that one indicates lower
amount but after revisiting
everything with cover and
everything that's happened in
and all the economy replaced
increases it really is
essentially at a nine point
three nine point sixty most were
going to work three million is
approximately what.
We really will request them
um.
Madame chair
yeah does this conclude your
presentation to no if there's a
big question on some questions
okay committee members
do we have any questions senator
rodriguez thank you thank you
chairman and um thank you
president for your presentation
in your work more on anything
for your preservations to all
these years that you work so
hard to to get one of the most
essential things in life you
wonder why anyone would have to
work for so many years still be
here today asking for a funding
for water supplies for
infrastructure to transfer and
distribute water supplies
doesn't make any sense to me
particularly now that the state
has plenty of money in its
conference a lot of money coming
in to state government now from
different sources and the states
it's on a pretty high revenue
source now and keep me now a
reserves at a high level and so
on
and projects like these are one
time projects it's not like the
statement would have to be
committing recording dollars
every year but it's a one time
expands but it goes for a
lifetime of help for people I
think that's one thing we need
to look at is if it's one
appropriation of ten million
dollars for example
that's it then we don't have to
keep doing it on a recurring
amount every single year
but I do have a question just a
quick one and mr president
johnson here
if the state was to appropriate
this fund this money you're
asking for for this distribution
line
stip may in the future require
some maintenance is all things
do but when that happens do you
have the cooperation.
Yes they narrow how nation now
or is it they have a plan I
guess to maintain this line if
if needed I would just hate to
see because i've been here
twenty nine years now and I can
tell you that i've seen very
good products finally just
become dismantled there were
many years because they don't
have the maintenance funding and
we don't want to see that we
want to make sure you have an
ongoing stable line so I just a
plan before that would be good
if you don't have it today
it I suppose if you have to come
back to the state for
maintenance money after that
that's fine too but I just
wanted to ask if you have the
thank you madame chairman.
Thank you thank you senator
rigges for the question
the nation
current is working with you that
the department of water
management and in coordination
with intera novel trouble
utility thirty nine it gets
turned over to november trouble
utility authority to do the
ongoing maintenance and
operations so water is free to
the constructions down but
memberships that pay their might
be all the way to cost to
maintain operations.
Alright thank you very much for
your good work in your foresight
and this whole thing and stay
with it continue to ask
hopefully you won't have to do
it again I really hope the state
will do something about this
ever since I start at many years
ago i'd been hearing the same
issue about the water the
problems with water
unavailability and water to in
the infrastructure to transfer
it and so on throughout now the
never honation are too many
chapters and I really would be
happy to see that this whole
thing would be resolved on once
and for all water life source
right so thank you madame
chairman thank you president for
all your good work president
johnson.
Thank you
representative garcia
thank you manager thank you
president being here today that
they're not honor working with
the past eight years
in i'm looking at the list of
the chapters you got twelve and
there and they just hope that
what happens the poor of our my
district like valley white
background to around my district
you know
this committee a lot of steak
water for granted you know
you turn to part it on is there
all the time not in the real
world it doesn't happen that way
and I know they've been out of
what a while and you know it
also and you know I commend you
as at the end of the day people
need water
in a lot of people do never as
interested in and more a lot of
people are here to water and
know this will be that part of
the nominal support of that and
I just want to go thank you for
what you're doing gets very very
important to although people
communities in all you go out
here and you see a
hollywood water barrels and
stuff and that's that's hard to
do but once I just want to join
you thank you thank you manager
think you representative I don't
see any other
of my colleagues
wish to ask you a question or
make a come out
um
did you want to respond to
represent a great
okay thank you representative
garcia as a pleasure to work
with you while i'll this time
i'll also thank you for doing
what you did for the past years
appreciated we'll still near
your support and continuity of
communication wherever it's
taken over shared this
information
thank you
appreciate your work for now
people
thank you very much for johnson
and president after thank you
for that you know but just on
portion I lost my election but
i'll be back.
You know two years a short time
I will be back thank you manager
thank you and
you don't thank you just to add
on the benefits is mentioned
earlier there's going to be
about ten more than ten thousand
people going to benefit from the
swatter project it's not this
the chapters there's residents
out there don't have watered
then shower this morning that we
did
and somewhere holiday from the
well when meals still boiling
water and maybe some not even so
these are going to be the
beneficiary people that's going
to benefit from
more listed not of his resident
lot of it is going to be
commercial businesses and also
there's an opportunity for
economic growth in these areas
so it's not this for
the people it's for everybody
our business somewhere below
stock because people are asking
for life stock and garden and
into the continued operation
that was mentioned the
maintenance
they're saying that well as long
as you pay for you feature live
start to have really start
drinking to do your current and
display your bill especially
when it comes down to so but
again thank you a whole heart
look up to all of you for your
support and kind heart so that
you can you know give us this
money and it's a long term
project and what's the done
we to local can worry about the
mendors and operation and if we
need to help we'll still see the
state for assistance
thank you
think you should I president
thank you for your presentation
I also want to add that I do
often see our community members
drive anywhere between thirty
and sixty miles every day or
every other day.
Into gallop from our rural
communities listed here to how
water so I understand the diary
need and in december at our last
indian affairs committee meeting
we well indoors requests so at
that time we'll include your
resolutions and endorse your
your your request here so we
just want to thank you here
thank you that's a desert
although I made a vice president
thank you and member of the
committee and
just like to do my last bridge
think about standing rock let a
horse you guys
when time permits thank you
did you hear that we're going to
standing right next year for a
committee meeting
ok thank you thank you committee
members now we have public
comment
we have darlines sort of
jennifer began
and honourable delicate amber
you have five minutes please
come to the microphone.
Madam chair
thank you I can't hear it but
work towards me
and committee members
doctor darly
and this is my first meeting
that I have a chanded and i've
witnessed new mexico and action
where I witness is that we have
a state and we have a group of
people who are trying to resolve
our problems and it was very
rewarding and interesting to
watch and we do have some good
absolutely great things in new
mexico
but there is a number of issues
that need to be addressed as as
a group and and we do have a
problem that i'm sure this is
not the first time you're going
to hear
we have a high the key rate in
the rural errors areas of new
mexico
oral dizzies and getting into
clinics is a problem
if a child is not able to get
into a clinic to get seen or
have access to prevental down
care there
going to miss approximately
three days of school more than a
child who has dental access
and in addition to that american
indians have three times the
disease rate compared to the
general population i've been a
federal government ploy with the
idiot house service for thirty
seven years retired in two
thousand and twenty two
at that decay rate has not
decreased during that thirty
seven years three times the
decree rate of the general
population.
And it starts with education it
starts with
you having access to dental care
I am the president of the board
for new jeannie smiles
means beautiful smiles located
in shiprock we have fourteen
dental operatories dental chairs
and many of you
may know somebody who has
received care there
I started
getting involved when I retired
and they were not able to
recruit providers there like
mini rural communities and new
mexico they were not able to get
dentists don't hijanise dental
assistance and two years later
still not able to so I drive the
two hundred miles from rear
rancho to ship rock and provide
care there as much as I can been
trying to recruit have not been
able to recruit and so
what i've been trying to do is
grow our own get individuals
from the community who are
interested in becoming dental
providers and
teaching them sent supporting
them and hopefully in four years
will have a dentist come out of
school because so far six
individuals since i've been
there have been indicated that
they will go and have shouted at
the johnny smells dental clinic
white with the the the one of
the reasons i'm bringing it
forward is that getting access
to oral health care has been a
problem forever for my entire
career of thirty seven year old
actually thirty nine years now
and closing a clinic there's non
profit is not indian house
service.
Is the non profit
does not make sense when we have
problems with access to care
anybody that receives care from
the indian house service will
know that you cannot get dental
services there for everybody in
your family at so
just wanted to bring the
ring the joy smiles to light and
also you know hopefully have
some suggestions from your you
all you know and new mexico as
to what might take place so that
it can continue to go forward
the johnny smiles has potential
it is a non profit to bring
resources to an or a rural area
of new mexico
today I delivered
there supplies that we brought
back from buffalo new york to
the community program here we
collaborate with the society of
market indian dent dentors we
collaborate with the new mexico
dental foundation and so we can
bring resources to the road part
in new mexico
thank you and if you have any
questions let me know
thank you very much thank you
jennifer
I think she left around
honourable sister delegate
friday.
Yeah I was hoping
I don't know what happened began
because she's president migrant
staff so a lot of questions the
representatives were asking
cause I would like to give a
response to no representative or
seer was concerned about the the
rule veteran center and that
told me talk about operated on
maintenance
and will get some information a
representative monster but
what's important colleagues
is
are you gonna provide public
comment return is now
well
well
i'm gonna differ
and then i'll i'll wrap it up so
we could go on our tour thank
you.
Hey sorry about that I had to
answer some questions i'm thank
you a share yet a like a
introduced myself before I am
from shipback new mexico and I
am the community of that area
and I do represent the northern
agency under the assessor of the
president vice president so
thank you chair I wish them say
here thank you and
representative state
senator and I really appreciate
your your tendencier at the
sheep springs chapter so and
that I do work with delegate
honourable and her as well so
thank you for all your hard work
each and every one of you and I
started on with with a
representative in march of this
year so I have about the
payments in the office I am
learning quite a bit so just
bear with me and I did answer mr
a representative of garcia's
question regarding veterans so I
had to get that to him out there
so I did talk to our are
veterans division director bobby
moderate outside and mr olympia
me he's a deputy as well with
under the affairs so I did work
with him as well so I got to
answer some questions on the
veterans building and if
anything else I am here they
really appreciate
the invitation as well thank
you.
Okay so i'm shut it as we wrap
down I just want to see from
today's discussion
even though that new mexico
transportation and mention they
have a large amount of millions
the challenge still is they want
to donation letter and that kind
of clicks in
a bureaucratic process when it
comes to donations so if there
could be a way that committee
could make recommendations where
there's more fluidity
and also if and i'm not sure
when it comes to roads if there
could be an appropriation to
help those communities because
when you take million not only
do you need a transport to your
community but you need the i'm
not a contractor engineer but
you need all of that stuff to
rehabilitate that millions to
put it down in the ground so yes
there's a lot but in my
experience I want to see from
like ship rug to be clarator
which is about forty miles
um
I think it cost us maybe it's
like a one point two million
dollar
project cost to get the free
million so it's like a free
product but there's a cost
associated so that could be
worked into a new mexico
department of transportation's
budget or we have a conversation
on what we need on our side to
to know how much million is
available in the we create like
a package for oliver communities
in new mexico and that was the
only thing I wanted to see in
terms of what was brought up but
I know it's been very warm in
here
rtins are women and men are not
supposed to sweat together so I
apologize for that so let's walk
outside and get some fresh error
and then we'll show you the
community center and I think i'm
there'll be a good way to end
today's conversation thank you
so much.
Amber call done miss began
representative little has the
request yes please thank you I
know you have the conversation
outside but we were all kind of
hoping you would provide that
response and here so we have get
some some of us are drawing on
experience that others are
having uh as buildings are
requested and built and some of
the complex or challenges that
can arise from it so if you
wouldn't mind
providing us all with that
information I I would appreciate
that thank you thank you thank
you representative little
appreciate that yes when the
question was that there is a
veterans building that was bill
in the room and that building is
not operating so the buildings
basically just sitting there and
I did we did discuss that so
when I spoke with bobby balled
when she's a division director
for veterans administration with
nabonation yes and I also spoke
with all in please did he is the
departy of the veterans
administration with nabonation
so none of the fundings that
came from the naba honation
veterans administration was not
used to build that building
so the money came from it was a
chapter project so it was
between the chapter and the
state fundings so the the
chapter was the one that applied
for the findings through the
state and that's how they
matched the front in the
veteran bill that I haven't seen
it so I don't know where they're
talking about but they know
exactly where it's at its
sitting right next to the
chapter so it was part of their
project.
So they as namination veterans
administration has nothing to do
with that building yes so if
there were going to operate the
building and get it going the
chapter will have to do another
resolution with the delete the
current council delegate and
this had happened to during the
prior administration so and it
just kind of came on to this
administration so that's what's
going on
when sold the red solution with
to not have the building under
the chapter and give it to the
veterans that administration
so if the chapter wants to
continue it's just sitting there
so if they want to go ahead and
operate it then they're gonna
have to work with their council
delegate and get the funding
came from either the general
phone or they up funds is what I
was told so they're gonna have
to go back to their counter
delicate to do another
resolution to provide those kind
of fundings to operate the
building
so the building basically has
nothing to do with the veterans
nobody better administration.
Period.
The.
Thank you for providing that
information it's definitely an
issue to be addressed in this
area
it's a informative as to the
processes that each community
tribal anyways because they are
savings have to work together to
achieve a process but you know
just as an outsider looking in
it's like it's kind of a shame
that that building is not being
utilized and hopefully in some
fashion it will be with the
community
you know with input so thank you
for providing that information I
appreciate that
okay thank you thank you for
your public comment
so I can't sit here without a
providing what we can do
in working with the rechapter
because I know other
representatives had invested in
that building and its an
investment o
new mexico and the chapter we
can talk to the current chapter
representatives and they're
delicate mr steven ardison we
could see what is their plan to
operate in maintain are that
bill being and there can be a
conversation with
the office of veterans
administration but they should
put that in writing that it's
either it sounds like they want
to chapter resolution to request
the operating a maintenance of
that building so I could be the
fact the first step madam chair
and the second step then there's
allocating that operating a
meatness cost so we'll need to
know what that looks like
working with the chapter because
it's very similar like these are
the headstart and senior center
buildings that are on the
chapter comparable they're also
chapter bill beans.
But they enter into agreements
with the program we call it
intergovernmental agreements and
that's how the operator meant he
those programs there so there is
a way from this conversation
will give you an update as soon
as we have that so appreciate
the follow up representative of
little
writing thank you
senator representative alcohol
thank you madame chair this
budget state
and smithflick has to better and
step through house and it was
funded by state money for the
capital outlet project what
reduced operated by the never
who nation the cars to keep that
building
the
heated and cool do never think
out is paid for by the whole
nation so they could do that and
smooth like I don't see why they
could not do it in the room
thank you very much thank you
representative that will be
doing the no dead and thank you
for your public comment oh right
let's take a walk to the
community center we are
in recess and tell tomorrow
morning ten am go up you and in
branch.
