Good morning in the
one or welcome more of you today
to our meeting this is far
the investment pension oversight
committee of august twenty ninth
twenty twenty four
we are short one person that we
are
getting some anticipation of the
walk and the webcast of why were
not on yet so we'll be starting
as a subcommittee and we do have
a few members on their way so
which they probably are within
the parking lot or two calls to
be in here and we will go ahead
and will start and we'll start
with my far left of our members
introducing themselves for
though web gas
thank you mr chair allen
martinez house district twenty
three represent the northern
part of rerential and the
western part of the town
brilliant.
First and only time I would have
been called for left
okay
you'd like to know.
Thank you miss chair i'm
representing bill ream district
thirty one the foreign northeast
heights of our kirki and glad to
be here
good morning mr chair.
I too am glad to be here and
it's been a while since i've
been towsky valley so it's
interesting to see it with grass
and not snow but time greg
nibert I represent senate
district twenty seven which is
uh the east side of the state uh
rosevalk curry towards the and
debacle counties.
The.
Thank you mister chairman and
members this morning thank you
for um hosting us at this lovely
place
um I think if we had more
meetings like this we would have
a lot clearer spirits in the
morning
um i'm representative cynthia
deep borigo and I represent
burning a county district
seventeen which is the area on
the northwest miser closest to
real roger.
Good morning mr german ladies
and gentlemen members of the
committee my name is harry
garcia I represent host district
sixty nine and I don't know
quite how to explain it because
runs from the coral farmington
so would be south central was
sent whatever anyway represent
parts of some one machinist to
build up no deal with instance
of coral countries it is
beautiful our year whoever put
is together our year and thank
you because it really nice to
write as pretty the people
friendly and hope you have a
good day thank you.
Good morning mr chair i'm
natalie figuero I represent
house district thirty in the
northeast heights of alba kirky
and have to say it was a
spectacular drive up here this
morning so thanks for starting
the meeting in such a beautiful
place.
And I will go towards the
i'm christine and ask is on a
staff attorney for legislative
council service.
I'm sorry go ahead
yes.
An opportunity to introduce
themselves
well at this time of i'm gonna
ask mr virtually the
administrator for the ski valley
plus I understand the other
different tell
parts of the what he's involved
with a ski valley to give us a
welcome to the hill.
Take out seven.
That.
Sorry about that i'm cheap early
the ski valley police department
imagine the director of public
safety fire you message risky
while then and also currently
the interim the administrator
also without being said a like
on behalf of the mayor of
council the towsky valley we
like to provide everybody
welcome everybody for being here
thank you for your they were
unable to be here but they said
regards guys need anything else
we're around here if you need to
do hesitate ask think you can
get all the diff
thank you all mister befull and
though we will go ahead and
start a now I would be cherry in
the meeting and a senator of a
word for bobby on salaries it
encompasses the district six
district six which is some part
of something or some was really
by an
I just want to add all to are
welcome you know home first
stone itself always so nice to
travel around the state turn now
and we haven't been here and you
know quite some time with them
any of the other meetings better
if you do have the opportunity
to walk around and to see some
of the improvements then I might
just say
given a little bit of my age
better on if you see that big
hill behind us that's else run
in the founder so the ski valley
at the very beginning was the
local doctors in towers and so a
lot of firm trails in the runs
that are within the ski part are
named after our doctors said at
the time
elsewhere is now considered to
be a very
prestigeous universe and get to
ski that and when we were small
we that used to be a cable who
was in the charity.
And we would go and so the young
kids are within way enough so
like halfways we would get
thrown out in
we just key down we didn't think
anything of it now it's all it's
a big part then you also have on
the west base of now the new
chair live now they are one you
really have to be pretty skilled
to go into it again to that one
that opened up will probably
like about four years ago five
years ago
very nice but on
I guess on the overall you know
in part of the.
The.
The.
The.
In the part of the welcome
the ski valley in general tow
ski valley and I was
incorporated and many individual
symbol and I was so that chris
stack could have been here took
yourself a bit more of the
detail though it has employed
many many individuals within the
area you know throughout the
year or so
a lot of employment plus a lot
of contractors plus a lot of
subcontractors you know however
worked with his said they're not
also within our young people
many individuals have become
very very profish and scares to
the point of being a instructors
or continue with them some form
or another you know with the
industry you know that the items
for the were the operation of a
ski valley now within that you
know our surrounding area they
enchanted circle we do have the
other phone
support range of fire red river
and so they are contributed very
much to the entire region which
we call though you know they
enchanted circle but again I
hope that you do have a little
time to walk around to look at
some of
what's going on in any more
it used to be to where it was
though I very very strong winter
season sport no it's pretty much
you around you know with a
recreation involved with a
different things happening the
end of that time it car attracts
a lot of individuals in a
throughout the
entire calendar year so with
that on
thank to everyone for being here
in our vice chairman though rep
suddenly but the reserve rate
welcome to information she could
not be attending due to some
commitments that she has so well
go ahead and will start with our
first presentation and this is
the.
An update from small business
investments corporation russell
comes executive director and
investment advisor welcome good
morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee is that you out
how about that
is it heckly
maybe okay how bad now
is that okay
mr chair members of the
committee thank you for inviting
me having to hear this morning
my name is russell comes i'm the
executive director and
investment advisor for the small
business investment corporation
you should have a hand out in
front of you that looks like
this and i'll be referring to
this during the presentation
the
small business investment
corporation sometimes referred
to as the sbic are also as the
as the new mexico small business
investment corporation msbic
it was formed in two thousand
and one
by the small business act we are
a non profit corporation and our
purpose is to make investments
and loans through agreements
with with cooperative partners
to create a job opportunities
and support businesses
throughout the state in the
mexico that we are funded by an
allocation from the severance
tax permanent fine
senate bill ten past and twenty
nineteen by the mexical
legislative session in the
mexican legislative session and
increased our allocation from
one percent to two percent of
the severance tax permanent
finding yes mister chair think
you have to be a little bit
louder now okay
we'll try that
and so our allocation was
increased in twenty nineteen
from one percent to two percent
of the severance tax permanent
find now we don't receive two
percent every year that's a one
time allocation but as the fine
grows we do get two percent of
the incremental growth so it's a
one time allocation from the
severance tax permanent fine.
We currently have one hundred
fifty five million dollars in
our states
the next page page four has our
border directors we have seven
directors are directors are
appointed by the governor and
confirmed by the senate with the
exception of the state treasure
uh treasurer my toyota's on our
board the state treasurer holds
a permanent seat on our board
directors
on page five there's a chart and
over the years we've developed
and refined a lending program to
support small businesses that
don't have access to traditional
bank loans
we did make a venture capital
equity investments in the past
we've stopped doing that i'll
talk more about that in in in a
mo- in a moment but the focus
now is is on expanding our small
business lending program there's
a continuing need for small
business loans in new mexico the
chart to barn the page shows the
the red bars are the venture
capital equity investments at
one point we we committed thirty
two million dollars to venture
capital equity investments you
can see those running off and or
down to about two million
dollars the small business loans
have been growing and we are
close to one hundred million
dollars in outstanding small
business names
the chart on page six
shows that you know starting
with the recession that the
started back in two thousand
eight
the bank loaned a deposit ratio
really started dropping and
has not has not recovered and we
think that this shows that there
is an increased lending gap and
new mexico for small business
loans in that certain that's
that's what we see as our
mission is helping to fill these
part of that gap
on page seven.
We are we are not a direct
lenders we don't work directly
with small businesses we are
required under the small
business investment act to work
with what a referred to as co
operative agreement partners we
call them lending partners and
the lending partners are
primarily community development
financial institutions or cdfi's
they include the loan find then
time of fund clearing house
dream spring which used to be
axyoung home lies and west
the cdfi's they're mostly
nonprofit corporations there can
be some exceptions but most of
the time it's a non private and
they receive their cdfi
designation from us treasury are
they received some loans and
grants and terrible
contributions without funding is
substantially an adequate
compared to the demand for small
business loans and so in new
mexico
the nms bic and cd advise a
partner to to try and fill the
gap in small business lending I
think it's I think it's very
important to know that the
cdfi's are not competing with
banks and new mexico and rather
they are they are partnering
with banks and often
the local banks are the number
one source of referrals to the
cdfish a lot of times what's
happening is a a small business
owner or a potential
entrepreneur goes into a bank
the bank can't do the loan the
banker will refer that customer
to a cdfi the cdfi will help
that business gets started in
grow and and then many times
after a few years that customer
goes back to the bank and
becomes a bank customer so there
is a good partnership with with
the local banks in my mexico and
the cdfis
page eight is a list of of all
any partners with the amounts of
the dollar amounts that we have
committed and the loans
outstanding and and for that
committee column what we do is
is we're we're in constant
communication with our lending
partners.
And and they inform us about the
the loan demand they're seeing
the the information about loans
that they have in their pipeline
that they're currently working
on and so that helps us have an
understanding of of the proper
amount
of the pop proper amounts to
commit to those lending partners
we commit funds to them and then
they work on closing loans to
fill up those commitments so you
can see we have we have a
hundred and forty one million
dollars committed to our lending
partners there's currently
ninety seven million outstanding
our largest lending partner is
the loan find followed by vinton
of fund and clearing how cdfi
and i'll i'll be going into a
little more detail about watch
what each one of these lending
partners specializes in which
you can see the amounts
committed and outstanding at the
bottom of page I noted that we
currently have about five
million dollars available for
investment and
we are expecting another
allocation from the seventh tax
permanent fund in february
twenty twenty five this past
year we received an allocation
of thirty million dollars and
based on growth in the seventh
tax permanent fine and this is a
very rough estimate but we think
we might receive another thirty
million in february twenty
twenty five from the service tax
permanent find destined based on
growth in the phone
page nine is a list of our
lending partners you can see at
the top is the long find on the
fire right you can see the
average loan size so you can get
a feel for for the size of loans
that they do and so you can see
the loan fund they're doing
traditional small business loans
it might be real estate
equipment receivables inventory
or the types of things they're
making loans on to help small
businesses average long sized
about a hundred and thirty
thousand
vinton of fund they are they are
doing rehabilitation loans on
multi family properties with a
low and moderate income tenants.
Been trying to find is a spin
off from the new mexico mortgage
finance authority the mfa the
mfa started being time to find I
think it was twenty fourteen
with a the mfa provided a three
point eight million dollar grant
to
the entire fine to get them
started and then we we have
provided a line of credit we
currently have a twenty nine
million dollar line of credit to
vinton and fund and in their
face started in time of fund to
do deals with that they saw
there was demand for deals
around the state to provide
housing that they couldn't do
and so they created in tiny plan
to do these deals that they
couldn't find themselves and
these are typically ten twenty
unit multi family units are in
all areas of the state and then
trying to find goes in a lot of
these units that you know the
landlord has owned a property
for a long time and hasn't been
putting a lot of money into
improving the property and it's
declined over time so then tiny
fines works with landlords to go
in and purchase those properties
and renovate them and make them
live and and we're talking about
more than just of course paint
they go in and they really
rehabilitate these multi family
properties around the state and
then based on the percentage of
low income tenants that
determines the interest rate of
entire fund charges and so if
there's more low income tenants
they charge a lower interest
rate on the property and so we
are working with been kind of
fine and gentina found notes
that you know there's a severe
housing shortage and
renovating existing properties
as cheaper and faster than
trying to build things from the
ground up and so I were working
to try and address some of the
housing shortage in new mexico
the other thing too is is our
focus with these loans is on the
construction phase of these
lands and so they're certainly
construction jobs tied the
projects and we also feel that
many communities round the state
if there is not adequate housing
you can't grow jobs and so
that's how we feel there's an
overlap in our mission in what
they are doing.
I am clearing how cfi they do
they do much larger loans real
estate loans historic hotels
hotel renovations and also
charter school construction
rbc game that's royal bank of
canada they have an impact
investing program but these are
these are only known to new
mexico and they are purchasing
spa guaranteed loans that are
focused on black conditioners
and people of color
that type of borrower and
they're pulling those loans and
then selling the pools to us
were purchasing the pools of
these loans and they're their
loans from all around the state
home wise is working on downtown
albuquerque commercial property
renovation and they're also
doing charter school
construction
dream spring which used to be
axion they do small business
loans you can see their average
loan size about twenty one
thousand dollars so they're
doing much smaller loans than
some of the other lending
partners west has offices around
the state and they have training
programs for small business
owners and entrepreneurs and as
people are going through the
different training programs west
if west believes that it makes
sense for their business to have
some funding then they'll
provide a a loan to that small
business to help them grow
we're partners with the mortgage
finance authority that's new
mexico mortgage fantastic
authority we provide funding for
their low income housing tax
credit properties and they've
got so what happened where we're
providing funding for the ups up
front acquisition of land the
development and construction
once the property is completed
in f has plenty of sources for
longterm financing so we are we
are helping and partnering on
the up front construction of
several of these
lightect product property
projects around this the state a
lift find lift fund used to be
account texas but they have
expanded into next mexico they
have small business loans and
also they have a product.
For unincorporated areas
including colonious colonials
along the border and an rcac
that the stands for the rural
communities acceptance
corporation they only do loans
and rural communities and they
do usd a guaranteed loans for
water wastewater and and also
small business loans
page ten
these are these are people were
talking to we don't currently
have relationships with them yet
but we're there's there's a lot
of demand for our program and so
we're having conversations with
additional lending partners the
tap two on the list here
enchantment land and beside
capital these are certified
development companies so.
As I mentioned earlier we do a
lot of business with cdfish the
community development financial
institutions that are designated
receive their designation some
treasury there are also cdcs
certified development companies
that receive their designation
from the small business
administration and and they help
provide small business loans and
what they're doing is their
partnering a lot of times the
small business loans the spa
loans come from banks but the
city c's partner with the banks
to help provide small these spa
loans and so spa has come out
with a program in recent years
it's still considered a pilot
program but they've been
renewing it every year and it's
it's growing so spa has
something called a community
advantage program as a spa
community advantage long it's
designed specifically for cdfis
and for cdcs so non profit
lenders and and these are loans
that similar to other sba loans
but but they have expanded
underwriting guidelines for
cdfis and cdcs to help small
businesses get started in grow
and so the programs not
available to banks and it's to
to help small businesses get
started and then hopefully
become a bank customer and so
under this community advantage
program spape guarantees the
loan but they don't provide
funding and so this so this is
where we are stepping in and
partnering with the cdcs to
provide funding for these speed
guarantee community advantage
loans
we're also talking with beside
fund that's a subsidiary of
beside capital and they are
working on becoming an approved
cdfine
we've been having conversations
with native partnership for
housing located in gallop and
we're talking about providing
funding for new home
construction and home
renovations and it it's a these
might be on naval nations but
native partnership for housing
works with with all indian
tribes in the state.
We are also having discussions
with the new mexico climate
investment center mcic that's
new mexico's green bank and
they're going to be doing solar
and weather reservation and long
modern income properties and
also working to expand renewable
energy generation for rural and
native community utilities and
so we're having discussions with
with mmcic there are going to be
doing consumer loans to
individuals and also small
business loans we're only
allowed to participate in the
small business loans that they
are doing we can't do consumer
loans
and but they will be doing small
business loans and and what
we're what we're discussing is
there are there are there are
federal grant programs that in
mcic will likely qualify for
many of these federal grant
programs require
matching funding in order to get
the federal grant fines and so
we're we're having discussions
with n n c I see about
a cinemas bicy coming in with a
line of credit that would
provide the matching funding
that would allow them to get the
federal grants and
we're also having discussions
with in mexico black cheaper
congress they are looking at
creating a subsidiary that would
be a new small business lending
cdfi and then also discussions
with hexagan housing
these are the same people that
started in tonight fund that I
talked about earlier which is a
spin off from the mortgage
finance authority they're
looking at creating a new cdfi
to support new mexico's military
missions and they they've noted
that
for many of the military bases
around the state there's
inadequate housing surrounding
those areas and if they feel
that it could jeopardize our
ability to to retain those
military bases and so they're
looking at forming a new cdfi to
help do similar drive in tiny
funds doing but doing it in and
you know around the military
basis.
I'll talk just briefly about a
couple of programs that we we uh
came out with during the
the covered nineteen pandemic
and we still have some of those
loans outstanding that are that
are paying and and process of
being paid off i'm page eleven
we came out with a covered
nineteen lending program
we provided funding to our
lending partners we provided
funding to the cdfi's as zero
percent interest rate for up to
three years we expanded that up
to five years provided that the
cdfi means loans to small
businesses impact by the
pandemic and it is interest rate
no more than three point seventy
five percent
the long find we're with some
very successful and originating
close to fifteen million dollars
in these loans they currently
have about nine million left
that are currently in the
process of being repaid and
liropocheco president co he
notes here I won't read the
whole quality notes that they
were able to create or proof
preserve over a thousand jobs
during the pandemic because of
this lending program that we
provided to them
page twelve we came out with it
as a different lending program
what we noted during the
pandemic is that there was
the the small business
administration came out with
something called a paycheck
protection program on a ppp loan
I think a lot of people have
have heard that term and the pp
loan was a tremendous benefits
for fault for small businesses
it was a long from it was an spa
loan that was forgiveable and so
it really helped save a lot of
small businesses in mexico what
we found what we saw happening
was that the banks were in many
cases only doing ppp loans for
their own customers or in some
cases the banks were only
focusing on the biggest
customers and so we had
discussions with dream spring
about a about this problem
because the the smaller small
businesses were being.
Shut out and didn't have access
to this tremendous benefit what
we did as we partnered with
dreams spring
and and hangs here ceo she notes
in her quote that that in a
matter of days we made thirty
million dollars and funding
available to the dream spring to
channel into pp loans for these
smaller small businesses that
were being shut out and and it
had a tremendous impact we think
i'm helping small businesses in
in new mexico and page thirteen
this is an exert from from an
spa report it's not the entire
report is the extra of the top
page of the report but you can
see here if you look at this
speaker report
during uh during this quarter in
twenty twenty one during the
pandemic that dreams spring
worth funding from the n SB I c
was the largest spa lender in
new mexico because the pp loans
we were providing I think it's
important to know that during
that quarter they generated nine
hundred and seven loans which
was bigger than any other bank
in the state but if you look at
the dollar amount you can see
the the they didn't do the
biggest dollar amount there were
banks with much larger dollar
amounts of pp these these are
all people the only thing going
on under in this time in a speed
lending was p p p lending there
are banks doing much larger
dollar amount so you can see
here is that dream spring was
helping smaller small businesses
get access to learning and I
think this report shows that
that our partnership a dream
spring we really had a
significant impact during the
during the plan democrat with
this program of the thirty
million we provided with the
dream spring it was guaranteed
by SB a and all of the money has
come back to us
page fourteen
for the most part the funds that
are lending partners make their
secured by real estate equipment
or accounts receivable so
there's collateral on these
loans which is similar to what
traditional banks do the
borrowers are usually required
to provide a get personal
guarantee so that's also similar
to what banks do.
The thing that is different
though is that the cdfi's have
more flexibility to help
businesses new and growing
businesses that I can't always
qualify for a bank loan and so
an example of that is if a small
business owner or entrepreneur
goes to a traditional bank the
banks typically go to was want
to see tax returns showing two
years of profitability well if
you're a brand new business or
if you're a growing business you
can always show that a lot of
times are growing business
doesn't show profitability
they're taking all their profits
in their plowing it back into
growing their business the
replying in into buying
facilities and equipment and
hiring people and so they're not
showing profits on their tax
returns well the cdfi's have the
flexibility to look at a well
developed business plan or they
can look at the top line revenue
growth as opposed to
profitability and they can often
make loans that uh that banks
can't do
and the last bullet on this page
you know a lot of times the
small business goes to the cdfi
they've got an idea but they
don't have a well a developed
business plan a lot of times
what's happening in the cdfis
are partnering with the small
business development centers
around the state so we've got
around twenty of these spdc
offers around the state that
that for free will help these
small businesses develop a a
business plan they have
certified business planners and
so the cdfis are partnering with
the spdc officers around the
state to help these small
businesses are developer
business plan and then uhm and
then come back to them and and
talk about funding for a long
no if it's if it's not a full
business plan if it's a small
business just needs some
specific help in it in a
targeted area the c d f i's
provide a lot of assistance
themselves to these small
businesses and so examples you
know these this is we call this
high touch lending that the
cdfires are doing in helping
these small businesses get
started and grow and so a lot of
times the serious eyes are
helping the small businesses
develop marketing plan.
And budgets websites set up
installing computerizes counting
systems this dispolate here
referring to cpa firms
this is an article for a lot of
small business in mexico they
they go to a bank but they don't
have financial statements that
they can present as part of a
loan application so that that's
a lot of times the first step in
helping a small business yet to
where they can get other cdf
loan or a bank loan is helping
them get their financial
stations or that they can stay
can supply with a loan
application and then also
something that you know during
the pandemic and and still the
cdfisher helping these small
businesses with price setting
there's been a lot of inflation
light of increases in pricing
and a lot of times a small
business is reluctant to
increase their price they
they're you know they don't want
to pass through price increases
small business and but then that
hurts their profit margin and so
the uh the cdfis have been
providing a lot of consulting to
small businesses on setting
prices for good some services
that they offer
paid sixteen
this is a impact this is since
since inception
we have we have provided funding
for over seventy two hundred
loans two hundred and fifty
three million in loans line and
those loans are as we make those
loans again these are loans and
not grants so the loans get made
to small businesses they get
repaired and we take those
dollars and and we loan him out
again so the funds are recycled
and over twenty five thousand
jobs supported and supported in
in all areas of the state if you
if you turn to page seventeen
there's a chart here and so
several years ago was the
legislative finance committee
staff
requested that I prepare this
report and I really like to
report and I I continue I
continue to include in
presentations but this was a
suggestion from lfc staff and
and what we we've done here is
there's a column on the far left
for you can see the number of
loans that we generated around
the state and so you.
And berlin county has has a lot
of you know over four thousand
loans and burned county
but we can see here's we also
have the population in each
county and then the chart with
the blue bars shows the the
number of loans and each county
per capita so this is per
thousand people in population
and so you can see here that
we are delivering loans to to
all areas of the state and then
this has been normalized to show
the uh the number of loans per
capita
I know page eighteen
during the most recent twelve
months for the loans made by our
cdfi partners fifty seven
percent of the lowest loans were
made to minority own businesses
forty five percent of the loans
were made to women on businesses
now that numbers more than one
hundred you had those two
together it's more than a
hundred percent because some of
them are minority and women on
small businesses
uhm and then
page nineteen
twenty seventeen we engage the
bureau of business and economic
research
referred to them as beaber to
conduct an impact study of our
program and so they looked at
loans that were originated by
our partners from twenty eleven
through twenty fifteen and what
they did as they calculated and
opportunity cost for a program
and what what what they looked
at is they said okay we get our
funding from the severance tax
permanent fine of the the fund
has a target return is six point
seventy five percent what we're
doing is we're making loans
available to our cdfi partners
at two percent so they're saying
that if if the money were left
in the seven sacks permanent
fund early six point seven five
there be more return to the
state and so they they took that
four point seven five difference
and they said for the number of
new jobs that are being created
there is a cost of about forty
seven hundred dollars per new
job they compared that to j text
costs during the same period the
g tip cost was about fifty nine
hundred per new job.
And then also the leader class
was about forty two hundred and
so their conclusion was the cost
of the program was similar or
two other state programs that
are there are creating jobs
the other thing that the beaber
studies show this is on page
twenty is the they showed that
for every one million dollars in
loans that are generated with
our funds there are twelve new
jobs created in new mexico
there is a similar study in
twenty thirteen done by the us
senses for spa loans around the
country that studies show that
for every million dollars in
loans there are five point four
new jobs created and so we
thought this was a very good
result that uh that came from
the beaver study showing that
we're generating twelve new jobs
for every million dollars in
loans and as I mentioned before
we alone those million dollars
out it's repaid to us and then
we load or not again and we
recycle the fines
page twenty one I mentioned I
mentioned at the beginning that
at at one point we had a
ventured capital fund there's a
foot note of the very bottom
that shows that we started with
thirty two million dollars we
had some of that money returned
to us we had about twelve point
nine million returned and so the
net investment inventory capital
over the years was was a little
over nineteen million the first
column here shows that net
investment of nineteen million
the current market value of
those investments is four
million and so life to date
we've had a loss of fifteen
million dollars on these these
were early stage or seed stage
venture capital investments so
we last lot we invested thirty
two million we lost about
fifteen million dollars it was a
big loss and that program
supported about three hundred
and forty eight jobs in new
mexico so there is a cost for
job about forty four thousand
dollars per job
and
in twenty eleven the state
investment council made a
recommendation the governor.
But that the sbic terminate this
program
and also the government are put
in place all new directors at
the spicy and that happened and
so and twenty eleven the SB I c
received on all new directors
except for the state treasure
the new directors came in and
the uh they terminated the
spentre capital learning program
and in twenty twelve they hired
me and and my job was to expand
the organizations lending
program and so I started with
your relation in twenty twelve
with with the job of expanding
lending program page twenty two
you can see the impact of the
lending program in terms of cost
per job
the chart half the page shows
that life to date since the
reception i'm on row eighteen
the total lending program has
generated seven point four
million dollars in interest
income that we've received from
our cdfi partners we've had one
point six million losses passed
through to us so positive net
interest income of over five
million dollars the program is
supported twenty five thousand
jobs and all there is the state
and instead of a cost per job
the program is generated a
profit of two hundred and thirty
dollars per job and then on the
bottom of the page of the same
information but just for the
most recent twelve months and
you can see in the recent twelve
months we generate one point
three million dollars in
interest on loans we've had
about thirty four thousand
dollars in loss as passed
through to us net interesting
come of over one point two
million supported three thousand
jobs of profit per job of four
hundred and fifteen dollars per
job and so that you know when
when we look at this we feel
like that we're supporting a lot
more jobs and we're doing it
cost effectively and we feel
that it's had much better impact
than the venture capital fund
that that the organization was
doing previously on a page
twenty three
just I showed on the previous
page.
That the interesting common
loans more than offsets
operating cost and so we are a
self sustaining operation and
then as i've mentioned a couple
times we recycle the funds so we
loan the money out the money is
repaired to us and then we loan
it out again and we keep doing
that over and over which creates
additional jobs
page twenty four
the small business investment
act has a revision called net
excess funds and so are the net
excess fines includes our
interest in calm and realize
gains minus any operating
expenses so basically if we make
a profit we return that profit
to the severance tax permanent
fund each year and so last year
for the fiscal year ended june
thirty twenty twenty three we
return one point seven million
dollars to the servant's tax
permanent find this year and I I
saw an updated estimate last
night it looks like it says two
point nine may here it looks
like we're going to return a
little more than three million
to the severance tax permanent
fund for the for the most
current fiscal year
page twenty five just as a recap
we feel that we fu- fill a
critical gap in lending to new
and growing small businesses in
new mexico
we provide a significant
assistance to mexico small
business during the covered
nineteen pandemic and we are a
self sufficient program that
supports job growth and economic
development around the state
and mister care members of the
committee that that's my
presentation would be happy to
answer any questions
thank you all thank you very
much before we go to question so
we're gonna take care of a
couple of things that we have a
couple of members that are
joined us after we started
getting to district up to
he was for the recorder for
their wife cast
thank you mister chairman he was
out when it said
my name is out when it's a deal
opens I represent district
sixteen and albuquerque and it
was a beautiful drive but I did
not anticipate that.
Traffic
so I apologize for being glad to
be here
growing up
representative
thank you mister chaira I am
representative and is the only
one on her representative six
parts of similar edit making the
county again just like serious
or so I add my gps and I was
supposed to be here right about
nine fifty this morning but some
of another federal money that
could be new fixing roads and a
insurance doing a heck of a job
in
entails thank you mister chair
thank you to both of you well
members if you can take the
second to look at our minutes
and
the child will ask for a motion
for a approval of the minutes.
We have a motion to accept the
minutes of special to use their
second
second.
Oh very well her zero position
to that
say none of her minutes are
approved for the july thirtieth
twenty twenty four thank you
we'll go our questions now
we'll start off with the
representative what I want
thank you mister chairman
thank you mr common
very impressive numbers
I just wanted to say that
the the way that you guys are
doing business is really just
it's wonderful to hear that it's
in new mexico when it and then
it's benefiting
both small businesses but also
are you know pushing
new housing and and
rehabilitation of existing
housing
which is desperately needed
I had two questions for you
mister chair one is did you all
receive any funding from the
american rescue fund during
covered cause I don't see
anything in here regarding that
so I just wondered I know the
city of alba kirky dead but I
didn't know if you are received
anything for forgivable loans.
You didn't okay and then my
second question was
with regard to the
and I know the program accerned
because I I remember when they
first came to alba kirki and we
helped the city of alva kirky
helped them sort of gain their
flooding and it's very
impressive to see all of these
programs that you guys are
working with
um but I wanted to know on
average just an average if you
could
what what would be like an
average if I were a small
business and I came to one of
these groups what would be an
average of interest that I would
be paying back as a small
business.
I know it's a little better we
have to go back and forth with
or yes there you go is that
better
mischair and representative rego
the interest rates vary and
there's quite a right wide range
now during the pandemic we had a
special loan program at three
point seventy five percent
that's lower than normal
I would say that a typical small
business loan is going to have
an interest rate of around seven
or eight percent
now they're there are some
exception and I I would say from
most of the program that's
probably the interest rate you
will see so for the vast
majority of dollars at around
seventy eight percent.
Historically that's been higher
than what the bank loans have
done historically the for of
many years the bank loans have
been five or six percent in the
current environment the bank
longs are now eight or nine
percent cause of uh interest
rates or higher but we think
that the bank loans are going to
start coming down at the at the
end of this year and
I think I think historically I
think it's it's worked well
where the cdfi lawns are at
seven or eight percent if the
bank loans are at five or six
percent then there's incentive
for those small businesses to
graduate from the cdfi program
and go into our traditional
banks which is what we want to
see
there if if you're familiar with
actually owner now dream spring
they do they do have some loans
where they are helping you know
there are predatory lenders out
there
and they are trying to provide
an alternative for those
there is a lot of risk in those
loans though and and these are
smaller loans usually less than
four thousand dollars that i'm
talking about like pd type loans
and and the interest rate on
those loans can be very high I
think it's been capped now at
thirty six percent in the state
so dream spring is doing those
types of loans their average
interest rate on a loan that
they're providing it is
alternative to pay day alone
their average interest rate is
about eleven percent for those
loans now depending on the risk
it can be above her below eleven
percent I think the highest rate
i've seen a dream spring is been
around fifteen to seventeen
percent on some of their highest
risk loans that are competing
with and providing an
alternative to the to the payday
loans uhm it's that they're very
small loans there's not very
many dollars invested at those
rates but there are some of the
loans out there that that
are in the teams that are
primarily from dreams spring for
this program to help provide an
alternative of the payday loans
thank you thank you mister
chairman.
Um and could you just comment I
know what cdfi is and I know you
have to apply for it to be and
it has to be a part of your
organization but could you just
comment real quickly on sort of
cdfi actually means
mister chair and representative
rigo yes the the the community
development then constitutions
they as I noted they received
their designation they applied
to and they receive their
designations in us treasury and
there they are non profit
organizations there's there's
can be some exceptions for a
four profit company that can be
but for the most part their
nonprofit corporations and their
purpose is to serve underserved
communities and understand
borrowers and and that's what
they do
to mister chair
very well thank you let me just
be a cautious of our time in
order to be able to stay on
schedule we have a
approximately four five more
legislators to speak that we
have about twenty minutes so
maybe if we can keep her
response back and forth a
shorter further maybe to five
minutes per legislator and the
next we have a representative
martinez
think mr chiro will be brief
mr comments on page twenty one
line sixty u say that
sounds a window and door was the
only direct loan made yes
is it more efficient to go
through some of the community
partners
why is there not more direct
loans
mr chair and representative
martinez
number one the small business
investment act requires us to
use
cooperative partners in making
their loans.
I don't know if that was an
oversight back in the early days
for making that direct long
but we feel that the the small
business investment act requires
us to work with cooperative
agreement partners rather than
doing direct loans but the other
thing too is is we have the
ability to do a direct loan as
long as we have a partner
working with us and that might
have happened in this performing
time might have happened here
but we think it's problematic
for us to do direct loans
because our meetings are open to
the public and having a long
file come in with confidential
information being reviewed in
public meeting we think would be
problematic
and just one request for mr
chairman on page twenty four are
you talking about the return of
the net excess funds as that
required by statue
mr chairman representative
martinez it is required by
statute
thank you mr chairman thank you
mister
well thank you
to the seminar said the unoffice
thank you mr chair and thank you
for this presentation i'd heard
about the work and it's nice to
really see the details my
question is or nonprofit
eligible for these loans
mr chair and senator city lopez
yes
they are eligible and I mention
that most of the time there's a
personal guarantee required
that's the exception of the
program is nonprofits don't have
owners so they don't have by
crucial guarantees but yes they
are eligible to receive loans
from the cdfice how do they
learn about it just because
yesterday I was
at
a legislative health and human
services and a non profit told
us about having to mortgage her
home because of delays and
reimbursement by the state and
she needed to to cover payroll
which was pretty atlantis in
which she said was banks weren't
going to give her a loan to to
cover this gap my question is
where this program be something
that she could turn to.
Because you would know the money
was coming in it's a build
they're just a couple of months
delay because of guidance what
and she needs a cover period so
chairman is all since senator cd
lopez I
we and our partners are always
doing out reached trying to to
locate and and
provide funding to partners but
there's always opportunities for
more outreach and
but I can't guarantee one of our
cd far partners would make that
loan but but I think it's
certainly be worth worth
contacting them and having a
discussion because yes they do
make loans to to non profits
would there be would that be
something that you're that you
would do directly on I guess not
because you
chairman is all the center city
as we would not do a direct long
we would prefer them to one of
our cdfi parkers
you do you think that that may
be a gap I am just wondering
because i've worked with a love
oxion or whatever dream during
spring and and they're fabulous
but they're also
I think it would be very
difficult for them to consider
that kind of one
is there a gap fair that might
need to be filled
i'm chairman of zones and
senator city or lopez you know
we we are looking to that's what
we're interested in doing is
looking to fill gaps and there's
there there's gap there were
certainly interested in and
taking a look at that now we
don't we don't dictate to our
cdfi partners what loans they do
and what ones they don't do we
provide them with the funding
and they get to make those
decisions and if there is any
losses in the loans they're
responsible for the losses as
well
but uhm
III think though you know as you
mention that there is dream
spring but there are a lot of
other lenders in the state and
sometimes if one lenders not
able to do the job it's worth
shopping around and seeing if
there's another cd fire partner
that might be able to help.
That particular nonprofit or if
night if none of them would do
it there might be a need for
another cfi to to sort of
specialise the non profits cause
it's unique I ran a non profit
for three years and
it's challenged it's challenging
dealing with banks because they
just don't count income the same
way so it is a challenge will
thank you and thank you for all
of this work thank you mister
chair
well thank you all
representatives
thank you mr chair a couple of
questions was great presentation
I had been trying to follow the
math
your estimating about three
million i'll be returned
to the separate stax find
but on page twenty two the
entire interest income was one
point three million so where's
the rest of it come from
mr chair and representative
figure i'm sorry I was turning
off my mike could you could you
show me those numbers again sure
you're returning about three
million to the seventeenth tax
month page twenty two indicates
if i'm reading a right that the
entire interest income was about
one point three million so where
does the rest come from
mr chair representative figure
out
that the part you're not seeing
it's it's a good observation the
part you're not saying here when
we receive money from the
servants tax permanent find we
invest those funds in short term
investments and the we we have
the the main places where we
invest funds are with the stick
treasure's office they have a
local government investment pool
program lgip during the past
year lgip was had there is a
yield of five point three
percent it was a a very good
yield and then we also have a
joint power's agreement with a
state investment council where
we also invest funds with the
state investment council and a
core plus out it's a credit plus
bine pool with the state
investment council so.
We we invest excess plans while
they're in the process of being
deployed in in those two places
and that's what generated the
extra income that you're not
seeing
thank you mister comings thank
you mr chair so the interest
income column on page twenty two
is literally just the interest
on the loans you put out not the
interest on these short term
while you're waiting to disperse
mr chair and got it
in for about yes thank you my
other question is about page
nine you talked about the
antonio phoned and that the
interest rate that they will pay
on their loans goes down based
on the number of low income
tenants so we are literally
incentivising had lords to
create affordable housing or
housing for low income which we
know new mexico needs
I wondered how low the interest
rate can go and how long the
interest rate holds at that low
rate because we're finding now
that a lot of landlords are
jacking up
branch prices so how long do the
low interest rates hold and how
low do they go
mr chairman representative
figure out
the agreement we have within
tonight find is that they can
use our funds for up to five
years and and so that and so the
amount of time that then tiny
fund can then provide their
funding to to the landlords is
also going to be five years and
what ventina find his indicated
is is they would like to go
longer because they want to lock
in those landlords with the low
income tenants and
but
we are we we are not providing
long term loans for housing were
providing loans that we.
Feel stimulate jobs and so
focusing on the up front
construction period is is why
we're limiting laws to five
years and and we're not
interested in providing long
term housing because we don't
feel that's our mission
thank you mister kernez that an
issue I think we have to face
its legislators how to
incentivise that low income
housing I would reiterate what
senator city at lopes mentioned
though and see if
you reach out to new partners
your page of new partners is
very exciting but perhaps there
are some that could work in the
construction fees of health care
facilities which we know we are
short on it in the state as well
as well as that non private net
thank you mr chair
thank you her very much so I
have a couple of questions in
there now we will go to our next
presentation home in page nine
or under the clearing house c d
f I and then also with the home
ways
I noticed that we have a charter
schools and I guess first is how
do they get the information.
I'm not sure where the
information is coming from for
them
thank you I guess what brought
this to my attention is so I
don't see any of the other
public schools and one of the
possibilities could be use
public schools have the
authority for property tax or a
charge calls do not have and
maybe that's why we're seeing
the characters coming this
direction this is that's just my
my my part of the same one might
be happening what will mister
chair the
or first of all the small
business investment act does not
allow us to do business worth
governments are municipalities
and and so
we would not be allowed to to
work with a public school
district when the charter
schools are purchasing their own
facilities they are always doing
it with a nine profit foundation
the non profit foundation
purchases are known as the
building that's where the our
loan is being made is with the
foundation and the foundation
leases the property that charter
school and that's that's the way
try to school finance works when
whenever try to school once it's
building and so we are working
with a nine profit corporate our
cdfi partners can make longs to
non profits and that's an
example of a nonprofit they work
with
what
you know glad because you know
they really don't have another
you know too
go through another avenue as
public schools to because they
have the authority of home
property tax or a miller with
them within their son we might
end up seen a little bit more
we have a center city low
perspective question thank you I
forgot to ask this question
because it was on the back of my
paperwork and this actually
relates to what represents
martinis was saying the statute
requires you to return.
The the profits to the seventh
tax permanent fund would it be
helpful to you to have a statute
change so that at least a
percentage of it if not all of
it would be rolled back so that
you could actually give more
loans and expand your impact
mister chair and senator city
alopes
I I don't feel that that's nest
I mean I I i'm turning down
turning down the offer for money
I know that but I don't believe
it's necessary and mainly
because the severance tax
permanent fund is seeing
pretty good growth and so
because of that
we receive thirty million last
year and we're receiving
probably another thirty million
this coming year and so that's
providing enough funding for us
to keep browing our program and
so
I mean certainly it would help I
think that
I think there might be well
anyway I I don't feel it's
necessary because we're getting
enough funding give given your
state of growth at the current
type of thing thank you mister
chair appreciate the appetite
thank you thank you very much
think it was very good
presentation a lot of
information and will keep
working with it motor thanks
again being here mr chair
members of the committee think
thank you very much before we
move to our next presentation we
have a senator peter has joined
us again interest yourself good
morning but my name is chairman
members of the committee and I
am senators and and pinto from
district not was cornered the
state manner great drive getting
out period as long as you're not
behind a heavy equipment truck
is a click thirty miles but
thank you it's good to be here.
Will move on to our next one in
the alternative were to mister
david are to let them you can
introduce your
percentage that are with you
good morning mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is david let them the executive
director of the education
retirement board to my right and
who will be presenting the bulk
of today's presentation is mr
bob jackson our chief investment
officer but i'd also like to
introduce or a new executive
assistant recent graduate from
the university new mexico mr
email per the cells are in the
back there if you like to stand
up
in without we can jump right
into the presentation we've got
a couple of items that you'll
see that will be discussing
starting on page two
list of things that mr jackson
will be going over and certainly
happy to answer any questions
you may have
to carry
very well welcome I could start
thank you mister chairman
committee members thank you for
inviting us to present at the
lovely tow scheme valley i'm not
sure we're going to leave but
before I get into the
presentation and an important
announcement if anyone is in the
market for some orange
construction barrels talked to
me afterwards I think we can
make a deal it's probably about
eight hundred of them on the way
the meeting here
before you go on maybe a shorter
announcement also to our audio
and so please welcome yourself
to some coffee or anything that
you know providing the pesteries
feel comfortable in
joining us thank you thank you
if you would turn to page three
this is a snapshot from our
website
all of our policies related to
investments are on the website
they serve as a framework for
our investment operations the
first item is our main
investment policy.
Which is the primary document
the others address more a
specific allocations and
activities so i'm gonna spend a
little time on that mean
investment policy on page four
you can see the table of
contents as to what that policy
covers
you can see it covers the
purpose the philosophy goals
constraints and roles and
responsibilities
starting unpaid five
the mission is the mission of
the overall organization to
provide secure retirement
benefits for new mexico's
educational employees that had
something that we in the
organization take very seriously
it's the reason we exist
as far as investment goals
does your focus done balancing
the risk and the return
a return that's sufficient to
provide the funding for a
beneficiaries and to balance
that
would the appropriate level of
risk we do spend a fair amount
of time focusing on the risk
component
turn to page six
just briefly the roles and
responsibilities
the board of trustees has an
oversight role they approved
policies they review performance
that sort of thing
are the trustees have delegated
authority to the staff for
essentially the operation of the
investment fund.
The investment staff is sixteen
positions currently three of
those are vacant
six of those positions are in
the albuquerque office and the
remainder is in a santa fe
office
if you turn to page seven
years the
asset allocation targets are
in our policy that's another
aspect to its in there
this shows the actual allocation
versus those policy targets it's
a little bit of a a busy slide
so spend a few minutes on it
just declarify
you'll see for instance the
what we call the physical
exposure to column we owned for
instance us equities of two
point nine billion roughly on
june thirty.
The total exposure is a higher
number because during the year
we were under allocated to that
and we added some exposure with
futures contracts so our market
exposure is actually about three
point three million
and you can see if you look at
the physical exposure percentage
about seventeen percent versus
the policy target of about
nineteen you can see where we're
short so we made up the
difference
during the year public equities
did very well so not owning
enough of almost a bit of a
negative but we've corrected
that
so the far column shows the
difference between our total
exposure which is what we're
targeting and the policy target
that is also listed there.
Are you can see it lays out all
of the different categories of
ourselves starks bins
a number of alternative assets
private equity real estate
infrastructure and and we can
talk more about that later if
you like
turning to page eight.
Since we're in educational fund
we're going to have alternative
class for a minute but but don't
worry it's all deborah when I
want.
The basic
formula for any pension fund
whether it be your for a one k
eurobe per what have you
is on this page the
contributions plus the
investment earnings must
overtime pay for the benefits
and the expenses
should think about a four or one
k you put in money early on
hopefully you earn money over
time
on the other side you have
expenses that start right away
and an eventually you start with
trying to pay for the benefits.
So over the year is the changes
that have been made in the
legislation have increased the
contribution and altered the
benefits most notably on the
coalition.
Those have been affective in
improving our position the
results of this is the annual
net car shout flow has decreased
quite a bit you can see those
numbers there we still do pay
out more cash than we take in
from contributions and that is
by design the investment income
is there to make up the
difference
and that target is the seven
percent called the actual target
and that's really what we're
focused on on the investment
side.
We are on a path to full funding
I believe it's within thirty
years
and those legislative changes
have helped.
If you turn to
page
nine.
D highlights for the fiscal year
the fund did do better than the
seven percent target that I
mentioned in most of the periods
with the exception of the three
year period
were consistently among the top
ten in a pure group of.
Other public funds in the us on
a risk adjusted basis
and we did read to new high of
seventeen point one billion at
the end of the fiscal year.
For all periods longer than a
year the return of the fund was
better than that the median of
that public fund group I
mentioned as well as the policy
index
I would like to put these things
in in dollar amounts rather than
just percentages in the ten year
period our actual results added
about one point three billion
versus what we would have done
if we just stuck with the policy
and a little over a billion
versus the median peer group
the one year return was over the
seven percent but it lagged our
policy and it did lag the peer
group and as I mention that was
mainly because we owned less in
public equities.
It turned to page ten this
simply shows our historical
asset growth over time
and you can see it has grown
substantially says two thousand
town.
On page ten
we do show you the investment
returns as of june thirty for
various time periods
all of these returns are net of
manager fees
the most important measuring
stick if you will is at seven
percent that I mentioned that's
what we have to hit again we did
do that with the exception of
the three year period
and I will say that during some
periods you simply can't
make the seven percent because
the markets won't allow you
we don't control the market
returns we don't control their
direction we just try to get in
the right place to uh try to
earn that.
Now in addition to the seven
percent we do look at a few
other measures we do have the
policy index again that would be
that set allocation target that
I showed you earlier
and we did exceed that in all
the periods except for the one
year
below that you can see the
differential for instance in the
five year period it was point
four percent
every year that's an annualized
figure
and then there is a ranking
versus that pure universe the
lower the number the better
number one is best one hundred
is the worst.
If you would go on to page
eleven
this shows you those ranking
numbers in a
a graph rather than on a table I
and I I like to emphasize as I
always have that the important
time periods are not a quarter
or one year it is several years
in any quarter or one year this
a strategy may fall short they
do conditions change so we want
to measure it over a longer
period of time because our
pension find is a long term
a long term beast if you were
so our goal with the return in
terms of the median public
pension finders we want to be
above the median in most periods
we are you see that line there
it does fluctuate
depending on not the market
conditions but we've done that
pretty consistently
if you turn to page twelve I
mention that we do
put a good deal of focus on risk
given her current funding status
we have to do that.
Our number one job is to make
sure that the pension checks are
paid every month and that's what
the fund is therefore so you
could say it another one another
way our number one job is to
make sure we don't go broke you
have to control your risk to do
that again this measures are
risk versus that pure group of
public phones said have more
than a billion dollars we are
almost always one of the least
risky funds
again here number one would be
the lease risky a hundred would
be the worst.
And then thirteen
combines risk and return in a
measure that's called a sharp
ratio which is widely used
across the investment industry
this sort of brings it all
together again the hiring the
chart you are the better and we
are pretty consistently in the
top ten percent
so that is essentially if you
had to target one thing that's
what I would look at
on page fourteen
we show this again in a little
bit different chart
this shows the five and ten
years all of those got certain
individual public pension fund
or actual results or the darker
larger blue.
Circle and then our policy index
is the lighter circle
the higher you are in this chart
the the better you return is the
further to the left you are
the better you are risk is
controlled and essentially you
want to be in what's called the
first quiet drink that upper
left and we consistently fall in
there.
That is all that I have
david mister chairman is the
committee
mister chair members of the
committee if you will like we
can and
we can focus on the investment
peace and then I can go over now
the different scenarios that we
arrest to develop or if you like
I could just go there different
scenarios
I would say just continue
continuing while hold our
questions at the end
so one of the questions it was
asked and you can see the answer
on page sixteen as what would
happen if we gave you some lump
some funding dollars in terms of
the impact her to solve and see
the program and this is a chart
that you saw the last meeting
but this is slightly different
it's basically directly from the
actuaries what they got it was a
manipulated to put into a chart
for the presentation basically
if we received two hundred and
fifty million dollars in lump
sum next july it will move a
spot but funded ratio of sixty
six percent to sixty seven
percent and our targeted funded
day are fully funded date would
move from twenty forty three to
twenty forty two
i'm sorry the ninety percent
funded date would move from
twenty forty three to twenty
forty two and are one hundred
percent funded day when moved
from twenty forty eight down to
twenty forty seven so would gain
about a year and then you can
see how how each different
increment would impact that
would have so for you received a
lump sum a little over a billion
dollars we would move to a
ninety percent funded ratio by
twenty forty and we would be
with fully funded by twenty
forty four if we were to receive
nine billion dollars
we would immediately move to a
full funding scenario where we
would be able to pull out our
produce the four costs to live
in adjustment now
without any sort of reduction if
you turn to page seventeen if we
were to increase the recurring
dollars that we receive in terms
of any increase in the employer
contribution if we move from
eighteen point one five percent.
Next year by one quarter percent
the funded period when we
reached ninety percent would
still see the same at twenty
forty three but we would move up
to one hundred percent a little
bit more quickly and that would
be twenty forty seven but if we
moved a full percent more from
eighteen point one five percent
of abroad up to nineteen point
one five percent a period I
think that would roughly
translate to about eighty or
ninety million dollars a year
and recurring general fund to
the program it would move us
to a night to twenty forty two
to get the ninety percent tire
yeah and one hundred percent by
twenty forty six so we'd save
about two years off of that
projected funding period
and then lastly on payg teen if
we moved toward providing folks
with the thirteenth check non
compounding thirteenth check if
we didn't have a limit on those
members who could receive a
thirteen to check because we
have a lot of members who are
drawing a pension that is
probably in the neighborhood of
twenty five to thirty thousand
dollars a month if we produce to
a thirteenth check for those
members there were some people
under the la they came
underneath that and there was
some retired university folks if
we were to give them a one check
in everyone in the program it
would cost us under twenty four
million dollars
if we gave those folks
only the folks that are eligible
to receive the pension cause
right now I i'm the cost to live
in adjustment because right now
there's a limit are you have to
reach minimum age of sixty five
for cheers three and four it
would be sixty seven that would
cost us a hundred million
dollars if we limited to thirty
five hundred dollars that check
it will cost us ninety million
dollars if we limited it to
twenty five hundred dollars it
would cost a seventy nine
million dollars and if we
limited that one time thirteen
to check to fifteen hundred
dollars it would cost us fifty
eight million dollars
ms your chair members of the
committee I hope that answers
the questions that you had as a
follow up from the last many
bits only we'll try to answer
anything else you may.
Request of us today.
Thank you so you ready for
questions.
Okay very well members though.
Okay will start with the sender
city a lot person that with them
senator neighborhood
thank you this was a very
thorough presentation in a
partnering because we're on a
we're already on a past two
solvency my question is why do
you think we have to be in such
a hurry to solve if the path
already is pretty clear
why the I mean
you're you're talking about rear
error
adding employer contributions
and and month phones and
you know reducing thirteenth
check
which are all strategies
but they don't seem necessary
well maybe the the lump sum I I
think into they don't seem
necessary to make the fun
solvent they might be good
things to improve to improve the
uhm return or they may be good
things to um.
You know change the
to benefit the retirees
and so i'm just wondering where
it what is the goal for these
improvements is it to reduce the
time period until we achieve
sovereignty or is it to benefit
the retirees
mr chairman and center city
lopez so this is in response to
the questions that were asked at
the last meeting
what would happen if we gave you
an influx of dollars how do we
get to the point in time where
we start to issue the four we
calculated costs to live in
adjustment for our members so
there's two triggers when we had
a ninety percent funded level
people will start to get a
larger cost to live in
adjustment it won't be as
reduced by twenty percent when
we hit one hundred percent
they'll get that full cost to
live in adjustment and that was
basically the just of why why
you're seeing the information
presented here how do we get
there sooner or what can we do
to either potentially help
people today that aren't getting
that cost to live in adjustment
that keeps up with inflation I
apologize I was adhere at the
less meeting so I I know you
said that this was in response.
And you said that but I didn't
quite understand it ok well I
think it if we were to do
something as things I think it
needs to be clear with the
purposes whether it's to benefit
existing retirees and existing
in future retirees or whether
it's to move up a sovereignty of
the fund or accommodation of
both I don't think we just need
to have out so clearly and I
didn't see it in this but that
wasn't which you were asked to
do thank you mister chair
very well thank you senator
neighbor
thank you mister chairman.
I probably are more common than
question but everything hinges
upon an investment return of
we've been said seven percent.
And if we do provide general
phone monies
to
help you advance the
path toward hundred percent
funded
one thing that i'm concerned
about is you all have your group
of sixteen people that deal with
this
para probably has a similar
group of people we have the
state investment council who
probably has a much greater
stuff uh than that I
anyway we have all these people
better essentially doing the
same work
m part of your part of your
formula includes the cost
of those
for those phones and i'm just
wondering if you have now
asking
the mexico put money into these
weather or not it be who's used
to really study
the overall investment
portfolios that the stated new
mexico's engaged and whether or
not
there ought to be some shift as
to who
is in charge of those various
lots of money making those
investment decisions I don't
know that the I have an answer
but I do think that there could
be some economies of scale and I
do think it probably be who's
this body to
look at some of those issues and
I don't know if you are or
parent would have any response
books that I do know investing
money there are people that are
very good at it but those are
very few numbers.
They're not very many people
that can do a really good job
investing
great sums of money and.
Average or for exceptional.
We're going to move toward
uh putting public moneys and to
into these
that we ought to.
That's my my comment concerned.
Neighbor is the only comment
that I would make you know is I
understand you're concerned and
I understand sort of the atm
perspective on that I guess from
my perspective we would have
there's some risk if we put all
of our eggs and one basking or
there may be a year where parent
does go to the size you do does
good or europe does good
if.
We have a really good year okay
we're all on for the river of
one program wasn't doing as good
then we all want to all that
well and I you know it doesn't
eliminate any of the liabilities
associated with each of our
discount different risk groups
that we would still maintain all
those and
you know there's some benefit to
the you know our board house
food usually responsibility for
the program that's part of the
constitution it's a it's it's
been down and I think that
they've done a pretty good job
of basically shepherding the fun
at least for the last thirty
years based upon the information
that he's presenting right there
to support the benefits that we
provide
you know our board doesn't have
an official policy on it I
suspect that they would be an
opposition to saying he let's
consolidate the groups and is
there a economy is a scale to be
achieved in balkans speak to
this better than I can you know
there might be some fractional
savings and we may see uncertain
investments but overall we're
large enough in you know
seventeen billion dollars
to already take advantage of a
lot of those savings and stir
their sixteen employees here how
many of those would ultimately
be eliminated they might be
shifted I don't think all
sixteen positions would be
completely eliminated so I don't
know that there is a huge
savings associated with a
combining the funds but buy me
have a different opinion
yet my first comment would be if
you looked at where the expenses
lie the staff expense is the
smallest part of the investment
expense the largest expenses
hiring outside managers it's
much large.
Ah
I suspect if you combined energy
as you might eliminate a few
positions you would change the
strategy however because but for
instance some of the things part
of our strategy has been for
years is we are a
smaller public pension find
compared to say call pers or you
know some of the.
Five hundred billion dollar
funds or would have you and we
can put money in a smaller fund
that has strategy in a little
corner of the market well if you
put all the moneys together it
would be
what is sic fifty billion plus
our seventeen you know a
multiple larger you wouldn't be
doing those strategies anymore
it just
it's too small to make a
difference in a larger so there
would be some change in strategy
uhm and
probably you would save a little
expense on the margin
that would be my comment.
Mr chair they
the fact that matter is sixty
two sixty thirty percent funded
maybe a little better
and we're trying to fill that
gap and I guess theoretically
get to a hundred percent
as I stated I think in new
mexico the number of people who
truly understand markets have
the contacts and have the
ability to to do those same
it is pretty slow
not dealt with the the billions
of dollars at you all have but
i've been treasured an
organization that had
a pretty good part of money and
I know one thing that's always
scared me as treasure was
current account to the
membership for
market decline.
And in dealing with money manag.
Comes pretty apparent that
there's there's unlimited talent
pool out there to really do a
great job and.
As a state that
we we have a few people but it's
probably pretty swell and it's
not
probably not the
twin year thirty people in the
state that they can do that kind
of stuff so anyway but i'd I
just think it's worth looking at
seeing if there's something to
be a co.
If we're avoider impuse all this
money from from the general fund
into
a repairer
you're.
Thank you mister chair
very well thank you are ruption
and bottom
thank you mister chairman
thank you guys for your work
it's seems like you did respond
to or questions from our last
meaning um and I was just at I
was just googling to see
you know at the end of the
school year twenty twenty three
the average funded ratio for
american public pension funds
was seventy eight point one and
I do appreciate that you guys
are looking at a hundred percent
fund funded
but i'm just wondering
based on the numbers that you
gave us today if we were trying
to reach that eighty percent
let's just say um how many more
years would be added to your
sort of strategy here
to re let's say we got to eighty
percent
I mean so
what what would we be looking at
in terms of I guess it would
deduct twenty percent of what
you seen here in the strategy so
how would how would that be
achieved I I know that's a hard
question because you didn't do
their numbers based on that but
i'm just curious how many years
without sort of take
do you think.
Representative whatever I think
did.
So.
You know basically we have a
named billion dollar unfunny
liability so fifty percent of
that is about four and a half
billion dollars how much quicker
could we get there I mean I
think we kind of show or attempt
to show here
with the lunch some
increases you know basically
three point sixty nine billion
dollars into the fund would get
us to eighty percent by twenty
thirty two.
I I
i'm does that does that answer
the question I have done
actually clarifies that a lot
for me so if we were if our
target goal was eighty percent
what to say that that call him
there is what you're your
estimating yes and I believe
that it's all for the probably
reflect back on the sides of bob
had there has been a lot of
legislation over the last decade
you know it help us kind of get
along to that point you know
until three years ago the
employer contribution was down
at fourteen point one five
percent so that four percent
increase translates into a lot
more money
for a year be I think this last
year we collected almost one
point two billion dollars and
contributions whereas three
years ago was about eight
hundred million dollars so that
puts a little less pressure on
the investment earnings need not
that we don't still need to
generate seven percent but the
baddiers won't seem as bad as
the other ways might be you know
in terms of that outflow of cash
and just one more question and
that um column that you
referring to
does that also assume that there
is not a recession and that we
are investing wisely I guess
rate
mr chair representative body or
that is corrected this the
assumptions we have here all
assume that we maintain that
seven percent target moving
forward
alright thank you.
Good
representative
thank you mr chair I am going to
refer to the table on sixteen
and I am going to
take responsibility I suppose
for asking for all these numbers
and say I really appreciate your
work because our discussion at
the last meeting had so many
books from the from the public
coming to talk to us about the
pinch they're feeling so many
retirees and their concerns
about having no color so then we
lead into a discussion about
letter proposing a lump sum and
you cure in these pages give me
exactly what I needed to see
which is what difference would a
lump sum make to those people
who were asking us for help now
and I think what's clear from
page sixteen
is it's not it is not even seven
hundred million is not even
going to change our
year that we are funded except
maybe by one um
it's not going to kick in their
caller are current call it
formula requires that we hit
that ninety percent benchmark um
and that's still decades out but
we are going the right direction
and we can't undo that
trajectory while we try to solve
this immediate problem
so I appreciate page sixteen it
makes pretty clear to me that a
lump sum is not the answer it's
not going to help the folks who
need immediate help and it's not
going to change our funded ratio
substantially
seventeen page seventeen
disappoints me I really hoped
that changing.
The employer contribution
changing what the state puts in
for each employee would make a
bigger difference
and it doesn't
even up to one percent
so that takes us to pay teen and
I understand mister chair that's
probably a a different
discussion than right now maybe
when we're talking about the
letter
but that page at least
addresses are retired use who
are filling a pinch and
something that could be done
without harming the upward
trajectory would I would have
liked to see
with the policies for asking for
more work but I really would
like to see on page sixteen when
are we going to hear the eighty
percent funded mark and when are
we going to head
well that would that would do it
because we might have to have a
discussion as the committee
about changing our call at
formula kicking in
at ninety percent
maybe it's possible to kick it
in at eighty and when would we
hit eighty and would affect what
that have long term would that
tip our trajectory.
Downtoward perpetually
permanently and funded in
bankruptcy those are questions
for future discussion
but thank you for this work I
really
appreciate it and that's all
mister chair.
Thank you home person martinez
no
very well
thank you powell but bliss
remained there and then we're
gonna ask mister join us
and we want switch over to the
letter
and then hopefully that we can
give the members maybe a ten
fifteen minute break before
lunch
and the facilities for
restaurant facilities you have
to walk across that
bridge and that straight ahead
on the rest from facilities.
What a week go ahead and start
in
maybe just to
small
introduction you know of where
we are in why
we came about a lot this letter.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we
the letter that you look at out
I believe this what we're
talking about
you know we are asked to provide
and produce some information we
had our actuaries we actually
share the same consulting firm
that advises both the version
conducts the studies are
solvency study in our gas being
work come up with some different
ideas that the information is so
presented here I believe great
has a small short presentation
that includes a lot of the
information that we also just
presented and obviously the the
idea that there is the
opportunity to direct some
additional funding teacher our
programs you know it's really
exciting to me then certainly be
happy to let our folks know the
even though the mean I get to
that recurring cost to live in
adjustment immediately that
there might be some really for
him on the horizon and
with that I asked mister
thank you mister chamber mister
chairman members
would you like me to go over the
numbers before we discuss a
letter
and we we do have a topic
for the committee as well yes
can we.
We can get.
Oh no not the letter the this
one.
I.
They said the first.
The.
The.
Mr chairman.
Go ahead thank you mr chairman I
just wanted to acknowledge some
folks that are in the audience
the nice that I saw come in I
see carry horton sitting in the
back over there from the retired
firefighters and an penny french
um with I think absolutely and
then carter bundy without me
and I know that there's a
counter that here from the
period but I don't know his name
thank you and I don't know I
think I just wanted to
acknowledge that we had some
visitors.
Very well thank you.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you members again a greater heal
with
PE r I and similar to david
slides I i've got a couple
slides just showing the impact
of some of the questions we
receive last meeting
so looking at lump sum
appropriations you you saw this
slide
last meeting but we were asked
you know kind of working on what
a three hundred and fifty
million dollars infusion may
look like my thought would be in
that that's right in the middle
if we got
three hundred million is a cash
infusion but took the rest of
that in use that is thirteen to
check payments for retirees that
help bring some relief there
that's why we're we modeled it
at three hundred million one
time that would reduce our
funding period from seventy
three years to sixty two years
takes off eleven years over that
funding period in an increases
are funded ratio of by one point
one percent we're currently at
sixty seven point one percent
that would bring us up to sixty
eight point two percent
looking at contribution
increases on slide three
within the paraphone which is
our largest one we have five
divisions that's our state
general are state public safety
plan municipal general and is
booked police and list for fire
on the second row uh you'll see
the deficiency and contribution
rates so the benefits that we
are promising right now we're
underfunded by contributions
over all by six point zero seven
percent so in order to get us to
that hundred percent level
within twenty five years
of contributions would have to
be increased over all by six
point zero seven percent if you
look at the different divisions
it varies state general would
have to increase eleven point
three five percent if we just
wanted to concert on state
general state public safety is
the only plan that's currently
or the only division that's
overfunded and the main reason
for that is the contribution
rates if you look under the safe
public safety column
the at the end.
Uh employee employer rates the
last line say public safety puts
in twenty five point sixty five
percent as a contribution rate
for the employer nine point zero
six percent for the employee if
you look at all the other
divisions there there are much
less funded in the form of the
statutory contributions.
Municipal general is is the
closest to being gone
fully funded
and we would need two point
three seven percent more in
contribution increases for that
and when I support police nine
percent uh fifteen point two six
percent for municipal fire the
dollar amount we would need an
occurring revenue across all
divisions is the next line down
be a hundred and seventy point
one million dollars that we
would need in recurring revenue
coming into the phone and again
you can go through each division
to see what that is
by each of the only one that
wouldn't need anything is the
same public safety plan.
And going down a little bit more
you can see the effect if we
increase contributions by a
quarter percent half a percent
all the way up to three percent
what that cost is
in I do want to see mister
chairman and think
the legislature think the
governor you know the reform
that was passed in twenty twenty
as I keep saying they'd have
significant uh significant
impact on our well being going
forward
be recalling you did increase
contribution rates already by
four percent that was two
percent to the employee to
percent to the employer state
his finalised
increases and as of this last
year that brought in over a
hundred and twenty three million
dollars in recording revenue
which is significant our
ministerials were given a two
year deferral and increasing
their contributions so they are
no entering year three after
this last year it was fifty six
point five million that came in
occurring for them so a total of
about a hundred and eighty
million dollars in recurring
revenue that the legislature is
already approved for for
parallel and i'm not employers
so it is it is significant that
that impact
in looking in a couple of
different ways we could utilize
a three hundred fifty million
dollars appropriation
you know we talk about period
because that is our largest fund
funded at seventy three years
you know if we took two hundred
and fifty of that three hundred
and fifty million and we put it
into the the parent plan it
would get us up to sixty eight
percent in our funded ratio
almost one percent increase in
or will reduce our funding
period by nine years old but we
still have other smaller plans
where cash infusion gives this
kind of a bigger being for the
book or judicial retirement
currently
in infinite level status of
contributions come again we'll
never pay off their liability if
we took twenty five million of
that three fifty and we put it
into the judicial retirement
that will bring our funding
period for that plan down to
thirty one years.
Uh in increase or funded ratio
from fifty nine to seventy two
percent of so much bigger impact
and I believe they're on
underfunded liability right now
is about eighty five million
same thing with our magistrate
returning plan it's it's very
small we're currently funded at
seventy nine years if we took
ten million of that three fifty
and put in to the magistrate
returning plan the increases the
fun will reduces a funding
period from seventy nine years
to twenty one years and
increases a funded ratio fifty
two percent to almost sixty
eight percent and then the
excess revenue which would be
about sixty six million we could
take their improvide thirteenth
checks for the next two years
two percent non compounding to
our members and those thirteen
check payments would be in
addition to any compounding
caller we would grant.
Looking at it different way if
we just look there taking the
three fifty and funding
thirteenth check payments for
retirees uh we would get to
about thirteen years of thirteen
check payments again this would
be in addition to any caller
that we would still issue that
would be compounding and if you
recall
we've discussed that length this
decade
is going to be the rest of this
decades can be difficult for us
we're gonna be paying more
retirees and we have active
members come again when we
really start seeing improvement
in our long term projections
about twenty thirty two so if we
could find
thirteen check payments through
the rest of this decade in
addition to the compounding call
that we would issue that would
provide I think welcome relief
for our retirees it's a little
bit different way to look at it
but that is a way we can use
that their additional funding to
provide a relief for retirees
and without mister chairman i'm
happy to stand for any
questions.
Very well let me just start off
by say you know I I apologize
that I wasn't at the less
meeting I just could be there
and why all means would I don't
want this to turning to a
working session I rather would
have the information that's
coming to us and we can have
this discussion and then if we
have to reschedule again for
next month you know at that time
we can give opportunity again
for a public comment because
this is very technical very
complicated and we're also
assuming you know on funding
coming in into the program so
without all let's switch now to
including the letter and then I
know that all we have a
representative really they
wanted to make some number
of up I guess you would call it
a member store and I think that
should be something that as the
whole group we either
are in agreement or we're not in
agreement or you know where
we're going that you know this
is a a very very
hard and very technical you know
what we're working here with and
has a lot of implications in our
different way so far the
different scenarios and I will
mention also that it doesn't
matter what we do it's very very
hard to come into an agreement
to where one will be satisfied
with he and I decisions like
they are sold with that are.
Or now we can miss your chairman
just one I I apologize I skipped
my final side of you you also
are there sir masked meeting on
slate six it's just what happens
if we went back to the two
percent to
cost a living adjustment as it
was prior to the reform I mean
so that reduces our funded ratio
from sixty seven percent down to
sixty three point six percent on
an adds about one point four
billion to our liabilities then
I apologize for for overseas
that oversight mister chairman.
Well thank you oh we can switch
over to the letter maybe a fall
as so we worked with her son if
you want to give us them short
version of you know
or we are so this letter and was
voted on at the last meeting and
members decided that they wanted
this letter to discuss um not
necessarily caller but also
solvency and to recognize that
these are two separate issues so
in the letter we do address
callers but we also address a
sovereignty again as two
separate issues arm and it
really is just requesting that
the LFC
give a budget recommendation of
a seven hundred million dollars
infusion to the parent ear be
trust funds and that would be um
you know based on membership and
then it also asks lfc to
do some research on the possible
impact that dedicating other
revenue to parent europe trust
funds would have on the solvency
of those funds and and kind of
we also talk in the letter about
how if those funds are solved
into then it's more likely that
we'll be able to do the call
that your being pair will be
able to provide call checks two
members.
Well thank you thank you for
myself and representative rim
you want to go over a year.
I think mr chairman so
on page one one uh so we want
the fifth wine from the bottom
it says an investment returns
and the prior year and then I
would add a sentence in july
twenty twenty four yrb retirees
received a one point six eight
percent
as their column and peori
retirees received a point five
percent as circle
then all the third wine from the
bottom uh it says erb trust
phones me I want to change that
will because we're talking about
seven hundred million
help and then delete the word to
raise the phone ratios then on
the back page
on the second page and we go
down
for lines and at the end of
trust phones we say
or increase contributions.
And i've discussed as with the
members of here and senator city
a lot has would like a copy of
this letter to go to all p LFC
members.
And representative alcohol would
like this letter signed by all
the item believe members.
Very well visit
thank you okay center city locus
thank you mister chair the only
part I apologize again for not
being at the last meeting I was
not in the state um
I don't the only part I don't
like is the central purpose of
the seven hundred million dollar
infusion is to increase the
speed at which the pera and I
for me personally it's their on
pause that we've worked out very
carefully over time to solve
and um if you read on what about
public pensions a hundred
percent solvency is not the goal
for a public she should should
not necessarily be the goal for
a public pension because they're
not like a private employer
government by your risker who
could steal the pension the
states always gonna be around we
have the we have the ability to
adjust it so my support for an
infusion would be to help the
members now not eventually
reduce the the time period too I
and I also agree with
representative figure out said
ninety percent before they start
receiving callers is ridiculous
because that's not it that
shouldn't even be the the target
I think we should
we we should
increase the colors if we stay
on the current car path one idea
would be to have the colours
come back if we reach seventy
five or eighty percent
sovereignty or not if when we
receive them because all of the
presentations we've heard is we
are on a path toward solvency
indeed we're on a path to a
hundred percent solvency so why
I would support an infusion of
funds would be to improve and
allow for
caller adjustments now
the night some future.
Date in some few depending on
what the future future holes so
that's I mean otherwise I think
you know it would be good for
the locator considering infusion
I just don't
like that rationale that the
central purposes to increase the
speed I would like to see the
central purpose would be to help
by retirees
with their financial sewage
situations now which will have a
ripple effect in our economy
cause if they have more to spend
l of course that'll help our
economy that's why I support it
not necessarily to speed up the
time period for which we had
achieved one hundred percent
sovereignty cause I don't even
agree with that
per well center let me just have
a maybe I some clarification for
our attorney staff
mr chair senator I just the
reason why I chose that wording
was because of the discussion at
the meeting the last july
meeting and you know also based
on the statute because we have
to be at a certain solvency rate
percentage in order to for the
call is to kick in and the seven
hundred million dollar infusion
would not allow us to be at
where we need to be for the
colours to kick in but that's
kind of one of the reasons why
but I think i'm david and greg
might have you know more
information on that
mission may I
then to me that calls for
changing the statute.
Thank you to me that calls for
for also changing the statutory
requirements as well which I
think should be laid out in this
letter to me cause otherwise I
look at seven hundred million
dollars and look at those charts
and say this is a big investment
for little return
certainly little return to our
existing retirees and
little return in the future so I
I mean I don't know whether if I
run lfc vote for seven hundred
million million infusion if it
was not going to benefit people
if it was just gonna benefit I
mean this may sound crass but it
was just in benefit wall street
with more money there so I I
would like to see it benefit
people and that would be a
reason that I would vote for it
thank you mister chair
thank you all we have a few more
members that I wish to comment
on seller neighbor
thank you mister chair
I think we don't be careful and
wording that because if you
focus on color for existing
retirees you may run into a cost
of two store problem
because you're providing money
to people who are not providing
any benefit to the state they
are retired so not doing
anything for the state houses we
may ran up to against
constitutional issues
point well taken you know
because it's always been the
foreign service as rendered the
one part of the winter
constitution
and will categorically will go
senator version then we're gonna
move
glad
thank you mister chairman you
know i'm just a yesterday on
this committee but would turn
rim I mean representative ream
just said that he would send
this later do LFC.
Why i'm a member of eldest you
know I have done nothing about
this letter and then I just
concerns me that it goes to all
of see not all the members are
aware of what's going on here
that that might be a little set
back to they know you have in a
problem with right now and and
trying to board and stuff but if
it was to go to all the sea
tomorrow
we've never seen that later
before yeah this is my concern
thank you mister
very well representative you
order
thank you mr chair I haven't
with respect to senator
neighborhoods comment I don't
know how we got around that
issue with the thirteenth checks
that we did as a state and and
maybe one of the directors can
tell us but we know at least
that we have done thirteenth
checks and we could do that
again
when i'm going to reiterate that
I don't agree with this letter
as it stands right now mister
chair because it is a huge
investment that doesn't get us
either of the good outcomes
we're looking for which is
either
hidding that trigger target to
get colors in effect sooner
by moving our funding d.
Nor does it get any immediate
help to retires who are filling
the pench from the inflation's
bike so because it doesn't
accomplish either of those two
things and it's a huge amount of
money
i'm i'm not persuaded at this
point thank you mr chair.
Mister chairman represent for
the rower so part of the reform
that was passed in twenty twenty
did include
stopping the caller for three
years twenty twenty twenty
twenty one in twenty twenty two
or stopping the compounding of
the caller and it was replaced
with three years of thirteenth
checks that was appropriate as
part of that reform
and at that point in time the
constitutional
issue or a question never came
up
but if I can miss it you're just
talking about our current color
so for our retailers and it's
different at a be once you
retire you have to be out for
two full calendar years to
receive a caller this last july
ninety percent of our population
received the but because I call
a formula is based on our funded
ratio which is sixty seven point
seven percent in our investment
return that's why we issued the
minimum half a percent uh as our
funded ratio
increases and where other
seventy eight seventy percent
eighty percent level don't call
his will start increasing but
just want to make clear order
our membership is receiving
constant living adjustments
well
anyone else
this is swear taiwano make a
suggestion to the committee
is that we go back to
legislative council
and ask for an additional
meeting strictly for there's
nothing else into that meeting I
know this would be insane fee
error by that time it gives us a
little more time to
look at
the research plus I think we
have to bring our can also so
that they're not all
you know out of the loop then
see how we would want to go with
this and hopefully that we can
do it early enough to wear we
don't get into the
you know or maybe even though.
Just revisiting a remaining
schedule to have their spare it
would be strictly the topic for
theirs because I I think there
is so you know we can do a work
session like this annoyed has to
be
with enough information and
enough form oh research that
will be placed in tool you know
the direction that we would like
to see plus also making sure
that were you know in the end
the portion of the
constitutional part you're not
within what needs to be done or
if they're so
need for a statute change you
know that we will work with that
tool
so membership go ahead represent
a room
thank you miss chairman of my
ideas and mister tory is I i've
looked at we have
members in para who retire
in their forties
why don't we have
maybe they have the small color
that's going currently but we
have the two percent color that
kicks in at sixty sixty five
have you looked at that arrow.
Well mr
representative with all fairness
that's why I mean I think we all
need to have a little more time
and to look in into theirs where
we come into and without
putting out information
to her world
definitely more prepared you
know with our information and
then we can see the different
scenarios.
Mr chairman I don't know if
mister tree has an answer on
that proposal mister chairman
represent marine that's not a
specific proposal that we've
looked at that I will say our
average which I rerate now is
sixty nine years old so putting
in the sixty five
threshold may not have has
bigger impact as we would think.
Mr chairman the other thing i'd
say is while you don't see it
huge increase in the projections
and i'm sure there conservative
but when you start thinking
about three hundred and fifty
million into each plan and the
compounding effect of that I
think will be greater but
you know to go at and say we're
not going to do anything and sit
on her hands as I don't think
that that's helpful but I do
think that it's a two part I
think that
if the legislature's going to
put money in I think the
employees and employers need to
put money more money year
when we look at the funding
ratios and unfortunately we
don't have internet or I could
send it to every one but mister
treeo is given me a document and
you look at the firefighters are
in the
worst possession I think
but I think every every one of
the plans it's deficient are the
employees that are currently
there need to look at their
future I am there retirement
thank you let me just respond
saying that my intention is not
to do anything my intention is
just to be better prepared and
that you know that's what I you
know I want to look at the other
parties if we don't have a very
good
presentation information to the
lfc
you know it's not gonna go
anywhere you know so others two
members from the let's see here
and as it is you know well we
have a little more information
than the other members but it's
gonna take a while to provide
this kind of information to the
entire group let's how one more
question and then we're gonna
break.
Thank you
mister chair of my is more of a
suggestion well what would it
look like if we targeted money
to those flindside or under
water that are literally you
know like the
firefederal expense and that we
were instead of looking at this
is this conglomerate in helping
the funds evenly but that we
look at specifically which funds
need an infusion to get them on
a past to solvency because the
overall funds are on the past
has sovereignty but that's not
sure for individual plans and I
know that we've in the past put
infusions in two
certain funds that were having
problems
or certain phones are just to
get them going and so that might
be a more rational way to do it
and insure that the retirees
have have what they need
and you if if we're not gonna
well and like I said and I do
think that we should try to
think about how to benefit
retirees now because now is when
they're struggling thank you
mister chair
very well we will leave it at
that and while steam
communication and will work
without end by all means are
when you come so to the
appropriate time we'll have a
also some public comment so will
stand on the break for about
fifteen minutes and then we can
come back and buy that time on
they will have a lunch for us
