We will go hidden start with our
second part from this afternoon
and while we're waiting for a
few of the members to come in
there to stop side
of
will have a couple of trivia
questions with one person in the
audience it's very good a
trivia.
Well.
If you're looking at the.
At the chairly if that's right
here to our left
what percentage do you think
that you're looking at off the
man.
Three.
One sixty fourth of a percent
so it's huge behind the student
when I was a kid with come
scheme that mountain I pretty
much did it on my back on my
lower back
i'll have a headed her home the
first couple times I think
there's quite a few that have
joined you on that
the other one is so what are
your different ski valley start
towarding.
Twenty fifty seven.
Going once going twice
nineteen fifty five
okay wonderful though higher
spoint per well to it would be
what elevation.
On them.
A little more common with the
more time
I saw i'm a parallel with a new
katina basin
you know it's what elevation to
it.
Take a gear some not nineteen
thousand.
Thirteen one forty
pretty high.
Okay
now if you are skinned
the catina based on
their two things that they ask
you to
be prepared what would they be.
The.
Yeah.
One is so
make sure that you're a good
skier
second is make sure that your
equipment is really sharp
early a good equipment cause
that is you are really scam like
this
you know
right ready for a presentation.
How many of you would like to
come back.
The next time you can't become
more prepared and stay and maybe
we can get you out
to it enough friday
senators the deal wants to come
for a month and solve the
problem
it's good that's what it's going
to take
we already go ahead
will good afternoon mr chairman
and committee members i'm
fernunda martinez on the deputy
director of the new mexico
finance authority seated to my
right does rain redecker or
policy and capital strategists
also her subject matter expert
in expert on this program in
particular thank you for having
us here today and making the
time to hear our
new mexico venture capital
program overview an update
i'm gonna start this often and
mostly turn this over to our
subject matter expert cash she
knows a great deal about it more
than I do I started with the new
ethical finance authority back
in april i'm still on the
learning curve and still a
rookie but I do want to start
with the little bit about the
venture cap program act as you
know that was created with an
mfe
created the venture capital
program phone and and after
raised the universal finance
authority board to make
investments in your mexico vis
businesses that are going to
build economic development.
All the objectives we have on
this state for economic
development and to create new
job opportunities that sir
primarily what it's for the
investments are made for the
purpose of providing capital for
start up expansion product or
market development
recapitalization or early stage
development
investments are made as equity
or debt through direct
investment and through venture
private equity funds which are
entities that make that meak
manage or source potential
investments then that have at
least one full time experience
manager.
The investments in one business
cannot exceed ten percent and in
one industry cannot exceed
thirty percent and we will be
reporting annual on the
investment activity and the
economic development impacts
currently the venture capital
program fund was capitalised by
the state appropriation
totalling fifty million but
through our partnership with the
new mexico economic development
department and mse currently
administers in additional twenty
million and federal funding for
venture capital equity fund
investments from the state small
business crack credit initiative
program of the department of
treasury and with that i'm going
to turn to technical parts over
to rain read a decade
welcome thank you for an under
an
members of the committee so
on side three of your hand out
and they just to cover
the implementation of dates
since that acts of intercouple
program act as described by a
fernander was created and twenty
twenty two so in terms of
program governance as many you
all know promigates rules and
policies that govern or funding
programs so this program we've
established rules and policies
we also constituted
an investment committee of staff
a subcommittee of our board and
then the method board of
directors is responsible for
approving investments from the
venture capital program and the
investment policy that we
astablished has five core what
we call mission and
diversification objectives for
the program on their listed here
so first
creating and investing a new and
early stage and expanding
businesses here in the state new
mexico businesses
second uh creation in retention
of quality jobs for new mexicans
throughed increasing investment
in.
Diverse sectors of the state's
economy and contributing to the
diversification of our
economic development and growth
force increasing access to
capital for business owned by
entrepreneurs from or benefiting
under serve communities and
the fifth objective is to
attract additional private
sector investments to
early stage businesses here in
the state
so those by the objectives will
be formalised in our policy
we also engaged in investment
consultant last summer they were
selective through an or a few
process
they support us on all aspects
of the program policy
development i'm very much on
sourcing pipeline and execution
doing to diligence on fund
managers on and are helping us
manage the program according to
a hyphen series standards and
also
investment industry best
practices
in terms of the underlying
themes in our portfolio we've
been deploying capital now
actively since we engaged them
last summer for about a year and
will be talking about some of
the investments we've made on
some of the themes so we've
anchored some new funds
targeting local new mexico
businesses they were providing
tapes a capital there are not
currently a bit available one is
a flexible debt product that's
available for early stage on
businesses here in new mexico
we also are looked greater
phoned that would provide very
early stage equity to
entrepreneurs that are operating
outside of traditional hitech vc
targeted sectors
we've allocated to a number of
emerging fund managers so those
are generally an for managers
that don't get me institutional
investor quality standards for
investment
we have made a number of
investments with.
Er firms and funds that are
national and scope that have uh
sector expertise and strategy
expertise that they'll be
bringing here to the state to
support entrepreneurs here
on and we've also
deployed both two
funds there are targeting a
market rate return financial
return through the type of i'm
underlying risk that the that
they're taking and then we've
also allocated the funds that
have what we would describe is
below market reader that the
differential rate that the
statute authorizes us to take
for the impact on the expected
impact of of those investments
on the next slide I just adopt a
little bit deeper into some of
the policy parameters of our
investment policy so on
fund manager qualifications when
we move forward with due
diligence on a fund that might
need the program objectives
these are the characteristics
that we look to see
during the due diligence process
so that they have the investment
expertise and the staffing to
execute on the investment
strategy they also have the
capacity to meet the back office
operational reporting and
compliance requirements
that they aren't have succession
planning and of mitigated cuman
risk
in the last two
thousand they effectively
managed potential conflicts of
interest and also
that the investment team is
aligned
with the the the funds that
they're managing on behalf of
the state so these are all just
kind of institutional investor
best best practice
requirements that we've
incorporated into how we're
administering the program
some of the limits some of these
are in statute
and then a number of them are or
to support diversification of
the underlying investments so.
We're targeting to invest in
between five to ten funds to
date we've approved eight and
we've closed it on seven fund
investments so we're we're
getting close to
where we are targeted to
allocate over overall portfolio
in terms of underlying funds we
expect our individual
investments to be anywhere
between two and ten million
dollars
and no single phone can exceed
one fifth other portfolio so it
really is turning some
diversification overall
a single portfolio company can
not exceed ten percent at the
time of investment so that's
actually a statutory limit on
funds are expected to seek
minority non controlling
interests and are fun
investments in any one new
mexico business and not exceed
fifty percent unless under a
certain circumstances that's
also a statutory requirement
that we've carried through into
the investment policy and gp
fund manager commitments so we
do have some requirements there
are looking to a line on the
investment professionals that
are deploying our capital
uh with the investments that
they're making
and then the last full it here
speaks to some of the federal
ssbci requirements governing the
twenty million of federal
funding that were working to
deploy with economic development
department and also
institutional limited
partnership association ill pass
standard
terms with incorporated when it
comes to the
lpa's and legal agreements that
we
enter into
the fund managers
in terms of what we've seen
since we've started actively
deploying capital over the last
year
we've first we focused very much
on the local ecosystem of fund
managers and some of the
advantages that those
opportunities.
Present us a relative to some of
our objectives so one a lot of
those locally based fund
managers are are targeting on to
primarily be deploying to local
businesses so that hits the
first objective of our program
which is to invest in relistage
local businesses here we do see
some mix of
the types of capital that
they're providing in terms of
stages of some of them are
in the seed stage and kind of
really stage there
and by working and establishing
relationships with some of those
local funds on we are excited to
help build their capacity and
the capacity of locally based on
fund managers some of the risks
that we have identified as we've
looked at that you could system
and also advanced a couple
investments and actually not
been able to move forward with a
couple where we initiated to
diligence so on it is a
relatively nison venture capital
for a manager ecosystem and to
some degree
some of those organizations
don't yet have the depth of
sector or strategy
experience and expertise that
the that we we need to see in
order to commit capital to the
funds that they're raising
we have seen on uh
through past performance
not I particularly strong track
records when we've looked at
that in the diligence process
some of them have arm are really
targeting relatively small funds
that can be really very
challenging the operate on
from me just financially
sustainable perspective as a as
a fund manager and as a result
of that we've also seen some
relatively high turnover in some
of the key professionals that
some of those organizations
two organizations come to mind I
just in the last nine months
where we've tried to move
forward with due diligence.
And have had to start due to do
to turn over and lastly.
There's
some of the local operations
some of the individuals engaged
with them are also involved in
other may be involved in
multiple arm kind of investment
organizations and that's not the
type of alignment on that
that we'd like to see in terms
of a manager fully dedicated to
the fund
that they're managing in the
capital of the state's capital
that could potentially be
invested in that fund on so that
said those are some of the risks
with that ecosystem on the
advantages are they are focused
on investing in local businesses
and we have made on two
commitments we actually approved
a third but we're unable to
close it not i'll talk a little
bit about those local fund
managers that were currently
invested in
with some of the national groups
that we have looked at in the
ones that we've advanced and are
now uhm invested with so the
advantages of the use
organizations so they are on
bringing investment strategies
and and have sector expertise
that we think are very aligned
with the objectives of our
program on in particular looking
at diversified sectors
agricultures one area that we
have focused on and really
trying to
improve access to capital for
producers agricultural producers
and farmers particularly those
that are looking to scale their
operations there really wasn't a
local uh group here that was
really and had that depth of
expertise and infirming and and
and and was focusing on how to
meet the capital or needs of
agricultural producer for
example a couple other examples
are on phones that were excited
be working with that are focused
on entrepreneurs that have
traditionally been underserved
by the venture capital markets
on raven indigenous capital
partners they have an albu- an
office speech during
albuquerque.
And they focus on investing in
local and in businesses that are
lead by indigenous founders and
benefiting native communities
and developing sustainable
economies for native communities
another fund is focused on
latin entrepreneurs and other
funders focused on gender
diversity and businesses founded
and lead by women so those are
very missional lion strategies
that none of the local groups
had yet
focused on so or approach there
was to find some firms that
can demonstrate that they can be
successful with that strategy
and and bring that strategy here
and find not furners and invest
in in their local businesses
here on another advantage with
these types of firms is that
they're able to they bring
additional investor networks
both their lp bases and the
investors that are invested in
their funds
and they can bring the technical
networks national networks to
some of the entrepreneurs that
they're working with so that's
another that's another benefit
of those types of organizations
and through our agreements with
them we actually do you have the
ability to converse on with
those managers in their
portfolio companies if there is
an opportunity so for example if
we have
if reven capital partners has a
local business
on lead by a need of
entrepreneur and they have an
opportunity to on deploy
additional capital from some of
their own appears we could
potentially have the opportunity
on to make additional investment
in that local business to
support that entrepreneur so we
think that's that that's an
attractive opportunity in terms
of the risks of um or the
the challenges with that
strategy so.
Umm with a lot of the funds I
would see the leader stage funds
on their unable due to their
fiduciary commitments to their
investors to make really firm
dollar amount commitments on how
much how many dollars they would
be deploying on into a state and
in some cases if they're
managing a fund if they have a
more
relatively attractive
opportunity in another geography
they could potentially deploy to
that opportunity so that is one
of the disadvantages of
of those funds
in terms of on the next slide
just the parameters of what we
look for in these two buckets
within the portfolio that we've
allocated to do so for local
phones and am fa cannot exceed
sixty percent of the total phone
commitments that's actually a
really high amount where we're
actually you know in that case
would be the majority investor
in an entire fund
we also I do have a match
requirement but it's slightly
lower for local funds
unless it's special federal
funding and we do allow them to
um if they've raised capital
from the state investment
council that does count towards
their match requirement so in
the case for example of the two
local fund managers where we've
made commitments on tram way we
made a commitment to their
refund three and dangerous new
mexico we made a commitment to
their fund one both of those
funds are targeting new mexico
businesses in the case of both
of those managers on we are
roughly
twenty five two one third of the
total fund size on in the sic
has also is the is a very
significant ambuster in in both
of those funds
the parameters for national
funds so you'll see that mfa is
a percentage of the total
capital in that fund is
significantly lower I would say
on average we're in the very low
single digits.
Um across all
four commitments we've made in
this bucket all those managers
have been able to meet a 1-1
match requirement reading
leveraging capital from private
investors which will be deployed
into the local businesses where
they investon and national funds
are required to demonstrate two
or more of the following
characteristics that they
have a strategy arm and have
expertise that they're bringing
to support the program that does
not currently exist in the state
that they've made prior
investments or have a
demonstrated pipeline of new
mexico businesses that they've
looked at to invest in
that they've hired locally based
resources established in officer
have someone be sure at least on
a part time basis
and that they've made a formal
commitment not just to staffing
but also office hours and
educational events and engaging
look local entrepreneurs
in the in their processes so all
all the funds that fall into
this category and the sidelider
agreements that we make with
them
clear require then to commit to
doing at least two of those
things on and and working here
in new mexico
on the next side so you have
here a list and description of
the funds on that our board has
approved commitments to today
the total commitments on amount
to roughly fifty four million
since we started really actively
deploying about this time last
summer
i'll just go through them and
they're listed in order of a
vintage so I mentioned uh before
revenue digitis impact fund we
invested in their fund to they
have a full time
um investment professional based
in an albuquerque office that
towers in the unit rainforest
innovation building we've
deployed seven million and that.
That strategy in particular we
think is very aligned with our
goal to
provide venture capital and
increase access to venture
capital for entrepreneurs that
historically uhm have not had
access to early stage equity
investment secondly train wave
until partners so we've
supported their fund three this
is a local women lead phones
that focuses on investing in new
mexico businesses and the bio
science sector
and they've actually deployed in
the fund three that we've
invested in they've already
deployed to two portfolio
companies here in the state
that the third fund is one that
we works really hard to incur a
new strategy that would be
investing venture equity and
local businesses and in diverse
sectors so
not your traditional high tech
sectors that are the focus of
most venture capital firms but
other sectors that are of
importance here for economic
development we did approve that
strategy but unfortunately the
fun failed to close within the
hundred and twenty day time
frame that's required to
actually
for us to to sign legal
agreements and that manager was
an unable to gain traction in
the market with the strategy or
with other investors to
reas capital for the strategy so
that's one where we know that
there's still a capital in we're
working to see if we can
identify another firm or fund
that could provide that type of
capital to local businesses.
Fourth dangerous venturers new
mexico fund one
so this is a local vca one of
their partners is beast full
time and santa fe and they focus
on clean energy and climate
technologies
they have a a strong renewable
and sustainability theme um
fifth advanced new mexico this
is a fund that we helped to
create with an outer state firm
called mission driven finance on
the back of creating this they
have hired on someone here on
the ground and albuquerque
she's based on she's based on
kirkish is an entrepreneur
herself she's originally from
the naval honest
and there are very much focused
on offering flexible that
capital products on to local
entrepreneurs local small
businesses and have a strong
emphasis on rural and
underserved communities here in
the state with that type of
capital on
the next one tyverton ag legacy
holdings fund to this is our
investment with the national
really agricultural sector
specialist on the focus on
firming operations that are
looking at scale they already
have an existing investment here
in the state in the dairy
sector and have a number have
already identified a number of
opportunities and other cash
craps and firms that they're
looking to work with one of the
things we really liked about
this firm so and we have a very
relatively small investment on
five million in their fund
that's targeting around four
hundred million capital raise so
relatively small investment for
them in their total fund however
if they deploy to a company here
in new mexico it's likely that
that investment in a single
company here would be anywhere
between twenty fifty million
dollars the types of things that
they're typically supporting
their firming operations with
doing is investing in equipment
processing equipment for
example.
Infrastructure again
infrastructure
really helping operations and
scale and become more of a
diversified into the value added
uhm uh supply chain of
agriculture so we're excited
we're excited about that one
that must venture is fun to on
just recently closed this as a
firm that's focused on
investing in diverse lead
businesses specifically latin
teams and when we met them they
had already looked at
with their fund one which was
significantly smaller than their
fund too that they just they're
in the process of raising
targeting a hundred million
day have already been here on
the ground and looked at i'm
seventy local businesses and
trying to invest in early stage
businesses so but I with part of
our commitment they're hiring on
two individuals here that will
act as scouts and help source on
pipeline for a fun to
for that phone in the house
they've also committed to coming
here a number of times i'm each
year and working with local
entrepreneurs hosting office
hours on and helping them
helping entrepreneurs through
the capital raising process and
lastly recent impact three this
is on a fun focused on women
lead companies
this fund in particular is
offering later stage capital
so is not precedent so you are
even serious a it tends to be
more the following and that's
another we've learned that
you know I think when we first
came into this a couple of years
ago
we were we understood that there
might be more of a like series a
tape gap but actually the
following funding is definitely
where a lot of local businesses
are struggling to raise capital
also precedent and seed stage is
where we're currently seeing
some of the highest needs.
The next slide
just shows you
visually
how are approved commitments i'm
sit across the different funds
that I just described and the
pie chart on your left there on
short illustrates those
allocations to those two
underlying strategies are
currently in the portfolio so
one
funds targeting local businesses
and and to
the national funds that are
targeting to deployed a to local
businesses.
I'm interes of the fifty four
million approved today so
roughly thirty five of that is
the state capital the venture
capital program fund has been
capitalised
with a fifty million of state
appropriate funds so we have
committed roughly thirty five of
that across these eight
and then on the federal funding
that we're working with med on
administering roughly we're
pretty close to having fully
deployed that roughly twenty
million to the three funds where
we've currently allocated that
capital.
Slide ten on this is our current
pipeline so these are strategies
where we're an active
conversation
with an underlying uh with a fun
manager that has a strategy that
we think and actually with two
of them we've just advanced for
due diligence so one is an ag
find this is very distinct from
the one currently in the
portfolio on this is actually
lending fund that is lending
lower costs capital to farmers
that are transitioning from
traditional agricultural
production to organic
firming practices and
regenerative farming practices
and we've also believe there's
an opportunity to work with
some of the local phone traffic
partners on to recent tactical
systems for local farmers that
are interested in engaging on
those types of more sustainable
informing practices so we're
excited about that one we're
hopeful that it all passed the
diligence process and if it does
we expect to
make a commitment
and possibly close before the
end of the year i'm not
or also in conversation with a
see adventure capital fund that
focuses on investing in women
found founders it's actually a
group that's been start of
oklahoma they also run an
accelerator on and so they would
be providing not just investment
capital but acceleration on
support to some of the women
founders and women lead
businesses that they might work
with
we've been an active
conversation with the number of
local research institutions
that have are trying to create
spent out funds for
the technology driven companies
are the the technology that
they're looking to transfer out
of their institutions.
And then the last three year or
a little bit further down in the
pipeline of entry capital fund
investing in modernizing
traditional industry is
specifically agriculture
infrastructure industrial and
health care sectors and then two
seed funds that were looking at
one focused on consumer
companies and the other
actually focused on potentially
are based out of arm taus
focused on um
investing in rural businesses
and slide turn
just to give an overview so this
is on part of our requirements
reporting requirements to the
legislature on an annual basis
so is for the the previous
calendar year we really kicked
off last summer
active capital deployment after
promigating the rules and the
investment policy and
getting our investment
consultant in place on so in the
calendar year twenty twenty
three we had actually only made
one close on one commitment that
was the commitment to tramway
and try and we actually had only
had yet funded and underlying
portfolio company so that annual
report wouldn't have significant
activity to report will be
providing the legislature with
an annual report for twenty
twenty four this is an early
snapshite of
for the first seven months of
this calendar year and that
shows you the funds where we've
committed capital vintage means
the year where they
started reason capital so
revenue to
it was actually a twenty twenty
two vintage fund that phoned was
actually closed when we
met them and they actually got
the concern of their existing
investor based to allow
new mexico into that fund
because
our program is so aligned with
their strategy and the
activities that they were trying
to do here in new mexico it was
a really.
Good match on so that actually
is the furthest along in terms
of fund under management
deployment that fund has
deployed to ten portfolio
companies you'll see on most of
the commitments we've made today
are to twenty twenty four
vintage funds so that means that
those funds have closed on their
first round of capital raising
in this calendar year which
means that we're not going to
see them start deploying until
probably tram way or dangerous
as has deployed to a number of
portfolio companies advanced in
mexico I know has one on that
they're looking at in their
pipeline and tiverton values and
rethink aren't really going to
get started until later this
year so these will take some
time to source and then deploy
investments on and you'll see
that over time um as that
happens but just so that you can
get a sense for kind of the
stage that those funds are out
on in their development and
are the managers
the the blue this the blue text
those are links they all have
websites where you can see all
the portfolio companies that
they're invested in we've listed
the objectives of the fund and
and and what we've committed
as I highlighted before the
local funds tram way dangerous
and advanced new mexico or
anywhere from a quarter to a
half of the total fun size on
and then the others revenue tire
to involve us and rethink we're
is significantly smaller
percentage of their total funds
sites because those are national
funds that have leveraged
significantly more private.
And here mission and
diversification objectives so
these are the readings that are
investment consultant assessed
in terms of our programs
objectives that each manager we
were we would potentially see
with each investment
and so that's the
so so that's that's kind of one
that this is actually the learns
that we use when we're speaking
with our investment committee
and and also our board about
making the fun commitments in
addition to these metrics that
you see here will also be
collecting impact metrics from
each fund manager and putting
together an impact report every
year and that's gonna include
not just these types of measures
but things like dollars deployed
to new mexico businesses and
dollars deployed to at which
stage of the new mexico business
is it see capital or is it later
stage capital job creation
salaries and the quality of
those jobs in terms of benefits
and whether or not
diversity and employment
practices also diversity and
ownership and control
of businesses and that
entrepreneurs from under serve
communities are representative
in ownership and control of
local businesses and also the
amount of dollars of additional
outside out of state capital and
in private investment capital
that the different funds have
been able to leverage for local
businesses so I know and the
technical expert so I did give
you a lot of information and a
lot of details and um so I hope
it was helpful and i'm very
happy to answer any questions.
Really for questions
alright very well thank you for
that on start with them
represented a martinez center
again you know if we can keep
our
questions narrow to
based on time representative
martials thank you mister
chairman I did I just have a
look quick question
i'm looking at the objectives
and and I think it's great to
that you're making money
available to less
traditional or or underserved
businesses but or you providing
any venture capital for
say somebody wants to start a
furniture manufacturing bad is a
white mail is there money
available for somebody like that
if I decided to store are not
producing widgets in my garage
is there money available for
that
mister chair date thank you for
the question
so that that's a great example
of uh a new mexico small
business and what we would
consider diversifying sector so
one that's typically not served
by venture capital funds and one
we would look to
serve with one of our
investments I would say the um
advance new mexico strategy on
is one that's focused on
diversifying sectors and
underserved entrepreneurs and so
that would be one also with the
flexible debt instrument
um so you the other and and we
did a capital landscape scan to
help uh inform that strategy
one of the characteristics of a
lot of the local businesses here
in in local entrepreneurs rate
with traditional venture capital
um there's always a focus on an
exit rate and the owner is
selling we know that a lot of
our local businesses and local
entrepreneurs.
Um aren't looking to exit their
business in five years or ten
years it's a family own business
it might be a multi generational
business
we know that
debt instrument might be more
relevant in terms of um funding
expansion or growth of that type
of business relative to
traditional equity
so yes that that specific funds
that we've invested in I would
say that type of business might
be
the most immediate fit
and that type of one should
burner would definitely be um
in the scope of the type of
beneficiary we would want to see
so
thank you miss mister chairman
and thank you for that
the reason that I that I asked
that question is because I have
several veteran owned businesses
that are one of the issues that
they bring up is there always
are trying to find capital and
and poorly it's very hard to
find capital than the state how
do
are you doing out reach out of
business has find out about june
and these opportunities
now mr chairman thank you for
the question and I didn't I
didn't read the definition of
under under serve communities in
our policy but veterans are
certainly um within that
definition and a target of any
strategy in our portfolio that
would be targeting underserved
entrepreneurs
and so and in terms of outreach
so a lot of mf's funding
programs are working directly
with local businesses or local
public entities providing
funding to them and that's
typically how we do outreach the
section this is actually a
little bit unique because we're
invested in funds and so in your
previous question if that
entrepreneur were to come to mf.
We would make that connection to
thunderlying fund that they
would then speak with
potentially about that product
so we're looking to um you know
not let's see and refuse
directly with clients but ensure
that and if you go to our
website you can see all the
funds where we've made
commitments and contact
information a couple of them
have included actually and take
forms were an entrepreneur on
could actually enter you know
they go to a link and they go
straight to that fund manager's
website and they could enter
information about their business
and they're their interest in
potential funding on so that's
that's to that's really how it's
working it's a little bit
different than our typical
funding program but
thank you chair thank you very
much
well thank you all person in
borrevel thank you mr chiro keep
my questions really brief
so is too a technology transfer
fund is out what that is an and
then also rethink
um mr chair no those are not
touched transfer funds those are
funds that are investing and
each one of them have
underlying about four targeted
sectors that I would describe is
on tech enabled
so in this day and age
it really technology is playing
a role in a lot of different
sectors and so that's that
that's what we describe is tech
enabled on very distinct from
tech transfer deep tech
investing in a emerging
technology
the only two funds in our report
follow that up of that nature
our tram way ventures and
dangerous ventures
and then also
are you guys looking to aid in
the future
mr chair I would say that.
A I isn't a specific theme so
another thing I may be
failed to articulate
as we were developing the
program we engaged in dialog
there's still investment council
quite a bit cause they have uh
uh you know significant local
investment activity and and
history and science and
technology in their statue is
really where they are focusing
and so again we really tried to
do something different than
what some of the other agencies
also the small business
investment corporate what russes
doing there with our program so
something like ai
investing specifically and a I
companies definitely not in our
perview that is what I would say
if there was a new mexico
business doing that it would
maybe be an asys per view any
venture capital fund manager is
now talking about a I
so it's there and it's going to
impact you know a lot of
different businesses but if it's
probably not one that we're
gonna be focused on
thank you all senders of the old
opposite thank you this is them
this is really great to grow
something that hasn't we haven't
grown in new mexico
very well
the oldest are private
businesses so in any I
understand you do have um the
capacity provide other than
equity binding or loans
would that be available to
nonprofits or is that okay
mr chair so.
Underlying funds.
Can invest a non profits.
They can non profits private
entities not all of the
underlying funds that were
invested in are targeting
nonprofits but a couple of them
are because they're aligned with
their strategies
yet I would say advanced new
mexico in particular
the one that's doing flexible
debt
I would expect that they might
deploy to some non profits.
That's really good in do vay
conduct the outreach or do you
conduct the outrage yeah so they
they're they're primarily
responsible for the outrich to
local businesses here we
certainly look to support them
as an investor and it is an
anchor also in that strategy on
what these specifically look
like in the ground on the ground
here so we close on our
commitment in may
on they hired someone by the end
of june here locally that woman
once printer I mentioned that's
based on albuquerque on the are
currently marketing so they
actually launched the fund you
can go to their website and find
information these they've also
held a couple webners
and are also part of their
strategy with outrage is also
working in and partnership
because they're very
collaborative is also working
with local
local intermediaries that are
also potentially working so are
like a dream spring or some of
our local cdfi's david and
conversation with them for a
year and a half because they
could also be a potential
colender with some of those
organizations and help bolster
kind of the dollars that those
organizations are able to deploy
to some of the um clients small
business clients that they've
been working with so that's kind
of what it's looked like to date
on and I expect as bernina
you know gets more time on the
grounds on behalf of that fund
behind her you know she's she's
here on the ground and and
looking to to meet with local
businesses.
That's really great in
there are some organizations of
nonprofits and collaborative
groups of non profits that it'd
really be good that she could
get into
because I I see it is a need in
our community particularly when
a non profit is seeking to buy a
building
it's just very difficult for
them to to find the funds or
find a financing to to do that
in some times they'll even get a
grant that provides like.
I down payment and they still
can't find a funds so this would
be this would be really helpful
and i'm glad to know about it
thank you very much.
Thank you off is there anyone
else.
No I just have a couple of on
page four.
The.
Where you have all
adhere to adequate conflict of
interest policies
so
what are the safeguards
normally when we have something
like this it seems like it
always comes after
you know that it's been
identified of a conflict of
interest better so how would
that be
but yeah so
interpretatory implemented
mr chair thank you for the
question on I think first and
foremost what we look for and
the most straight forward
approach is you have a fund
manager that has
staff each of whom are fully
dedicated with all their time
to the business of that that
fund
so you don't have an investment
professional that let's say is
twenty five percent of their
time is that the fund manager
and seventy five percent of
their time there doing other
work for for other things that's
definitely a a clear way to
ensure that
interests are aligned and also
you know potential conflicts
might not be emerging another
way to ensure that alignment and
not have conflicts and there's
also a language in legal
agreements and various specific
classes around potential
conflicts and potential
conflicts that I find manager is
required to then bring force to
an advisory committee of
investors in the fund and for
for that committee's review so
that's kind of a formal and very
standard in the industry process
for looking at potential
contract conflicts and example
of that could be if you have a
fund manager that's managing a
couple different funds and you
have a investment opportunity.
Which funds are they from which
under the deploying capital into
that opportunity
and if we're invested in this
fund we want to ensure that we
have the opportunity and that
our capitals being managed
prutantly if we're investing in
that transaction relative to
another fun they might be
managing so
to some degree there are a lot
of
you know industry best practices
that in the diligence process we
look to see that the firm
embodies that with their
conflict of interest policy that
we asked for during the due
diligence process for example
that issues have an origin in
the past etc
on but I think too just their
time focus of their time and
also
that you know they don't have
significant investment activity
personal investment activity
outside of you know there
involvement in the fund
operation
with that one so is there a
committee that looks at their
how is it
so typically for the general
partner of a fund there's what's
called a limited partner
advisory committee
and an mse with a couple of our
funds we do sit on that
committee others we just observe
and others were not significant
enough in the fund to play
pardon in in that fund
governance
but it's it's typically that
committee that would review
potential conflicts of interest
very well
one more question then we'll go
to representative welcome on
peach nine
so as you're looking at all
lending to say for example the
top one they need to local farm
farms transition into organic
is
so if you're looking at this
how do you look at that they
would have the work force
and enlimited just give you an
examp.
Like what i'm talking about
you know southern corrupt
there so potential farm
earned up the family what they
call parts in every part is a
hundred and sixty acres and the
family normally does like forty
four points and they're down to
only doing like eleven and the
reason is because they don't
have the work tourists
so even at a smaller you know
how would you go into
something knowing are they going
to have the work force or not
were horribly preparing for it.
Yeah mr chair thank you for the
question
one thing that
I found really compelling when I
was learning more about the ag
sector
and educating myself
around some of our potential
investments is actually
it's
largely an immigrant work force
that's working on firms here in
the state
and that's just
what it looks like in terms of
our strategies
the fund that were invested in
you know they would be.
Supporting affirming operation
that's growing and would
potentially be increasing
employment
around the growth of that
operation in the case of
this lending strategy
transitioning from
traditional to an organic
practice
I would say the impact of that
is more on
let's see
kind of the
the the land
in the environmental impact as
opposed to a work force impact
so it's really the the fund that
is currently in our portfolio
where there would be a potential
increase
in kind of
the number of workers that that
firm could employ.
Give her response now i'm just
saying this is that available
you know and
they check it out yeah I guess
how do you
monitor it.
Alright well very well will move
on to a reps only welcome
thank you mr chair
representative here in our
thinking are going into business
we never both veterans
and we want to know if we can
moral money and in this program
we can have a cat back
production plant
it'd be organic
and regenerative so I mean would
it fit in that category
mr cherry so a local farm
owned by veterans if yeah I
think we might have a couple
funds that would look at how
they could provide capital to
such an operation
with representative here never
to be looking you up there
so is to chat and mr chair and
representatives thank you for
your service as well so
appreciate that
very well thank you thank you
very much for your presentation
thank you mr chairman and
committee members
one of one to
our less barters public
employees retirement association
structure trial.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
members again greater here with
the PE r a I believe my
chuckleford has been before you
were before but make it due for
investment officer
brought him out here from north
dakota and I believe he's been
with us about two years
exactly two years old i'll turn
it over and he will be doing the
presentation.
Good afternoon good afternoon
members and thank you for having
us
some of the start on slide for.
So the first thing i'd like to
talk about is our on board in
its functions i'm so the pair
board establishes the strategic
direction for the fund they
staff and consult the staff and
consultants implement it
and the board's job is to
evaluate monitor our performance
and slide five
they're more detailed
responsibilities of the board
first they set our soon rate of
return which is currently seven
point two five percent
second the board's sets the
strategy
they they said our strategic
acid allocation are risk
tolerance in our liquidity
guidelines
and our ug over all these and
more detail and further slides
number three the board sets are
benchmarks over the the
benchmark upon which are
investment performance is
measured
for the board delegates
implementation so they delegate
implementation to the investment
staff
and then fifth the board
monitors our performance so
once like six
we have four strategic goals
first to sustain the trust fund
for current and future retirees
sucket to set the acid
allocation to meet or exceed our
seven quarter percent actual
assumed return.
Third produce returns that meet
or exceed our policy benchmarks
and fourth be cost efficient and
achieving total investment cast
at or below the benchmark cost
relative to our peers
the investment staff functions
we assist the board and
establishing those investment
policies and acid allocations
we construct our part follows by
selecting and monitoring
investment managers conducting
dediligence evaluation as well
as contract and fee negotiations
we conduct searches for
castodians consultants and third
party service providers we
oversee the daily administration
over investment activities.
And we report to the investment
committee and the board on our
performance are risk and all the
other functions of the
investment plan.
One of the most important things
that we do is set our acid
allocation so this goes through
this process someone paid on
slide nine.
As I mentioned the board sets
the assumed right of return
right now it is seven and a
quarter percent so a few sort of
broker up you know what what is
that seven and a quarter percent
going towards the biggest
portion of that is going to pay
benefits
so
the contributions into the found
each month do not meet the the
requirements of paying retirees
so every year about four percent
of the funds balance or
investment
half of our investment returns
have to go out to pay
beneficiary is to pay retirees
on so that's about four percent
then two percent is about to
keep up with inflation.
And the rest is to grow the fund
so that's sort of if you want to
look at the seven quarter
percent return on how you would
break it up that's about which
you're getting on slight ten.
The board also sets our wrist
tolerance in investments risk is
measured by volatility so the
voltility of different asset
classes or the voltility of your
portfolio
so the board has set a rise
tolerance between eleven and
thirteen percent that's eleven
thirteen percent standard
deviation
of volatility.
Slide eleven the work also sets
our liquidity targets our
liquidity targets are based on
the liquidity needs of the funds
as I mentioned we have to pay
out four percent every year of
the fund to meet beneficiary
payments so that's a that's a
critical
thing that has to be done so
that's part of what the input
goes when we're trying to figure
out our liquidity requirements
so the board has said a ten
percent tier one liquidity so
tier one is sort of think I like
US treasury bonds you know high
quality bonds very liquid assic
classes that you can that you
can liquidate you know within
the day i'm so ten percent of
our portfolio has to be very
liquid
very liquid assets
currently we have about fourteen
percent liquid into your one
slight twelve
again this is the most important
thing to does is set our
strategic asset allocation
so this is our current acid
allegation it was just modified
in december and it was
implemented on april first of
this year so you can see we have
four forty six percent in global
equities we have thirteen
percent and core fixed income or
high quality bonds we have
seventy percent in credit that's
lower rated bonds in loans.
Ah eighteen percent in real
assets that's real estate that's
infrastructure that's
agriculture things like that and
six percent in absolute return
those are hitch funds those are
those who are designed to
generate alpha regardless of the
whatever with the rest of the
market is doing
page thirteen
the board also sets our
benchmarks those benchmarks or
what we measure our performance
against almost all of our
benchmarks are um publicly or
public acid classes public
indexes so you could invest in a
low cost index fund in this so
our view of it is if we can't
beat a low cost index then we
shouldn't be in our jobs so i'm
almost all of these are that
except for the hedge funds which
are measured against cash plus
two and a half percent so it'll
be a little bit harder to get
that but that's only six percent
of the portfolio
on slight fourteen
the board delegates
implementation so the board has
delegated implementation to me
that chief investment officer
and I am working with my staff
working with our investment
consultants design and implement
our investment program
on slight fifteen the board
monitors our implementation in
our performance so on a
quarterly basis we provide to
the investment committee of our
board our strategic goals how
we're aligned with our **** at
all cation what's the total form
of fund performance or cash
activity manager activity and so
on.
On a monthly basis I deliver a
cio report to the entire board
on our monthly performance and
then we do add hot reporting as
the board requires.
I'm slide seventeen i'm going to
go over and few slides i'm gonna
go over what has been in where
we're going to go from there
so
I think I got this goes all the
back to nineteen ninety four you
can see on site seventeen you
can see
this these the blue lines are
the total stock holdings of the
fund as a percent of the fine
the red line is the total net
answered value of the fund
and so you can see in the early
in the mid nineties early two
thousand the fun had a
significant portion in stocks
and while that was good in the
nineties when the market was
rising it was not so good in the
early two thousand and certainly
wasn't that great in two
thousand eight when the start
markets crash so the stockmarker
crashed in two thousand two
thousand one and two thousand
two for total over thirty
percent decline and then the two
thousand eight we all know that
it the market dropped thirty
seven percent in the stock
market drop their seven percent.
Arm so
so having sixty seventy percent
in stocks was not the best thing
to have at that time and so
so after the crash of a weight
the board and the investment
team changed the accident all
cation to significantly reduce
our investment in stocks
and I would are do they
overcorrected because we went
all we down to
thirty five percent in stock so
we went from seventy percent in
stocks at one point to thirty
five percent.
So since i've been here i've
been here two years in even in
prior year two before I got here
we've been moving back up in our
stock holdings to capture more
alfa from from the stock market
so right now as I mentioned in
our new strategic as a location
we have forty percent forty six
percent target are to global
stocks global equities
slight eighteen I will go into
too much detail but that's
pretty much what I just said in
o they had
the experience of losing money
and having over exposure to
stocks the bond the board got
very conservative in the middle
of two thousand and now
currently were taking more a
little bit more risk
slide nineteen
you can see how this
along with arms some underfunded
benefit enhancements in them in
nineties you can see how this
exposure to stocks in the
exposure to the market crashes
of two thousand and two thousand
eight i'm affected or funding
status
in
the
site
you can see in
actual numbers as opposed to a
chart you can see how we know
eight we were seventy percent in
stocks
twenty five percent bonds and
then in fourteen we dropped to
fifty three percent in then
twenty twenty we dropped the
thirty six percent in stocks and
now we're back up to forty six
percent in stocks
I earn sly twenty two
so as I mentioned the most
important thing we can do in our
investments excuse me is our
strategic gas allocation
so these are these are studies
that were done on the left hand
side and there there are they're
actually more many more but on
the right hand side you can see
this chart and it shows ninety
two percent of investment
performance is derided by your
acid allocation.
So simply choosing how much in
stocks you want how much a bonds
you want how much in real estate
you want determines ninety
percent ninety two percent of
your returns
the rest is determined by
which managers who select
whether you select active
management or passive management
you know when you select those
managers and those sorts of
things but most of your return
is going to come by choosing
those assets and so when we
chose seventy percent in stocks
in the early the early two
thousand eight nineties
then what those market crashes
you know those those were on a
fact of choosing down seventy
percent stocks and then choosing
to have thirty five percent
stocks for a while that under
performance that we had in our
fund as a consequence of
choosing to have thirty five
percent stocks and said maybe
fifty percent or something so so
at one point we were over
allocated stocks and then we
were under allocated stocks now
we're trying to get to be about
where we should be relative to
our liquidity requirements read
out of the two to our funded
status and relative to our peers
on slight twenty three.
You can see arms so this
basically is how it's all be
i'll be like bob jackson was on
to be a little little equation
here so this is the source of
return I am so we have an
expected return of seven quarter
percent how are we going to get
that return how does anyone get
a return the first part of an
equation is return equation is
the risk free return so that's
just investing in tea bills US
government tea bills cash
that'll get you part of your
return beta is the market you
choose the ban besides t bill
also how much you have in stocks
how much you have and bonds how
much you have in real estate
that's market better so that's
just a market return that's what
you would expect to get from an
index fund that you invested in
and then the last thing is staff
responsibility that's alpha that
is how much excess return over
an index fund that we can
generate to basically justify
our existence and you know get
the fund better fund it over
time
on slight twenty four
you know why not invest in a
hundred percent stocks or
whatever well we saw from two
thousand and two thousand eight
not a good idea but that you can
see here a more detailed
explanation some stocks do
really well when gdp is growing
stock to do really poorly when
there is high inflation.
Bonds do really well when when
stocks are crashed normally when
stocks are crashing unless
there's high inflation
so so you balance all these mix
and you come up with an acid
allocation based on all these
different answer classes that
you can investor on slight
twenty five you can see that in
the real world i'm so these are
actual returns from market
indexes.
And they show you that in any
given here
something else is on top rate so
in two thousand fourteen fifteen
reach weren't top in two
thousand sixteen small cap
stocks were on top in two
thousand seventeen emerging
markets weren't stopped warrant
and so you can see across the
board that it's it's good to be
diversified generally speaking
now you can which you can also
see though is that across the
board except for one year
large chap equities are in the
top for
so you so that's a no way of
seeing you definitely want to
have some exposure to stocks
because if we don't
you're you're gonna underperform
the market
and if you if you want to be
invested in some of these at the
bottom is the the etf index
funds that that correlate to
this
right so slide twenty seven
so as I said you know our job as
investment staff is to deliver
all for deliver excess return to
the to the fund
so this first chart here shows
our performance versus our index
and remember our bench marker
index are index funds so you
could you could invest in and I
can invest in anyone can invest
in these index funds at a low
cost
so you can see except for your
one in the one year where we had
a eight point six percent return
you can see in the three year
five years seventy or ten year
thirty year instance inception
which goes all about eighty five
we've outperformed our inducts
and just isolating in the last
ten years weed we've generated
our investment team investment
staff and most of it because
i've only or two two years so
most of it was someone else and
other people but they've
generated three hundred million
in excess return to the fund so
in other words if the board had
chosen.
To just invest in index funds
the fund would be lower by three
hundred million dollars so
having an investment staff
that's chosen active management
in certain sectors
and picked good managers in
those sectors they've generated
over three hundred million and
excess return over the last
three ten years
so then the next thing though is
how we don't get out how has the
fund performed against its
assumed rate of return so that
seven in a quarter percent
return and you can see
in the three five seven ten
twenty years we've not
outperformed that seven and
quarter percent return and the
reason is as I mentioned before
the board got very conservative
after the crash overweight and
they underinvest it in equities
and as a consequence of that
under investment in equities
under exposure tax equities we
were not able to meet our
subright of return
so we're so we're so
the lesson from that is of these
two charts is our investment
staff is really good at picking
managers picking stocks but are
picking up strategies and
managers in different acid
classes
but the board in our consultants
and our investment staff had had
become way too conservative
after a eight and um and
underperformed there there are
some very return and so as I
said since i've been here we've
been trying to add back more
risk into our portfolio add it
back fruitly but add that risk
because we need risk exposure to
get to that seven or four
percent alright
and so on slide twenty eight
this is another example of how.
Staff has been really good at
picking managers so we are of
two hundred or a hundred ninety
one public pinch and funds over
the last ten years per a is
number nine in picking private
equity managers so again that
was long before it proceeded me
but the staff before we're
really good at picking
investment managers in private
equity and so
they they delivered an average
annual return of seven point
three five percent seven times
or seventeen point three five
percent and if you look at the
left hand chart
private equity
delivered.
Eight fifteen point two percent
return on average are from the
same manager so we outperformed
all those managers public
equities so if you want you
might wonder why are we in
private equity versus public
equities well public equities
over that ten year period
delivered a ten point two
percent return and we deliver to
seventeen point three percent so
we outperform public equities by
seven point one percent i'm over
that ten year per year over that
tiny period so this is why we so
that it's called we call it up
in the quick illegality premium
i'm so owning something that's
eliquit should generate extra
alpha over the public markets
to pay you for that illegitimate
so you can see that we were paid
for it in fact all appears were
also paid for it the ones that
you know deliver to fifteen
point two percent
but we ought performed our peers
as well so pretty good at
picking managers
and you can see
in our risk
as a consequence of night owning
a lot of equities we out
performed on a risk basis we had
less volatility in our fund.
You could say that's great on
the other hand that meant our
returns were right so you might
want to so our goal is to take a
little bit more risk take a
little bit more of all till it
in the fund to generate a little
bit extra return
and slight thirty
so this is a sharp ratio I think
bob jackson into this earlier
sharp sharp ratio measures how
much return you're generating
per unit of risk that you're
taking
in so you can see.
That we are in the top third as
bob mentioned so the little
parentheses are where you are if
you look at the bottom of the
chart there's a number that's
the actual number that we
generated of sharp result and
the number in the parentheses is
are where we rank so the lower
the number of the better so one
would be best a hundred would be
worse so we're in the top third
of our peers in shop ratio so
that means again it means we're
picking good managers and their
utilising the risk that we're
giving them to take on very
efficiently
but again we could use we could
use more risk in our portfolio.
So this is this flight thirty
one is our acid allocation so
you can see we are our current
so I we have our policy there
and we ever current as a asset
allocation
so you can see we're within
range of where we're supposed to
be and we have tolerance his
bands we call them on was
tolerance is for you know we
don't have to be exactly at
forty six percent in equity we
don't have to exactly be forty
percent forty six percent
equities we can be a little bit
over a little bit under
but you can see were pretty
close to our targets
in the middle chart there that's
our those are all are risked
statistics.
And so you can see we we beat
our index in almost all of those
written statistics so we have a
standard deviation remember that
that's a measure of altility
that's a measure of risk we take
less risk than our index funds
take
we generate alpha funds don't
index funds don't generate
officer it'd be zero but we we
are generating alpha for the
fund
we that data number is our
correlation to the market
i'm so being less than one is
actually a good thing so we have
we're we're only point six
correlation to the market one
would be one point zero would be
a hundred percent correlated the
market we're not and that's a
good thing because we don't want
to be a hundred percent
correlate to market.
Upside capture
that's how much of when the
market is growing do you capture
that upside and downside capture
is when the market's falling how
much of that you capture so
upside capture you want to be
above fifty percent downside
capture you want to be below
fifty percent of around fifty
percent and that's where we are
in the all the other ones
basically are the same thing
i've been talking about how much
are we using risk versus return
and generating alpha
and the last the
last way
so sly thirty two
that's you know one of the
things we're tasked to do is
generate generate all this alpha
generate these returns at a low
cost
so last year we don't have our
current numbers yet we're still
working on our financials but
last year we had a forty nine
basic looks like forty nine
maybe forty eight basis point
armed fees
so that's basically half a
percent that's pretty good for a
fund that has about forty
percent of the fund is in it
look with assets so that's
pretty good for a fund our size
with um I look with assets in
the portfolio so in in our per
fun fees range depending on
whether we're in an index fund
and we do have some index funds
that were in and those are very
low cost is like one or two
basis points depending on if
they're domestic or foreign
assets
and but we also have active
management
and we also have eloquent active
management as well I am so a
combined mix of your half a
percent is a really good for a
fun like ours
never less last slide is
um
just a couple of you know things
that you have to decide when
you're structuring a fund do you
do active or passive
we make that decision based on
the acid class.
I'm so some asset classes like
large cap stocks it's hard for
managers to consistently
generate all for over the long
term so we actually have an
index fund and it's a very low
cost and it's almost you know I
think it's less than one basis
point
and then same thing with high
quality bonds it's very hard for
a manager to generate excess
return or alpha in a high
quality bond fund over the long
term so same thing we have an
index fine and we pay very low
fees and we get the index return
on the other hand with small cap
stops with emerging market
stocks with higher bonds in high
old higher loans we have active
management so even though those
are publicly traded we have
active management in those
managers generate alpha or
excess return for us and that's
what we're looking for neta fee
right.
Only the other choice you have
to make is do you want to be
public or private do you want to
be liquid or in liquid
in so again we make that
decision based in part on our
liquidity requirements that the
board is given us so we have to
maintain a certain amount of
liquidity but to the extent that
we can absorb that illoquidity
we want to be ill liquid for the
reasons I talked about with
private equity you should get
paid and ill quit a premium for
being a liquid and as as you saw
with private equity we we are
paid that elequity premium
in so we hope to get that in
private equity we hope to get
that in private credit and we
hope to get that in private real
estate and private relative
assets
so those are those are some of
the key choices we have to make
well aslide is just some
investment terms that I gone
over here there for your perusal
in the future if you want to
remember why what shop ratio was
or whatever i'm happy to answer
thank you thank you very much
let me start off with one before
I go to the members on the peach
nine
on where you have all the board
search assume target return
so the seven point two five is
that for the year or for how
long that's per year yes so
every year per year we're
supposed to generate a seven and
quarter percent return now
that's impossible because
markets go up and markets go
down and i'm so what we look at
I think bob mentioned this
earlier is we look at like the
five seven ten year period to
see if we're making that return
because any anything shorter
like if you have a major just
location in one year that's
going to not only affect that
year but it will also affect the
next two or three years
depending on how big that market
declines so
most investment managers look at
and when you're talking about a
fund like ours that's a.
You know that's a indefinite
fund a generational fund you
look at like the five seven ten
years as you know if we be are
can we be hour or have we beaten
ours assume break a return over
the five turn seven year
seventeen thirty year period
thank you for the response
they're not in the history of
the finder as the board ever
have to change that within one
year they have changed it you
great price not better than you
have mister charming per so
one of the earlier meetings that
we had with you i'll weigh it up
when a wor experience study so
the board performs an experience
study every three to five years
to look at all or assumptions
that make sure that they are
still
relevant
so when I started at per I
believe we were actually at an
eight percent return the board
didn't external study dropped it
down to seven and three quarters
and then we further reduced it
down to seven in a quarter of
the the last experience studying
said it was still reasonable to
keep it at that at that rate
but we do look at it very
regularly
okay very well thank you for
this response first we have a
seller neighbor
thank you mr terr
looking at slide nineteen
and earlier we're talking about
it maybe a twenty some year
window and it may be get back to
a hundred percent
eighty percent hundred percent
whatever it is
we look back twenty years
you were over a hundred percent
your fully funded
it was decisions of the board
there
has
my words under performed.
And have grossed to a situation
where we're not fully fun
am I concerned as that
you have a
board i'd like to buy the
members but those board members
and m probably most of the
members
don't have expertise in
financial decisions that are
being made and so they saw two
thousand one two thousand two
two thousand three may over
reacted
and then
the last
night years
except for one year you should
have been
either fully invested in their
companies or at least
substantially invested we
wouldn't be at sixty seven
percent had we been there
in my opinion and tell me if i'm
wrong but the returns from the
the market have been
pretty good probably the last
nine years with maybe one or two
exceptions
and and so much my problem with
this whole thing I said earlier
is that
I wonder if we as a stay need to
do a better job in determining.
At least this board made some
direct decisions that have
impacted where the fundies today
am I see in this room.
Mister chairman in
representative or sorry senator
neighborhood so so a couple of
things to throw in here
I think it was up until two
thousand and five tsac per year
b I didn't have the option to
have a private credit private
equity we were limited to just
stocks and wants to two thousand
five the legislature well passed
and put in a best to act to
allow us to diversify
some of the private in my
speaker this better than I
getting into these private acid
classes takes a while to ramp up
you're not just going out an
investing private equity you
know the day after the
legislation became effective so
I think from a timing standpoint
we don't have that flexibility
and I don't know how long I can
talk about
tuly implementing a private
program you know so that was
three years ago procession
happens two thousand eight
timing was awful and at that
point in time I want to own our
own for liability was under a
billion dollars
and we didn't really there were
there were some attempts
to change things that needed
legislation up but nothing
actually passed until twenty
thirteen so we went from less
than a billion dollars and
funded to over six billion
dollars in that six year period
and during that time you know we
had the market downturn we're
still paying the three percent
compounding caller we're adding
retirees to the role so that
just compounded throughout the
pension form of twenty thirteen
do you know what's going to help
us in the long term read
established cheer too you know
that's now about sixty percent
of our population so those
members are paying the same
amount of contributions
that I am but their benefit is
less and they have to work for a
longer period of time
and we started seeing some
improvement but then again or
return repopulation and I keep
saying they're kind of
overtaking the phone we're gonna
be paying more of those.
People out you know active
membership it shrunk until
that's why the reform was needed
in twenty twenty cause twenty
thirteen didn't go further
dinner for enough
it's also there is some you know
there were support decisions and
maybe we were less conservative
than we should have been but
also our cash flow needs our
significance when we're paying
you know fifty percent of
returning people out of the
return cheese making the other
house is coming in from
contributions you know you can
truly be as risky as you would
like without kind of cash for
issue that you've got a manage
hopefully that helps him I can
add your info just add that you
know greg's right it takes a
good five six years to go from
public's to investigate to fully
invested out a target of a
private equity and the other
thing I would point to in this
chart is that you can sort of
see you can easily see the
investment environment so like
if you look at oa oh seven oh
seven oh eight you can see that
market decline
but will you can't see or you
isn't obviously apparent is that
you're going from ninety three
to eighty percent from that
market decline but the rest of
that decline is really what with
greg is talking about that those
benefit payments and those
callers and things like that
that are slowly eroding the rest
of that so i'm so some of it is
as i'm greg said
you know just the crush of of
new retirees and callers and
things like that coupled with
yap
over invested in equities at the
wrong time
works seems to me that
they came out of
a whole if we call the whole uhm
trying to get back to a hundred
percent.
I guess we could write a check
but it seems to me that the
bigger impact is enhanced
returns the work that you're
doing
that's going to have a huge
impact
if you were making much better
returns than we'd start seeing
back sixty seven percent seventy
percent rising up into the
eighty percent range I would
sus.
Thirty some percent invested in
the equity market the last mine
years or so
you missed out a lot of
opportunities and
you know i.
That that's part of my concern
is that
we probably
probably need people who
understand the markets better
who are coming up with what what
should the
you know we we've had some great
years i'm not sure what the what
the next few years hold but I
think most people are getting a
little nervous at this point
about the act
me maybe be best to be thirty
five percent you know the next
couple of years but that uh
you know
it looks to me like we we kind
of miss about probably because
of the award and steel feeling
effects of two thousand one two
thousand two where most people
got that behind them a long time
really came into the markets
even even though two thousand
eight two thousand nine downturn
in the markets.
People recovered
if your loss as they have there
are probably within three years.
You know that's the the the the
rub i'm happening with some of
those because we're talking
about sticking a lot of money in
into
the retirement
programs that we have and i'm
not at burst to that but I also
think that uh we need to look
more carefully
who makes these decisions are
they the best people that we
have in the state to make those
decisions and if they're not
then we ought to do somethi.
Thank you that representative
no
kind of no senator said the
locals and then
think you mister chair I
actually think we have the best
is we we have experts like you
all governed by a board that is
directly impacted by this so
that they can and they know what
kind of brisk they can tolerate
just like any other investor you
know like I have to think about
risk that I can tolerate when
i'm investing in a minute one of
these individuals who would
rather have less risk for
certainty and in so that kind of
decision I think these is best
made by the people who are most
impacted even if it doesn't turn
out
the best in the long haul
if it's their own damn fault I I
well paid at way I know that
that sounds trivial but would I
mean by by by saying they're the
most important decision makers
is if you have professionals who
make mistakes it's going to make
the community
really angry and not trust the
professionals who make mistakes
where is if there if the the
people impacted or involved
personally in these decisions
you know they can say the reason
we did this is because this was
our retirement and we didn't
want to put more at risk at that
time and that's why we did it
and you know it may not have
rent as much but we didn't lose
and and that may have been what
they could tolerate so I I think
it's the best of both worlds if
you have professionals like you
all advising aboard and then
explaining I mean they they made
decisions about the risk they're
willing to tolerate and they
made decisions about liquidity
because they want to know that
they're going to have a flow
so to me it seems all very
rational would happen we may not
think that the outcome was the
best but it was rational.
Um and I was you don't speaking
of of like the i'm looking at
the bigger picture like you've
done a really beautiful job of
laying out the investments and
what you've done but the bigger
picture it you kind of alluded
to it retirees are growing if
it's all these baby boomers that
are retiring and we don't have
people behind them the number of
people behind them to pay into
the phone to cover all the baby
boomers who display covered then
I don't know we I asked you once
about the impact of covered but
despite covered are living
longer
and so do you take that into
account like the the changing
demographics of the retirees um
it and and the size of the
working finded the working group
who are contributing and how do
you take that into account yes
mister chairman and members that
you will open so that is part of
you when we do our experience
study because we're we're
looking at kind of national
averages but also we're looking
strictly at our population so
our population is still lagging
you know
their mortality is in as good as
the national average but it's
still on average we expect our
italians if your mail to live to
eighty five minutes for your
female to live to your eighty
seven you know we talked earlier
today it's not as
normal is it used to be but you
know we have people reterring at
thirty eight years old and
paying them for fifty years and
the benefit structure if you
sell my earlier presentation you
know the contribution rates to
fund the benefits have never
been enough so yeah I don't want
to this to come out bad but
unless if you are a retired say
police officer don't
correctional officer that's the
only population that really
truly funded their benefit the
benefit I am going to receive
i'm not fully funding so we
traditionally relied on
investments to kind of make up
that short.
Fall but the demographics you
talk about with a baby boomer
generation which isn't unique to
us at every pension funded so
security so that's that's just
weird we want to work through
that bold and so yet we we
definitely do look into it and
and like they say we've been
projecting we know we're gonna
be paying out more people than
we have paying in and I think I
think at a peak
are active population was like
fifty five thousand members were
down to forty seven thousand
and that actually increased a
little bit so I want to see
maybe forty seven seven but
actually population isn't going
to be
growing we're not adding jobs in
government but but that new
active population they're also
paying the same contribution
rate their working longer
they're getting a reduced
benefit so over the long term
it tips in thirty years what we
need we just have to manage
stock market as to cooperate a
bus a bit but yet we we
definitely look into all those
factors until then it happens
that's that's an excellent point
and then the other point then I
know i've talked about this
before is
it is it and I am sure every
every manager has their own
system for choosing but to me
climate change is something
that's very very obvious and
that is going to impact
industries in various industries
and so I myself personally have
been paying attention to
industries that are renewable
and also industries that are
taking into account how claim it
changes going to impact them and
that's working out really well
to my surprise cause this isn't
my area of expertise at all and
i'm wondering whether your
managers are doing similar
things
so chair senator yes most
managers ha.
Have some sort of esg program
where they look at import you
know so whether whether they're
a linder or whether the
equity provider of capital they
look at the companies that
they're proposing to lend you or
buy into
they look at you know what
climate change might of how it
might affect them if it'll suck
them
in then on our infrastructure
side are real assets we actually
have managers who
are solar farms who are win
farms and things like that so
yes
so it is something that is
talked about and and worked on
and cause like I said I was just
doing it i'm not an expert as is
doing it for my own funds and
it's turned out really well cher
senator yes they it's much
talked about in the industry
thank you think you mister chair
thank you
go to represent a borregal
thank you mister chair
really great job great overview
I felt like I was back in paris
all over again
and you know I was looking at
your slide nineteen
mister chair and I was just
looking at the trends you know
because a lot of this is sickly
called rate
and I just wondered have you
guys
I know you don't have
a glass
what is it a looking glass into
the future but
a crystal ball
it's getting
so I was just wondering like
you're actuaries how often do
they do an actuarial study for
you
yet miss chairman in a represent
what I go sweet we do are
actuarial valuation annual
and and like say the experience
study every three to five years
in each year we also do have a.
Can a long term projections look
in out the next twenty five
thirty years but they also model
different scenarios
you know like if stock market
performs extremely well
what does that look like for us
we get to hundred percent sooner
if it's just kind of how it has
been you know which is kind of
cruise along but then they also
looks like if you know there's
another great recession what is
adding to us and
we had a graphs during the
senate bill seventy two
presentations where to know you
know in a bad
in a bad situation in all three
scenarios we were near heading
right down the clinton towards
insolvency i'm right now
we we are we're gonna survive if
something like that happens
again and your actuaries who is
your actuary or do you have more
than one mister chairman and
representative we'll currently
it is a gabriel rotor smith or
grs they've been arrangement
for about three years
and prior that we had a cab back
they were with us since before I
was that per i'm not sure how
long they were but the other
thing we also do is every
usually below every three years
we bring in another actual firm
to kind of do an audit on our
valuations on experience studies
to make sure what we're getting
is reasonable
and mr chair sorry but I have
i'm thinking out loud but
with regard to the actuaries
they make make recommendations
than to the board and the board
then decides on does scenarios
mister chairman and a
representative that is correct
pressure example of that the
actuaries are one that made the
recommendation to the board to
update our mortality rates
because they were seeing people
living on her so that's
something they recommended to
the board and they adopted
and then just one last question
mr chair.
With regard to your risk
there was a slide here and then
you see if I can find it now but
had a little star
and I was just concerned that
that little star look like it
was almost out there
better rates cause you had a
like a range in there and I
don't see the paper here it is
picked slight
that little store that you have
on the slide is it closer to
thirteen percent volatility is
that what i'm seen here because
you didn't mention that at all
and I concerns me because at
that point it seems to me like
the board would have to make an
adjustment with regard to your
risk am I correct
so mister chair representative
absolute store is just sort of
in so we have a range of eleven
and I think I mentioned eleven
to thirteen percent for more
today so that stars just
basically there are to sort of
represent that it's not a dozen
star does mean anything else
it's not uncertainly if you want
okay I just wanted to clear
you can see that our policy so
in the middle on page thirty one
that short in the middle there
that has all our statistics on a
four year basis so we don't
usually look at one year risk
really get like four five year
risk so you can see our policy
on index had almost a twelve
percent volatility
so that was that's basically
about where we want to be and
we're actually under that we're
at seven and a half so we're
doing better not a volunteer
basis on a standard deviation
basis than our inducts but
because the hero the back of my
neck was starting to stand up a
little bit and I was getting a
little concerned about that and
I would add that every three
years we look at our arm
strategic as an allocation.
In as part of that review we
also look at you know what level
of authority is the board
willing to accept
they they've had in the since
i've been here we've changed our
strategic gasolication twice
arms are once each of the two
years i've been here so they've
had an opportunity to look at
the volatility and ask
themselves is that acceptable do
they want to lower it do they
want to raise it they
can of the view that it's
acceptable our consultant has
said it's acceptable I think
it's unacceptable voltely eleven
at thirteen percent is more than
acceptable
in you know as being under that
i'm again shows that the staff
again prior to me being here has
been really good about picking
managers picking strategies
within major asset classes that
are less risky but still
generally alpha
unless think mr tear would you
just comment on the different
types of risk because you guys
are only talking about one write
one level of risk is the risk
you're talking about including
all the different types of risk
under without definition so
mister chair representative so
this is one type of risk so and
that's the it is the primary
type of risk that investment
managers look at it's called
volatility so it's it's the
amount of change in the assets
or a stock or bond has in price
you know every month every day
whatever
and so in its measured on what
we call standard deviation so um
standard deviation is
the level of
um change from the mean rate so
so one standard deviation is
income in capsulates like sixty
eight percent of all scenarios
right so this twelve percent.
Means that in a four year period
you would expect stocks to be up
twelve percent or down twelve
percent in sixty eight percent
of the scenarios right and then
two standard deviations
encompasses like ninety plus
percent so as two standard
deviation event with twelve
percent would be twenty four
percent so the market would be
down twenty percent or up twenty
four percent in ninety percent
of the scenarios does that make
sense
and so that that's how we
measure risk that's the most
price volatility is the most
because price while utility
affects the net acid value of
the fund so that's the primaries
but yeah there's all counters
multiple kinds of risk I mean if
you think about like a bond bond
has credit risk the the risk
that you won't get paid back it
might have liquidity risk you
might you know you might if you
need to sell it for some reason
you might not be able to so
that's a look what it is there
are a lot of there's a lot of
different types of red
underlying risks but the main
risk in the risk to the fund as
a whole is volte and that was my
main question mister chairs that
we are within our are limit and
and our policy I guess thank you
thank you mister
k r very what representative
thank you matrim and just one
quick question in two thousand
two two thousand twenty three
thirty nine percent
okay my question is
in two thousand to now it's been
nothing but it dropped one one
year went to sixty five hours
sixty seven percent
what are we going to different
to stop the down down here slide
cos there's something wrong
somewhere that these percentages
are dropping out much you know
i've been in business for forty
years in accordance to stain a
forty percent loss in business
you know you you're drawing
numbers out of all ability and.
Option down michael is what are
we doing wrong different two
thousand two right now we
dropped thirty nine percent what
are your door of fixed that's a
question
mr chair representative garcia
um so
you know some of that as as we
mentioned was market decline so
that going from like two hundred
and three percent funded to
ninety seven percent funded that
was market decline probably
are going from ninety three
percent funded to seventy nine
percent funded was oh eight but
some of that a rousing is again
more retirees retiring higher
benefit payments retired young
and having paid benefits for a
long period of time i'm so a lot
of that was um taken care of by
the pension reform SB twenty
seven and SB seventy two uhm and
so we have higher contributions
now from both employers and
employees we have to walk to
your two now so you have to be
sixty five or the rule was rule
of eighty five so you have to so
a lot of those things were
solved arm and so what we're
doing on the investment side as
I mentioned is is to be less
conservative so we we were very
aggressive in our portfolios in
the early two thousand and
having almost seventy percent in
equities after the crash of the
week we got very conservative
and we went to thirty five
percent equities I am so under
investment under invested in
equities i'm so we're moving
back we're getting we're putting
more risk in the portfolio we're
trying to do it prudently but we
are adding risk to the
workfollow to generate our part
of it is which is that seven and
a quarter percent return I mean
I think the the legislature in
these prior years with sp twenty
seven n SB seventy two sort of
did their part by giving us to
your two giving us higher
contributions in although in
time the call it to the
performance of the fund and
those sort of things.
I hope that
I think then i'm germany known
and i'm not trying to be
critical about you to one of the
okay because I know these
problems have been there way
before your time but you know if
you look at this sharp
it's done exactly what happened
in and we know we're under
donald
you know we just matter what you
say from how we're going to do
it risk the numbers were still
going to do
you know that the dispray ten
years from all of the people are
going to be early
in you know it know you know
reconsider getting numbers of
key and they don't know all the
details and I don't want to be
critical about anybody in this
room but in by looking at
numbers in any but in his
audience this there seen the
same thing i've seen what do we
do stop it
and mister chairman in a
representative here so that goes
back to historically we've
promised benefits that we
haven't properly funded and now
we're getting to that point
where there's so many people
taking those benefits that
weren't funded not there
that because they did something
wrong it's just that
how it happened so yet as mike
mentioned the reforms that we
put in an in two thousand and
thirteen slowed the rate of the
benefit accumulation for future
members we've decreased the
amount of money going out in the
form of reducing callers we will
increase the amount of money
coming in
and changes like there for a
fund or size I mean it's gonna
take twenty years from the kind
of fully take effect that's also
when you say ten years or not
people are going to have a
pension of what are going to be
on the ups so upswing backing
ten years it's just the baby
bombers this poor huge
population that were we're going
to be paying out that's that's
what we need to manage
I thank you the one was just
comment on mischairman you know
I hope we don't take color with
repeat.
To come the teeth for the losses
on the mere let me refresh open
a call off from state employees
to compensate for the last is
embarrassing business to
be ray could at that time of the
day that was happening could I
know the governor one in a
couple years ago and I voted
against it is still going
through to reduce the caller
and you know here we are
a couple years later was the boy
known so what are we gonna do
not did you just come as i'm
sure what I will do will take
more color the we from these
people in order to that their
money they were playing with and
my bad investment is coming down
to the bottom of the door the
people to pay for thank you
mixture
well thank you
thank you mister charges a quick
question i'm looking at slide
thirty one
the bottom blue bar
you stated I think if I heard
you correctly that the target
for the most like what
investments is ten percent and
it's sitting according to this
at fifteen so it's just
wondering
when and how you hope to move it
closer to the target of ten
percent in the tier one category
when you hope to have that
reality
mister chair representative yeah
so we're in the process so we
just changed to gas adultation
it just took a fact and as we
talked about earlier it takes
time to get invested in liquid
assets it's really like a four
five year process so
that looked ill that liquidity
that we have yeah we'd rather be
ten because we we want to expose
us ourselves to more risk but we
can't just deploy it immediately
so we're gonna we're probably
going to have a little bit of
excess liquidity into your one
over the next year or two on as
we try to dollar into private
investments.
Thank you that's all this to
check
very well thank you thank you
for the presentation I thought
of this very thoroughly easy to
follow in a lot of work behind
it better or not thank you again
for that and membership we are
done or next meeting is october
first and it will be here i'm
just came but I just wanted to
see if you are a week
