Mexico, covering most of
northern and central New Mexico,
but in close partnership with
our sister stations at KENW at
eastern New Mexico University
and KRWG at New Mexico State
University. We are in close
partnership and closely
connected in a lot of what I
talked about today, uh, also
applies to them and, and the
work that they do. Uh they reach
parts of the state that I do not
reach and I reach parts of the
state that they do not reach.
Um, we have long had
partnerships with tribal
communities in New Mexico. My
station does cover, I think, 18
of the recognized tribes here in
New Mexico. One of our closest
relationships and the most
long-standing relationships has
been with the Navajo Nation, uh,
for many, many, many years, uh,
Navajo Nation TV which is uh
retransmitters operated uh uh
out of Window rock.
was carrying our signal into the
Navajo Nation. Um, it was just
kind of a handshake agreement.
There was nothing official, but
in uh 2015, uh, the Navajo
Nation approached us and they
wanted to make it a more formal
agreement, so we had to work
with PBS in Arlington, Virginia,
the national group, and we had
to work with the Navajo Nation
and we forged a trilateral
agreement that we gave the
Navajo Nation permission to
carry our signal on their
proprietary, their own channels,
and PBS gave us the right to
allow the Navajo Nation to carry
their copyrighted content along
with that. So it was a unique
arrangement as far as I know,
it's still the only one,
although I hear the rosebud
sewer working on a similar
arrangement, but so far this is
the only arrangement of its kind
in the nation, and I think it it
really well serves. Another
interesting aspect of that
agreement was that the Navajo
Nation wanted and needed the
ability to interrupt that
signal, that PBS content, for
their own purposes. It was their
television network.
They wanted to be able to manage
it their way. EPS does not do
that, and in this case, PBS
agreed to do that. So PBS did
allow their content, which
Honestly, I'm not even allowed
to interrupt sometimes, but the
Navajo Nation got special
access, um, so that they can
interrupt public televisions own
private programming, um, with,
with their own content when.
The the time comes that they
need to. So unique arrangement,
um, a long standing arrangement
through that, uh, we have worked
with the Navajo Nation to um
roll out a lot of different
initiatives, a lot of
technological stuff. A lot of
what public television does is
really in the background of what
you see. We're known for Sesame
Street and great children's
programming, we're known for
Downton Abbey and Nova nature,
and we should be. But a lot of
what we do with our spectrum,
with those radio signals that
cross
everywhere, um, is behind the
scenes, and one of those things
is carrying vital emergency
alert information.
Mexico PBS is a national leader
in these efforts. We are
recognized nationally for really
pushing the envelope in
different ways to provide access
to this information to rural and
tribal communities, and we've
worked closely with Navajo
Nation, with Coachchidi Pueblo,
with a number of other tribes
and pueblos around the state,
make sure that the
get the access they need in the
ways that best serve them. So we
work very closely with a lot of
tribal partnerships, make sure
that you all have access to that
kind of information, as well
during COVID, uh, one of the
things that we started doing,
um, and we're the first
nationally to do it was to data
cast to send.
Internet content over our
airwaves to homes that did not
have access to the internet.
And we worked with a couple of
groups nationally, and then
worked with a lot of local
tribes. We got a grant from
public education department to
build this network out. It was
built out statewide, and that
allowed us to actually send
content to homes, uh, that was
designed for the internet to
homes that did not have the
internet. I will tell you this
was not a raging success.
The technology worked
beautifully.
The desire for people to use it
that way, did not. So I think
it's still in place, we're still
rolling it out. It's used for
both education and for public
safety purposes, but we are now
in a position of understanding
that the needs of teachers and
the needs of students were not
being met by the content that we
were providing, and quite the
way we're providing it. So now
we're coming back and we are
retooling the technology to
better serve the community's
needs.
It's kind of our mission
statement that we will be there.
The way you want to see us. So
if you want to watch us on
television, we're there. If you
want to see us on the internet,
we're there. If you want to
access us on demand, we're
there. So it's important to us
that we reach out to these
communities and find out how do
you use us, how do you need to
see us and find a way to get it
to you the way the community
needs to see is not the way that
we dictate that to be seen.
That's one of the important
parts of that partnership is
getting that feedback from these
communities is how best to use
us.
Um, another really exciting
thing that we did in, in, in the
last 10 years is we were one of
the founding stations to pick up
FNX First Nations experience,
which is the channel that is
operated out of San Bernardino,
California, the PBS station
there. It was initially funded
and I believe still funded by
the San Manuel Band of Mission
Indians, and it is a television
network designed for by and
about Native American and
indigenous peoples content.
And it is a nationwide channel
and we carry it here in New
Mexico, so it reaches everywhere
that our signal reaches,
including being repeated on the
Navajo Nation. So FNX is one of
those things and we're one of
the reasons that continues to be
a success because they sought us
out. They came to us and said,
Will you carry this channel? We
worked with them.
Both on the ends of the content
and the technical side to make
sure that it could be delivered
properly, and once it met the
needs, our needs, our technical
needs and the community's needs,
we rolled it out and it is now a
channel that is on 24/7 365,
everywhere our signal goes.
Vision Maker Media is a program
that comes out of the
corporation for Public
Broadcasting. There are 7
different groups, they're part
of the what's called the
minority consortia. They are
groups that are designed to
serve specific populations.
Vision Maker Media, um, was the
first one created in the early
70s by Frank Blythe, and it is
the Native American voice in
public television. We are close,
close, uh, collaborators with
Vision Maker Media. I was on
their board for 6 years. I was
secretary.
for my last two years, and we
continue I continue as an
advisor to the board of Vision
Maker Media, which is a native
run board. I was one of two
non-native members on that board
during my tenure, but we worked
with them again, because it's
the way of of tribes and
pueblos, indigenous peoples to
get their voice heard in public
media. They're granting um uh
institution.
They put out grants. One of the
grants they put out is to um pay
for um the salaries and the
living expenses of interns.
So we've had a series of Native
American interns working at our
station, working with our
producers, creating content that
then goes out to our communities
and division Maker Media and is
used nationally. And that has
been a really great success on
our part.
Um, PBS Learning Media is a free
online educational uh set of
educational assets. It was part
of what I'm, I'm talking about
when we were sending internet
content to homes using our
broadcast signal. Some of that
content was built through PBS
Learning Media. It is the
world's largest database of
online learning content. It is
free to every student and
teacher, and that comes through
PBS and that comes through us.
We are a conduit to get content
into PBS learning media.
into that database and we are
users of that content. We work
with um um school districts all
around the state to train
teachers on how best to use it,
but effectively it started out
as recognizing that teachers
were taking public television
content and using it in the
classroom, and they didn't need
the whole hour of Nova. I had
this great story about a
chemistry, high school chemistry
teacher who built a 3-minute
video, um, part of a Nova on
penguins.
this 3 minutes on why their feet
don't freeze, and he did a
chemistry lesson on why
penguins' feet don't freeze. The
chemistry of the penguins.
The penguin's chemistry, and he
built it out into
An actual module, and then he
created lesson plans, he created
quizzes, he had talking point,
all of this stuff, all of that
got packaged together with just
that 3 minute clip that was used
and put into this database for
people anywhere in in the world
to use at any time.
So we have populated uh PBS
learning media with a whole
series of things. The latest
being, um, uh, a couple of
series that we did that was paid
for by Vision Maker Media and by
PBS. We got grants from both of
them called uh the first series
was in Digi Genius, the second
one was Sovereign Innovations.
Both of them were looking at the
amount of innovation that has
come out of native culture.
Everything from waterproof
clothing, makeup, you know, uh,
cooking style, everything, just
all the innovation that came out
so that people understood that
some of these things that we
look at today and go, oh, brand
new, flashy, cool. No, they've
been around for a long, long
time. Here's where they came
from, to try and tell that
story.
We made sure that we wind up
native producers who had these
stories to tell. We got those
produced, we got them online,
and then we got them into PBS
Learning Media, so this can all
be used in classrooms around the
state and around the country.
And then the last thing I wanted
to talk about is our public
safety efforts. I referred to
that a little bit earlier. Um,
Rural and tribal communities are
sometimes the ones that are
hardest to reach with the
information they need in the
most timely manner.
It doesn't matter if you're in a
city or if you're out, you know,
you know, in a rural community,
storms happen, fires happen,
earthquakes happen, you know,
bad things do happen, and part
of public television's mission
nationally and locally has been
to make sure that we are a
conduit for that information.
It's not always what you see on
television, oftentimes it's
information that is sent in the
background to what you're
watching, that is actually being
fed to the KOBs and the KOATs,
nationally, if information is
is.
nationally on a national
emergency, it's going through
public television station
signals.
And then fed to the local radio
and television stations through
our signal. So even if you're
not necessarily seeing it on our
air, you're seeing it because of
our airwaves.
The latest effort that we are
engaged in.
Is, uh, something that was
modeled on the California early
earthquake warning program.
Um,
they created this device.
It's, it's in people's homes.
It's got a battery backup.
Little antenna or it can be
hooked up to an outside antenna
because this building's a
perfect example. Um, the
television signal isn't reaching
here. If I stand near the
window, I can make it work, but
it's not reaching here. But
these can be hooked up to an
outside antenna so you don't
have to rely on this little one.
It receives our television
signal.
So just like when you're
watching television in an
emergency alert comes on
television, this thing is all,
you know, awake all the time. So
even if you're asleep, you know,
the TV is off, even if you're
doing something else, this thing
is listening and waiting for
that emergency content. And as
soon as it hits, it's received
by this antenna, it triggers
this device, loud lights flash,
a big alarm goes off, wakes
people up in the household and
then a short brief message, and
I'll just give you an example of
what it sounds like, it's not
the message, but just you
tell what the audio sounds like.
It then puts out a
So it's just
I won't belabor that, but it's,
it it it then starts repeating
this message over and over
again, whether it's an
earthquake or a wildfire or a
flood or whatever it may be.
One of the neat things about
this, what we've learned through
emergency alerting is that
Right now, the system is built,
so when we send out a message,
everybody in
Listening, viewing area sees it.
So all of northern and central
New Mexico get information. Most
of the people there don't need.
This is not affecting them.
That trains people to ignore
those messages.
This device is geolocated so it
only targets those people in the
immediate area that are going to
use that information.
It can be targeted down to the
neighborhood.
And that comes out of local
authorities. It can be managed
at the national level. It can be
national information, but local
authorities are the ones who
control the information that
flows through into this device.
So, they insert it into the
network, it then goes to our
television station. We don't do
anything with it other than pass
it through and make sure it
becomes part of our signal and
reaches, you know, the areas
that it needs to reach. And our
signal reaches a lot of areas
that no other signals reach. We
reach homes that have no cell
phone that.
have no internet.
We reach a lot of homes that
have no cell phone and a lot of
internet. So that is just kind
of the reality, as you well
know, of living in rural areas,
we reach places nobody else
does. That's one of the beauties
of this device. But now it's
only gonna be targeting those
homes, those communities that
really need to hear that
information. So we're no longer
training people to ignore these
messages. It can be managed at
the local level, so it can
include really kind of any
information you want, including,
and this is something that we've
worked with Navajo Nation on.
We're working right now with the
Department.
Homeland Security and with FEMA
to test these devices here in
New Mexico. We're working with
Navajo Nation, trying to get
them to roll these devices out
to some community members just
to try it out and see how it
works for them, to get that
important feedback that partners
give each other, and whether
this device is working for them
and what kind of information
they need. For instance, one of
the things we found out early on
is it does need to also include
the name. It can't just be in
English. There are 70 languages,
including Dana that this device
uses.
So, if it's programmed to speak
in, it'll give the messages in
Dana. If it needs to be in
Spanish, it'll be in Spanish.
English, English, Vietnamese,
it'll be there.
70 different languages.
Targeted the locations
completely controlled by local
authorities, including
information on missing murdered
indigenous women and relatives,
missing people, we've learned
very quickly that the sooner
that information gets out, the
more likely there would be a
good ending to the situation.
So, this device is cut down the
emergency time from the time
it's sent to the time it's
received from 30 seconds to as
much as 2 minutes. It's now down
to 2 seconds with this device.
So from the time that the local
authority
sends the message to the time
this thing is going off and
waking people up and tell them
there's an issue, 2 seconds.
It's a pretty amazing device. So
we're working with the Navajo
Nation and we're looking at
other tribal communities to try
and test these things out as
well.
Find out what what's needed in
in those communities. Find out
what else we are missing that
might be helpful, and that's
what we start to incorporate
into these devices.
I also just gave out a couple of
links, I think at the very end
to some of the content that
we've created. Again, we've
worked with a lot of different
groups for a long time. Uh, one
of the things I'm proudest of, I
remember uh back when the uh
Serra Grande fire kind of
devastated the top of Santa
Santa Clara Pueblo's beautiful
canyon, and they had those
devastating floods that really
wiped it out. Um, they applied
for a FEMA grant, and we were
part of
A, a, a group of people that
were helping in Santa Clara
Pueblo, figure out how to raise
the, the necessary matching
funds to apply for the FEMA
grant. Ultimately they were
successful.
And Santa Clara Pueblo, uh has a
a a document on restoring that
can that canyon that FEMA still
holds up to this day as the
example of how best to do this.
It was a pretty amazing effort
on their part.
We were part of that as well
because we got that story out.
We got that story out statewide
here in New Mexico, but we also
got that story out to the nat
the, the, the PBS Newshour that
they covered that story as well.
So, that's one of the ways how
FEMA heard about it, and I heard
from the FEMA administrator that
he watched that program, and
that's something that just stuck
in his mind. So our ability to
get that message out, not just
statewide, but nationally, is
really vital to every rural
community's connection to the
rest of the world, you know,
we're
window on the world for it, but
we're also a window on the world
too.
So it does go both ways, as much
as television signals are seen
as a one-way thing. They're
really not. That information
goes both ways, and it's a way
of getting our stories and our
message out to the rest of the
world. And in New Mexico PBS
we're particularly proud of the
fact that we have those
connections nationally, and
we're able to make sure that our
communities are heard
everywhere.
So with that, I will stand for
questions.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate your presentation
today. Um, uh, Madam Chair, I
regularly go on and watch um.
First Nations experience on PBS.
And um Aliya Chavez, who has
been one of the news reporters.
I just saw her on KOAT, uh, the
other day, so I'm like I guess
she's transitioning or
transition, but I, I know it's
just, I listen in other words,
and a lot of the other um
programs that do come off uh
either before or after around
FNX, um, there's a series also
where the elders are being
interviewed for them to share
their stories.
Um, through what they remember,
um, and it's, it's very
Educational, to listen. So I
just want to say thank you, um,
but I, I, I, I watch and listen
and learn. Thank you. Antonio
Gonzalez is another one. She is
a regular. She's um um a regular
on Indian country today, which
is carried uh on FNX and uh
we're working with their, their
Produced out of the Phoenix
public television station, and
we're working with them to
Get the uh program in a more
timely manner, a little bit
faster so that we can put it on
at 5 o'clock in the afternoon on
a daily basis. Um, so that's
something we, we, we've been
working with Indian country
today specifically, um, and but
also with FNX to make sure that
that, that program has got legs
and is able to continue. But
Antonio Gonzalez is, is one of
my favorite setss who I remember
all the time.
Well, the kids, madam chair,
loved the music also.
Because there's music that comes
on at a certain point in time in
the evening and it's wrap based
and all the others just some
creativity.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Senator Pinto. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
presentation.
Um, I do watch it, but I, I
think I'm watching like Molly of
Denali and
and um uh educational too.
But thank you for doing that and
thank you for working with our,
our, our indigenous nations. Um,
so how can we support you?
Well
I will tell you, this is one of
the ways that, that, that uh
we're seeking support is really
just to help us get the word
out, um, with the Navajo Nation
government. Um,
That this is something worth
paying attention to. It's, it's
early days, Homeland Security
and FEMA are on board, but we're
having a little trouble getting
the Navajo Nation to um sign on
to this and say just
And just that will allow them to
test it. We just want them to
help us get these devices into
people's homes.
And Madam Chair members of the
committee, um, because we, well,
it's still that we all don't
have internet, but I know TV is
Um
I think after some of the
funding that's gone through,
some people got bigger TVs that
they should have probably.
Some of them are hanging right
here.
Look at how many
So that communication aspect,
because my understanding too
that AM radio is also in
jeopardy of being, you know,
taken out of uh the vehicles.
And that is another avenue which
are particular area is in
communication and this emergency
communication. It, it's
interesting how some entities
try to rely on one form of of
communication, but multiple
forms in emergency situations
are necessary, um, especially if
one goes down.
And even in that sense, because
um
There has been a trend of some
decrease.
Donations or public funding
coming in to some of our
entities that rely on it. Um, we
need to consider that too with
some of these.
Services that are essential, um.
For our communities. I mean, we
like to think um.
That we're gonna have the
Netflix and all these other uh
stations to to be there, but,
uh, PBS has been there since I
was a child, so I, I still
expect it to be there for um.
my nieces and nephews and their,
their children, um, because it
is
is in some sense, educational,
and like you said you're able to
use those snippets in your
classroom because they don't,
um, you won't get into the
litigation about it.
Well, and to that point, thank
you, Senator Pinto, Madam Chair,
um, I, I did want to point out
for example that this
is in your handout and what this
is pointing out, this, this
Kind of light orangey yellow
area. That's actually Navajo
Nation TV. That's their 3
transmitters, um, and you can
see how they're fed off of our
gallop transmitter. They
basically pick up um the gallop
uh translator, and then they,
they repeat that signal. So
that's how that pathway happens.
But part of that, and because
they are carrying our signal,
we've been able to legitimately
work with Navajo Nation and work
with FEMA. They have a new
program out called the NGWS
grant, and it is
To help harden and build out
emergency alerting in, you know,
across the country, but in rural
and tribal areas particularly,
they were given, you know, um,
um, a higher priority to be
reached.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and we've been on
this for quite a while.
Is there any mandatory
legislation or anything out
there that says that there has
to be some form of communication
in these rural areas for
emergency alerts.
Um
But you
Do you know if there's anything
exists like that. There is no
law that says there has to be,
however, there is something
called the universal service
mandate, which
The FCC and the corporation for
Public Broadcasting, both.
Put a lot of, of weight on. So
when the FCC is granting
licenses.
Um
One of the things they look at
is, is this an area that is not
being served, and they will give
it a priority over other uses.
The corporation for Public
Broadcasting, same thing, they
will give priority to stations
that are serving communities
that are not being served any
other way.
Um, to make sure that they get
service and that those stations
get funded, make sure that they
can continue that service.
That's the reason the
corporation for Public
Broadcasting exists, is to fund
these things in the universal
service mandate is a way of
doing that, but it is not
mandatory, even though the word
mandate is in there. The mandate
is on us, not on anybody else.
It's on us to find communities
that aren't being served and to
serve them whether there's a
return on investment or not.
That's the trade-off that public
television gets over commercial
television, commercial
television exists to sell
things.
Right? And if they can't sell
enough cars or canned goods or
whatever it may be, they're not
going to serve that area, and
I'm not criticizing that, that's
just the business model.
Because of that and recognizing
that the FCC carved out a place
for public television saying,
We're gonna protect you guys,
we're gonna protect your
channels, um, but to do that,
you gotta go find these people.
So there's a reason why we're in
Harding County where there are
800 people
But they all get public
television.
I, I don't know if I have any
members. I've never looked to
find out. It doesn't matter.
It's not the point. The point is
there are people there who need
to have access to it, and the
access has got to be there,
whether they use it or not,
because there will come a time
where they may need to, whether
it's through emergencies or
education or whatever, were to
be there in case they need us.
And that's the core of the
universal service mandate. So
that's really the only thing I
know of that is really driving
that kind of connectivity.
I would love it if there was
legislation that said we had to
do that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, because even though
we have internet, you still have
an antenna.
Um, to get
The other kind of TV in case the
Internet gets shut off.
Um
It, it
For some reason, some
It's, it's very
Um, weighs on you if you're, you
don't have a TV in your area,
but uh like I said, it's been
there since I've been there,
something that you didn't have
to um
You had your antenna and your
TV, no subscription that's
monthly, um,
Well, I live right in to Hatchie
so you can see the tower right
there's um
accessible. We couldn't see the
tower in that line of sight, um.
You knew, you knew if you
weren't going to be able to get
a signal.
Thank you, Senator, and one of
the other things we're, I'm
sorry, with this, do we know if
the nation's not really um
paying attention cause they
don't have the funding to invest
in it or there's no investment
required. There's no money
required on the part of the
Navajo Nation. This is just,
just, it's really, I think it's
Partly it's, it's a little
early. We're still getting the
word out. I'm looking for help
and helping me get the word out.
Part of it is I'll be frank.
I'm sorry, part, part of it may
be, uh, and to be perfectly
frank, you know, the turmoil
that has been going on at the
top levels in the Navajo Nation
now.
Um, part of it is, and, and this
is true everywhere. I'm sad to
say, but there's a lot of
distrust in the public safety
community on different ways of
sending this. And this is a
different way, and it's one more
thing they're gonna have to
figure out and learn, and I get
that. It's one of the problems
we had when I was talking about
sending content, you know,
internet content over our
airwaves without internet in the
home. It's called data casting.
It was one more thing teachers
had to learn at a time where
they were struggling.
Really struggling during COVID.
So that was one of the reasons
it didn't fully succeed, and
it's one of the reasons it's not
fully succeeding with public
safety yet. We did not put
enough emphasis on communication
and educating, we put too much
emphasis on the technology, the
technology works great. Now
we're figuring out how we've got
to communicate this better. One
of the reasons I'm here today is
so that leadership knows about
this, and any opportunities that
you can help me get um to, to
get this
word out. That's what we're
seeking cause we need to let
people know this exists.
That there is not a cost to at
this point, there's not a cost,
this is being borne by DHS and
FEMA.
Right? Um, so it's not gonna
cost anybody, it's not gonna
cost any government outside of
that, just to get these out
there so that people can try
them out and provide the
feedback that we need to make
this a robust system that works
for everybody.
And that
So that particular piece of
equipment.
You can translate to the
languages, but you're still able
to see images on the TV or will
it just be that kind of they're
totally independent.
OK they're, they're totally
interdependence, so you'll still
watch everything you want to see
on the TV. It doesn't affect
that at all. It's just the data
that this gets is incorporated
in that signal, but you don't
see it.
Just like you don't see closed
captioning unless you turn it
on. That information is still
there.
This emergency alerting
information is still there, if
your TV is not looking for it,
this device is.
In Madam Chair, when you talk
about development, um, because
there are limitations to the
Amber alert.
I mean, you, you can read it and
but to actually see the child
you're looking for the
Perpetrators, it does take
television, but if you don't
have a subscription or you don't
have the income to subscribe,
then you're stuck a deal with
the the the, I believe this is
probably the simplest form of.
Television and cost there is,
but Madam Chair, Senator Pinto,
this, this won't show you
images, but it'll.
Alert you to go to the TV and
look.
It'll it'll it'll help you find
the information. It's, it's,
it's primary purpose is to make
you aware there's an issue,
there's a situation.
Once you're aware, you know to
turn the TV on, you know, to
turn the radio on, or, you know,
to get in your car and get the
heck out, whatever it may be.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, I've been taking
a look at this, uh,
presentation, and I, I have a
clarifying question, please. Um,
I noticed that this was
directed, is this only directed
at the Navajo Nation, is this
like a project that you want to
get completed, um, Madam Chair,
my question actually would be,
is this already available to the
communities, tribal communities
that are um in the rest.
of the state, uh pueblo's, uh,
nation, the Apache nations and
so on.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lill, no, it is not yet. That's
the reason we're um um targeting
the Navajo Nation at this time
is just because
We have uh a long term
relationship with them, DHS and
FEMA saw that and said,
Let's try them. There's already
they recognize that.
They're not necessarily the most
trusted sources in the world.
And so they're looking to local
sources who have long standing
relationships to help get that
message out. This is designed
for tribal and rural communities
everywhere.
This test is to make sure that
it works for that.
And when it does, then to deploy
it to everybody. So uh just one
more follow-up question then.
This is a this isn't a test mode
right now. It is not being
deployed yet.
Madam Chair Representative
Little, yes, it is in a test
mode right now. That said, I
will say this device is
In use in California, as part of
the early, the, the earthquake
early warning system.
So it is actually in homes being
used for that. Currently,
California is also working with
the same folks.
To figure out how to expand that
from just earthquakes, cause
right now it's in fact, if I had
power and I turned this on, you
would hear, there are no
earthquake warnings. Yeah.
Um, because right now it's only
being used for earthquakes. So
California is looking at
expanding this to other
emergency alerting.
Mexico is looking to do the same
thing.
We do have earthquakes, I
understand, although I've never
experienced one here, but uh we
do have plenty of other
emergencies that this would be
valuable for. So the
It has been proven to work.
But it's only been, you know, in
a limited capacity, and it
hasn't been used the way that we
would use it here in New Mexico.
It hasn't been used with the
kind of technology we use here
in New Mexico.
Um, California, um, television
systems are very honestly, not
anywhere near as robust, believe
it or not.
We do a much better job of
covering a large swaths.
Of rural communities than
California does. California is
much more urban centric, and a
lot of the rural communities in
California.
Frankly, don't have the
television access we do here in
New Mexico.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's, that's all my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
I don't see any further
questions, comments. Thank you
for your presentation.
I did grow up a little bit
watching.
Um, PBS Sesame Street.
Remember the preteen show Zoom.
Zoom.
And the electric company, those
were my favorite. I've been not
to use that as my background on
Zoom calls.
So,
um.
You know, we just missed a
council delegates Steven Arviso.
He was here earlier.
Uh, we will, uh, be glad to um.
share your information.
And uh
I will personally uh tune in
FNX.
Now that I know about it and um
The, the important purpose of
NMPBS, so thank you for
presenting. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee
members. I appreciate your
patience and your time. Thank
you. Thank you for your
patience.
All righty.
Committee members, let's move on
to agenda item number 11.
Adult education and literacy
enrollment and proposals and
their link to children's
education outcomes, higher
education department.
Please introduce yourselves and
uh.
Uh
Your role and you may begin your
presentation.
Hello, Madam Chair, thank you.
My name is uh uh Amber Gallop. I
am the director of adult
education at the Higher
Education department.
Um, and my name is Kayakus. I'm
a New Mexico high school
equivalency administrator and
also data administrator for.
Ah
Um, we, we had a presentation. I
wondered if that was able to be
shown.
Got it.
Wonderful. That sounds great.
All right. Well, uh, Madam
Chair, we're here today because
we would like to tell the
committee a little bit more
about adult education and uh to
ask for your support for 3
legislative proposals that we
have to grow our system. Uh, so
just briefly in a nutshell,
adult education, uh, you may not
realize actually overseas or
some, some don't realize that we
in the adult education division
actually oversee 3 different
systems in the
Um, the state. One is the adult
education system. Uh, the other
is the adult literacy system and
the other is the um high school
equivalency system. So there's
the three separate systems that
just briefly about each one,
adult education is the one that
people are often most familiar
with, um, people prepare for um
their high school equivalency we
call it. Sometimes we hear you
say HSE, but um it's, uh, there
are various pathways to that.
People often talk about it as
the GED, but there's the GED,
right, the
set is another test you can take
in order to access your high
school equivalency, and we
actually have a competency-based
pathway as well called the NEDP.
But in addition to high school
equivalency, we also uh serve um
those at more of the adult
literacy level, uh, we serve,
um, people who speak English as
a second language, providing
English language proficiencies,
um, instruction, and we prepare
people for the workforce. In
fact, the whole purpose of that
system is actually to prepare
people for the workforce.
that is a federally funded and
state-funded system. And we have
26 programs around the state.
separately, there is a uh
completely separate adult
literacy system funded
exclusively by the state, and
this is called uh the adult
literacy system and this system
has 18 programs, and it serves
people who are at the lowest
levels of literacy, uh, in the,
in the state. Uh, these classes
are more, these are, these
services are provided more
like one on one, with tutors and
um
Uh, it, we often serve, uh, a
lot of rural locations as well
as urban areas with these
programs. Um, and then third,
the high school equivalency
system, uh, we separate from the
adult education system because
actually about half of the
people in New Mexico who
achieved their high school
equivalency, do so completely
outside of the adult education
system. So, uh, we provide those
services separately, um, and,
uh, they serve the people in our
adult education, sometimes adult
literacy system.
But also again, about half of
the New Mexicans who achieved
their high school equivalency
each year, do so through other
means, either on their own
through other programs or or or
or in other ways. So that is the
system and we're here today
because uh we want to ask you,
um, we have 3 asks we're gonna
mention, uh, a little bit later
here. But we want to tell you a
little bit about um how we've
been changing, how we've been
serving, uh Native American
students and Doctor Back is here
can tell us a little bit about
that data.
Thank you so much, Amber. Um, so
we would like to begin by first
telling you about how many
people were actually enroll and
serve in all of those three
different systems, because it's
all about how many students we
can actually serve, um, before
we can even talk about the
outcomes. So first, let's look
at our adult education system.
In fiscal year 24, we served
over 12,000 people in our adult
education programs. If you look
at the bar graph, you can
actually see that.
The trend has been really
changing in our enrollment. So
first you can see a huge drop
during a pandemic. So you can
see that real dip in fiscal year
21.
Then you can see that the
enrollment started increasing,
but one very interesting thing
is that the enrollment is
actually increasing very slowly,
and if you compare the bar on
the left for fiscal year 20 and
the bar on the right for fiscal
year 24, you can see that
unfortunately, even though we're
seeing the increase of
enrollment, we're still not
quite at the pre-pandemic
levels. So in fiscal year 24
overall, we increased our
enrollment by about 6% compared
to fiscal year.
23
Now, as Amber said, we have 26
adult education programs in the
state and every single program
actually serves Native American
students, but we have 5
programs, DNA College, the one
over at NMSU grants, uh, the
program at CP uh program at San
Juan College and the program at
UNM Gallup. They serve
predominantly Native American
students. So I also want to
share um the details of
enrollment specifically.
for Native American students
with you for adult education
system. So on the bar graph on
the bottom, um, you're seeing
that our enrollment for Native
American students has also been
increasing in fiscal year 204,
we served 1,151 Native American
students in the state.
You can see that overall the
trend for enrollment is pretty
much the same, um, as what
you're seeing for all adult
education students, but one
thing I find um very, very
encouraging is that in fiscal
year 24, we already reached and
surpassed our pre-pandemic
levels of enrollment. So you can
see that our Native American
student enrollment is actually
increasing faster than the
overall enrollment.
So now, uh, let's talk a little
bit about the outcomes, um,
adult education uh system
provides excellent services to
our students. And I think a
proof of it is in our outcomes.
Um, in adult education system,
we have different federally
required outcomes, but one main
outcome that we always report is
called measurable skill gains,
which is all about the
educational gains in reading,
writing in the language that all
of
the students are gaining as the
participate in our programs.
So if you look at our adult
education academic outcomes. You
can see that they've been
gradually increasing starting
from fiscal year 20 to fiscal
year 24, but this increased
really accelerated in fiscal
year 23, and fiscal year 24. So
we finished fiscal year 24 with
this outcome being 51%. Here's
what this means. It means that
more than half of the adult
education students actually had
an outcome when they were
Done with our program. We feel
that this is quite a victory and
really an indication of success
of our programs. You can see
that we started from about 30%
MSGs in fiscal year 20 now we
increased it to 51%. Now,
another very interesting thing
is on the same graph, you can
actually see the outcomes for
our Native American students,
and the first thing that I see
when I look at this graph, is
that the outcomes for our Native
American students are always
above.
The outcomes for all of our
students, um, you can see
they're very, very consistently
in the last 5 years, the
outcomes for native students
were higher.
Now, last fiscal year our native
students finished the year with
incredible outcomes of 62%. This
is something that we've never
had in the state. And I Native
American students, I certainly,
um,
Exemplify the success of our
adult education system.
Now, let's switch gears a little
bit and now let's talk about the
enrollment in our second um
system that Amber was talking
about. Let's talk a little bit
about literacy. Notice how full
literacy I'm only showing you
data for the last two fiscal
years. The reason for this is
because this is our relatively
new system. We actually did not
um we don't have the data for a
previous fiscal
years, and we will not really
administering those programs.
This is why you're only seeing
the last two fiscal years on
this graph.
The last fiscal year we served
1,421 students and um you can
probably also notice that our
involvement only increased very
slightly. It only increased by
about 2%. The biggest reason for
this is a lack of funding for
our small rural literacy
programs in the state.
Now our 3rd system is um the
system of uh students who take
high school equivalency exams
and strictly speaking, they're
really not even students,
because about half of them do
not even participate in any of
the programs, so let's look at
the number of the test takers
who took high school equivalency
exams. So last year, 50,650
people took high school
equivalency exams in New Mexico.
I was very encouraged by this
15% increase.
into fiscal year 2023. Um,
overall, you can also see an
increase in the number of people
that are taking the exams. So I
hope that I convinced you that
um all of our adult education
systems have seen an increase in
enrollment, except maybe our
literacy programs, um, in the
last program here, um, also the
outcomes in our adult education
programs have been increasing as
well.
But now there is one important
question. So, this is who we're
serving and how many people were
serving, but the question is,
well, what is the need in the
state. We all know that there is
a huge need for uh literacy um
in adults. But the question is
how much of that need will
actually serving. So let's talk
about it next. So let's look at
the data landscape for all those
3 different educational systems,
and let's look at what they
need is and how much of that
need we're serving. So let's
begin with high school
equivalency achievement.
In New Mexico, 13% of New Mexico
population doesn't have high
school diplomas or high school
equivalency.
New Mexico is ranked number 47
nationally in the number of
people with high school diplomas
and or um high school
equivalency.
Now, if we look at uh the
English proficiency, 9.7% of New
Mexico's have limited English
proficiency.
Hold on one moment. Can you um
when you start talking, refers
to what slider, you're gonna hit
up. Um, so, uh,
on this page, so high school
equivalency and then the English
proficiency. I know it's so hard
when we don't have the
really, really hard. So, so for
English proficiency, so that's
the slide on, um, the uh, on the
upper right. Uh, so in New
Mexico, 9.
7% of our population has limited
English proficiency, and this
number is even worse for some
counties. The percentage of the
people with limited English
proficiency really varies by
counties, and we have some
counties where half of the
population has limited English
proficiency. New Mexico is
ranked number 41 overall in the
nation in um English
proficiency. Now, if we look at
the adult literacy, the
situation is even worse.
9% of adults in New Mexico have
very limited reading proficiency
and uh New Mexico is ranked
number 50.
In adult literacy nationwide.
So now, if we look at this very
challenging and very troubling
statistic. What actually even
increases the importance of
looking at adult literacy is the
fact that adult literacy is
actually connected with
children's literacy. So from a
lot of the national research
that was done. It is well known
that children literacy is
connected to many socioeconomic
factors and also to the levels
of adult.
Um, education and adult literacy
nationally, but what we've
decided to do, we've decided to
look at the picture from the
point of view of New Mexico.
Because, you know, every single
state is different. So we've
decided to do, we've decided to
look at the relationship between
the children literacy, chill and
specifically with the children
reading proficiency and we've
decided to see its relationship
to factors like curity level and
income level of
uh people in the, in that
particular county. Also, we
looked at the educational level
of adults, things like the
percentage of the adults that
have college level education,
adults that have low literacy
levels, the adults that have a
high school equivalency. And
what we've discovered is that
out of all of those factors,
children literacy is correlated
the most, which means has the
biggest association specifically
with the adult
literary super efficiency. So
this tells us that when we look
at the adult literacy levels. It
tells us not just about um the
kinds of jobs and the kind of
peace that our adults can have
in the state, not just if our
adults can go to college, but
also it tells us about the
future. It tells us about the
education of our kids as well.
So as you can see that New
Mexico really has a great, great
need for adult education
services, and it has a great
need in all of the three
different systems that we're
serving and adult education in
high school equivalency and the
literacy. It plays the crucial
role, not just in the well-being
of our adults, but also in
educational level of children.
Now, the question is, we have a
need.
Everybody knows this, and we
have challenges. But what are
the solutions?
So I'm hoping that Amber will
tell us a little bit more about
the what are the solutions that
we're proposing. Thanks, Katia.
So, uh, Madam Chair, we've been
working for the last 3 years,
uh, like we just described to
raise our enrollment, to improve
our outcomes, and to be able to
serve adults better in the
state, which in turn um helps us
uh and uh oh, am I going too
loud? Sorry.
Oh, which in turn helps us, OK,
sorry.
I thought this was going too
loud. Um, this was causing me to
be too loud. Um, and also to,
uh, uh, to be able to better
serve the children in New Mexico
as well. So with that, uh, we
have laid the groundwork now for
3 legislative proposals that we
want to um bring to you today.
Uh, one for each of our systems.
Uh, the first is, uh, a $3
million increase, um, preferably
from general fund that we're
requesting for adult education.
Uh, and we'd like to do, uh, two
things with this. Number one, we
would like to, uh, hire more
teachers in adult education.
Right now, we're in a situation
where our enrollment is raising,
as we mentioned, but our number
of teachers uh is lowering.
It's, there's an attrition
problem with teachers because
what you may not realize is that
our adult education programs
don't get the regular quality of
life increases that you might
get at the universities or
colleges or that you get in the
K through 12 systems. We're
grant funded and the
plants have remained static. So
even as others have moved up, we
have stayed the same and that
has created a problem, uh, for,
uh, retention of our teachers.
So we need to hire more teachers
and uh for the same reason, we
need to pay our teachers better
to retain them. Only in this way
are we going to be able to serve
a greater percentage of this
need, which has cut uh
established is great in New
Mexico. Uh, so we think we've
done the, um, we've done the
research, uh, we've done the
analysis and we know that
$3 million increase will help
us, uh, continue the trajectory
that we're on, uh, for, uh, many
years to come.
So that is the $3 million
increase for adult education. In
the adult literacy system, our
second system, we're asking for
a 1.25 million increase for a
total of 2 million. Uh, what,
uh, many don't realize is this
the entire system, um, of 18
adult uh adult literacy programs
are served by just $750,000. So
some of these little tiny pro
the rural programs uh can serve
just a handful of students they
can't pay any staff, they're
Dependent upon volunteers and
they don't have access to
professional training. We think
that this modest request, uh, on
a recurring basis will help us
number one,
fund more adult literacy
programs so that we can serve
more people in the state. Number
2, better fund the ones that we
have so that we can actually
start serving more people there
and again serve a greater
percentage of the need, uh,
remember that, um, we're 50th in
adult literacy uh in this in the
United States. So
um, a greater investment is
necessary. And then third, um,
We are really hoping that um
this uh infusion of funding
would help us better give access
to folks in these these staff
and these adult um English,
adult literacy programs give
them access to professional
development, to training,
helping um connect them to the
governor's, um, uh, literacy
initiative, uh, giving them more
training and structured literacy
in the science of reading.
And then thirdly, our request
for the high school equivalency
system.
So this is something that again,
um I found that sometimes
legislators may not be aware of
the entire high school
equivalency system in New Mexico
has no
Uh, recurring appropriation
attached to it. Uh, we
occasionally, uh, you know,
Katya, uh, half of her position
is the state high school
equivalency administrator. She
is the only person in the state,
uh, with oversight over this,
and she works in my division,
um, and, uh, and that's only
half of her job. Uh, so, um, we
get occasionally, um,
non-recurring appropriations
that we use simply to um
purchase of vouchers, um for
students.
so that they can um pay for
their tests. Uh, a, a single
high school equivalency test,
the entire battery could run
upwards of $145. Uh, we have
very few testing centers in the
in the state which can cause
problems as well with access and
costs of transportation. So our
1.25 million requests. Again, it
is modest, but what we'd like to
do is, um, fund our programs
better fund new programs, uh,
raise awareness in the state
that these things exist.
And crucially to provide free
testing uh for all New Mexicans
in need. As you recall, we're
number 47th in the nation, uh,
for folks with high school
diploma, high school
equivalency, and this, uh,
Like as other states have done
who have um better track records
in this particular area, we
strongly believe that providing
these, um, these tests for free,
we'll go a long way towards
helping people access those and
Kat you in a moment we'll tell
you some more things that we're
doing to um help people do that.
Uh, one exciting thing we're
also hoping to do is to
establish new testing centers
around the state, including
mobile testing centers and we've
been, we've started our first
mobile testing center already,
um, and we're excited about
trying to get some more, but
that's all dependent upon
um, a small amount of funding
that we're able to ask for
Literacy is going to be part of
this initiative and we think
this also will go a long way
towards ensuring professional
development and access for our
tutors and teachers and moving
adult literacy forward in New
Mexico. So we actually think um
that even though there are some
significant challenges that
we've outlined. We think there
is a very bright future and
we're very excited uh about
adult education, adult literacy
in New Mexico going forward. Um,
for one, you know, just to give
you a couple of highlights of
things that we've been able to
do a few
highlights of things we've been
able to do, uh, you know, a
couple of years ago we had our
competition for adult literacy
programs. We went from 8
programs around the state to 18,
right? So even though we had no
additional funding, we're still
with the 750,000. We expanded
our services and we're doing
what we can, uh, to move forward
and like I said, build that
infrastructure that's waiting
for the infusion of support. Uh,
we also, um, use some funding
that we received in other ways
to um provide access for to
professional development for our
teachers.
tutors, so giving them that
professional knowledge that will
support them going forward. Um,
That's a buzzword, the
legislature um was able to, um,
uh, provide some pilot funding
for us and some TAA funding for
in many places while they're
earning their high school
equivalency, they may
types that we're offering by
128%. Uh, we have many new, um,
uh, IET programs, um, we're
getting to the point where, um,
up to 20 of our 26 adult
education programs are, are
providing these types of
programs. So this is a real
bright light in the state and
it's helping us, um, really, you
know, um, serve the economy,
serve employers and get people
into jobs faster, uh, into
families sustaining careers
faster.
Um,
in addition, as Kaa mentioned,
we have been improving our
performance, uh, significantly.
Um, we are, um, also improving
our outcome so much that um 3.5
years ago when I began this
position, we were 50th in the
nation, um, in, uh, outcomes for
adult education compared to
other states in adult education.
Now, this is not the level of
illiteracy, it's the outcomes in
the adult education system. Now,
this year, uh, we are, we are
have the exact ranking now, but
we appear to be around 20th. So
we went from the 4th quartile,
the very bottom of the 4th
quartile to the top of the 2nd.
So, uh, we're moving fast and um
we're excited about what's
ahead. And then finally, like I
mentioned, we have some new
testing centers, including some
mobile testing centers. And in
fact, the high school
equivalency system has seen some
key improvements and the reason
we mentioned these is because
they're going to help um adult
learners access their and
achieve their high school
equivalency.
diploma much faster. Katcha,
could you tell me a little bit
about this? Oh, thank you so
much, Amber. I'll be happy to,
uh, we've been working on trying
to remove all of the different
obstacles that our test takers
are facing in attaining a high
school equivalency in the state
of New Mexico. Uh, first of all,
we now have a total transcript
that allows students to combine
high set exams with GED exams.
So the students can start with
GED if they're not successful in
the subject or two, they can
Diploma center and we try to
contact all of the test takers
that have only one exam left. So
what we try to do is we try to
encourage them and say, look,
you're so close, we know it's a
marathon, but you almost there,
and we tried to reach out and
tell them, look, you're not
alone, we're here to help you.
Uh, we also changed, um, some of
the um rules and we've been
working with the publishers. So
changing rules for high school
equivalency exams is very, very
challenging because it's not
just the state.
decision, but also the decision
of the publisher, but working in
a very close collaboration with
both of our publishers, Pearce
and View, that's the publisher
of the GED exam and PSI, the
publisher of the high set exam,
we were able to achieve short of
cooling off times, but that
means is that if the student is
going to fail a certain number
of exams, they have to wait and
usually they have to wait for 6
months to a year up until they
can actually restart taking
exams. We now decrease that
cooling off period, so
our students actually can start
retaking exams faster. We also
changed some of the term limits
on the scores. So if before all
of the scores from 3 years and
older will not really counted
So, uh, we've been really
working very, very hard in
supporting all of our test
takers, and we think that this
combined with the possibility of
free exams and more testing
centers will really help us to
increase high school equivalency
attainment in the state.
So Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, we have, um, we, we wanna
thank you for your time and
attention today, uh, for the
invitation to come. Uh, we'd
like to ask you for your support
and we're curious how, uh, what
kind of questions that you have
about adult education, adult
literacy, and high school
equivalency services and, um,
you know, what other needs you
have that we might be able to um
to address.
Thank you committee members.
Vice chair Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
the presentation and the work
you do, um, not that easy. So.
750,000.
Yes, ma'am. And I'm like, even
when you divide that to a staff
of 70, 75,000 salary, that's
only 10 staff, so that I'm most
people are volunteers and they
make it as little, some of our
programs get as little as 140 to
$15,000 from us and they um they
basically work on a volunteer
basis and use that to purchase
um materials for students and a
few other things and then it is
less than $500 per student, and
a lot of our students in
literary to stay for the whole
year. It's not like with high.
equivalency when they came, they
studied in 3 months to John.
They actually come and they
study for the whole year and for
this whole year, $500 per
student. Yes.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
That particular diploma for many
career technical, even some of
the workforce entry level is
like
The door opening is the
requirement, yes, in fact, um,
even for a registered
apprenticeship program, um,
which we're, we're so excited
about it in the state. You do
need a high school diploma or
equivalency to be able to access
entry into that.
So it's crucial um for our
adults to move forward and
access the opportunities
scholarship, for example, that,
um, you know, that so many are
accessing now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and I
I mean, not too soon, but I, I
think that anybody running a
business of any kind would
note for
Need a um tribes, nations or
pueblos really even considered
adult education when we talk
even about having the.
Um, cause I'm sure some of them
maybe have dropped out of high
school, um, with along the lines
of the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
So when we talk about, when
you're talking about program
money, I think there should be
some flowing to you from the
Indian education fund.
I mean, because you are serving
the Native American population.
So these three proposals you
have, I think we need to do a
little bit deeper diving into it
to kind of get some numbers and
um in the budget of where we
could um put this, um, but I
If the, I'm in support of it.
Um, I think for you, um, there
is, there are a bit of a
conundrum in this right now
because we don't physically have
um to take emotion to do a
letter of support, but tomorrow,
um,
But then I think also the the
other members would really like
to have a little bit more detail
on.
How to, um, I don't know if we
can actually, we can probably
just do a general letter of
support.
Um, for your
For these proposals.
And I would I would bump it to
10 million. I don't know how you
feel about that or if there's uh
many uh discussion about um
supporting your three proposals
here from any of the members
that are present.
Um,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair.
Senator
Thank you very much and thank
you Senator, uh, co-chair of
Pinto for that. Uh, I think it
is a good idea. I just found um
that it is section 7, it
requested under section 7 of
House Bill 2 and um that's where
it would be more defined and
easy to to find and track and
follow for your approvals. Thank
you. And, and I appreciate what
you said, uh, co-chair Pinto. I
think that, you know, adult
basic education, um, I've seen
it for many.
years now, and it's always been
underfunded. It's always been
just there as the uh on the side
they're kind of moved aside from
the regular budget or something
that is not important. Well, you
know what, it is quite
important, as we all know,
preaching to the choir here, um,
and we need to show
People that we are committed,
the, the prospective graduates
that take the time with their
families and so on to go and and
try and get a diploma. We need
to show them that we have the
resources for them. We have the
support system, and it's a
comprehensive support system and
that we're there to help them.
So, um, and there are no, it's
not less than high school.
Um, diploma, uh, it is
equivalent, that's why it's
called equivalent and uh so on,
so I, I think we need to put
more funding into it ensure
incessant commitment and
continue to have people graduate
more and more. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I think even that
addressing the finance
committee, I think we also
probably need to address the NMR
New Mexico.
PED of where, because I think
that's the only part of money
that we have is the Indian trust
fund.
For education.
I don't know if we have anything
in higher ed as far as um
Um
Monies to draw from.
It's my
That's why I think we need a
little bit deeper diving. I
don't know if for other members
have any.
And put on that, but I maybe I'd
like to really motion for letter
of general support, but also I
don't know if we really need to.
Push our other departments to
find some money for you.
Thank you, uh, vice chair. Thank
you for your presentation in
looking at your proposals. I
don't know enough about how to
make it happen, but, uh, for
example, adult literacy.
I'd like to see
More
centers in northwest New Mexico.
Uh, gallop as a, a, a good
library. How do we improve that
and make it stronger for the
Navajo Nation.
In that area, well, not just the
Navajo Nation, but in that area
we have.
Um, ue of Zuni, you know, we
have other, um, all walks of
life.
Uh, we have the I-40 corridor
and then we, we have that 491
that goes north.
So, and then we also have um
And on the same note, looking at
your adult education. I see you
have Gallup UNM, but we also
have Crown Point.
our
university NTU and then we have
many campuses throughout
Northwest New Mexico, Dana
College could house and host and
assist.
I just would like to see more of
those uh types of numbers from
those communities.
And then
I am.
I was curious about uh.
For example, in McKinley County.
Our, our lack of teachers and
tutors.
You know, we're having a hard
time um recruiting teachers,
retaining teachers, growing our
own teachers, encouraging our
young people to
Um, attain those degrees and
careers. How does that play into
your proposal here. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, there are a couple of um
things to address there. I think
that, um, uh, Doctor Bacchus and
I can do that together. I think,
um, in terms of funding, uh,
well, in terms of serving more
people in Northwest New Mexico.
One thing that I would love it
if the um if you all would be
aware of is that uh we have um
we fund our programs through
competitions and uh the adult
education competition is once
every 4 years, and that is
Beginning soon.
And so this is an opportunity
for NTU and other organizations
to apply uh for the funding that
we have available and then, you
know, as new funds become
available, we're able to take,
put them out in the forms of of
grant of grants, right, to those
programs. Uh, you know, another
way to serve more people in
those areas is simply what we're
finding is to simply have more
funding to be able to do that,
uh, we're pretty much at
capacity right now with the
teachers that were able to hire,
um, in the number of
that were able to serve. In
fact, uh, in adult education,
it's, it's, it's helpful to have
a low student to teacher ratio.
Well, it is all over education,
but especially in adult
education, people have different
needs, um, different
backgrounds, and they need
specialized attention. But as
our numbers grow inside the um
the pro in the inside the
classrooms if we have just a
limited number of teachers and
were unable to hire more, um,
the quality of service can drop
or people aren't able to get as
much out of the classes. So one
of the best ways that we can
can do that is just as we're
just as we're suggesting, we
need to uh infuse the system uh
with enough funding to hire new
teachers and to retain the ones
that we have, uh, and I wonder
if you could speak to, um, her
second part of her question. Um,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this is such a great,
great point and such an
important question. And I can
tell you we think about this uh
very, very frequently as well.
And in the last year, we
actually made some efforts in
trying to actually not just
simply increase and rule.
but actually serve some of the
underserved counties in in New
Mexico. So what we found that
really works is to expand the
distance learning education and
we're already doing this in, in
adult education. If you look at
the number of counties that I
served in adult education, you
can see that it's a lot bigger
than the number of counties that
let's say we serve in our
literacy. So our plan is if we
can have additional funding
because this will
Transition into distance
learning is not as simple as,
say, let's do this online. We
need to make sure that our
volunteer tutors are trained,
how would you be able to provide
those kind of one on one
tutoring services over the
computer, because many of the
volunteer tutors that we have to
really have that much of the
educational background. So we
need to train them how to do it,
though, so through additional
funding, we're hoping to train
the tutors to provide more of
the distance learning. So we
can actually cover some of those
counties, um, for example, we
can cover some of the uh areas
close to Gallup, close to Grant,
you can see that not very many
students were served from those
communities um on our literacy
side. So we're hoping to expand,
um, while we're still waiting
for newer programs that maybe
will join us in the next
competition, but we can't wait,
right? We can't wait for 3 or 4
years because we have people, we
have the need that's waiting for
us. So we're going to
address the need through
distance learning, and then we
will keep advertising and
hopefully we will have more new
programs to come.
Thank you, thank you very much,
Senator Pinto. So Madam Chair,
after some advisement, um,
because we don't have the, the
number here that a proposal for
the members that are here will
be um for tomorrow, to see if we
can have um motion to have a
letter to the LFC drafted for a
request for 10 million, um, and
we'll let them find it.
Just to let the members know and
let you know.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we really appreciate
this and I appreciate all the
recommendations you've given as
well.
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
In some of our districts were in
very close proximity.
Like in my district we're very
close to Arizona.
So if my
Eva was wont services. They go
to the border towns. They might
live 1 mile inside the Arizona
border, but they go to
Farmington or Gallop for
services. The services that you
provide in adult education with.
Um, they're not my constituents,
so with my family members within
the state be eligible for the
services you provide.
Yes, um, um, Madam Chair and the
members of the committee, I'm so
glad that you brought this point
because we were actually going
to talk about this. So we feel
that a lot of the families from
the Navajo Nation, the ones that
live just across the border, but
belong to, let's say the
Arizona, um, uh, constituency,
what actually happens is that
they would like to be served by
us because the family members
are also served in New Mexico.
So what we do is we actually
serve all of the people who
apply to us.
As long as they live within the
50 miles from the border. So we
actually can still serve people
even though they're coming from
Arizona, in some cases, we can
even make an exception if we
know that the people have
relatives here on the Navajo
Nation. They live in New Mexico.
So we would love to serve more
people and we certainly would
love to serve those families.
Hey, madam chair. Thank you for
that because, um,
My
My family or relatives that live
within the Arizona. Uh, this, if
they want services, they have to
go to Windrock, for example,
which is 100 miles from uh let's
say, or else they could go to
Chienta, which is another 75
miles for the same services,
they could very easily go into
Farmington, which is like 30, 35
miles, so thank you for that
answer. Thank you for that
consideration.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. I believe that
wraps up your presentation.
Thank you for joining us today
in presenting, and we will
follow up.
With regard to the letter of
request to LFC for your funding
request. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee. OK, committee
members, let's move on to agenda
item number 12.
Department of Health.
Primary care partnership with
the musculero Apache Tribe.
My cousins are here.
Navajo and Muscaleo are cousins.
Through the Athabaskin lineage.
Please come to the table,
introduce yourselves and uh you
may begin your presentation.
Good afternoon, madam. back up a
little bit, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health. I'm joined today by uh
Councilwoman Fraser Plata from
the uh uh Mescaler Apache nation
from with Janet Johnson, who's
the travel liaison for
Department of Health and with
Tony Johnson, who is, uh, our
primary care project manager,
they'll each introduce
themselves again when they get
to their portion of the
presentation, really appreciate
the opportunity to be here. And
we're actually gonna talk about
something that's a little bit
broader than, than what's teed
up on your agenda. Well, we
really want to talk about
Department of Health Health
strategy general tribal health
strategy generally.
Um, you're, you're we don't come
to very often and really from my
perspective, that's a little bit
of a shame. Um, uh, if you look
at, um, uh, at slide 2 of the
presentation, that microphone is
super sensitive.
Um, down on the lower right-hand
side, we've we've called out
what is our strategic objective
as an agency, or Northstar that
New Mexico become the healthiest
state in the country by 2040.
Um, and, and really, New Mexico
is not a state where you, you
can sort of look at statewide
numbers and, and kind of, you
know, statewide averages will
roll up and cover all kinds of
challenges. In New Mexico,
because we are so diverse, you
have to really pay attention to
everyone's health to be able to
change statewide health. And
most importantly, we think the
tribal health is New Mexico
health.
Uh, and, uh, and so we really
want to focus on, uh on that
relationship.
Coming here, I came here from a
state that uh also had a, had 9
federally recognized tribes in a
fairly significant uh tribal
pres presence, but no, no real
IHS services to speak of. Um,
and as a result in, in Oregon,
the state health agency was
really looked to by the tribes
as its primary um source for
health information, health
services, resources, those kinds
of things.
Here, I found a little bit of a
sense within the Department of
Health, kind of an attitude of
IHS does tribal health and so
we'll do other stuff and um I
think, I think that just doesn't
work. And we see that
demonstrated work in tribal
health outcomes. If you look at
the next several slides, there's
some data, uh, about Native
American health compared to New
Mexico and National Health on
slide one,
Replied one.
At the next slide talks about
age adjusted alcohol rates. Uh,
the top line is the, is the
Native American, Alaska native
rate, um, uh, uh, in New Mexico,
the dash line is the New Mexico
average, uh, and the, and the,
the dot dash line is the US
average. There's a couple of
things that you can see. One, of
course, is that the Native
American rate is significantly
higher.
First, that's not at all a
commentary on the Native
American population in the
state. That's a commentary of
everything that goes into what
is Native American health in the
state. And we've often talk
about it as social determinants
of health, but it's the, it's
the structural systems that
we've built over generations
that result in those kinds of
health outcomes. But the other
thing you see is that um we we
aren't going to move that dash
New Mexico line very far if we
don't move the tribal line, the
Native American line. And so
that's what really what we're
focused on. The next two
Slides, I'll show you some
information about um uh overdose
deaths generally and opioid
deaths specifically. Those two
charts, you have to be a little
bit careful with because there's
some really incomplete data
there. We're trying to kind of
balance getting information out
quickly with having it be really
complete. And when we started
looking at subpopulations that
gets really trickier. So this
data may change over time, but
you can see that there are
trends there that, you know,
generally look like a leveling
off in overdose deaths and
opioid deaths generally in the
but maybe not quite as much in
Native American populations,
troubling if that number holds
the next chart is data that uh
that is much more complete, uh,
and that's, uh, that's people
who identify that they've been
diagnosed as having diabetes in
much higher rates, um, uh, in
the Native American population
and the state overall, and
again, that ties to those social
determinants that deal with
things like commodity food and
all kinds of things that are
lots of history that go back a
very long time.
Um, on the next slide on, I
think, I hope it's slide 7.
Just a quick rundown of what
we're going to try to do over
the next few minutes with you,
um, is, is talk a little bit
about how we as Department of
Health are trying to come at
these issues of tribal health.
Uh, and so we'll talk about, um,
our tribal liaison and the, the
state um state travel
cooperation, coordination Act,
how that works and how we try to
operate as a as an agency. Um,
uh, we'll then talk about
specifically what, what we're
doing in partnership with
Mescaler Apache Nation League
you'll hear from the
Representatives, um, about their
perspectives and what their
needs are, and then we'll talk
about the projects that we have
underway most especially
including primary care clinic,
um, uh, uh offering that we're
standing up and Tony to talk
about that. So with that as
introduction, I'm gonna go ahead
and turn things over to uh to
Janet Johnson.
Bindi
angi. I'm Janet Johnson. I'm the
travel liaison for New Mexico
Department of Health. I'm from
the Pubs of Nambay and Santa
Clara on my father's side.
Um, maiden name is Cheria, but
no relation to Governor Cheria.
And I am Mandan Harada from
North Dakota on my mother's
side.
Um, thank you for this
opportunity. So as we look at
this slide, we see.
The overview of the office of
tribal liaison. So as um
Secretary Allen mentioned the
state travel collaboration Act
established travel liaisons in
every.
Cabinet level agency and I serve
as the liaison for Department of
Health and the Office of tribal
liaison functions as that
communication hub.
For receiving inquiries, helping
um with technical assistance
requests from our 24 tribes of
nations, as well as our tribal
serving organization, our
Department of Health.
Is the largest state agency.
And also I serve as that role to
facilitate those connections
between our services and
programs and our tribal nations,
tribal serving organizations. So
what that looks like,
And what can that be is, um,
That gives me the opportunity to
ensure that there's ongoing
communication and collaboration.
Also gives me the opportunity to
share that there's technical
assistance if we have a
technical assistance request,
helping to be able to um
facilitate those
Connections
So as we look at the next slide
that should be the general goals
for the state tribal
Collaboration Act.
And when we look at this,
Tribal leadership was very.
Um
Diligent in how they wanted this
structure. So Sitka provides a
framework on how state agencies
are to engage with our tribal
nations or tribal populations
and that is on a government to
government basis.
Also through effective
communication and collaboration,
and they also wanted to ensure
the cultural component.
So when state personnel are
working and engaging with our
tribes that they receive that
cultural competency. And when
you look at that, that works
hand in glove. If you have a
culturally informed workforce,
then you'll have that
communication and collaboration,
which will then hopefully also
extend into that positive
government to government.
Next slide.
So on this slide, entitled
Investing in Tribal Health,
you'll see examples of
activities taken uh taken on by
Department of Health and OTL.
What we're looking at is one of
the top items is the emergency
operations at OTL and our chief
medical officer and several
members of Department of Health
stood up in the time of need
when Muscularra was experiencing
the fires and the flooding. We
worked with our um points of
contact with Maslero, as well as
federal contacts and some of our
sister agencies to better
identify resources on how we
could provide a
assistance
There's other areas that we've
been working with our tribes and
our tribal serving
organizations, um,
Through the opioid settlement
grant, we have 4 contracts, 3
with Pueblos and 1 with the
urban ribing tribal serving
organization to
Look at and assist and better
deliver services for medically
assisted treatment for opioid
use disorder.
So we're able to have 4 direct
contracts going out to those
providers.
And then just, you know.
In summary, these are just
examples of how Department of
Health
And the office of travel liaison
are able to leverage resources
to help to improve the health
and welfare of our tribal
populations.
And so what we try to do is
outline a little bit of how we
think about these things
generally. What that really
means is that we don't go
crashing into a community and
say, well, here, we're public
health, here's what we think is
wrong with you and what we think
you should do or what we're
going to do for you, or worse.
Well, we, if we do this right,
it's a conversation over a
period of time to try to
identify what are the priorities
and needs and what are the tools
that we have that can help, uh,
meet those and I'd like to uh
turn to Council Plata to talk
about uh Ms. Ger Apache Nation's
perspective on that conversation
as we began it.
Madam Chair, vice chair, members
of the committee. Good
afternoon. Good to be here. Um,
before I begin my comments, I'd
like to give you a little
background on myself.
Um, I, my name is Eraser Plata.
I am the treasurer to the
Mascaropache Tribal council.
Uh, prior to being on the
council, I served in the
capacities of chief of staff and
chief financial officer for the
tribe.
Um, I did also work several
years in the gaming industry,
um, at our facility in
Mescalero.
Uh, the last two years I served
as a member of the Area Indian
Health Board, and in that
capacity, I was able to learn
more about health issues and
just a general health.
Um, I'd also like to provide a
brief introduction to my tribe,
the muscularpai tribe.
Um, we represent 33 bands of
Apache, the musculleo the
Chiricahua and the la pan.
Our homeland spanned from Texas,
New Mexico, and Arizona and
parts of northern Mexico.
We have approximately 55 tribal
members.
Um, we are located 3.5 hours
from Santa Fe and Albuquerque,
and we are also located about an
hour and a half um north of El
Paso.
Um, as you know, uh, my tribe
along with other tribes, um, we
see higher incidents of
diabetes, heart disease,
obesity, and other chronic
illnesses.
Um, we also see higher rates of
alcoholism, PTSD, anxiety
disorders, depression, and
suicidal ideation.
Um, we do have an IHS unit and
we are a direct service tribe.
However, um,
Several years ago, that clinic
was downgraded from a hospital
to a clinic.
Um, even before that in the
1980s, we started to see a
decline, um, in the types and
levels of service that they
provide.
Um, the started limiting more
and more.
Um, when
Someone needs specialized care
at IHS. They have to get a
referral and as some of you all
are aware and know the referral
process can be lengthy.
Um
When the referrals made
sometimes are um tribal members
don't have transportation, don't
have childcare.
Um, so it makes it difficult to
make these appointments.
Um, these types of things, um,
lead to a delay in care and
diagnosis, and it just increases
um negative outcomes more.
Um, unfortunately, due to
several reasons, lack of
housing, um, for providers, our
remote location in Muscaleo.
There's a high turnover, um, in
medical providers at the service
unit.
Um
In addition to that, because of
that high turnover when you go
to see a doctor, the um lack of
consistency and continuity of
seeing the same doctor every
time is there, so that also
leads to negative.
And for all these reasons, um,
you know, the prospect of
increasing access.
To healthcare for our tribal
members, um, is of great
interest to the Mescalero Apache
tribe.
Um, we are excited to
participate and part and partner
with the Department of Health on
this pilot program.
Thank you.
Thanks. If you turn into slide
12, that gives a little bit of a
quick outline. We now have an
actual tribal Department of
Health work plan that we've
agreed to um uh with the tribe,
uh there are two main elements
to it. One is a kind of a
classic public health element
around uh helping with resources
that improve physical activity,
nutrition, and other things that
contribute to diabetes
prevention, which you heard the
councilwoman talk about. Um, and
then, and then access to
healthcare. Uh councilwoman
talked about the, the service
unit, um, scaling back over
time. I think it's one of those
things that we've wrest.
with a little bit is
We have great partners at the
Indian Health Service, but we
all know that they are
chronically underresourced and
that that problem has been
getting worse over time, not
better, and that, you know, we
can all send letters to whomever
to, you know, try to get more
resources. But meanwhile, we
actually have to do something
and, and actually try to figure
out how to how to meet needs. If
you turn to page slide 13, that
shows you, uh, you know, kind of
an indicator again with some
data about um uh having a
primary care provider and you
can see the chronically, uh, the
American Indian population.
In New Mexico under reports
having uh identified as having
identified a primary care
provider. And so what we're
really trying to do um is step
into that now, uh uh
beneficially, uh, the
legislature last session
provided us the resources to
begin kind of an experiment of
putting primary care in one
public health office. Public
health offices tend to do very
specialized services around
vaccinations and STI prevention
and things like that. We, we
haven't historically just simply
provided primary or preventive
care.
So you all give us resources to
do it in one place and, and so
through this partnership, we've
landed on the one place being
Brios so with that, I'd like to
turn it over to Tony Johnson,
who's helping head up uh the
establishment of that project to
talk about the pilot.
Awesome yacht, everyone. My name
is Tony Johnson. I am the
project manager for this pilot
project in Mescalero.
Um, as you can see on our slide
here, we're very, very excited
to partner with Mescalero and
kind of look at those challenges
and also collaborate with the
tribe.
Um, as we all know, as we
mentioned Sitka earlier,
collaboration and consultation,
right? Those are two of the
primary concerns for our tribal
community from working in a
state agency.
How we collaborating with tribes
to get the information that we
need as a state agency to
provide resources and figure a
way to help improve our health
outcomes for our tribal
populations.
So, uh, the establishment and
operation of this primary care
clinic out of our public health
office down south. Um, again,
we're, what we're gonna
hopefully establish we're in the
pre-planning phases right now
is, first, we want to
collaborate. We want Mescalero
at the table. Um, we want to
make sure we have council
members, uh, who are able to
provide feedback because they're
the ones that get the feedback
directly from community members
on the ground. Um, so part of
that initiative is we're going
to create a tribal advisory
Committee council.
With Mescalero and Department of
Health.
Um, and the Indian Health
Services unit down there. So as
we all know, it gets really
complicated when looking at
health services, whether it's uh
speaking services from Indian
Health Service or going to a non
non-tribal health facility.
Down south, uh, it's a different
picture. It's a challenging
picture looking at what is the
layout of the land for
Mescalero. Um, they are
surrounded and we do have public
health offices there, but what
is that collaboration look like.
Also, how can we support uh the
Mescalero, um Apache community
in terms of what are those
health outcomes? What does it
look like and what resources do
we have available to provide to
give us a broader picture. Um,
of course, providing that
culturally safe, integrated
healthcare within.
indigenous peoples. It's so
important. And as a project
manager, as a native New Mexican
from here, I find it very
important that we sort of look
at this from a culturally
appropriate lens.
Um, again, starts with
collaboration and communication,
as we all know, um, indigenous
health and indigenous hands is
so important. And we're really
excited again to collaborate,
uh, with Mescalero to have him
at the table, uh, with this
advisory committee to figure out
what can we do? What can this
pilot look like? Um, and again,
how can we improve better health
outcomes for tribal members down
south in Mescalero.
So again, um, we want to make
sure that, you know, we're
providing the clinic staff
support there as well, and now
we're operating as a pilot
program, which again like
Secretary Allen mentioned is
funded. Um, and we're really
excited about that reoccurring
state funding to help us and
support this particular pilot
here.
Um, but yeah, again, let's
increase collaboration and
communication with tribal
communities and the tribal
leaders. So if we go to the next
slide. Um, again, we are in the
pre-planning phases. Um, we're
gonna be putting together again
the Mescalero Advisory Health
Committee.
Um, which will have IHS
partners, it will have our DOH
partners, and then we're also
going to have our Mescalero
Community Health Parts there. So
again, we're really excited
about moving forward and
drafting what this model can
look like, because it is going
to take an integrative
communication process.
Uh, between all three areas and
all three sectors to figure out
what are those resources? How
can we allocate uh what we
already have in the area. But
most importantly, we have
resources there, right? It's
just a matter of figuring out
what is available, what's not
available, what are the
challenges.
So our draft primary uh pilot
program here is to uh get
established a provider
availability, have a provider
there, um, from our PHO office
that can be our Mescalero, um
Apache community members, as
well as providing support staff.
Um, we're looking to bring on an
RN and a medical assistant,
perhaps.
To help with the provider and
seeing our Mescalero Apache
community members, um, and of
course starting our hours of
operation. We got great feedback
from the council, and they were
like, 8 to 5 doesn't work. So
can we have staggered hours of
operation. So our tribal
community members can see their
primary care provider.
So hopefully we can get that
established.
Um, again, we're going to be
utilizing our existing
electronic health records. And
what we have already available
at our public health office at
Riodoso. And so I think that's
an opportunity to enhance.
And integrate services that we
already offer through DOH. So
it's building that capacity and
awareness about services that
are, are existing in that, um,
area.
And of course, we want to
leverage our public health
resources.
Um, we're really excited about
this pilot because what I think
it's gonna create hopefully is
give us a layout of how this can
work in Mescalero, but
potentially how can this work in
other um areas of the state that
are located and working with
tribal, um, uh, health services
in the areas.
And then last but not least,
it's that collaboration piece,
very excited about this pilot.
Um, we want to make sure we're
coor coordinating care, um,
that, you know, reflects the
community, but we also want to
make sure that we're having
follow-up and that our patients
in that area, particularly for
Escalero, know those resources
and they know where they can go
for help. So again, just really
excited about this primary care
pilot project. Um, it's very
important again, having
indigenous people at the table
from that community speaking to.
the health concerns and then us
as a state agency collaborating
and figuring a way out for a
solution to help improve better
health outcomes for all New
Mexicans, you know, hopefully in
the future, especially for our
tribal population.
Thank you. And so just to sum
up, uh, again, tribal health is
New Mexico health, and we can't
become the health healthiest
state in the country by 2040 if
the Department of Health doesn't
pay better attention to tribal
health issues and make a better
effort to address that. I'm very
lucky to have colleagues like
Janet and Tony to help with that
work, and we're very grateful
for the relationship we have,
uh, with the Mescalero tribe,
uh, to begin to roll this out.
I'm grateful for the resources
we got to do, uh, primary care
and a public health office and I
can't think of a better place
for us to be able.
To roll that out. So with that,
we'd be happy to answer any
questions. Thank you.
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Allen.
It is so good to see you again.
And I'm glad, dear, I'm glad to
see that you're accompanied by
my indigenous brothers.
Usually when we see one another
or before the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, and you're asking me
for money and you're usually by
yourself or you're with your
attorney.
I'm here. I'm, I'm glad to see
you here with the people that
are
Uh, seeking your help.
I'm very, very pleasantly
surprised to hear the words
partnership.
You're looking for partnership.
And then you're also asking for
resources, taking advantage of
it available resources.
Um, one of your slides.
Oh, that the secretary-treasurer
mentioned was access to
healthcare. We're all looking
for access to healthcare where
indigenous people.
And then improving physical
activity, nutrition, and
diabetes prevention.
That should be a goal of every
New Mexican.
And we should
Take advantage of the resources
that's available.
I was pleasantly surprised to
see your slide number 10.
For you mentioned.
That one of the resources that
you're gonna use.
As the tribal and county health
councils. I'm, you know, that
I've, you probably knew before
you sat down that that was what
I was going to ask you on, on
how you were going to support
county and tribal health
councils.
I think it's uh
Uh, a resource that's already
readily available, and they'll
help you with whatever you need.
They're established in 9 Pueblos
and 1 Navajo community and in 33
counties, so no sense in
reinventing the wheel in that
area, and I'm glad to hear you
say secretary Ellen, that you're
gonna use those available
resources and work into a
partnership.
I can only agree that you're
going to be successful if you
use the available uh resources
that's available to you.
And the gentleman mentioned
collaboration.
That is exactly what we need.
We need communication,
cooperation, and collaboration
to have a healthy New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Shanna.
Representative Allison.
Uh, vice chair Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
them.
Thank you for the work you're
doing in the presentation.
At a meeting with Navajo Nation,
and they said they had not
received a response about the
people that were taken from
Gallup to Arizona.
So I hope that can be resolved
or um communicated to them, um.
From, from our department to, to
the leadership there.
Going down to Rioso, they just
opened the hospital.
And
We're, we're not the majority
yet and I'm just gonna prepare
you for some of the questions
that will come forward because
Um, being in Gallup with RMCH
and having the IHS right across
the street.
I, you know, they were about.
Investing more money.
into another facility.
Or work that could be done at
the existing facility.
And knowing that and being at a
couple of those conversations,
there was some underlying issues
within the community.
And I don't know at what point.
I think there are some that have
moved past that and some that
it, it still lies deep and
Basically was that they felt the
IHS was for the Native American
people.
And that those who are not
native shouldn't go there to, to
get services and vice versa.
That if you're um non-native,
then you shouldn't come to RMCH
to get services.
But um that's not the case, but
they will.
At the meetings that was
expressed by some of the people.
And I started saying some people
move past that.
So to have that.
And then going to cause the
location of the office you're
looking for is right in the
middle of Ridoso.
And um, you know, there was
some.
Issues, uh,
Between, I guess the elected
official that was there in
Rioso.
Um, where they kind of like got
kicked out of meetings and
stuff.
Um, it didn't really want to
cooperate.
So as we move forward.
I think that's um.
I'm not sure where this
discussion will go within the
debate of our legislature just
to prepare you. Um, especially
when we say additional funding.
I mean, I'm in support of that.
I know there's, there's issues
out there for our, our people to
get services and the primary,
and I know that facility to that
muscular have has, needs to be
updated. It is um almost like a
historical building which you
couldn't really.
You hit a boundary of renovating
it to get some of the um
technology um updated technology
incorporated into it, um, or
even expanding services because
it was very small in the
geography of where it sits. It's
a challenging to me. And it, I
think we're running into that
issue too with the IHS that in
Gallup is, um, will it last the
time frame of before the new
hospital is built.
So it's uh
You know, gamble we take, but
having that primary
Care provider, I think it's
something that we should
consider and should have already
considered regionally.
Um, not just in one particular
or one particular nation, tribe
of Pueblo, um, but that all
All of our people deserve all
our constituents in our rural
areas deserve to have a facility
in such a distance that there is
a primary care provider, um,
24/7 available, and I'm saying
just having one work the whole
shift and overworked them, but
that there is someone there to
provide those services, and we
should be funding it.
and keeping it open 24/7.
That's my
My own personal um
Opinion as we move forward on
this.
And appreciate the work behind
it, um, but I, you know, we're
gonna get some other thing,
well, what about these guys?
What about them, you know, and
it's kind of if you really know
the area and actually um.
been to, you know, the these
meetings to know what what's
available and who's not really
getting what they need.
Um, and that needs to be
communicated um to others, um,
especially when we move into the
session to justify um moving
forward.
So, I, I, I'm
Not so much questions, just that
one part about um
Me communicating with Navajo
Nation about that particular
issue that came up before.
And um I hoping that the
behavioral
So he carried a bill about the
alcohol tax and raising the
liquor tax and
I'm like, oh, there was
something in her in particular.
The
Tribal with the office of the
tribal liaison.
was the um
One of these boards.
That was
Good.
on here.
And
About mortality.
And we are affected the most. We
have the highest rate nationally
and in the state of New Mexico.
and yet nothing has been put
forward besides, oh, we're gonna
still put the funding into the
AOC for the DWI and oh that's
punitive.
It's after the fact.
Um, and we, we still don't have
the funding for the behavioral
health or the infrastructure,
you know.
We're proposing as we go in
there and we have this provider
after the accidents after the
fact.
Where's the preventative care
within this facility?
For them.
Because it should have
wraparound services, you
shouldn't have to have the
referral and sit 3 months when
we know there is an addiction
problem.
And not have to go to a
facility.
57, 10 times.
Or an opportunity um to maybe
get a bed, um, be turned away
because of that capacity and
you're ready to turn your life
around and you have to wait.
That is where we are.
And we still have gaps. That's
why they went to Arizona because
we got the 30, the 60, but we
don't have the 90.
But addiction is a lifetime
issue.
Any time you relapse.
Do we help in that aspect? No.
Um, and that's why I jumped onto
that bill and they really found
it very hard.
We some of those that
felt like we were punishing our
low-income people when really
the punishment is you lose your
life.
And we're not gonna try and help
or intervene in any way to help
you make modify your behavior.
By raising the tax and the cost
of liquor.
Um,
That's my little soapbox there
because I know we have a
presentation on it next. So, um,
thank you, Madam Chair.
If I could just respond quickly,
Senator, thank you, thank you
for that. I think, I think the
topics that you touched on
illustrate these are really
complicated issues that get into
legislative disagreements of
whether or not you can pass a
bill and relationships with
Indian Health Service and who's
investing in what facility and
those kinds of things. I think
that's why we've decided to, to
say, OK, that's all great, but
we got to do something.
So let's go do something. Let's,
let's be real in a real place
and actually go do things.
You've mentioned, you know,
others saying, well, you know,
can we get, get some of that,
whatever that is. Gosh, I hope
so. I, I hope one of the
outcomes of this is that I start
getting phone calls, your data
starts getting phone calls
saying, hey, we hear you're
doing a bunch of stuff with
Mescalero, can we do that in our
Pueblo or in, in, in our nation,
um, and we may not, you know, we
may not be able to meet all
those needs. Uh, we came into
the last session asking for
money for 5 primary care sites,
and you all gave us one.
Uh, we could put the one
anywhere. We decided to put it,
uh, in partnership with the
tribe because we thought that
was so important. Uh there's
certainly demand for more, not
necessarily all tribal, but, you
know, potentially more. But I
would love as a result of this
is like my, the phone's ringing
off the hook that um that that
uh we have more tribal partners
who want, want a deeper
relationship with us because we
think we need to do that to be.
OK, thank you. Uh, Senator
Rodriguez, thank you, Madam
Chairman. Good afternoon to
everyone and of course um
secretary um Ellen, let me, let
me just ask a quick question. I
know we're beat already we've
been here a long day, so I'll be
sure. Um, the funding, uh,
secretary Ellen that we had
talked about a while back in one
of the other committees. I think
we were at an LFC meeting and it
was funding that was apparently
still there at a at DOH for the
health councils. Did that get
released after all? Do they
have?
Yes ma'am.
It is, it's done, so you're down
to 0 at this point or well, it's
all, it's all contracted and
funds are flowing on those
contracts and so it'll go over
the course of the fiscal year
and, uh, and there is a request
again for that funding in our
budget for 26 as well. OK, good.
I was wondering if you had
requested it again, so we'll
take a look at it at the LFC.
Thank you for that. That's all I
have, Madam Chairman.
OK. Are you, I'm sorry, my
apologies, Madam Chairman,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation this
afternoon. Um, so it sounds
like, uh, you've uh
This, uh, presentation has been
made in other committees before,
as you mentioned, you hadn't
been here before. Uh, this
sounds really exciting and so I
just want, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
I was wondering if I could get
some clarity on what the ask is.
Of this committee, please. Yeah,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. We don't have an
ask. Um, I, you gave us money
for primary care. You've given
us more money for resources to
do a better job of meeting the
uh the health needs of uh of
tribal organizations, and we're
just here to tell you what we're
doing, so you're, you're
familiar with how we're trying
to be strategic and focus on
this work.
Thank you very much. Well, OK,
then that helps me actually, uh,
in formulating the rest of my
questions because um with the I
don't have right now
Give me time. Got you, yes, yes.
So, madam chair then, um, I
would, uh, then I have, I'm
curious about some pieces. So in
your direction in the direction
that's being taken, and I think
it's um
Uh, quite exceptional, um, to
look at a partnership to provide
an increase the services that
have um been gone.
Uh, for so long and it's so, so
very needed, um, in Mescalero,
especially because they're,
it's, it's in an area away from
the major cities of New Mexico.
So, uh, I have several uh about
3 questions, Madam Chair. Um, so
with Ms. Clara being a direct
service tribe, I'm curious as to
um
And they're kind of all over the
place, but these questions are
who will be the employers of
these individuals that you're
looking at, uh, Department of
Health, Ms. Gla Apache, the
Indian Health Service, and with
these agreements and I'm curious
as to like, um, specifically the
electronic health records
because IHS is the um owner, uh,
uh, right now, um, those
agreements, uh,
What agreement might be possible
with them, um, because the
There's been uh challenges even
for those uh tribes who are
looking to expand services if
there's 638, uh, and I may be
speaking out of turn, it may be
much easier now than it was, uh,
many, many years ago, but um,
Uh, what will it take to get
the, that data, that
information, um, for IHS to
release it and allow uh the
providers, uh, depending on the
status of, of their employer,
who it is, um, and finally the
Is it a uh
Um
Let's see, the last one was I
have and I can't remember what I
meant by this. It's the public
health office or the Indian
Health Service, the New Mexico
Public Health Office, do you all
this Department of Health
maintain some type of records?
As well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam try to tackle all of those
in uh kind of reverse or, yes.
We maintain, uh, we maintain uh
electronic health records in our
offices. In fact, we're in the
midst of a project updating our
electronic health records
across, uh, across the agency
because we have them in
different settings in our
facilities in our public health
offices, um, uh, and so on. Um,
uh, in terms of, I'll go to the
first question in terms of the
employees, they will be either
employees or contractors of the
Department of Health.
Um, we're leaving ourselves a
little bit open that we may, we
may need to use contract staff
instead of direct hired
employees because they're a
variety of of efficiencies and
especially speed around that,
but they could end up also being
uh being employees. Um.
Record sharing across systems as
you observe is complicated. We
just had our most recent um uh
tribal data summit, um, a couple
of weeks ago, um, uh, down at
Isleta. And so we continue to
work on these issues. That's an
element of this that's gonna be
a little bit building the plane
while we fly it. Um, uh, it
probably won't be real clean at
first, and they're gonna be a
bunch of things about the
partnership, our partnership
with Mescalero and our
partnership with IHS as we do
this, that we may, I mean,
honestly, we may screw some
things up. Yeah, we haven't done
this.
Before. We haven't tried to do
it in this way before, and so,
um, you know, our commitment is
that if we do, we'll kind of
pick ourselves up and apologize
and, and figure out how we need
to adjust and, and move on, and
I mean, equally, honestly, I
think, I think the in the intent
of the legislature giving us
enough money for one of these
offices to say, let's see what
happens.
You know, and maybe this is not
a good idea.
Uh, and, and maybe it won't
work. Now I, I, I would have to,
it would have to be, you know,
a, a real huge failure for me to
want to give up on it and not
give it a good long, long try.
And this is base increase money,
not a growth fund or anything
like that, that we got to be
able to do this. But that's a
possibility too, we may decide
that it doesn't doesn't work
very well and there are other
ways we can meet the same needs,
but that's kind of the intent is
to work on this, some of this as
we begin to deliver it, but my
gosh, get on the ground and
start meeting the need.
Thank you, Madam Chair. One
final comment I have is that
yeah, this is exciting, uh, I'm,
I'm.
With all of the other um
possibilities that tribes have
to uh um
Provide to be a part of
providing their health care of
providing health care, ensuring
health care, not providing it,
but ensuring that their
community members have the
opportunity to access healthcare
and equality healthcare, um, is,
is, is really uh key and it's
exciting for me to see what and
this is another possibility. And
as you described, you're flying
the plane while building it. I,
I totally get that. That could
be a little scary, but.
In my mind, I'm looking at this,
it's like, well, you.
tires are rolling.
The tires are rolling, so I see
this as one
I'm going to be real, I'm very
interested in watching how this
progresses and um I wish you all
luck.
Thank you very much for your
presentation.
Thank you, Representative.
I, I just want to correct for
the record that
Uh, RMCHCS and gallop does not
turn turn away Native American
patients. As a matter of fact,
uh, this on a
We have a census report on a
daily basis, and we have a high
rate of Native Americans who
utilize the hospital.
In addition to the Indian Health
Service across the street, in
addition to the community health
and the VA satellite clinic in
the Gallup Cancer Center.
Um, there is an advantage for
all of those clinics being next
door to each other.
If an equipment goes down in one
hospital.
They share equipment and go
across to the other. So I just
wanna clear that, um.
For the record,
I also wanted to ask you, um,
how does your department
play a role in the
I think, uh, when was it before
the pandemic, after the
pandemic, there was a kid uh
situation where there was a
kidnapping of Native Americans
from Gallup and taken to Phoenix
for a false behavioral health
program.
Um, several people were left
behind, um, some people passed
away.
Um, people were stranded.
Do you play a role in that, or
can you talk about that?
Thank you. That was happening
right about the time I got to
New Mexico and took on, I took
on this role. Um, and, and it
was one of these things that
because it's, it's interstate
becomes really complicated.
Prior to July 1st, we at the
Department of Health were
responsible for our division of
Health Improvement for
regulating uh healthcare
facilities including behavioral
health facilities in New Mexico.
Now, of course, this was a uh I
was gonna say provider that
obviously is not accurate at
all. This was an entity in
Arizona, which nobody in New
Mexico's regulatory authority
for that regulatory authority
that we did have for New Mexico
entities went over to the
healthcare authority. That was
part of what that consolidated
there, and so they have, they
have a a responsibility for
that. But this scam really kind
of
Um, took advantage of the fact
that when you do this interstate
kind of activity, you really,
you are taking advantage of gaps
that exist between states and
between agencies that that
provide a window um to try to,
to be able to to to deal with
that. So I don't have real good
answers about, you know, there's
something specific that we could
be doing, and we don't really
have any authority in the area
anymore. And since it was in
Arizona, not much, uh, at the
time either. Uh, but again, I'm
only a little bit familiar with
this because it was happening
just
as I got here.
And
On that point,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
The nation would want to know
what's the state's response plan
to such a situation. We can't
just say.
Oh, it's out of our
jurisdiction. They were um
citizens of New Mexico.
He can take it out of gallop.
Um, being served in Gallup, and
then all of a sudden, you know,
taking over there. So we can't
just say we're not gonna do
anything. Um, I understand
Arizona did respond and came up
with the plan, I think our due
diligence is that we have
something in place to say it's,
it's if this happens because of
the overlapping of the Navajo
Nation into Arizona. So I hope
there's some can be some
outreach in uh communication and
see what they have and let's.
come up with something and have
the nation um put at ease that
we're not just going to turn our
back because they're not on the
reservation of where it
occurred. They were in gallon.
Which I think makes it even more
our responsibility.
When you want to really throw
jurisdiction out there.
Yeah, that's Senator Pino. I
don't at all want to indicate
that we didn't the state
generally didn't respond or
anything like that. I don't
actually I don't know what all
was involved in response again,
just having gotten here, we can
follow up on that and get back
to the committee.
Thank you. I just have one final
question. Uh, who is on the
tribal alcohol-related mortality
work group who is afforded a
seat at that table.
Hello. Thanks for that question,
um, Madam Chair and
Representatives. It is me. Um, I
am the tribal alcohol
coordinator as well under our
Office of Alcohol Disease
Prevention Office.
So we had a reconvening of our
work group. Um, we've had 5
meetings so far this year and
what we're primarily focusing on
is addressing tribal
alcohol-related mortality. So we
are looking at uh prevention,
intervention and treatments.
Oh yeah, so, uh, you know, just
a little background, but, uh,
members on the committee, we
have 30/30, uh, organizations
represented as well as 12
tribes, pubs and nations who sit
on our uh work group.
So we have our average
attendance of around 35 people
that attend monthly, and this is
online. And what we do is we
talk about prevention
strategies, what is happening on
the ground in the communities.
We have prevention specialists,
we have behavioral health
support workers. We have a good
representation from the
Northwest area, from McKinley
County specifically. Uh, we have
Jean Center. The honorary
council as well as a sign of e
Gallup recovery Center
representatives, or prevention
specialists are on our
committee, um, as well as other,
uh, individual.
Those who are working in the
sectors trying to address
alcohol-related issues and
tribal communities. Thank you.
And then can you tell us a
little bit about the all tribal
Roundtable coordination.
And what that entails.
Yes, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you.
Last year we held 2.
Tribal Round tables where we met
with tribal leadership to
discuss what were their health
priorities in their communities.
What were areas of gaps that
they had identified and would
like to see better and increased
communication, collaboration,
partnership from the state
besides Department of Health, we
invited our sister agency, um,
at that time, HSD also to be in
attendance to have this full
conversation in
In terms of what does tribal
health look like? And what are
these areas and gaps that we can
all work collectively to
address.
Thank you.
Would it be possible to include
us as um representatives and
senators on that list are on
both of them.
Yes. Thank you. Thank you for
your presentation of.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the
opportunity, um.
I'm gonna go to, I guess these
aren't page numbers, but I guess
investing in tribal health uh
the OTL acting.
page and, and, um, just looking
at your, the chart for
opioid-volve drug overdose
death, um, in a
How much of
The settlement funds, Madam
Chair, are going towards, um,
Towards our investing in tribal
health and, and the
The numbers that we see with,
with the for opioid prevention
and for not just prevention, but
for all that is going on with,
with the epidemic that we have
and how it's, you know, um,
affecting our tribal
communities.
Janet, do you want to speak to
that?
Yes, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
We have when we have received 1
million for the opioids
settlement fund for tribal
projects. We have $620,000 in
direct funding, and that's to 3
pueblos, Taos, en bingo, and
Ama.
And we have one travel serving
urban travel serving partner
Changing Women initiative that
are providing direct services
for medically assisted treatment
for opioid use disorder.
Additionally, um, out of that 1
million, we have 130,000 that we
will be using to fund technical
assistance training on the
gathering Native Americans
framework. So that framework is
to help providers um.
Practitioners on how to directly
work and engage with tribal
populations in area of substance
use, and so we'll be hosting a
variety of different technical
assistance and trainings in the
upcoming year and priority
proper, um, priority is to our
contractors, but it will be open
to anyone.
And if I could just add quickly,
that's the investment of the uh
of the settlement dollars then
there are other dollars that we
spend that are at least adjacent
and so for example, we're
offering um medication-assisted
treatment in uh 43.
Around 40% of our public health
offices around the state and so
our partnership at at Mescalero
at the office at Rubio, so we'll
be able to leverage that
service, which is general fund
um provided as well as opioid
dollars provided uh into uh into
the tribe, and we do that in
offices around the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I, I
appreciate those numbers. And
you also have listed here, um,
Are you using the support for
tribal health councils as well?
Are, are they integrated into
what you're the programs that
you have set up.
For this, for this specific
purpose.
Thank you. And then in
coordination with local
governments and and tribal
governments with the opioid
funding. How are you
coordinating that? Because what
Madam Chair, and I'll just
prefaces. This is something I've
been working on, um, and I just
recently went to the um
fentanyl, uh,
Conference that they had in
Albuquerque last week. So can
you, how are you coordinating?
That seemed to be like one of
the overhead, one of the biggest
issues that we're having and how
all of our, our different
governments are really
coordinated in using these
dollars into these programs and
and making sure that they're
getting to those that need it
the most. Can you?
Maybe add to what you've already
talked about. Madam Chair, are
you thinking sort of globally
around, around opioids. So the
dollars or specifically in a
tribal context into yeah into,
to, yeah, into our tribal uh
communities specifically because
There are, there's a lot of
money and it's, it's through our
local governments that got the
settlement and then the state
got the settlements and then
I'm, I'm just wondering how that
is all aggregating, how we are
all going to the communities
that need it the most. And you
mentioned and I'm going through
here Mescalero for sure, and
because they've had.
They have trauma from the fires
and disasters and all those
sorts of things. So I think that
you wanted to do some kind of
trauma control as well, but how
are you all working together?
Like collaboratively through
All the government um entities
that have the fundings.
Thank you. So let me, let me
tackle that in two parts. If
we're, if we're talking about
coordination across all of the
entities receiving all of the,
the settlement dollars. Um, that
collaboration is, is more
informal than structured. We
work closely with Bernao County,
uh, for instance, as a major
recipient of those dollars in
Albuquerque. Um, uh, it's much
more intentional at the, at the
tribal level of the uh of the, I
believe it's $5 million that
you.
wage gets from the settlement
dollars, um, uh, 20% of that,
uh, the equivalent of about 20%
that gets allocated specifically
to tribal needs I ask, uh, Ms.
Johnson to talk about the, the
process of working with uh with
tribes on the allocation of
those dollars.
Yeah, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, yes, thank you.
And so again,
Using the opportunity and
leveraging the resources that we
have in our tribal health
councils. Also, um, leveraging
our tribal opioid overdose
coordinator.
Who goes out and conducts chain
the chainer on terms of Narcan.
So,
Um, she is able to go into a
tribal community post trainings
with the staff, um,
predominantly our behavioral
health, social services, law
enforcement staff on train the
trainers, and they're able to
then, you know.
Be able to access their own
internal personnel to be able to
ensure.
Knowledge and awareness on how
to recognize the signs of an
overdose and provide um Narcan
in case of an emergency event.
So there's continued ongoing
collaboration and connection and
technical assistance with our
tribe's public nations.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for.
Thank you committee members and
thank you so much for joining us
today, traveling here and
presenting and giving us an
update and informing us of your
work. We look forward to
following your work.
And uh we appreciate you. Thank
you.
OK, committee members, last
agenda item number 13.
Introduction and update from the
Mexico, New Mexico tribal
behavioral health providers
association.
Please have a seat, introduce
yourselves, and then you may
begin.
OK, you may begin.
Good afternoon. My name is Cindy
Sockerman. Um, thank you so much
for having us here today to
introduce our tribal behavioral
Health Providers Association.
It's been a long time coming,
and so we are excited that um to
be able to present to you today.
And I have with me here Miss
Melanie Montoya, who is a court
member of the association. And
I'll have her do a little bit
more of a longer introduction
once um she's gonna talk about
her membership, um, role. Um, a
little bit of a background.
I wear several hats, um, in a
state, so you, you'll see me
here for different things and
I've met and interacted with
several of you on different, um,
topics, so I'll just pinpoint
some of those in case uh there's
some recognition, um, I am an
evaluator and I own SBS
evaluation and program
development specialists, and so
I evaluate a variety of programs
across our state, um, in
addition to that, I also um just
finished doing the Bernalillo
County assessment on the opiate
settlement funds and the
engagement component of.
So I'm very familiar with the
conversations that we're just
being had. Um, and I have a lot
of local um community evaluation
programs as well. Most of them
are in McKinley County, Gallup
area, um, and some of the larger
evaluations that you will um
hear about are in um state level
or federal level evaluations.
So that just gives you a little
bit of background to kind of
tell you um the evaluation side
of my role, and in addition to
that, today I am here as the
director and founder of the
tribal Behavioral Health
Providers Association, um, and
later on you'll hear a little
bit about my role in the alcohol
harms alleviation association as
well, because anything health
related or tribal specifically
related, I am normally involved
and to try to make a change in a
positive direction in our state.
So that's
Just a little bit of an
introduction.
Um
So a chair members of the
committee, um going to formally
introduce our New Mexico tribal
behavioral health Providers
Association to you today. I
think it's really important to
start by talking a little bit
about the public law and a lot
of people know it as 6:38. Um,
it's one of the laws that
allowed tribal communities to
implement programming within
their, within their communities,
and one of the first ones was
normally substance abuse
prevention program, so you'll
hear a lot.
not a lot of you know, you'll
hear, oh, they 6:38, um, there
we hear about health programs.
And although before 6:38 was
normally the ideal method of
funding any type of behavioral
health programs or treatment
programs in the communities.
It's been a little bit of
expansion, um, a lot of, um,
In 2006, there was, there was an
allowance to be able to bill
Medicaid for some services as
well.
Um, and, and so I wanted to set
that um as a background or
foundation, um, as I talk about
some of the services that we do
in our association.
Um, on slide 3, you'll see a
little bit of an overview of how
we were created.
So I mentioned that I was an
evaluator in 2020, I was
evaluating a statewide
initiative um through the
centers of Medicaid and with
through that evaluation, there
was a lot that was coming up
about a need for a place or a
forum for tribal behavioral
health providers. They did not
feel supported in our state.
They didn't, they did not feel
heard in our state, and they did
not feel like they had a lot of
opportunities.
And so because of that, we
established um the association
during the pandemic, during a
very crazy time, and at that
point, we thought that Zoom
meetings were
Kind of the only way to meet,
but it also allowed and opened
the door for a lot of the
communities that were, you know,
New Mexico and our rural areas
to participate in this
association.
Um, and so we had our first
meeting on, in March 19th of
2021. Um, we also sought
endorsement at that time by um
Indian Affairs Department, and
at that point it was Cabinet
Secretary Lynn Trujillo, who
endorsed our association.
Um, you have the link of our
association on there, it, it is
modest because we have no
funding, um, and so we've been
running this association on a
voluntary basis, but it does
have a lot of information about
our association on there.
Um, so tell me a little bit
about how we went about
developing the association, so
there was that larger needs
assessment. We also conducted
focus groups and interviews with
key stakeholders across our
state to figure out was this
really needed because we were
very aware that there were a
couple of other groups out
there. One of them is Nask, um,
And so we do know that there is
a focus on groups, um, primary
care, and then there's also a
focus on the consumer voice
through other departments and
other associations, but there
wasn't a voice for this tribal
we hearal health provider group.
Um,
So what are some of the things
that the groups were um asking
for and what, what are some of
the needs for this specific
group.
A lot of the needs were
associated to having a voice for
the challenges and the barriers
that they were facing related to
billing, bless you. Related to
billing, related to um how to
grow the the behavioral health
field, how to obtain
supervision. You can't grow your
behavioral health field locally
if you don't have supervision,
um, or access to supervision.
A lot of claims were being
returned and so they were having
a lot of complications with
Medicaid billing or billing in
general. Um, recently, some of
the needs have been around, um,
negotiating contracts with the
MCOs and being new to this
process and needing that
technical assistance.
Um
The other group that we had
considered people had mentioned
was the intertribal group, but
we also knew that that group had
lost its funding and so had been
um non-functional since 1980.
Um, so there was a need for this
group.
Um
On slide, um, 6.
Uh, there's a little bit of, uh,
again, the endorsement, some of
the encouragement, and I, and I
mentioned encouragement because
We have provided a lot of
support and, and we do attend a
lot of meetings with um our
behavioral health services
division, CYFD, um, UNM has
provided a lot of encouragement
as well for the association, um,
And, and we get a lot of support
from um Medicaid as well in
terms of if we need their
assistance or technical
assistance during one of our
meetings.
And we have been
acknowledged the most by federal
agencies and other states. And
so that's something that I want
to bring to light that I feel
like
Samsa has recognized us and has
invited us to a lot of meetings
to be an advisor, um, for, and,
and so has the Centers for
Medicaid and Medicare. And one
example is we've talked about
traditional health being, uh,
traditional services being
billable through Medicaid. It's
been a topic for many, many
years. Um, we've been at that
table when those discussions
were happening before now it's
put into law that now we can
actually bill for these
services. I know in New Mex
ago, we have been able to build,
but to a limited extent, and,
and this is not a national
level. So we've been able to um
sit at the table during those
conversations.
Um
Slide 7 just gives you a little
example of um Indian affairs
endorsed us and then it was.
talked about us and also
promoted the work that we were
doing as an association, but as
you know, when administrations
change, so does the support and
there's fluctuation in the
amount of um support that we
have received either in Indian
affairs or in um in the state in
general. Um, on slide 8, I'll
talk a little bit about the, the
beginnings of our of our
association. We created a
planning council, which includes
myself.
Teresa Gomez, who is with the
UNM division of Community
Behavioral Health.
Jennifer Nonez, who is with, was
at that point with Tribaltech
and Eldred, who was a policy
analyst at Indian Affairs at the
time.
Um, our first meeting, as I
mentioned, was in March of
192021.
And our membership includes, um,
Navajo Nation, Apache nations,
and pueblos. Um, we meet monthly
and we include, uh, we don't
And this is important to note as
well. We don't charge membership
fees for our tribal members. And
the reason is that there's
behavioral health budgets are
limited, and the expenditures
are limited, unlike other
associations which charge
thousands of dollars per agency
to participate and that's
sometimes how they pay salaries,
etc. We don't have access to
that, so.
Um, and we didn't feel that that
was fair for our membership as
well, and especially because we
were just growing and being
established. So I'm a volunteer
director, and we have a
volunteer planning group and
planning um and core group
members.
Um, on slide 9.
So I mentioned us as
co-founders, um, and then the
planning council, we now um have
extended our planning council to
include also Miss Melanie
Montoya right next to me, which
I'll have her talk a little bit
about her role as a member, and,
and, um, Miss Lana Valdez, but I
know that everyone's having um
tribal doings right now and
she's back in in Hickory Inn, so
that was a long drive. Um,
For her, but we do have, um,
Support from our core group
members. Um, our mission is to
advocate as a united tribal
voice for equality behavioral
health system, accessible and
responsible for to tribal
uh matters that affect the
collective.
And really what that means is we
want to be one strong voice or
tribe will we hear about health
programs across our state. And
now because of the recognition
that we're receiving also across
the nation.
And so I'll pass it on to my
colleague.
Sing it to counsel and members.
Um, I would like to introduce
myself. My name is Melanie Joe
Montoya, and I am from Santa
Clara Pueblo.
Like Miss Cindy said, I am a
volunteer, um, on this core
group and um I have attended
since the first meeting in 2021
and have been a part since then.
I just would like to say that
the engagement and also the
knowledge that I gain from
attending these meetings is
invaluable. We um have trainings
that are specific to the needs
of our behavioral health
association on a monthly basis,
which means that we have the,
the ability to have input as to
what we would like to see every
single meeting, such as we would
have representation for
Medicaid. We had representation
for from Tony's group that just
presented from the um the
carpal alcohol, um, mortality
roundtable, and all of us
participate in that as well. Um,
it's a, it's a valuable valuable
asset to have these sort of, you
know, assets and communities are
readily available to us as if we
did not have um this working
group and core group, we
wouldn't have access to that
because we are scattered all
around from community to
community and um I know that you
are all aware, but Santa Clara
Pablo just opened our um
community.
in 2024 in February, you know,
we were a close community due to
the pandemic, you know, so we
weren't able to attend meetings
or government wouldn't let us um
attend any sort of meetings
unless it was on Zoom. So these
sort of trainings I was able to
get and bring back to my
community because of the
behavioral health association.
Like, um, Cindy said, we are not
only just recognized nationally,
but we also need to be
recognized locally. I was um
appointed to attend these
meetings from my tribal
leadership, but the more that I
have attended, it's become the
need and the want to get this um
association out to more
communities, um, we would like
to grow our, you know, our
association and our core group,
but the thing is we don't have
the funding. We are all at, we
are all volunteers. We all go to
our meetings on our
own, we travel on our own. We do
outreach on our own. We attend
whatever um activities or any
sort of outreach that we do on
our own, we kind of collaborate
and see in what areas we're in,
you know, can you hit northern
New Mexico, can you hit
Bernalillo, can you hit, you
know, at the different areas
that we do live in, so we do do
all of these on our own.
Um, we don't have a budget for
um any sort of trainings, and we
would like to meet all in
person, we have never met in
person.
Because of the, the lack of
funding. All we do is we attend
our Zoom meetings and get every
single training on Zoom. You
know, it would be nice after 4
years to finally meet everybody
in person. And that's the goal
of our association.
I would just like to thank you
all for the um opportunity to
speak today and I know
everybody's busy and it's the
end of the day and um I just
wanna say thank you for letting
me be here today.
Um, so continuing with our
presentation. Thank you,
Melanie. Um, our tribal
membership and you've heard, um,
The previous presentation,
councilwoman also talking about
the turnover rates.
turnover with within behavioral
health is also very extensive,
and so trying to recruit members
from the different tribal
communities, um, sometimes has
been really, really difficult,
especially as a volunteer in a
volunteer basis because there's
such turnover in each tribal
community and sometimes the, the
new director doesn't get hired
for 6 months or a year, and so
there's a gap in attendance, um,
in addition to that, if they do
hire someone, they might not
have passed on all of the places
or
associations that they or
meetings that they might have
attended. So, um, the, the list
that you have here is a sample
of our of our membership because
like I said, it does fluctuate,
so if they're currently not
active. I, I removed them from
the list until we can have
somebody from the from the
community, um, in addition to
that, we do have um
representation from VHSD does
attend um send their tribal
liaison to our meetings,
Medicaid will come in, um,
Indian Affairs.
Tony, when Tony was part of
Indian affairs. He was also part
of our association, um, and we
have representation from the um
managed care organizations as
well, which is really helpful
for your health um providers to
ask any questions about billing
or services that they can
provide for their community
members. Um, and again, I've
added some of the out of state
recognition and participation.
It was shocking to have someone
during our our meeting from
Alaska, um, but it was, you
know,
acknowledgement that word is
getting out about the
association.
Um, we have some initial goals
with our association and one of
the main goals, we had a couple
of main goals, 3 top ones that
stand out to me or one is we
want um to bridge communication
between state departments and
tribal behavioral health
providers specifically we have a
health services division. Um,
the other big one is we wanted
to reinstate the tribal liaison
within the behavioral health
department, a group of tribal
community members fought really
hard to establish that position,
and then there was a really big
gap.
in hiring that position and so
we were, we were successful in
doing that as well. And then the
third one is to inform policy,
which, you know, we've talked a
little bit about some of the
policies that we have been part
of. One of them is reviewing
policy within the association,
um, including the alcohol um
harms alleviation.
Um, policy in the role that the
association has had in that, but
there's a review of a variety of
roles and initiatives, for
example, the opioid settlement,
um, as you mentioned, that it's
key to make sure that
communities are not only aware
of the tribe, the the funds that
came into the tribal
communities, but the funds that
came into the counties as well,
and part of that should go to
the tribal communities, um, for
some of the services that are
there. I've also asked, um, the
state what they've done with
their.
opioid funds to figure out, you
know, are they going to support
the tribal communities or are
the initiatives that they have
identified going to benefit the
tribal communities as well. So,
that's kind of the role that
that um we have had as a as a um
behavioral health of the tribal
behavioral health Providers
Association is to be able to
have that communication with
different departments and, and
at the federal level, as I
mentioned.
Um, in addition to that, of
course, there's been um
Awareness of funding
opportunities, whether they're
state or federal, a lot of
tribal communities have never
really hear about state funding
opportunities, and there are
barriers to funding as well. I
do wanna, I'm gonna go through
some of the accomplishments a
little bit faster, so I'm gonna
throw some of these in here, but
one of the big accomplishments
that I feel we had was we were
able to have the behavioral
health director attend our
meeting and talk to the to the
tribal providers about.
spending opportunities and why
it's so difficult for them to
apply.
Um, part of that included the
rapid turnaround time. The
having to go through legal
departments, all of these
different barriers that came up.
And so at that time, the, the,
the director decided to open
funding specifically for tribal
communities, and it all came
because he attended that
meeting. So it's about hearing
and collaborating and hearing
the needs of the community
members, um.
So that those are just that,
those are just some of the
priorities that we've had, of
course, building capacity and
building the workforce is a huge
um area of need.
Um, I do want to, um, point to
some of the initiatives that we
have, um, been
Extremely effective on and the
three top ones again is the
alcohol, liquor excise tax, um,
the association has been very
committed to this initiative. We
know the impact that alcohol has
on tribal communities,
especially dry reservations, um,
and communities that are
targeted by the liquor industry,
the opioid initiatives as well,
including medication assisted
treatment where needed.
Um
Have background music.
It's OK.
Uh, it just felt like we needed
some background music.
Um, and then, and then the third
huge initiative was the
increasing the behavioral health
workforce, you know, in addition
to that, or a tagline to that
would be decreasing the
administrative burden to
communities, um, especially when
it comes to declined billing
initiatives because
It
It takes a lot more work and a
lot more time and a lot more
funding to be able to address
some of those, um,
declines, um, we have been able
to provide a lot of assistance
related to Medicaid billing,
supervision, workforce
development,
Um, grant writing and funding
opportunities.
Traditional services and
encouragement of of billable
traditional services, including
an RFPs through um the
Department of Health.
Technical assistance and being
that strong united voice.
Um,
and I, I apologize because even
with my glasses, I realized now
that it's printed how tiny this
is, so I do apologize that and I
can send this in as a PowerPoint
with bigger font, um.
Uh, so some of, some of the key
accomplishments, like I said,
I'll go through these a little
bit faster, but some of the key
accomplishments are, there's a
list on here, chests prevention,
e-prevention, um,
What that really means is that
there's a lot of initiatives
that are coming out through
either the Department of Health
or, or the behavioral Health
Services division or the
Healthcare Authority.
That never gets to the tribal
communities.
So I, because I have this
relationship and I'm trying to
be this bridge.
Finding out that experts of
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment in which
IV evaluated and how successful
that is. And right now, that's
such a huge initiative because
every single um safety net
emergency department has to
implement expert clinics are
implementing expert and even the
Department of Health that just
left, um, is going to be trying
to spread the word on as, um,
well, we were bringing the topic
of e-prevention, which is
electronic expert out to the
communities.
So the tribal communities since
2021.
We were way, way ahead of all of
this implementation that's
taking place now, but they would
have not found out about some of
these initiatives, had we not
had this association.
Um
Some of the other funding
opportunities I've mentioned. I
used to also train and go into
each tribal community to train
about 988 and how 988 could be
implemented in tribal
communities because it's not
just something that can be, um,
you, yes, you can use the phone
number to call, but there were
also mobile crisis teams and
crisis triage centers, and
entire crisis system um that
needed to be explained and
modified for each tribal
community. Um,
In addition to that, and one of
the, one of the ones that I
really wanna highlight is as an
association.
We were bringing up the
predatory behavior that was
happening in Gallup because I
get calls from Gallup saying,
Cindy, here's some pictures.
Here's some photos. Arizona is
picking up our people. What are
we going to do about it? And I
don't have funding, so what can
I do? I was notifying behavioral
health department. I was
notifying UNM. I was notifying
DOH, I was notifying anyone that
would hear me.
So that something could be done.
Had we had funding, we could
have added implemented and done
something about it and saved
thousands of lives.
During that period of time.
Then we had to raise our voices
up again because then we knew
that it was moving into
Albuquerque.
And at that point, I was getting
calls from Laguna.
From Mescalero from other
communities that were telling
me.
We have family, we have
relatives in Albuquerque, and
they're not as connected as in
McKinley County, and even though
it was horrible in McKinley
County, most people, most
relatives know where their
relative is. Are they in NCI?
Are they out, you know, in one
of the camps, where are they?
But that wasn't happening in
Albuquerque. We were losing
people left and right.
So we could have done something
about that. We were trying to
raise awareness.
But that was the limit that we,
that we were limited to that.
Um, the other big um
accomplishment that I, I want to
celebrate is during the Gallup
crisis, again, I get called a
lot people have my cell phone
number, um.
During the Gallup crisis during
the um during the ceremonial, I
was able to mobilize as the
association, the behavioral
health department's Opry, so we
sent out peers. I was able to
mobilize um UNM and they sent
out therapists. We're able to
mobilize, um, social work or
tribal social workers, and they
were able to go to McKinley
County, mobilized, um, and we're
able to get community members
and a tribal healer to go to the
area and provide services, and
create talking circles, but
again, a lot of this work is
just on a volunteer basis,
right? So it's who do you know
that you can mobilize and send
help when it's needed. And
that's what we would like your
support in being able to do a
lot more of this, um,
With actual supporting kind of
like um.
A little bit more tenacity and
some teeth behind what we do as
an association. Um,
So, again, informing policy, um,
some of these I can um
skip a little bit.
Um,
On slide 15.
Um, so we are asking for a
moderate support of 450,000 from
um
From legislature.
To do some of the activities
that we're doing to enhance
activities that we're doing to
be able to provide services, um,
and be a lot more proactive in
our approach and to be
supportive of our tribal
members. Um,
We are asking for support with
staffing.
We want to hold a behavioral, a
tribal behavioral health
conference, um, and meet in
person, um, and we have been
talking to a couple of different
people to see if we could
collaborate on doing something
like that. Marketing, and part
of that includes being able to
market our association, as I
said, we have been getting
recognition, but there's limited
recognition even locally, so we
need to do that and, and
recruitment and retention, um,
that
Like I mentioned, there's a lot
of turnover within um
communities and within the
behavioral health field, um, and
then some administrative cost.
Um
Yeah, so then in summary, I have
um a couple of our continued
goals, which we do want to
continue bridging communication
between all of the departments
and, and behavioral health
providers. We want to be able to
have a voice and have and, and
have input from the providers in
legislative changes.
We also need sustainability
within the behavioral health
workforce and so any training
and capacity building that we
can provide to in to enhance and
sustain that workforce. It's so
needed in our communities, um,
we also want to be known as that
advisory voice.
We have a lot of experts in our
group, and it would be nice if
when they have um
Strategic planning sessions, um,
and they call on one of us or
our team to provide that voice,
it would be ideal. Um, a lot of
the times we are called to
participate in a lot of meetings
and a lot of um advisory boards,
etc. But again, we're volunteers
and so it's only if we have time
to have that voice, um, to
participate.
Um
Again, building the capacity of
our members.
Um, ideally, we would have
secured funding for this
association ongoing.
Um, but at least for the
meantime, if we could hire staff
that could help move this
association, um, we do work side
by side sometimes with the
larger um behavioral health
association, um, and they do
support us in a lot of the
initiatives that we have or are
are the topics that we bring to
light.
Unfortunately, that association
focuses on, on different level
items than what we do as the
tribal association and the needs
that the health providers, the
tri hear health providers have,
um, but they are very supportive
of all of our initiatives, and
I'm really thankful for the
partnership that they have with
us.
Again, recruitment and retention
and then um
And then the annual conference.
So with that, um, we haven't uh
an image in the link for our web
page and then our contact
information, um, and with that,
I would just stand for questions
and comments and again,
appreciation to you all for
being here on this Halloween
day.
Thank you. Committee members.
Representative Lujan.
And then we'll have leader
Chasey, Representative Little,
and vice chair in tow, so.
Thank you, madam Chair. um, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um,
So you, you were here for the
previous presentation. Did you
hear the.
So I just feel like, madam
chair, there's just a lot of
silos that we were working in.
And I just
It's, it's, um, it's a bit
frustrating for me, but I can
only imagine how frustrating
that is for you, as we heard all
your
Your, um, your, your issues that
you're having and your
challenges, and I, and I feel
for you.
Um, but do you, are you part of
the, the payroll collabor
collaborative that we have um.
Yeah, with the state of New
Mexico, do you participate?
In their meetings. I know
they're only quarterly, but do
you participate with them?
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I do participate in
the collaborative. I'm not a
member of the collaborative,
right, because you have to be
invited, but I do participate.
OK.
And from that, um.
other resources that you, that
are available, madam Chair, and
I saw them in the room earlier
with the, the tribal health
councils.
How are, are they part of the
association?
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, um,
Representative, they are not
part of the association. The
association was specifically
created for behavioral health,
the tribal we hear about health
providers, directors, and their
billing, um, because that was
the gap in need that was
identified.
Understand that, um.
But they are doing some of this
work. Is that correct, Madam
Chair?
health
They're they're there to fill in
the gaps with um.
With behavioral health and other
um other providerships or other,
you know, uh,
Uh
Issues and challenges that they
come in and they help out. So
are you working with them at
all, Madam Chair?
So Madam Chair, um, we are
currently not working on that.
Well, we have one health counsel
that is attending, but as
mentioned before,
Everything that we do is on a
volunteer basis and it's very
limited and so the outreach to
all of those that would need to
come, or would, we would love
for them to come has been really
difficult. I've also reached out
to um a lot of the urban we hear
about health providers. I've
also reached out to um social
detox centers because I believe
that they could also benefit and
support the association, but I
feel a lot of the times the
barriers either folks are very
busy or everyone's running.
their own meetings, and it's
really difficult to have this
coordinated voice.
No, that's what I'm hearing, man
and and that's why I'm, I'm
asking some of these questions
and and
Um, again, working in silos
isn't isn't working. And have
you met with DOH and talked to
them and say, hey, you have this
coordination and you have paid
staff members.
Right, how, how can we
collaborate with each other.
So Madam Chair representative,
um,
We started in 2021. Um, DOH's
tribal work is recent.
So we, yes, but to answer your
question, yes, we have and, and,
and as I mentioned before, Tony
used to be part of AID and so he
participated and he's known
about the association and
actually at the last meeting we
talked about the association
and, and recruited during his
meeting, he talked about our
association and encouraged
participation and, and extended
collaboration and actually when
I mentioned that, um, we've been
wanting to do the behavioral
health conference. Tony and I
have talked about partner
partnering to be able to do
something.
like this together.
Yeah, I'm sure, I appreciate it
and just being involved, you're
gonna have to, you're gonna have
to anchor yourself to to some
source that has the finance, the
financial, um,
Resources in order for you to
really get to get things going
or or else create some kind of
program where you're going to
get those resources that you're
asking from, from DOH and I'll
say this, I, I'm on house
appropriations as well as with
with representative.
Um, Allison.
And we've given over a billion
dollars.
Uh, from our state funding and
behavioral health programs for
our state.
And it's all over the place.
So, these are the frustrations
I'm having because I've been
meeting with groups throughout
this interim.
time and they're, you know,
they, they, they've been in
Active, uh, pro, you know, um,
nonprofits and whatnot for years
and years, and they're barely
getting some uh funding out of
some of these.
These uh sources that we've,
we've, we've provided by natural
resources. So this has to be
very frustrating for you, asking
only for $450,000 only, I say.
But that money has to be
somewhere. So I would, I would
like to, to further this
conversation with you as I'm
working with these other groups
and even with DOH and say, where
is that money? Where is the
programming that you can, you
can do that outreach because
I'm gonna tell you right now,
you're gonna have the hardest
time getting that funding. This
from us just based upon what I
just told you. When we've
already put out a billion
dollars from the state, how, you
know, how do we
We need to do some of that work
with you though and help you to,
to find out where that is and
where some of that program
funding is because your work is
essential.
And um your outreach, you've
you've created an association
and there's, there's a lot of
things already going on there. I
just, I just feel like you're
hitting some, some
Some problems and complications,
and I feel like we can help you.
So thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the time.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
floor leader Jay.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, you
know, I
I am
I'm trying to figure out exactly
how your organization might be
like another one, and, and I
don't think you're like this
one, but there is one that I was
active in when I was director of
a community program.
In the area of developmental
disabilities, but I was in
charge of an early childhood
program that served children
birth to 5. We got public
education for 3 and 4 year olds
with disabilities and then
Focus then on the um what are
now the fit programs, family
infant toddler.
Um, those programs all have
direct service money.
And then they have an
association now.
And um we always hear from the
association advocating for
funding for those direct service
programs. So I, I just
What really caught my attention
when you said that you were
hearing what was happening in
Arizona.
Because that just wasn't widely
known. I mean, that was Medicaid
fraud that was going on a wide
scale, and I first read about it
in The New York Times.
I mean, I hadn't even heard
about it here.
And I know the governor was
really concerned with um some
large initiatives that were
being proposed because she could
see people saying, hey, we could
use some of this money and do
the same thing, uh, that
horrible thing that they did in
Arizona, and we need people like
you with your ears to the ground
and, and knowing um with the
tribal communities, it's, it's a
unique challenge because there's
so, so many and
Um, you really want to
Create a network that's not
controlling anything. They're,
they're tribal sovereigns and
and uh.
So, I, I don't, I don't have
advice for you. I just want to
um, underscore the importance of
having people like yourselves.
Involved with all of the actual
providers.
So, um,
How you go about the financing
of what you need. I mean, good
heavens, look what you might
have saved if
If you had been able to um to do
something and, and, um, frankly,
we're, we, we have this one
effort going right now where
we're trying to look.
Um, at what?
In under resourced communities,
people need.
So that they don't end up in a
crisis, whether it's with
Um, a lack of food or housing or
um
Shelter for their children and
try to keep them away from ever
needing to uh be involved in
child protective services, for
example, and that's just one
effort that's going on and uh
let me just connect you with
them, with our, with them, with
our effort, right, like right
now they just did a 2 day
meeting in Taos, and they've
already done a meeting up in um
in Aspanel, it's called the
Blueprint Project.
Uh, through the Anna age 8.
Um
Institute at New Mexico State
University and Veronica Kropnik,
who's in my office is doing some
of the facilitating when they go
out and do their listening
sessions, but
You know, I, I don't have a no
light bulbs are going off in my
head telling me what to do about
money, but I, I do think there
has to be some kind of a, a
service you're selling to the
state in order to get the state
funding. So whether it's a
direct service to clients or or
whatever, and yet,
What you're doing is kind of
what the Blueprint project is
looking at, um, which is to
prevent problems.
And we need to look more at
prevention.
So we're spending the money
upstream.
Instead of how expensive it
gets.
When we're spending it
downstream.
So, um
We'll just talk for a minute
after, OK, thanks.
Thank you.
Representative Tracy, uh,
Representative Little.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
um, uh.
Listening to my colleagues and
uh offering uh what they have as
far as guidance and painting uh
uh the landscape that you're
going to be dealing with because
what I think, what I know, uh,
of the collaborate collaborate
collaborative that you all have
is that it is quite effective.
And so, um, I'm curious as to
whether you uh is this the first
committee you've
presented to to make a request
or have you presented this
somewhere uh in another uh uh a
forum.
Madam Chair, members of the
I've
I have present, and I haven't
presented to legislature before.
This is our first time as an
introduction of the association
into kind of get us going and
partly um Madam Chair, the
barriers that we have faced in
terms of obtaining funding from
in a department, um, or
You know, in terms of, I, I, we
hear often there's thousands and
thousands of maybe billions of
dollars in behavioral health,
and we're always asking where?
And how come those behavioral
health programs, and these
associations aren't necessarily
Obtaining it and it's not
obtainable for us, um.
The barriers in terms of not
being able to implement when
people are dying, um.
Or being kidnapped and left to
die.
was extremely was a huge
struggle to everyone, to all of
the members in our association,
um, not being able to implement.
And then recently, as I did the
community engagement for
Bernello County on the opioid
settlement, one of the biggest
concerns was around.
are some of the sober living
homes here going to be doing the
same thing.
Who's who's supervising that?
Who's?
Who's going out there and making
sure that that's not happening,
that that fraud isn't happening.
Not being able to mobilize
funding to address not only
prevention but workforce.
There's been so much um
conversation around the need for
workforce development. I just
heard Secretary Allen saying,
um, tribal health is New Mexico
health.
It is, and a big part of that is
behavioral health.
And so how do we mobilize that?
How does our group that has the
behavioral health tribal
providers actually do something
about it.
And, and where, where is the
actual vivid collaboration,
where they're saying, here's the
funding for all, look at all the
work that you've done with no
funding. Out of the kindness of
your heart. Thank you so much.
But how many organizations have
died because there are, there's
no funding. There's nobody
willing to do the work.
I
You know, I, I'm lucky enough
that I, I, I've worked with
tribal communities for 20 plus
years.
And there's this dedication
there and so I, I have been
doing it since 2021. And for the
most part, uh, with support from
our core members on a quarterly
basis, um, as needed maybe to
review something, but other than
that,
Staying up at night, trying to
make sure that there's
coordination. People that trust
me in the communities that call
me and say, we need this urgency
and I have contacts that
Department of Health or BHSD or
wherever to be able to mobilize
them and get help to like
McKinley County during a crisis
and any other tribal community
as needed.
But where is the
Thank you.
So Madam Chariot appears that um
so I've been in this body for 2
years, and what I've heard, um,
more recently was the uh
Health collaborative um.
Tribal health councils, uh,
request was most recent that
sticks in my mind because what
they were doing was pretty much
like you were, and we recognized
um the importance of the work
that they were doing, um,
despite not having um dedicated
funds to to do that work.
It sounds very similar to me
here and I'm wondering how um
Uh, well, I acknowledge the
amount, the larger money, uh, a
large amount of funds that have
been set aside for behavioral
health to address this issue,
and
It appears that that was the
situation for um the Department
of Health as well. There was no
the, the issue was that there
was no uh
Line the item, if you will, a
line item for the tribal health,
um,
Um
councils
And I see the same situation
here.
How might we
Despite all of the dollars being
set aside, how might we be able
to be helpful to um create a
fund.
Ensure that there are funds for
this work to continue, um, a
cup, um,
So that's 11.
Kind of question, but it's about
us and our committee trying to
figure out how, how, how best to
approach it.
Um, with you, not for you, but
with you, and I'm curious as to
when you get into specifics, and
if you were requesting.
$450,000.
Uh
When you talk about the support
staff, I may be putting the
cart.
Ahead of the horse here, but
I'm, I'm curious, uh, how.
Many FTEs, what, what are you
looking at as a structure and
where would this be located?
Um, would you have to worry
about a uh a um.
A place to hold this program.
So, um,
That's my question, uh, Madam
Chair.
And if you could make that brief
too, I know that we're running,
uh, in time, but I would
appreciate that. Thanks and
representative, um, we would not
need a location. We're thinking
of having a director, a
coordinator that would go out to
the community for recruitment
retention, maybe an admin.
Two positions and enactment
maybe, so that's about 3,
administrative services, I mean
it's.
Uh, website development, etc.
Mhm. OK.
All right. Thank you. That's my
last question. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Little
Vice Chair Pinto. Thank you,
madam chair.
Members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation and
and what did you do?
I see this date for March 19,
2021.
And not making light of or make
an excuse that COVID was going
on or what of us coming out of
it, um.
But getting to their um digging
our way out still digging our
way out in some sense, uh, with
the implications that came out
of that particular epidemic.
Um
And we don't have a tribal
liaison within the department of
behavioral health.
It seems like you guys are doing
the work that probably the
liaison should be doing, so
there should be some way to get
funding to you or even um
contract with you guys, um,
through that department because
that is a big lap in um.
Something that should be
provided to, especially when we
talk about our tribes, nations
and pueblos in that sense of a
salt source because if you're
working with them, have those uh
relationships already
established, so discussions
offline, more work needs to be
done. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, just real quickly,
um, we did as an association,
push for that position to get
reinstated, and it did get
reinstated. So we do currently
have a behavioral health tribal
liaison within the BHSD
department.
See, um, because I looked on the
website and didn't see anything
there but um.
And I think too you probably did
have momentum going, working
with Secretary Trujillo, which
would probably a little bit
derailed when our secretary left
us, so let's move forward and
find a way. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you for joining us today.
Thank you for your presentation
and Cindy, thank you for coming
to Gallup.
And working with us in Gallup.
I've seen you several times
there.
And um I know you do great work,
you care about your mission and
your goals and your values here.
So I think we can find a way.
Your work is really important.
of much needed and if we should.
Work very hard and come up.
Provide the funds.
Those would be considered
startup funds and would you move
forward and write grants and
raise funds and.
Can you talk a little bit about
that?
And I'm chair members, um, I am
a grant writer. I write grants
for the state. I get the
millions. I get communities,
tribal communities, billions of
dollars for programming. We're
not a 501c3, and part of that is
I own my own business. I'm part
of the association. I'm part of
the Yahoo.
I have very limited time and so
this startup fund would allow us
to become a 501c3 or a 5016 to
be able to advocate, and then we
would be able to write grant
applications to federal funding
to the state, to whoever, and be
able to do something like that
currently, we can't do that. So
we need the startup funds and we
needed to start up as an
association and build our
momentum and get credibility for
what we do, um, in order to, to
achieve our goals.
Thank you.
OK.
On that point, on that.
Me only time on that point time
thank you. I just, I, I think
we're just kind of brainstorming
here. I really like this, um.
I would say, um, to talk to
your, your local cog, your, um,
Because they do provide some
help with grant writing, and if
they don't, you should let us
know. I know my cog is a north
central, um, yeah, I know you're
a grant router yourself, but
you're a volunteer. So if you
need some, right?
Right? So I'm just, I'm just
trying to brainstorm, so on that
point, like to get some
additional support there, but I,
I think we've been talking to
and I, and we wanna, we're gonna
inquire a little bit more with
you, Madam Chair, if that's.
Appropriate, if you feel that
that's appropriate as well.
Thank you, man.
OK, thank you. So with that,
thank you once again for your
presentation and your hard work,
and we look forward to our
continued work with you and
we'll do our best to support
you. Thank you so much. Thank
you for having us.
OK. Committee members, a little
bit of housekeeping. I would
like to thank.
Uh, JD Bullington once again for
coffee and a great lafui's
breakfast, uh, please thank Mark
Duran. If you see him down the
hall, we um had a great lunch
provided by Mark.
And uh JD also invites you to
take a pumpkin, uh, pumpkins,
uh, also compliments of JD
tomorrow morning, Drew Setter
and team will provide coffee,
bagels, and fruit.
Uh, please encourage your
colleagues, please come back.
Encourage your colleagues, uh,
to come back tomorrow.
On time
On time, there will be coffee,
bagels, and fruit.
Agenda, it's on your agenda.
9:30 a.m. we can, we will
reconvene tomorrow morning at
9:30.
Thank you for your work. Have a
great day.
