2024 meeting.
And uh with that uh.
We'll have introduction of our
members to assist with a webcast
and.
For the record
And we'll start in
All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Alan
Martinez House District 23.
I represent the northern part of
Riorancho in the western edge of
the town of Brolio and I'm
excited to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Greg
Neibert, Senate District 27,
which is 5 counties in central
eastern New Mexico.
Travis Curry, tobacco,
Roosevelt, and Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning to all of our
members and guests. Um, I'm
Representative Cynthia Brego,
and I represent District 17 in
Burnlio County, which is the
northwest corner of um
Albuquerque, closest to
Cottonwood Mall.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. I'm Natalie Figueroa. I
represent House District 30 in
the Northeast heights of
Albuquerque.
Thank you. We'll go to our
staff.
I am Christina Vasquez. I'm a
staff attorney for legislative
counsel Service.
Thank you to our staff and um
and uh good morning again and uh
it's the chairman, I'm uh.
State Senator Roberto Bay J.
Gonzalez, representing 4
counties.
And part of Los Alamos Ria Riva
Santa Fe and Taos.
So again, uh
Thank you for being here and
thanks to our audience and we'll
go and we'll start with our
first.
Presentation
And uh.
I'll let you introduce yourself.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you to the committee. Um, it's
really an honor to be invited
and to share our research with
all of you.
Uh, my name is David Drain. I'm
joining my, my colleague
Stephanie Connolly from the Pew
Charitable Trusts.
Um, and our state fiscal policy
projects and just as quick
introduction, you know, the
future charitable Trust is a
nonpartisan nonprofit that looks
at a range of public policy
issues on an evidence-based
approach, our work on state
fiscal health and specifically
on public sector retirement
systems has gone back to 2007,
um, looking at both funding and
funding policy, uh, planned
design and retirement security.
Uh, investments and investment
transparency, and tools to
measure and manage risk. just a
little closer on the micro, of
course. Oh, well, there you go.
Um, so, you know, based on what
we're asked, if you look at uh
page two of what we are
presenting, we were asked to
talk about 4 things.
First looking broadly, uh, best
practices and model approaches
to pension policy.
Uh, based on some work,
particularly looking at
successful states and how
they've been able to offer
well-funded pensions with strong
benefits and stable costs.
Specifically looking at
considerations for pension
sustainability? What does it
mean to have a sustainable
pension policy? Are there ways
to measure and assess it?
Using stress testing to assess
pension policy, to understand
the risks, particularly from
investments and investment
performance, and what tools
there are to manage those risks.
And then lastly, because we
understand this is an issue of
interest and importance in New
Mexico, talking about how other
states have used variable colas
and some of the COLA policies
we've changed, uh, we've seen in
In the states.
Go to page page 4.
So let's start with big picture,
you know, in 2008, uh, we saw,
you know, pension plans are
above 80% funded.
So, even before the full impact
of the Great Recession was on
the books, below what the
actuaries would have said,
should have had been set aside
to pay for benefits already
earned by workers and retirees.
Uh, in the intervening years, we
saw liabilities grow faster than
assets and a widening gap
between those assets and the
liabilities that states had
incurred.
From a combination of reasons
from investment, uh, losses from
the Great Recession that were
being recognized.
From assumption changes as plans
recognized a lower future
expected rate of return, as well
as um yeah, other demographic
assumptions.
The ongoing shortfall of many
states to adequately fund their
pension benefits. So we'll talk
about some of the success that
we've seen in that area.
Uh, and then the legacy pension
debt that many states had uh
racked up even before the Great
Recession and the dot-com crash
from, you know,
Decades of choices made to not
put aside enough to pay for
pensions.
Then if you look at the right
side of this, you see.
A spike in 2021 and the funder
ratio.
Once in a generation investment
returns, you know, typical
pension plan got 27% returns
that year, pushed the funder
ratio up to 82%.
I've seen since before the Great
Recession.
Uh, but then losses in 2022, uh,
Basically erase those gains and
pushed the overall pension
funding down to 74%.
Um, and I think one of the
takeaways from this, um, and as
you, you look at the
Uh, you know, one of the
takeaways from this is that
investments and investment
volatility.
Will play a big role or continue
to play a big role in shaping
the funding and the cost of
pensions.
Uh, next page, page 5.
So I talked about how states
overall had spent years uh
underfunding pensions, putting
aside less than what was needed
to
Meet actual benchmarks to keep
pension costs pension fund of
liabilities from growing.
But an important finding in our
research is that the last 5
years, most states have been
hitting important benchmarks.
Um, you know, 40 states from
2018 to 2022, met or exceeded
the contribution benchmark we
use to assess states and state
pension funding.
What do we look at? Well, we
look at whether or not the
country from employers, from
employees, from everyone else,
you know, any other government
unit contributing to the pension
is enough to pay for the costs
and new benefits in a given
year, the service cost or the
normal cost.
New Mexico public workers spent
another year providing service
to the state to um to
communities.
They aren't a greater benefit
because of that, that cost is
estimated by the actuaries and
that gets paid for.
But then also the expected
growth in the net pension
liability or the funding gap.
Right, the uh
Total pension liability is going
to grow every year based on that
assumed rate of return.
The funded portion to be matched
by the investments on those
assets, but the unfunded
liability will grow year over
year, unless pension
contributions pay it down, just
like any other debt, are you
paying for the interest?
States that meet this benchmark.
Consistently, will have their
funding gaps stay stable over
time.
that exceeded will pay down this
unfunded liability and get the
full funding over some period of
time.
And in states that are
consistently below it have
negative amortization.
Even if they make the
contributions they're making,
and every assumption holds true.
Their funding gap will grow year
over year, unless something
changes.
40 states has had a positive or
stable amortization from 2018 to
2022, and states, including a
number of states with fixed
contribution policies fell below
that threshold, including New
Mexico.
Next page.
Now obviously, the 40 states
that are hitting this benchmark
is great news. This is not
something that we've been seeing
in the data until recently.
Reflects
Efforts in state governments,
uh, in pension plans themselves
and the actuarial community to
try to get things on a more
stable footing.
But even the fact that states
are meeting this benchmark
today.
Doesn't tell us that they're on
the right track unless they also
have tools to manage future
risk. And here we're looking at
investment returns, both for the
typical pension plan is the
median pension plan in a
database collected by uh
Wilshire.
And you see that, you know, this
is the blue line, and it more or
less follows that red line which
is the S&P 500's returns.
You know, the pension plans use
of diverse array of assets can
help mitigate some of the ups
and downs, right, the dip in
2009, the typical pension plan
was not quite as steep as for
the S&P 500. The spike in 2021
was not quite as uh sharp uh
going up.
But on the investment side,
given the investment goals of
pension plans have to get a
significant return, to pay for
promised benefits means that
investment risk and the
uncertainty of it.
is going to be built into
Pension plans, and then the
question is, can they put in
place tools to address that?
If you look at page 7.
You know, one of the key
takeaways of our research is
that good policy can make a
difference.
You start with the red line.
It's the employer contribution
rate of the average state from
2007 to 2022.
You see it more or less doubles
of this period. In 2007, the
average state was paying about
11% of payroll into their
pension plans uh by 2022 that it
increased to about 23% of
payroll.
Look at the 10 worst funded
states that have had an even
sharper increase um to over 30%
of payroll as their employer
contribution rate.
Now, importantly,
This increase was necessary,
right? This is how states got to
the point where they're meeting
contribution targets where
they're stabilizing their
pension debt.
At the same time, as I think all
of you are well aware, when you
uh make those increases, it's
going to crowd out other
important budget priorities. You
can't put as many cops in the
street, teachers in the
classroom, or fix as many roads
and bridges.
And so then the question is, if
you don't have tools to manage.
Future risk.
And ensure that you're not gonna
have another repeat of the last
15 years. Another doubling
another 10% points.
At what point does the cost of
paying for these pension
benefits becomes something that
Legislators, policymakers are
unable or unwilling to make.
So then if you look at the
bottom of this in the purple
line.
This is 5 well-funded states
that have had predictable costs.
Uh, you know, Idaho, Nebraska,
South Dakota, Tennessee, and
Wisconsin. We'll talk about
those last three, a couple other
times over this presentation.
So these are states that have
well funded pensions, right?
Their success in keeping costs
stable is not at the expense of
future generations of taxpayers
will have to deal with unfunded
liabilities.
Um, but instead they've been
able to keep their contribution
rates on average going from
about
8% of payroll in 2007, about 10%
of payroll in 2022.
So they've been able to have a
predictable cost over this
period.
Now, part of this is that
they're well funded.
But if we look at other well
funded states,
Uh, we see that without the same
tools to manage risk. The
country rates went from about 8%
of payroll to about 15% of
payroll over this period.
Now, I'd rather be one of these
well funded states than the
typical state which was paying
25% or 23%, I'd rather be one of
these well funded states than a
Kentucky or a Pennsylvania or
New Jersey that had substantial
unfunded liabilities that
they'll have to address, but at
the same time, it shows the
difference between states that
are just
You know, consistent about
funding and states that are
consistent about funding and
have tools to manage risk.
Page 8, please.
Mm
I walked through 3 examples of
these states, Wisconsin, South
Dakota, and Tennessee.
Um, one important takeaway that
we have in looking at these
three states, is that there's
not a one size fits all
approach.
All three states have different
plan designs, different funding
policies, and different tools to
manage risk. They all do things
very differently, even though
they have similar outcomes,
stable costs, significant
benefits for workers and
retirees, and a well-funded
system.
Wisconsin is what we call a
shared risk design.
Uh, the idea is that they want
to share risk between employers,
employees, and retirees.
Um, from employers and
employees, their risk is shared
by a shared actual contribution.
They paid the actual
contribution rate and split it
more or less down the middle
between employers and employees.
And then the retiree side, we'll
talk a bit more about how they
do this. Um, they have an
adjustable cola that's designed
to make sure that the retiree
portion of the benefits is fully
funded.
South Dakota has what we call an
adjustable benefit framework.
And that's because they have a
statutorily fixed contribution
rate, like New Mexico and like a
number of other states. Um, but
then they adjust the benefits
each year to make sure that that
fixed rate is gonna be
sufficient to pay for benefits.
Once again, the way they
adjusted is through the cola.
Every year the actuary of the
plan calculates what cola can we
provide in order to make sure
that the assets and
contributions we have are enough
to pay for current and future
benefits.
And then lastly, Tennessee.
Before the Great Recession hit,
Tennessee had a well-funded
traditional defined benefit
system, and it built itself a
cushion to make sure that even
if there's a downturn hit, they
had some level of protection.
At the same time, when the Great
Recession hit, policymakers
there decided that this is a
level of risk and volatility
that we don't want going
forward.
The new hires were put into a
hybrid system.
A smaller defined benefit paired
with a defined contribution.
And then policymakers added in
additional pieces to make sure
the costs would stay stable.
They set aside more each year
than the actuaries recommended
and put that in a reserve fund.
To deal with unexpected cost
increases.
And if that falls short, they
then have other tools that they
can put in place in terms of
adjusting benefits, to make sure
that their contributions, you
know, they've set their target
contribution rate of 9% of
payroll for both the DB and the
DC stay stable.
Next page, please.
So what do we learn from all
this? I said, we looked at, uh,
you know, we looked up at the
states, we've looked at 3 states
that have had particularly good
outcomes. We seem to have
different policies, but have had
similar results.
First, all, all three of these
states provide a path to
retirement security.
When you look at a career
employee and what he or she
gets, they provide adequate
replacement income.
And when you look at shorter
term workers, they're getting an
effective savings rate to make
sure that they have a path to
retirement.
And importantly, one of our
findings is that if you've got a
well funded pension system with
stable costs, you end up having
the fiscal space to fill in
holes in the benefits.
Wisconsin, South Dakota, and
Tennessee also places where what
they had in place were falling
short and were able to adjust
their benefits to make up for
those gaps.
Next, maintain fiscal
sustainability. We'll talk about
more in detail, but, you know,
all three of these states uh
fund their pensions obligations
sustainably in a way that's
predictable and affordable for
the state.
So we're not having a trade-off
between leaving unfunded
liabilities for future
generations and having a stable
costs today, they're able to do
both.
Planning for uncertainty.
Uh, I think one of the things
that we've seen is that we've
had volatile investments over
the last, uh, you know, 25
years. And even if
Over that whole period.
You know, over 25 or 30 year
horizon investments have hit the
long-term targets.
which many state pension plans
have reported.
These those ups and downs a bit
hard to manage and have caused
real problems in a number of
states.
These states have a tool for
managing uncertainty.
It differs in each case, how
they approach it, but they have
a deliberate focus on managing
to target cost and putting in
place policies that will do just
that.
And then ensure investment
transparency, you know.
Overall, $5 trillion in assets
set aside by taxpayers and
public employees.
Have been put in place to pay
for promised benefits.
Yeah, how are these being
invested, um, and, you know, I
won't go into a lot more detail
on this, but you know, our
research has shown the
importance of both disclosing
your investment policy
statement.
What do you want to do and how
do you want to manage these
billions of dollars in each each
individual pension plan.
Giving details on your
performance? What are you
achieving with these
investments, and then
particularly as states have uh
state pension plans have moved
to some more complex and risky
uh more complex and expensive
investments. What are you paying
in fees, and are you fully
disclosing those?
If you get a slide 11 and talk
through.
Uh, page 11, how do we measure
fiscal sustainability and get
them more in depth on that.
And so when we're talking about
a sustainable pension policy.
It's really one where
The cost that you're paying over
time will stay stable and be
sufficient to pay for the
benefits that you're promising.
Over time, which will likewise
stay stable.
Now we see that
Even the well funded states of
some movements and their
employer contribution rates.
Um, but
You know, within fairly narrow
bounds. So, you know, if you're
Wisconsin and you look at the
contribution rate in 2007.
It's gonna be more or less what
you're paying within a plus or
minus 2% of payroll.
Uh, arrange for the next 15
years.
You're looking at a number of
other states that range is much
bigger.
Um, likewise, a number of states
have kept their costs stable,
but have had to dramatically cut
back on the benefits being
offered.
And likewise, that meant that
the policies fire weren't
sustainable because they
couldn't offer the benefits that
Workers and retirers are
expecting.
So actually measure this.
When we start looking at
solvency.
So, most mature public pension
plans have negative cash flow,
right? The whole point of the
system is to take money from
employers employees.
Set aside and grow it through
investments, and then be able to
pay a larger amount out, uh, in
terms of benefit payments.
But when that negative cash flow
rose to a significantly large
enough share of plant assets.
It starts to be unclear that
whether you can make up the
negative cash flow through
investments.
When we started measuring this,
uh, in 2014, and a lot of our
data points start in 2014
because that's when new
accounting standards changed the
reporting requirements and gave
us new data points to work with.
6 states are below that
threshold and had solvency risk
from our the way we measured it.
And now all 50 states are are
past that point, and don't,
don't show that risk.
Next, debt reduction.
If I'm able to maintain, uh, you
know, assets in the plan, but
I'm adding net pension
liabilities, adding on funnel
liabilities every single year,
meaning that future generations
taxpayers have to pay for them.
Uh, that's likewise not
unsustainable or not a
sustainable situation.
And so we look at
Whether or not states are
meeting this contribution
benchmark of stabilizing or
paying down pension debt.
And I said 40 states were doing
this from 2018 to 2022.
And then lastly, cost
predictability. If you're asking
dramatically different amounts
from public budgets, from the
state budget, from school
districts, from uh local
budgets, you know,
That ends up creating an
unsustainable situation from the
budget perspective.
Of the states that have had
success in managing the, you
know, meeting the other two
tests. Only 5 states look, you
know, looking at past
performance, have also had
predictable costs and have had
kind of all three tests of
sustainability.
Now, importantly, given the
improvements and changes we've
seen across a number of states,
I think if you asked this
question a decade from now.
Our hope and our expectations,
more states would, you know, be
meeting these uh these targets.
Next page, please.
So on page 12, how is New Mexico
doing?
And, you know, New Mexico's
funding remains below average.
Uh, the funder ratio for state
pension plans in 2022, 74%, New
Mexico is at 67%.
And obviously,
Funded ratio is just one point
in time measure. It's not just
where you are, it's where you're
going. That's an important
consideration for policymakers
and stakeholders.
If you look at page 13.
We see the New Mexico, like some
of its neighbors, uh, Arizona
and Texas. You seen its funding
ratio declining over over this
period of time.
You know,
New Mexico and Arizona or Texas
and Arizona were close to full
funding in 2003. New Mexico was
not that far behind.
And we've seen the funding ratio
declining year over year, you
know, with some ups and downs
from investments. Um, because
the policies put in place,
particularly on contributions,
weren't enough to close that
gap.
Now when I drop 2 draw attention
to two other lines in this, on
this table, on this chart.
The green line at the top is
Wisconsin. You can see how plans
with tools to, you know,
maintain full funding, um,
Cross the period of economic
volatility, are able to have
insistent funded ratios that,
you know, the
Um, you know, results we see in
many states.
Uh, to, you know, where funding
drops significantly after the
dotcom crash after the Great
Recession, was the result of the
policies they had chosen.
And then the other line to look
at is that blue line at the
bottom that's West Virginia,
because this offers an example
of how
States can get themselves out of
trouble over time by having a
funding plan and sticking to it.
The West Virginia, if you go
back to 2003, it was the worst
funded uh state of all the 50.
Um, due to decades of choices in
the years past to underfund
their pensions.
Uh, and over, you know,
subsequent to that, in the 90s,
West Virginia policymakers put
in place a plan that said we're
going to get the full funding
over time and we're gonna stick
with it.
Now this plan took a while, um.
I think our experience looking
at pension policies that states
can get into trouble pretty fast
and it takes a lot longer to
get, get back out of trouble.
But they stuck with it, they
paid their actual contributions,
they set an actual funding
target that would get the full
funding.
Uh, when they had extra money,
say from the tobacco tax
settlements, they put that in.
And all those led to
West Virginia going from the
worst funded to above average
and close to full funding,
fulfilling this goal, the
policymakers had set.
Next page, please.
So this is looking at the New
Mexico's.
And this is page 14.
Uh, looking at New Mexico's net
pension liability, you know,
reported funding gap from uh the
financial reports put out by the
state, put out by PERA, and put
out by the ERB, um, you know,
and looking at the change from
2014, started 2014 to the end of
2022.
Uh, we see an overall increase
of about $5 billion in the net
pension liability.
And while there are some ups and
downs, particularly from
assumption changes, um,
And uh you know, reversal of
those, we see that investments
over this period.
2014, 2022.
We're above expectations and
paid down a small amount of the
unfunded liability.
But that confusions and net
amortization led to about a $4
billion increase in that uh
funding gap.
And so I think this is an
illustrative example of how, you
know, states that fall short of
this contribution benchmark.
Over time, we'll see their
funding gap rise. Even if
investments over this period did
better than uh next page,
please.
Now I'm gonna talk about
What we see is an important and
valuable tool for policymakers
trying to understand, not just
where their pension plans are,
but where they're going and the
potential trajectories,
depending on how investments and
other assumptions hold true.
So if you look at the map on
page 16.
This is looking at states that
have stress testing or risk
analysis as part of their
pension disclosures and
assessments.
And what we're looking at is
which states have something
that's forward looking, not just
where you are today.
But where contributions and
funded ratios will be.
You know, depending on how
investments or other things pan
out.
Going forward.
Um, and we, when we started
tracking this, 7 states were
doing this type of analysis.
Now, 25 states are doing this
either by statutory requirement.
By a board policy that requires
this or simply by identifying
this as an important policy
practice.
Now, the reason this is so
important, if you look at page
17, is that
You know, despite the wide range
of what states have done to
change benefits after the Great
Recession.
At the end of the day, state
pension plans are still, you
know, making significant
commitments to workers retirees.
You know, an important
commitment that those workers
and retirees depend on.
But that long term commitment,
unless it's managed exposes the
state to risk.
So the most common benefit
remains a traditional defined
benefit.
And even most of the states that
have moved away from that in
some fashion have gone towards,
uh, you know, hybrid or cash
balance plans that still have a
meaningful defined benefit
commitments to those
participants.
And then even the small number
of states that have gone to DC,
Alaska, North Dakota, Michigan,
and Oklahoma, in many cases have
defined benefit pensions for
some significant portion of the
workforce.
And also have legacy pensions
for uh those workers as well.
So
All 50 states, regardless of
what plan design changes they
have made.
Still have to have tools to
understand and manage their
risk.
And on page 18, I want to share
an example of an analysis that I
believe was shared with this
committee, uh.
Uh, last year.
But that shows what we see as
the value of this type of
assessment. This is looking at
Pra, um, and what I can tell
you.
This is from the 2023
sustainably sustainability and
solvency analysis.
Um, and it shows what the funded
ratio would be.
Depending on what investment
returns will be over the next 30
years.
That, uh, you know, dark line in
the middle is at 50th percentile
scenario.
Half the time, the uh the plan
and their investment experts
think things will be better than
that. Half the time they think
it'll be worse than that, and
that trajectory shows going from
about 70% funded to about 80%
funded.
And once again, this is uh from
the 2023 version, you know.
Things will change if this gets
updated. Um,
That green line at the top.
shows what the funderra will be
if investments exceed
expectations, and the analysis
shows a 39% chance of full
funding in 30 years, depending
on what investment returns do.
Uh, but then I think a line to
pay close attention to is that
red line that shows there's a
25% chance that the funder ratio
could end up 35% or worse.
And the analysis shows the 70%
chance of asset depletion and
insolvency.
Um, now what's driving this?
Obviously there's a lot of
policies in place. There are
some tools to manage risk and
particularly the COLA policies.
But absence, an actual funding
commitment that makes sure that
if investments or other things
fall short.
That the employer and the
sponsor will
Will make up for those
shortfalls.
That's how you end up with a
projection that shows such
potential significant drop in
funding.
Um, you know, as I said, we see
this as a useful analysis, um,
for, uh, policymakers. It can
serve as an early warning sign.
Uh, we'll talk about how
Colorado uses to identify early,
you know, solvency risk in their
system and make changes.
It can help calibrate
contribution policy, Connecticut
found that they had a higher,
uh, high risk of, you know,
volatile contributions.
You know, and change the funding
policy without really changing
much else in terms of their
overall benefits.
It can confirm the things you've
already done are working well.
Pennsylvania is a state that had
deeply distressed pensions, made
a number of changes, and now
their stress testing is showing,
uh, the results of those, uh,
uh, those decisions.
In South Dakota,
In the midst of the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic, uh, did a
stress test to try to understand
in this world of higher than uh
abnormally high economic and
financial market volatility to
the policies they have in place
still work, and in fact, we're
able to make real-time tweaks,
um, in light of this.
So it's a useful analysis. It's
one that New Mexico's pension
plans have already produced in
the past and could be part of a
regular reporting uh approach to
understand.
The trajectory
Under different investment and
other scenarios of New Mexico's
pension funding.
Uh, next page, please.
So we were asked to talk about
examples of colas and variable
colas in other states, you know,
obviously this is something
that's of deep interest in New
Mexico and and the conversations
as we understand it about.
How to, how to manage Cola's,
um, and is in retirement
security is, is at the fore.
And I wanted to show just 4
examples of different states and
their different approaches to
CAs. Uh, two of these are states
that we have mentioned in, in,
in detail, Wisconsin, South
Dakota, uh, one of which is one
we just talked about in terms of
stress testing and then the last
is Rhode Island, and how they
have approached, you know,
their, uh, ongoing COLA
policies.
So starting with Wisconsin.
Uh, I said they have a shared
risk policy. You can see the
effect of that in terms of both
the contribution rate on the
right, the red line is the
employer contribution rate over
time. The blue line is the
contribution benchmark, you
know, they've been able to have
stable costs that meet or exceed
that benchmark.
Um, in the bottom right is
assets and liabilities over
time.
And I think it's worth, you
know, we'll we'll get to what we
see in 21 and 2022 is an
interesting example of how their
policies work.
I said, on the active employee
side, it's actually funded with
those contributions split
evenly.
And then the retiree side, the
way that Wisconsin has chosen to
manage this benefit is that
They have committed that the
money set aside when someone
retires should be sufficient to
pay for his or her retirement.
And that employer and employee
contributions will not be relied
upon to make up any shortfall.
The way they do this is they've
set aside an amount that they
expect will pay for, but the
court pension and an ongoing
cola.
And then every year they assess.
Based on assets and liabilities
in that retiree trust, what kind
of cola can they give?
When investments or funding
falls short.
Uh, they can reduce or suspend
the cola, and in particular they
did that in the aftermath of the
Great Recession.
When investments are better than
expected, that increases the
coal that they can provide, and
they uh apply that as well. And
so in 2020 and 2021, the annual
adjustment for Wisconsin
retirees was 5.1% and 7.4%.
Giving them some of the greatest
protection against inflation,
against the high inflation that
was being experienced.
In one way you can see the
effect of these policies is
actually if you look at the
bottom right.
In 2021, strong investment gains
boosted plant assets, and
because of that uh high funding
levels.
Uh, the expected coal they could
provide went up and the
liability went up.
In 2022,
Losses undid those gains, and
the assets and the liabilities
went down in turn.
And now looking at South Dakota.
Um, you know, as, as mentioned,
they have a traditional defined
benefit pension plan with a 1.8%
multiplier.
Uh, in a fixed contribution
policy, but a commitment to
making sure that that is
actually adequate by adjusting
the cola each year to ensure
that
Contributions and assets are
gonna be sufficient to pay for
current and future benefits.
The way that they do this is
every year the plant actuaries
is asked to set.
The maximum allowable cola that
they can give, and then every
year they give the lower of that
of that ceiling or what actual
CPI was.
Uh, that maximum can go no
higher than 3.5%.
It can go no lower than 0%.
In 2023, when they actually
looked at uh the South Dakota
situation, uh, what they ended
up was a 1.9% maximum cola.
And then one thing that South
Dakota does is different than
other states, and I think it's
important understanding.
Their policies on both the
benefit side, as well as the
fiscal sustainability side, is
that the cola applies its
separation, not a retirement.
So, in a typical state, if I
joined at age 25, and I leave at
age 40 and get a benefit based
on, you know, the 5-year average
of my salary from 35 to 40.
By the time I actually get it,
take that benefit.
worn away by 25, 27 years of
inflation.
Um, in in South Dakota's case,
Uh, that same person would.
Start getting that coal
adjustment at 40.
You know, assuming they never
returned to service.
And that does two things.
First, it means that
This example person who worked
15 years in public service in
South Dakota. We get a much more
meaningful benefit so it helps
the savings of shorter term
retire uh workers.
Um, but then also by virtue of
making the cola a bigger portion
of the benefit.
It also makes adjustments to the
colon more effective at managing
volatility.
Uh, page 22, the Colorado, I
mentioned that Colorado is an
example of a state that
And you know, got an early
warning of
Fundamental challenges to their
pension policy with stress
testing or able to respond to
that proactively.
So
Colorado was one of the earliest
states after the Great Recession
to make changes to their system.
Including cola changes, um, uh,
as you know, part of their,
their adjustments.
But they have the question of,
were these reforms sufficient to
meet their policy goals?
And where these reforms
sufficient to avoid the risk of
insolvency that they've been
facing.
And so they had done.
On a kind of an ad hoc basis,
stress testing analysis to try
to address that question.
What they ended up finding is
despite the changes they had
made, they still had a 1 in 4
chance of insolvency, something
that the policymakers and plant
administrators in Colorado
viewed as an unacceptable
outcome.
And so those analyses
Spurred and guided.
Uh, for reforms that made
additional changes increasing
the employer and employee
confusions, making additional
reductions in the cola.
And also because they saw that
Making this on a, you know, kind
of asking the legislature to
come back and adjust things
every time meant that they were
slow to react. They put in place
automatic adjustments going
forward, that if they get in
trouble again, similar policies,
increasing employer and employee
contributions, reducing the coal
again would come into come into
effect.
Um, and you can see, you know,
if you look at the liability
side, you know, from 2016 to
2017, when their actuaries were
projecting.
You know, potential planned
depletion of assets?
Uh, followed by the change that
was the changes that were made,
they were able to get back on
course.
And then
If you look at page 23, you want
to talk about Rhode Islands, um,
Rhode Island is a state that at
the onset of the Great
Recession, had already
Encouraged significant unfunded
liabilities from decades of
underfunding.
But then the Great Recession and
its impact, both in terms of
immediate investment losses, but
also a realization that they
could not count on their 8%
return assumption going forward
meant that the state
felt that needed some
significant changes.
Has made significant
Uh, changes to current and
future employee benefits as well
as to the CLAs.
And in Rhode Island's case, two
things happened to the colas.
First, they're reduced by 3
quarter until the plan was 80%
funded.
And given they're underfunding,
The resumption of the full cola
based on that is, you know,
years and decades in the future.
And then it also put in place a
risk adjustment to the cola
where half of the cola formula
is based on what investment
returns do.
Other changes that they made
were a hybrid pension as well as
later retirement ages.
And then, uh, this year,
They look back at the policies
they put in place. They, um, and
wanted to consider the
possibility of undoing some of
those cola changes. Given the
both the burden that it placed
in retirees in light of high
inflation, but also the state's
better fiscal position in a
sense that they could afford to
actually fund some level of
resumption of a of a cola.
And what they ended up deciding
was that for pre 2012 and uh
retirees, so people retired
before the changes that
occurred.
And had the least ability to
adjust to these changes. Um,
they would undo the coal
reduction going forward.
So, you know, instead of a 3
quarters reduction, you get the
full formula.
Um, but they also would keep the
inflation or the investment
return portion of the formula.
So maintain a risk-adjusted cola
that will go up and down
depending on how well
investment, the planned
investments do.
Um, as I said, they were able to
identify the actual costs and
are committed to actually
funding that cost, right? Making
these changes without ensuring
that.
would add, uh, you know, unpaid
for, unfunded liabilities.
But by virtue of being able to
both
Actually assess and commit to
making those payments, you know,
they're in a position where this
doesn't undo the overall
strengths of their reforms and
keep some of the tools to uh
manage risk, well, uh, being
able to make a different
trade-off in his bearing some of
those costs.
Just to wrap up on slide 24.
What are some of the key
takeaways of what we shared and
what our research has been?
Your first, importantly, most
states have stabilized their
pension funding by 2022, uh,
through fiscal discipline and
improving contributions.
As well as some of the other
changes that were made.
But investment volatility
remains a challenge, and, uh, as
well as the need to maintain
fiscal discipline.
You know, states that have
achieved this benchmark, but
don't have a tool to manage
risk.
Or forget some of these lessons
and walk back some of the
contribution increases they made
might end up in trouble once
again.
Successful states like South
Dakota, Wisconsin, and
Tennessee.
Of examples of how good policy
can maintain high funding
levels.
contributions stable and offer a
substantial benefit to workers
and retirees.
Um, when we look at successful
states, it's clear that there's
not a one size fits all
approach. You see multiple paths
to success.
that other states can learn
from.
Uh, when we look at the changes
in the funder ratio and the net
pension liability for New
Mexico, uh, part of that story
is contributions that fell
short.
Of paying for the cost of new
benefits and paying for
Expected increases and uh that
pension liability?
Uh, stress testing is a useful
tool to assess current policies
as well as to assess
alternatives.
Um, and has been applied in the
past in New Mexico and could be
part of regular reporting.
And then lastly, variable codes
are part of the toolkitt that a
number of states have used in
different approaches, including
New Mexico.
And you know, can serve to
manage uncertainty and share
gains and losses.
Uh, so that, you know, it's been
uh a privilege to share some of
the research we've had with the
committee.
Uh, happy to answer any
questions, talk about any
aspects of either what we shared
or other pieces of our research.
Thank you very much. Uh, I
didn't introduce myself and in a
little bit late, uh, I'm the
vice chair, Patricia Royal
Caballero.
And I wanted to say that Q has
been a wealth of information
throughout my tenure and um very
helpful, so I appreciate you
coming forward. Before we move
forward, committee, um, I would
like to do a couple of things.
One, introduce, uh, have the
legislators introduce themselves
who came in, and then second of
all, we're gonna proceed to uh
adopt the minutes from the last
meeting. So if we could have
representative Ream introduce
himself.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
representing Bill Ream Far
Northeast Heights of
Albuquerque.
District 31. Thank you, uh,
Senator Stefanis.
Madam Chair. It's a pleasure to
be here. Liz Stanic Senate
District 39 representing Part C
6 counties and many state
retirees. Thank you.
And Representative Lujan.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative Tara Lujan House
District 48.
Thank you. I'd like to now
entertain a motion to adopt the
minutes.
Also
Thank you.
It's been moved by Senators to
Phoenix and seconded by
Representative Borrego.
Is there any discussion,
corrections,
Anything too.
Thank you. So, uh, seeing, are
there, is there any opposition?
No opposition, the minutes have
been approved. Thank you.
So, now we will um open up the
questions and
Representative Nibert, and
Senator Nibert.
I'm sorry, you haven't left the
house yet, in my mind. Thank
you.
As it turns out, probably
shouldn't have.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, at
our last meeting.
We uh had some presentations
regarding uh
The subject matter and uh
Both are education and our
public employees retirement
accounts are.
Not where they need to be or
should be.
And
It uh has always seemed to me
that
A lot of
The ability to catch up.
has to do with the returns on
the investment.
And
It was uh presented I'm probably
gonna get this wrong, but I'm
sure Greg will correct me, um.
But
The
A decision was made.
To
After being burned in one of
the.
Cycles down in the stock market
to uh
Basically
Limit exposure to equities,
which
Over the last few years has
proved to be a pretty poor
choice.
And, and so,
My, my question on, on the
states that are doing
Well, do they have
Well, let me ask it this way, do
they have
Um,
Substantial investments in the
equity market.
Or they relying upon bonds and
And more or less uh
Interest return type investment.
Uh, so
Yeah, I don't know the numbers
offhand, we have some of this
data available and reports on
our website. Um, I guess a
couple pieces. First, when we
look at the difference maker,
the thing that
Differentiates the states are
doing well. It's not better
investment performance, though,
I think in some of these cases,
we do see a lot of investment
best practices, uh, to, you
know, virtually all of the major
pension plans run by states have
substantial exposure to equity
and equity-like investments. Uh,
they vary a lot within that, but
You know, there is a solid usage
of that tool.
Um, that we have seen.
Some go to try to hedge more or
try to find alternatives that
are gonna be.
You know, move a little
differently than equities.
Um,
You know, and likewise, when you
look at states that have had a
lot of trouble, you know, some
of them also have had challenges
with the investment.
Part of things, but the driver
has been contributions that fell
short.
Right, you know, pick
Pennsylvania's example where
there was a state that, you
know, I think in their various
reform efforts, they took a hard
look at.
Investment practices, among
other things.
Found that they were paying a
lot more in fees than they
needed to and were able to carve
off, I think it's about $3
billion in long-term fees.
And all of that is helpful,
right? Every dollar that you're
keeping within the system or
returning for the system is a
dollar that you have.
But the driver of what
Pennsylvania did was unfunded
benefit increases and
contribution shortfalls, and
anything else that hampered
their success, then yeah, was,
was, was hampering but was not
the driver.
So do your best practices, Madam
Chair.
Um,
Include
The full gamut of things that
the pension funds should be
looking at, including the
investment side.
Yeah, we're not experts on kind
of what to invest in, and I
don't think we're ever gonna be,
um.
When we looked at performance of
state pension plans, I think one
thing that would have been nice
to find when we did our research
because you could then talk
about it is that states that did
one thing that really, you know,
did a lot better than the states
that didn't, and I, we didn't
end up finding that pattern.
We found some states that had
heavy use of alternatives that
were very successful in some
states that had heavy use of all
state pension funds that had the
heavi use of alternatives that
were less successful. We see,
you know, states that had uh
state pension plans that had a,
you know, more passive approach,
be successful and others that
didn't. So we, we didn't find a
clear trend. And so what our
recommendations really ended up
looking at was
You know, given the complexity,
given the risk, given the
potential high costs in some
cases.
How do you just disclose to make
sure that you're being
accountable to the
beneficiaries, the stakeholders,
and to the policymakers.
Yeah, because
Madam Chair, uh, my concern
For a while has been that
The
Yes, I have a hypothesis that
there are very few people who
are really good at uh.
Investing money.
Uh, and, and that.
If we rely upon a board of
elected individuals.
Hm.
May or may not have any
experience in that.
Making the decisions as to who
gets hired to make the
investment.
Um,
Oftentimes we'll get.
Performance that is not uh
Maybe
Equal to or exceeds a benchmark.
Regardless of what the benchmark
is.
And um
I have advocated that maybe we
need to.
Divest that decision making from
The retirees and the board they
elect do more of a
Uh
Group of people who are
professionals engaged in that
day in, day out.
Uh
But I guess
My hypothesis may not work if
you're not finding that
correlation.
You know, and, and there's been,
I'm, I'm not sure how conclusive
it's been, but there's been some
research on
For composition and performance
and like do you have in addition
to, you know, the regular gamut
of ex officio and elected.
Uh, members do have people on
the board by virtue of.
Professional or investment
expertise. You know, it's also
the case that even if the
decisions are being made by.
Uh, elected, um, board members,
you know, they are advised by.
You know, an investment
professional, you know, team,
you know, they're, and then I
guess lastly and maybe
Perps the most useful, um.
You know, there's, it's not just
what you're doing, it's how
you're doing it, and
We've seen examples of states,
you know, South Carolina is an
example of
A state that really was failing
at the pension investment
function, and
You know,
Brough in place
You know, tools to help and
we're able to find a number of
Targeted ways of restructuring
things.
Um, that did seem, at least in
their case, to have real
benefits.
Um, but, you know, once again.
Doing better on investments is
more money in the system, less
fees paid, all of it is good
stuff, you know, you should.
There is no downside to trying
to do as good a job as possible.
But when we look at states that
have had real significant
pension challenges.
Um, you know, it is driven by
the funding policy and in some
cases unfunded benefit
increases.
And also I guess, sorry, one
last point is that
Uh, you know, our focus is on
states, you know, the places
where there's a lot of small
local governments running their
own pension systems.
You know,
Some in some of those cases, the
challenges for the investments
may be, may be higher.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Next we have
Representative Lujan, followed
by Rep Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for being here. I guess
my first question is, have you
um presented in front of our,
our board, our board.
Uh, this is the first time we've
presented on pensions in New
Mexico. So we can get you in
front of the board, um, it's a
wonderful presentation. Thank
you. Um, so my, my next
question, I'm gonna just go into
a page.
Tenant 1112, but 12, we're
looking at this list and
You're telling us that New
Mexico is declining over time.
And the the states that you
You spoke about like Colorado,
I'll take for instance, and
they've had um reforms in
policy. Are they moving up the
list,
so you know.
Colorado is moving up the list,
um.
You know, the, so I mean, and
once again, some of this is
where you are. So if I'm looking
at, let's pick Kentucky, right?
3rd from the bottom, um, and
Yeah, dramatically underfunded,
um, in 2012, you know, their
state pension plan was, you
know, among the worst and was at
risk of insolvency. The
teacher's plan was not that far
behind. They've put in place
things to strengthen funding.
We expect now that they're
hitting this country should
benchmark and exceeding it, they
will improve over time.
Yeah, I guess that ends up being
the real test. Um, the other
thing is one difference we see.
I
A number of states
the courts, through their
contract provisions through, you
know, the way that policymakers
had made benefit commitments in
the past.
were and felt able to change
accrued benefits for current
employees and and mainly the
colas there, right? So if I look
at what's Ohio doing? Um
Yeah, Ohio was able to
dramatically improve their
funded ratio, how they do it?
Well, on the teacher's side,
they eliminated uh Cola.
Um, whereas, you know,
With controversy and, you know,
for better or for worse, um,
that is, that moved them up in
the funder ratio. Uh, whereas if
I look at a Kentucky or
Pennsylvania, uh, those are
states that were deeply
underfunded and also had court
decisions or things that were
Made it clear that
There was no ability to touch
accrued benefits, um, in that
same way that
You know, the Colorados, the New
Jerseys, the Rhode Islands did,
and so, you know, the way that
they're gonna get the full
funding is simply by paying the
bill, and that's gonna be a long
trajectory, uh, but if they
stick with it.
You know, what
What these benchmarks are
showing is that they can't
expect to get to an improved
situation and and West Virginia
is that proof of concept, right?
Worse funded in uh in the 90s
and early 2000s, above average,
close to full funding today.
Thank you. I guess what I'm
thinking about is which state is
most uh like New Mexico, uh what
what imperatively and
Of those like states who has had
the reforms and how faster
they're improving.
In order for us to have some,
you know, some better judgment
on how we want to reform our
policies if that's what we
choose to do for New Mexico
because it sounds like that's
what we need to do, do the risk
assessment type of policies
which you're mentioning. So,
which state would you say is
more equivalent to New Mexico as
far as policy.
So, um, two that are worth
looking at is one Colorado,
exactly as you mentioned, you
know, has some of the same.
You know, kind of prior
challenges of statutorily fixed
funding policy. Um,
And decided as a state that they
more or less wanted to keep that
approach but wanted to make it
work and so.
You know, they have those
adjustments and they have the
stress testing.
Um, I think in other states to
look to is Texas, where, um,
and, and possibly, you know,
Keith coming after me can, can
talk a bit.
More about what they did. I
think he's closer to it, but
You know, once again, a state
that in our data.
Has had shortfalls because of
Statutory fixed funding policies
that don't need actual targets,
and then for the Texas ERS side,
they said, well, we wanna
Both handle our current
situation and handle our future
situation, the current situation
was, I believe now the state is
committing to making up that
gap. Now ERS will have actual
funding, um, I said kind of the
the single best.
you know, requirement for being
on the right track.
is making sure you're hitting
that benchmark, and then they
decided to go for a cash balance
plan designed for new hires that
they think are going to provide
adequate benefits while having a
way within the system to share
risk.
Um, I don't know to what extent
there's similar discussions on
the teacher's side in Texas,
which is still
My understanding has those, you
know, same statutorily fixed
contributions, but I think Texas
on the ERS side is an example of
a state that has some
similarities to New Mexico's
situation that that took steps
to address it. Wonderful. Thank
you, Mr. Man. I appreciate that,
that really get like
Further answer some of the
questions I have, so thank you.
Thank you. Next Representative
Brega.
And if I may ask everyone to
please go through the chair. Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
So my, my questions are kind of
similar to representative uh
Lujan, um, as I'm sitting here
looking through this, this is
really great information, by the
way.
But I have to look at your chart
on page 12.
And as I looked at um
The states that you compared us
to or actually, you know, on the
continuum, um, South Dakota,
Wisconsin, which are doing
better than us, and then
Colorado and Rhode Island, which
are doing worse than us.
Um,
I, I also have to ask the
question about population.
Because you're comparing us to
Texas and
Texas has a population of what I
just looked at at 300 million.
Um,
New Mexico's population is at
2.1 million in terms of, you
know, population-wise, South
Dakota 909,000 Wisconsin 5.9
million and then um Colorado 5.8
million in Rhode Island 1.094
million.
So, when I think about
The total population and then
the population of actual
government employees and the
base of government employees.
Um, I have to ask the question
as to Madam Chair, um,
What state really is more
similar to New Mexico.
Because we're talking about the
government population base, as
opposed to the population of the
total state.
So when we're actually doing
that comparative analysis.
I would really like to see that.
Broken down in this report,
because that gives me a better
understanding of what
Our government base.
The comparative analysis of
government bases.
And it truly that population
itself, and I don't know if
that's something that you could
provide us with, but I think
that would help us see things
from a maybe a whole different
lens. Um, so, Madam Chair, if
that, you know, I just asked
that question if we can have
that broken down a little bit
more.
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I think we
can get that, and I think
actually, I mean the demographic
questions of incredible
importance, and I think actually
the most important way to look
at it is.
If you are unfunded liabilities
and you are a growing state, it
is much easier to make up for
those than if you were to have
unfunded liabilities and you're
a shrinking state, including a
number of the New England
states.
Um, and you certainly see this
even more predominantly at the
local level. When we look at
Detroit and their pension
challenges.
The real challenge is they lost
two-thirds of their population
and any long-term liabilities
that you've committed to become
incredibly difficult to manage
when that's happened. You know,
the places that I've had true
pension defaults, places like
Central Falls, Rhode Island, and
Pritchard, Alabama, likewise,
localities that had substantial
population declines and and and
lost the tax base. So it's it's
really
The growth or the decline or or
the stability of the population
that ends up being a big
question of how well suited are
different states to manage even
the same size of an unfunded
liabilities. It's a great
question. I think we'll see what
we can do to answer that. And,
and Madam Chair just kind of on
top of that, and I hate to that
this is just the way I think so,
um, one of the additional
questions that I have is, and
what you just said about the
total population, and I do think
that that's important as well.
But
I think that what also is
important, Madam Chair, is that
we have to be thinking about
what are the, what is the rate
of growth for that particular
state and how that compares as
well uh to that uh government
employment base. So if
You know, I'm sorry that I'm
asking for this, but I think
that would help us understand a
little bit more how competitive
New Mexico is, and, you know, we
all want to provide that
additional cola, I think, and I.
Just
For uh transparency, I am a
pension recipient, so I do look
at this stuff every day. I watch
the stock market this morning,
there was, there were some
issues, um, and I think that,
you know, a lot of government
employees do as well because we,
you know, we're dependent on
that, but that would also
provide us more information
about your key takeaways. So
thank you for that, Madamme
Chair. Yeah, and, and Madam
Chair, I think we can provide
some of this information. Some
of my colleagues work on.
Demographic information that can
help states understand their
situation. I think we can pair
the two together.
Thank you.
Any other committee members with
questions?
I do have, uh, couple of
comments and questions.
I am, I want to commend our,
our.
Director Greg uh Trujil and his
office because they're um
Reports
That are given to us are very
similar.
Um, to what you have provided.
So that gives me a lot of um
I don't have anxiety.
All right.
About how we're assessing,
evaluating.
And determining
Um, all those factors are very
important.
The next thing I wanted to
mention on uh your key
takeaways.
is particularly the last two
bullets because those have been
of major concern to us
throughout the years, especially
after 2013, and we went through
all of that.
Period of uncertainty.
And um so he was their office
was very uh has been very
intentional.
About this, and you noted that,
so I appreciate that. So, um,
Next thing I did want to, uh,
and I concur with Representative
um Borego. It's very important
for us to have uh a population
age, demographic, and rejection.
It's actually a projection chart
that we need to have, that we
can then, um, and I believe, uh,
Mr. Trujillo's office.
Has that
Or access to that data.
Uh, as well, so.
And I know that he will confer
um with you and others, um, in
order to provide that to us. So
I just wanted to make sure
because we've asked that of Mr.
Trujillo's office also.
The key question I have is
In all of your um
States, the, the ones that
you've noted here, uh, Colorado,
well, the ones that you've noted
in here.
And perhaps maybe others.
Do you have um a way to know how
the retirees themselves.
feel about
Systems that you um
Showed us or compared us with.
It's very important because
We have the responsibility of
oversight and making certain
policy determinations.
Um,
And we rely.
Um, or should rely.
On how our retirees are
Uh, part of that.
Process.
So do you have a way to gauge
that?
Uh, not easily, Madam Chair, not
easily from where we sit. We
have tried.
Well, not, not on the retired
side, we've tried pulling active
employees in the past in order
to try to understand, you know,
what their perspective is, um,
but that's challenging and, and
costly. Uh, but I do think an
example that may be useful to
look at is Tennessee and their
retirement readiness program,
which is
Um, you know, a very deli and,
and, and we have a piece that we
can share that, that's on our
website looking at that more
more detail, but you know, it is
a very deliberate way of first
combining the data of all your
participants, right? Knowing
what's in there.
You know, DC accounts,
supplemental savings accounts,
DB what their Social Security
benefit is.
Then next, identifying at-risk
participants and trying to say,
OK, here's
You know, here's tools that you
can use to, to get yourself back
on track. Here's data you can
understand your what your
situation is, and this is
focused on the active employees,
not on the retiree side, but it
at least is a way of connecting.
The plan and from through the
plan, the plan sponsor, uh, you
know, the the the government,
um, with, uh, with the
participants in the system, you
know, that's not quite the same
as as what you're asking for,
but I think as an example of,
you know, state thinking hard
about
How do you connect the policies
with the actual people in the
system who need to benefit from
it.
I think it is very important
both from both the active
employees as well as the
retirees because in
Actually, they are the ones that
are going to be either
benefiting or
Feeling that they not um
Benefiting to the degree that
they should be.
And so it's important from my
perspective, um, to have a way
to, as you mentioned, pole or
Uh, your pole, their opinions.
Um, and, and provide those to
those of us, the legislatures
that are involved in these kinds
of um oversight and decisions.
So, however, I don't know if you
know of any other way of doing
so or in any other entity, but I
trust you, um, because of, of
their
Very valuable, um.
way of, of doing work. And so,
I don't know whether you can
make a recommendation to us down
the road, not necessarily right
now. I know in our state we have
a very active, um, both employee
and retiree um feedback we get
very, they're very active and we
get feedback, but it's really
important for them to
understand. This is why this
report that you provided to us.
is um very clear, succinct.
And on target with the concerns
that we've been um
charged with and asked, I
appreciate it. I don't have any
other questions and I, I just
wanna thank you, um.
For your presentation that asks
the chair if he has any final
words.
Thank you, uh, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair.
Well, I just, um, want to
mention though.
You mentioned that this is your
first time to our state.
Yes.
You know
So, uh, thank you for
Being here and uh
Hope we can have you again in
the future, you know.
As you can see some of the
concerns that gives you a
Also the ability to see what uh.
We're looking for and uh you
know, how you can assist us but
thank, thank you to both of you
in here.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, all the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity.
We appreciate this, this
opportunity.
We're ready for our next
presentation and we have a
The National Association of
State Retirement Administrators?
Welcome, Keith, and
We can start whenever you're
ready.
I think you'll need to be a
little closer to the microphone.
It helps a lot and thank you.
Sorry about that.
You asked that I provide a
comparison of the uh
Cost of living adjustment
provisions in New Mexico,
particularly for Pea but also
for ERB, um, relative to those
around the country.
And uh that's what I'm gonna
talk about.
A cost of living adjustment is
one component of a retirement
benefit, and it's really
essential to understand the
larger context of the of the
retirement benefit.
Um,
In order to fully understand the
cola and the role that the cola
plays. You should have uh 3
handouts for me, one, on my
slides. 2 is a one pager that it
provides a regional comparison
of retirement of cost of living
adjustments, um,
Or uh states surrounding New
Mexico. And the third is the
appendix from the Nazreth issue
brief, which is a standing brief
that we update annually. Uh,
that's, uh, I don't know, 12 or
15 pages in length and it
provides the basic cost of
living adjustment provision
that's in place for roughly 100,
mostly statewide retirement
systems around the United
States.
Um, and I recommend that you
refer to all of those.
Um, on page 2, or slide 2
comparing retirement plan
designs, and important to
understand that uh in New Mexico
public employees um benefit.
From participating in the what's
considered the model retirement
plan design, which is a
three-legged stool, uh, for many
years that's been held at 3
legged stool has been held out
as the standard, the gold
standard for retirement benefit,
three legs of the stool, of
course, are an employer pension
participation in Social
Security, and access to uh an
individual retirement savings
account.
Not all employees in the United
States have access to Social
Security.
Uh, roughly 40% of public school
teachers do not participate in
Social Security, um, all the,
nearly all uh public employees
in 7 states including Colorado
and Nevada, among others, do not
participate in Social Security,
excuse me, uh, majority of
firefighters and police officers
in the United States do not
participate in Social Security,
uh, substantially all public
employees in New Mexico
participate in Social Security,
so important to understand at
the outset that uh the overall
retirement benefit structure.
Uh, in New Mexico, uh, is quite
favorable.
Uh, next slide, slide 3, please.
Um, the New Mexico retirement
benefit focusing on Pra. uh
Pera's retirement multipliers,
also known as the factors, 2.5%
or 3% depending on the date of
hire.
The highest in the nation for
state pension plans whose
members also participate in
Social Security. This is for
general employees.
3 and 3.5% pair multipliers for
public safety workers are also
among the highest in the nation,
and what this means is that the
starting benefit.
For newly retired employees in
New Mexico is the highest or
among the highest as a
percentage of their salary, uh,
of any group of state employees
in the country.
Next slide, please.
Overview of New Mexico Paracola.
Um, it's rather nuanced and
idiosyncratic detail, I won't go
into all of this complexity.
Suffice to say that there is a
minimum cost of living
adjustment for New Mexico pair
retirees, with certain
exceptions, such as those who've
been retired for a long time,
disabilants and so on.
A minimum of 0.5%, the
retirement benefit is a function
of
Uh, investment performance and
the funding condition of the
plan, retirees must wait 2 years
before they become eligible to
receive the benefit, the maximum
cola is 3%.
As long as the plant's funding
level is less than fully funded
100%.
That maximum could rise to 5%,
um, when the plan reaches full
funding or 100% funding.
Uh, maybe the best rule of thumb
to understand the para cola in
terms of comparatives is what
the actuary assumes will be paid
uh over time, uh, and as shown
on the slide there that shows
that, uh, actuaries assume that
uh cola 1.25% will be paid until
2039, and then based on
improving funding level 1.6% in
2040 to 2054 and thereafter 2%.
New Mexico Educational
Retirement Board COLA, uh, also
is rather complicated. It is a
function in part uh of the
plan's funding condition.
For the cola at age 65 or 67,
depending on the date of hire,
so uh relative to Pra, um, pair
as a reminder, pa um retirees
must wait 2 years to qualify for
a cost of living adjustment ERB
retirees must reach age 65 or
67, depending on the tiers that
they're participating in.
Uh, basically, um, ER ERB has a
minimum of 2%, but that is
reduced um until the plan
reaches a certain funding level.
And I won't go into all of those
details. I think you probably
understand those as well as I
do, but I, the actuary, uh, ERB
actuary assumes that an annual
co of 1.8% uh will be paid, uh,
and indeed that uh is uh what
has been paid recently and can
be reasonably expected to be
paid in the coming years.
And next slide please slide 6
core objectives for providing a
cola and uh Mr. Drain who
preceded me referred to all or
many of these, um, when
developing a cola provision of
policymakers have to consider a
number of factors and balance
these different uh objectives.
One, of course, the core purpose
of providing a cost of living
adjustment is to protect
retirees uh against uh the
effects of inflation, at least
partially.
Also maintain stability in the
cost of the plan, a
well-designed cola is not cause
the cost of the plan uh to uh be
volatile, to rise and fall
significantly from one year to
the other.
Uh, similarly to preserve the
integrity of the plan's funding
policy, make sure the plan can
continue on a path to reaching
or funding the Pabs, for
example, is identified a uh
funding policy and amortization
period of 25 years. Uh, that's
the desired objective, um,
timeline to reach a full funding
over 25 years for P, you want a
cost of living adjustment to
enable the plan to continue to
reach uh that full funding level
within 25 years. And then also
to promote intergenerational
equity.
Which is a $10 way of saying you
want each cohort of taxpayers
and plan participants roughly
share in the cost of the
benefit.
So the challenge for
policymakers is to design a cola
that can be meet each of those
different and generally
competing objectives.
On slide 7, comparing New
Mexico, Perescola.
Variable
That is, it changes from one
year to the other, depends on
the plant's funding level and
investment performance.
That's not unique.
Uh, 15 years ago, that was
rather unusual. Many of the cola
plans that have been uh uh
reformed or instituted in the
last 10 or 15 years have
followed a similar lines that is
taking into account to some
degree, the investment
performance of the plan and also
the plan's funding condition. In
New Mexico, Paris, and um
incorporates both of those.
Difficult to make a simple
comparison because every plan is
unique, uh, different plan
designs incorporate these two
different factors in different
ways to different degrees. Uh, I
would observe though that in New
Mexico, Paris Cola uh does make
a very good effort toward
balancing those objectives we
talked about just a moment ago.
Next slide, please slide 8. Klas
are not universal. Useful to
keep in mind that not every
state, not not every plant
provides a cost of living
adjustment.
Um, about 1/3 of state pension
plans provide no COLA at all.
You could consider those to be
ad hoc states, ad hoc meaning
that the, the legislature must
take an action in order for
there to be a cost of living
adjustment. Um, but even among
those, many states have not
provided an ad hoc cola in
years, decades even, uh, we were
referring David Drain was
referring to the ERS of Texas,
which is the plan for state
employees in Texas.
Texas State employees have not
had a cost of living adjustment
since 2002.
Uh, Iowa Purs, there's been no
cost of living adjustment there.
That's substantially all on
public safety workers in Iowa at
Noola in more than 30 years,
similarly, Delaware,
Pennsylvania, New Hampshire,
only ad hoc coas and generally
they have not paid coli in in
decades.
Non-public safety employees in
Arizona hired since 2013, have
only an ad hoc cola and they
have not paid a cost of living
adjustment since well before
then.
I I mentioned state employees in
Texas, teachers in, in Texas
also have only access to an at
hot cola legislature has
provided a cola maybe every 6 or
8 years, uh, over the last 30
years or so, um, this past year
they did this past legislative
session in 2023.
The state did provide a cola for
a retired teachers, uh, and they
paid cash for it and they did
not try to fund that through the
uh through the plan.
And important to keep in mind
that teachers and almost all
teachers in Texas do not
participate in Social Security,
so they retirement benefit uh
for most of them for the career
teachers, their retirement
benefit is their primary source
of uh of retirement income and
so for Social Security provides
an annual COA that is tied to uh
inflation.
Um, and when you don't have a
Social Security, uh, your call
uh uh really becomes an
important factor.
And of course, corporate pension
plans, uh, there's no corporate
pension plans that I'm aware of
that provide any form of an
automatic cost of living
adjustment.
On the slide 9 please Cola Cos.
This table is taken from a uh a
primer that was prepared about a
12 years ago by GRS Consulting,
which happens to be the
actuarial consultant now for
both of the statewide plans in
New Mexico. And what this is
showing is providing is
basically a rule of thumb, um,
a, a general guide to what a
cola costs relative to uh while
having no color.
So you can see there at the top
of the, the top line of the
chart, no cola, the, the cost
factor is 1.0, uh, and if we
were to go say to a 3%
compounded automatic cost of
living adjustment, which means a
plan paying it, um, cost of
living adjustment every year,
um.
At the rate of 3% that is
compounded that factor is 1.26%.
That means the cost of the plan
would increase by about 26%.
So this is a, a helpful guide to
understanding the, the magnitude
on the plan's cost of providing
uh different uh types of colas.
You can see all the different
varieties that uh GRS Consulting
has included on that.
Uh, in a nutshell, I think one
takeaway from this is the cost
of living adjustment is a fairly
expensive benefit provision or
it can be.
Uh,
Now membership is, is, uh, if
it's OK with you, what I'd like
to do is spend a little time
talking about the different
types of colas in use, and you
can read this detail in the uh
uh appendix handout that I have
provided at your own leisure,
but, uh, you know, it's
interesting for for something
that seems like such a simple
plan design feature. Uh there
literally are almost, uh, um,
There's almost as many cola
provisions as there are public
pension plans in the United
States.
Individually designed and it's
the case in New Mexico as well.
You've got two plans here and
each of them have their own
types of uh of plan designs. You
don't, you know, you don't used
to be that 3 for plans are
provided an automatic cost of
living adjustment. It was 3%,
automaticoA year after year.
That's when CA really began, um.
In the public sector in the
1970s, uh, that was sort of the
standard, the norm of states
would establish a 3% automatic
cost of living adjustment and if
you know what was going on in
the 1970s, of course, it was a
very, very high inflation. It
was an initial effort by many
states to establish some hedge
against the ravages of inflation
for retirees, certainly weren't
addressing the full of it, you
know, when inflation went up to
double digits for a number of
years back in the 70s. But that
was sort of the standard uh for
many years, and as I mentioned
earlier, especially in the last
10 or 15
years, those planned designs
have been revised fairly
significantly.
So there are a few uh facets of
codes that I'd like to talk
about. One, still the the the
most prevalent type of cola, uh,
is an automatic that's tied to
the rate of inflation, but
normally, that's also capped.
There's, in fact, there are
almost no plans in the United
States to have an uncapped cost
of living adjustment that which
is the Social Security model
right now. Social Security tries
to cover the entire increase of
inflation. It's very expensive
to do that. So virtually all
automatic cost of living
adjustment provisions provides
some limit after
Of inflation or up to 2% or 3%
or something like that.
2nd most type of uh second most
common type of COA provision
would be an automatic fixed-rate
cola, 2%.
1.5%, 2.5%, something like that,
regardless of what the rate of
inflation, uh, actually is.
Next slide is slide 11 types of
colas in use among states, this,
and these are not mutually
exclusive as we'll see the late
oncept onset minimum age of
eligibility. Colorado Pera and
uh on this and following slides
I've provided an asterisk for
plans that whose members do not
participate in Social Security
and as a reminder, you're not
participating in Social
Security, you're not, you're not
getting access to that
retirement benefit that provides
a full hedge against the effect
of inflation.
So, Colorado.
And this is a change that was
made just a few years ago.
Inuitants must wait 3 years
after retirement to begin to
receive coal.
New York State and local ERS and
state teacher retirement system
and frankly, this applies to New
York City employees as well. Uh,
so this is everybody in New York
State.
Nances must be age 62, with 5
years of service credit.
Or age 55 and retired for 10
years. I'm sorry, 862 with 5 and
retired for 5 years, or age 55
and retired for 10 years before
they're eligible to receive a
cost of living adjustment.
Ohio police and fire.
Cost of living adjustment begins
at age 55 1 year after
retirement. So if you retire at
age 50, you've got to wait 5
years.
And then Rhode Island uh employs
a retirement system, and this is
a change that was made
relatively recently as well, uh,
as Mr. Drain talked about, uh,
they've had some significant
changes in Rhode Island, uh,
including to the cost of living
adjustment.
eligibility in Rhode Island, the
ladder of the Social Security
normal retirement age, which is
67.
Uh, or the 3rd anniversary, um.
Of retirement.
So the earliest at age 67.
On the slide 12 please, still a
few more. These are simple, not
compounded coli.
Simple cola is one that is based
on the uh the retirees's
original base benefit rather
than um being increased at the
rate,
um, affected by the prior any
prior cost of living
adjustments. And you can say I
won't read all these, you can
see the uh list of fairly
lengthy list of states.
Not necessarily exhausted, but
certainly a representative list
of states that provide an
automatic cost of living
adjustment, but it is simple and
not compounded, and you can can
see also we've delineated the
non-S Social Security plans
slide 13.
Cos applied to only a portion of
the benefit, Massachusetts
non-Social Security state.
Nobody in Massachusetts, no
public employees participating
in Social Security. They get an
automatic 3%. It says
effectively automatic, and the
reason for that is technically
it is ad hoc, requires a vote of
the legislature. The legislature
approves that cost of living
adjustment every year. So for
all intents and purposes, it is
automatic, but that 3% cost of
living adjustment is applied
only to the 1st $13,000 of the
benefit. So if there is a
retiree who's making an annual
benefit of 3000 to $50,000 that
uh benefit is applied only to
13, 1st 13,000.
That increase. We talked a
moment ago about New York State
and local government employees
and teachers, and this applies
to New York City employees as
well.
The code is based on half the
increase in the CPI.
Minimum 1%, max of 3%, but
applies only the 1st $18,000 of
the benefit. And the idea behind
that is that it cost in the
minds of uh presumably these
policymakers, is that the cost
of living adjustment ought to at
least address the core um
financial needs of a, of a
retiree. So we're not
necessarily uh protecting and or
ensuring the last dollar of
benefit, if you've got somebody
who's making an annual uh
retirement benefit of $100,000
or $200,000 a year, the state is
not
for paying uh cost of living
adjustment on every last dollar,
but what they're attempting to
do is to address uh uh the
effects of inflation on at least
the core um retirement
obligations or um living
obligations.
And then finally, uh, members,
coal is, uh, that are based on
individual employer election.
This would not really apply in
New Mexico because your plans
are cost sharing. Uh, the
examples that are used here,
so-called agent plans, um, each
of these plans, uh, is for local
government employees and each of
the employers who are
participating in these are
cities or counties or special
districts uh in these states.
Um, and in those cases, the
retirement system uh allows the
individual employers.
The cities and counties and so
forth, uh, to elect whether or
not to provide a cost of living
adjustment. Uh, and of course
those who do provide a co of
provision that cost generally is
going to be higher than those
that do not.
Couple of instances in which
participants are allowed to
contribute to a higher level in
order to, uh, basically prefund
the cost of a cost of living
adjustment uh in retirement,
Kansas and Louisiana do that.
Uh, and then Nebraska, state and
county workers at retirement may
make an election to have a
reduction in their um automatic
retirement benefit uh an
actuarial reduction, and then
have that increased by, I
believe, 2.5% uh uh for the rest
of their rest of their lives.
And so that's a quick
walkthrough of uh cost of living
adjustment provisions and how
the state of New Mexico compares
around the country, um, Mr.
Chairman, members, I'd be happy
to answer any questions.
Very well, thank you.
Yeah
Reps in the rim.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
You, you touched on the federal
windfall, um,
Provision in the tax code.
Where the individuals aren't uh
in public safety or not
contributing.
To Social Security.
Would you explain to the
committee
Um, I think it's good for them
to hear it from another person.
What happens, let's assume that
that person is also worked.
Outside of public safety.
And has
Plenty of credits to go ahead
and get a full Social Security
retirement.
Had they not been in
And public safety.
But because they're in public
safety, what would their Social
Security be basically?
Yeah, so you, um,
Representative, you are
referring to the so-called
windfall elimination provision.
Um, which is accompanied by also
the government pension offset,
which is a uh uh related uh
limitation or restriction that
federal law puts on uh employees
or spouses, um, who participate
or do not participate in Social
Security. So in the example that
you cited, um, the Social
Security benefit uh of a public
employee like that, um, like
depending on the circumstances,
likely uh would be reduced in
many cases significantly.
Um, and there's government
pension offset would, if you had
a spouse who was participating
in Social Security, that
spouses' benefit could be
reduced significantly as well.
Uh, it does create, um, a lot of
consternation uh among
individuals and and spouses who
participate uh in non-Social
Security eligible plans. Uh, as
I mentioned, 25 or 30% of
employees of state and local
government do not participate in
Social Security, and so there
are many lives that are affected
by um that issue, um.
Public employees who do not
participate in Social Security
are the largest single group of
uh of employees in the United
States who do not participate in
Social Security, um, as you
might be aware, uh, Social
Security is projected to be
insolvent in about 10 years. Um,
Congress has been and continues
to receive a significant amount
of of pressure from these
individuals and politically um
to uh make adjustments, if not
completely eliminate the um
elimination provision and the
government pension offset. It
is, as I mentioned, it is the
source of a lot of angst and
consternation among these
individuals, generally speaking
on a political level, um, the
consensus is that those issues
will be addressed some way
somehow, um, as part of a larger
package to um restore Social
Security as long term
insolvency, which must happen
sometime over the next 10 years.
That may have been more than you
wanted. Was that responsive to
your question?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What I've uh spoken to
individuals in that group and in
fact, I'm in that group.
So, so I understand it.
Basically, if you didn't work
for public safety and you had
enough credits, you would
receive X as your retirement.
But because you're in public
safety.
It's, you're going to receive
30% basically of that.
It's, you're going to receive
30% basically uh vas.
Is that about you, you're
effectively penalized as a
result of your
Pub public service. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
He represented Bore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
sir. Um, very enlightening, um.
So one of the questions I had.
was with the
in your
I'm trying to find my place
here.
Um.
You talked about.
Cos that.
into place at a certain point in
time.
Um,
That, so you don't receive your
cola immediately, you would get
it later on, I guess, and, and
so my question is,
How does that work exactly?
That's a weight required um.
Waiting period or the cost of
living adjustment, um, and
I, I don't know what exactly
policymakers were thinking, but
obviously the longer you
postpone eligibility for EOLA,
the less that cola is going to
cost.
So there would be some cost
element in that plan design, um,
in addition, it is possible that
policymakers are thinking that
by creating a uh delayed or a
waiting period like that, they
can reduce the incentive for
someone to who might want to
retire just based on the cola.
So Mr. Chair, um, you, in your
study, and I don't have the
exact page here, but you said
something about separation and
retirement. So,
Explain to me what is the
difference between separation?
And at what at what points do
they kick in? One is separation
and one is retirement. Yeah, I
think actually Mr. Drain the
previous speaker, brought that
up, but I can speak to that. And
it is possible and typical in a
public retirement system for an
employee to work, say, who
begins working at age 25, work
15 years, and leave at age 40,
leave their contributions at the
retirement system, and then they
qualify for retirement age, say,
62.
So they separated at age 40,
they qualify for retirement at
age 62, and upon becoming
eligible for retirement benefit
at age 62, they could begin to
take their retirement benefit.
OK, thank you, Mr. that
definitely clears that up
because I was a little, it was a
little lost on that, on that one
in terms of what you were
talking about when you said
separation.
So if the if the pension stays
in place, then
At that point, if you leave,
then it then later on, if you
take that pension.
Then at that point is, you would
go back in time, basically.
Sounds like.
Well, your um
Absent particular provisions
which some systems have.
Um, your retirement benefit will
be based on your years of
service and and the factors, the
retirement multiplier.
Um, there are some instances in
which uh employees, uh, the
effects of uh of inflation, um,
our employees are held harmless
by the effects of inflation?
Uh, Mr. Drain cited an example
that I was not familiar with
with regard to that, but
generally speaking, uh, if you,
if there's a
A gap of say 20 years between
the time you separate and the
time you begin taking the
retirement benefit, your
retirement benefit is going to
feel a lot less because of the
effects of inflation.
But um,
All retirement systems have
so-called inactive members and
inactive member is someone who
has separated but left their
contributions with the system.
And so Pra and ERB are like uh
all other statewide retirement
systems in that they have
thousands, probably tens of
thousands of inactive members,
individuals out there who
eventually will qualify for
retirement benefit.
Sometimes some of those folks
don't realize they have a
retirement benefit coming, uh,
but the systems have to assume
that those individuals are going
to be coming for their
retirement benefits someday.
OK. And Mr. Kerri, so, so you're
saying, and let me, I'm just
trying to think this through. So
the compounded rate would not,
would be fixed at that point
when you separate from
government. That's what you
would make at that point in time
and whatever time you're gone,
say 20 years or 10 years or
whatever, you're not getting
that compounded rate, correct?
That's right. OK. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chew.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just
wanted to follow up on.
For clarification on what a ream
was talking about the the the
windfall provisions are that are
in place.
Is that 30% deduction from their
Social Security benefit or from
their
Um.
future
The 30%.
Of the X value.
is what their pension from
Social Security will be. OK.
That that's, that's more
clarification for me. It's
purely federal law, ma'am.
Yeah, that's, that's what I'm
asking is on the federal side,
that's where the, and that's
what I'm.
Understanding better thank you
Mr.
Chair.
So just
If you respond to respond to the
chair, chair. Thank you. Um, my
other question is here, um.
In New Mexico, Mr. Chair, I've
been talking with some of my
state employees that that I
represent, um, my district
represents.
Um, I think that a big portion
of our state agencies, um, and
they have a concern with the
amount of cola that they've
received.
Um,
Did we, do we have any, can you
give us like dollar amount
values of what
Um, our employees or our
retirees, excuse me, to be
clear, the retirees are
receiving this year, Mr. Chair.
If you know that. I want to be
sure I understand the question.
Are you asking whether I know
what
Um, the dollar amount for public
employees in New Mexico. Yes, if
there, do you have any of that
information? I don't know that's
very that's, that's beyond us
here. That's what I'm asking.
It's, it's a no, Mr. Chairman,
it's a knowable number. Uh, you
can look in the financial
report, you can identify what
they're getting on average.
They're actuarial evaluation
typically will provide detail on
that and you can apply the cost
of the cola, which I think was
0.5%.
It's a knowable number. That's
what I'm asking if where I can
find that, Mr. Chair, thank you.
I didn't think you had that, but
um I have been getting some
complaints from mom.
From our retirees about that
amount, Mr. Chair, and that's
why I came to this committee
today to learn more about this
and be more um knowledgeable of
what's going on in our own
state.
Um,
So
My other question, uh, I think
you clarified that, but just for
further clarification, Mister,
the windfall did, um, do you
know about, or could you tell us
about some of the provisions we
gave to our um our firefighters
and other um.
Professionals for for New Mexico
through our policies, Mr. Chair,
did we, are we taking care of
them is what I'm asking, Mr.
Chair, you are policies in our
pension, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative, I would say that
you are doing all that is within
your power.
In terms of providing a a
pension benefit, providing them
with access to a supplemental
retirement.
Uh, savings account, you have,
uh, as a state representative,
you have no authority over
Social Security law.
Um, and so there's nothing you
can do about that, but you are
providing um a, a very solid
retirement benefit for your
public employees in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Maybe Mr.
Chair, we didn't we change
something a couple of years ago
through our, uh.
our package or our
Or the PRA through the state
policy that gave some benefits,
additional benefits to our uh
firefighters. I'm just trying to
clarify that information to see
what more we may be able to do
for them if we're not doing it,
Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Madam, you, uh, New Mexico
has gone undergone some pension
reforms, um, that did reduce uh
retirement uh um multipliers or
um benefit accumulation rates
that included uh public safety
workers in the.
State, um, that really is
separate and apart though from
uh what's going on with Social
Security and the windfall
elimination provision.
Uh, what New Mexico has been
doing is, uh, is making a good
faith effort to keep its plans
sustainable.
Um, at a, at a cost that you can
afford while ensuring that
future retirees will be able to
continue to receive their
benefit.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
I'm just trying to get some
clarification. Thank you.
Um, we had asked to
Director Trujil may be if he
wants to add a little more to
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh
Represent Lujan, Gregor here
with Pera. There has been some
tweaks, uh, to all our employee
groups uh for public safety,
which, you know, uh, police and
fire, 2013 that reform
introduced a new tier of
benefits, uh, tier one, public
safety employees, uh, can
essentially uh work 20 years and
retire at any age with a pension
multiplier of 3.5% uh for
employer, for employees that
were hired 71, 13, after, uh,
those
Public safety employees now have
to work 25 years and their
pension factor is 3%.
So those were the changes
related to public safety.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. So, we'll
have a.
Now we have senators to Phoenix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I do
not have a question. I have a
comment.
Um,
I believe that the PERA pension
fund needs to
Uh, be protected to grow in the
future.
But I also believe
That are retirees.
Have had their money taken.
And invested by the state.
And there's, there's um an
unevenness.
About how we are treating
The retirees.
And their money that they've
already put out there.
And I just want to make that
comment as we're looking at all
of these plans.
You know, if it, if we are
sitting here and some of us are,
we'll put our money into that.
And are not receiving it back.
And I think it's an issue.
While the rest of the employees
are receiving cost of living
increases while they are
working.
There is a difference.
And so I just want to put that
on the table because I know
there's various
Approaches to how we're going to
Handle
The PERA funds, but I think we
cannot forget the retirees.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
for that and uh we have uh
Representative of our order.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wanted
to look at the 2nd page of your
presentation and go into depth a
little bit about that, ask for
some clarification. It's the
page that starts, Mr. Chair,
with the para retirement
multipliers of 2.5% and 3%.
are the highest in the nation.
New Mexico is not usually an
outlier in the positive sense in
the presentations we get. So I
wanted a little bit of
explanation of that. How far
outlying are we?
Um, how many states are close to
us? I mean, how unusual is that
high multiplier.
I would say the median
multiplier.
Well, first let me say that uh
multipliers like Clis have
become more complicated in
recent years?
It used to be there was just one
multiplier and it applied to
everybody for all of their
service.
And now we've got different
tiers of multipliers. We've got
multipliers that vary based on
length of service, which I think
we have actually some now in New
Mexico, and so on.
Um,
Right now, I would say that the
median, midpoint multiplier of
all state plans, not public
safety, just general employees
and public school teachers.
Um, for the, the, the states,
the 47 or 8 states that have
traditional defined benefit
plans as New Mexico does, uh,
would be something on the order
of around 1.7%, maybe 1.75%.
And so that 2.5%
which is for folks who are hired
now.
You know, in the, in the current
year,
You know, in the, in the current
here
um would compare with that
median of about 1.75%.
But even with that, I would
hasten to add the caveat that
you also have to consider
salaries or retirement benefit
is a typically a defined benefit
plan as a function of length of
service, salary, and this
multiplier.
And so salaries are also a
factor in there, and if one
wanted to make it really fair
and direct comparison, they'd
have to take into account the
level of salaries as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that clarification
because a multiplier might be
high, but if our salaries are
low compared to other states.
And the take home that a retiree
makes.
Might not be that different. Uh,
however, then we have to take
into consideration the cost of
living in New Mexico too. There
are many variables, Mr. Chair,
when we're doing state to state
comparisons that we have to
consider, but this stand out
multiplier um struck me from
your presentation.
When the second point on here is
the 3 and 3.5% for public safety
workers are among the highest in
the nation.
Does that also have the caveat.
Not receiving Social Security.
Um, as the first.
Your first statement says among
the is the highest in the nation
for state pension plans whose
members also participate in
Social Security.
But the next point for public
safety workers.
Has no caveat for Social
Security participation.
So uh
Public safety participation is a
little, uh, is much more
disparate.
Um, there are far more, uh,
firefighters and police officers
who participate in local locally
sponsored plans as opposed to
state.
Um, also a majority, as I
mentioned, a majority of public
safety personnel do not
participate in Social Security.
Um, with that though, I would
say that uh.
Um,
New Mexico Public safety
personnel, um, are near the top.
Uh, of statewide, uh, retirement
plans for public safety in terms
of their
Uh, retirement.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, that answers my questions.
Thank you very much, uh, vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your very thorough and
clear.
Uh, presentation.
So I, and thank you to
representative um you because
I was gonna address also um
That same page.
Um, I don't have page number,
but the one that talks about New
Mexico.
Retirement benefits because
there are many
Uh, factors.
Um,
And variables.
That we in New Mexico.
We must consider, and I think
one of our, one of the things
that that uh representative
brought out was
And I think we have to make sure
that we acknowledge this.
is that we have a history of
very low paying salaries.
We've not paid.
Um,
compared comparative salaries,
comparative meaning to other
types of professions as well as
um to neighboring states, all
the other factors that
Come into play when we're, uh,
when our state personnel office
is setting up rates of pay.
So there's been a history.
So our retirees, unfortunately
have fallen into that.
That poor
Um,
History of poor salaries. And
so, unfortunately,
We've done
What we can
In addressing
That, but
Most of our retirees are not
experiencing um the full
benefit.
Of that factor, that particular
factor, and that has to be,
that's part of what we
charged with, um, trying to come
up with
An equitable way.
Of addressing that one factor,
which is a huge factor because
we have a lot of retirees, Mr.
Chair, that are um
Basically living
Yeah, on poverty level salaries
from previous, uh, their, their
previous years of service.
That's really important to me
because it's an important factor
that we've been trying to
address or or include.
In how we address our um
Mr. Chairman, may I, may I
comment on the statement that
you just made. You're exactly
right.
And by providing this
information in my prepared
remarks, uh, not for a second am
I trying to suggest that these
plans are necessarily generous.
Uh, just providing comparative
information in larger context
for considering the cola.
Uh,
This is a hard job, policy
making with regard to retirement
benefits because you are trying
to balance a lot of different
factors.
Uh, another factor that's not
mentioned here is the age at
which one qualifies for
retirement benefit and the
required length of service.
Uh, particularly in the context
of uh mortality or expected
longevity, how long are retirees
going to live?
Um, and if you are in a state,
which I think is true in New
Mexico, where the life
expectancy is shorter than it is
in some other states. The
retired age age of eligibility
is a, is a key consideration.
There's just a lot of different
factors to consider when
designing a retirement plan.
And I appreciate that. Thank you
for adding to that because
A length of service, and
longevity are very key
demographic uh profile that
we've discussed with our
director and board and everyone
that we consider those things,
which
When we were dealing with all of
the problems in trying to bring
up um
Or retiree benefits to a more
equitable level. So I appreciate
that because we have, we've done
that and in your presentation,
we've at least attempted to,
we're not quite there and not
everybody is going to be
satisfied, uh, because we
You know, we have other factors
that we have to um consider, and
that's our fun one of them is
our funding levels.
Um, so in, in our the key
takeaways for me.
Um, have been the multiplier, of
course, the cost of living, the
funding levels, and investment
and performance. The investment
performance is
is a key factor.
And
We've asked this question over
and over again.
Uh, whether our management, um,
Entities
And those that are charged with
How best to invest.
Um,
Our limited funds.
Now and they, and that's the
other side of what we do. We
have to look at that and that
those have been hard questions.
So I just wanted to bring that
up because on the comparing New
Mexico, Paris.
Cola.
Um, those are, are mentioned,
but I also wanted to mention
finally.
Is that
Um,
Where is it?
We were just talking about that,
where we stand, um,
I think we stand pretty well.
You've, you've kind of gave us
that um
Um,
Observation in your assessment.
Um, oh, this is the page. Polas
are not universal.
So roughly 1/3 of the state
pension plans do not provide an
automatic pull-up. We, we are in
that category.
Uh, I mean, we are not in that
category. So that's a good thing
and I wanted to mention that,
and we finally got to that
point.
It's not
It's not
As timely or as much.
As
What our retirees would like to
expect.
And we had extensive discussion
on this.
However, we are responsibility
also needs to address the
funding level.
And that is key to me.
Um, in sustaining
Our um retirement benefits, and
I'm alarmed by your
Social Security is expected to
be insolvent in 10 years.
Because we are Social Security
state.
So that is alarming. So now we
have to take that.
Into consideration when we're
factoring in and um
That, that's another projection
that I saw as well as it
pertains to my uh particular
constituencies, because in my
district we have a large retiree
constituency.
And they're largely on Social
Security, plus very few other uh
public related.
service
So, and they are in that.
What you mentioned earlier, our
life expectancy.
Um, quadrant.
In the report, and so I, I look
at those kinds of things very
closely.
Um,
Because it's gonna, it's across
the board in our state.
So thank you very much for um
just comments, not, not any real
questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Oyster. Um
I also want to thank you for the
information. I only have uh one.
Very small uh
Maybe if you can briefly go over
it again and I guess I would say
this is page 8 and this is on
the Holocaust.
And when you mentioned to the
3%.
That you said that this would
bring it up to 26%.
Of additional cost.
Yeah, so 3% compounded automatic
cola, the rule of thumb is that
that would add 26% to the cost
of the plan. And that would be
recurring.
Every year.
Very well. Thank you.
Is there anyone else?
If not, uh, we really want to
thank you for presentation.
Uh, members, um.
We're trying to get a little bit
of a start, but we haven't heard
from our persona from 105, so.
we will stand at that, that we
would come back at 105, but we
do have lunches and uh we have
to thank um
Uh
Singleton and Schreiber Law
firm.
And Scott Scanlan for.
Today.
So, uh,
Oh, we'll stand until 1:05.
