morning. My name is Janice
Peterson. I'm from Chur area.
I'm a club president. I enjoy my
work working with the
communities. I just want some
comment I like to stress to you
guys it's been ongoing for years
and we were all talking about
education, make your child, you
know, do better in school, be a
role model to them see what they
can learn from our, you know,
the years that we educate. I
graduated back in '85 and Galla
High School.
So it's been a challenge for me.
Then I went to college for a
couple of years as paralegal
assistant, and I've been
studying different areas with
legals areas to know what I can
be able to basically understand.
So my concern is with McKinley
County, they need to kind of
change their agenda with open
comment for parents that needs
to put their information about
concerning their child, their
students, what they really need
to work on it. They need to
change that area because when
you go to the McKinley County
meeting with the school board.
It makes you feel like you're
intimidated, that they don't
want to listen to you, they
don't want to hear your concern.
I mean, our child, our grandkids
are there to educate him, to
take, treat them right with
respect.
The regards of who they are with
all colors, you know, that's the
main thing I look at it.
I'm also an educator. I used to
be a substitute teacher back in
80s, so a lot of things did
change between here and there,
not just the numbers, but um a
lot of disrespecting one
another. There's no actually
communication with the
resources. It's hard. It's not
that easy anymore, but back in
the days was a whole lot
different. So that's one thing
I'm concerned about and
childcare, we need a lot of uh
info on childcare position areas
because we don't get that much.
with McKinley County, we don't
get any information about
childcare, how things are going,
uh, what needs to be done. So
those things that we need to be
addressed to understand us more
and basically we're all facing
these alcohol abuse in homes,
out in the street, younger
teenagers are out on the street.
It's very sad, you see all these
young ones, they're just maybe
graduated from high school year
two, and they're out on the
street because the amusement
comes from the family.
I wish there's a resources that
can be done with McKinley County
that these young people can go
over there and get help.
At some point get some funding
for them, get them off the
street, then they go missing,
you know, then we find them
something bad happened to these
individuals. It's hard. It's
sad, but then it's just, you
know, where the parents were,
you know, that's the thing about
it. For me, I have high
I have 6 kids, no matter how old
they are, I still support them.
Even though good or bad, I'm
still there.
I'm still teaching them because
they're not really not educated
where they're coming from.
Because they're not knowing what
to expect.
That's what I do. And then on
top of it.
The tribe truly does not share a
lot of information.
We don't get those uh travel
clothes no more back back in the
80s and 70s. Those have been
lost.
So I don't know what happened to
those tribal clothes back in the
days, cause when I was in
school, they used to get funding
for school supplies. There's
none of those anymore. I don't
see it.
And there's no school supplies
to support elementary school,
mid school or high school. I
think that's one reason why
we're lacking off too because
there's no supplies for them to
use.
And they really need to come
forward with us and see what we
can be able to do to work within
the resources and I see a lot of
these things in my term what I
see with the community areas and
what they complain about it.
And earlier we talked about this
individual two young man.
The people were up here, but
worrying about education with
BIA public school. Internet is
not really good for Navajo
nation because not all of us
don't have good internet. We we
suffer from it.
If they want to reach out into
the public area, they need to do
in person, they need the
official to go to chapter
meetings, talk to them about
what it needs to be done, what
needs to be addressed to them
because it's their grandkids,
and their kids that are in
school and that's why they're
there for so because I did that
in my pastime.
I had to go to chapter meetings,
make planning meetings, and
they're stressed out what we
need with our minimum wage, and
I help that with the resolution,
the resolution was passed. It
took time, but it was worth.
Because I did it for my
community, you know, I'm
concerned about. I'm not doing
it for me. I just want to put
out this out there because they,
they really need to know. So
that's my most concerned about
our communities and thank you
for giving us that grater again,
like we mentioned yesterday, it
was, you know, it's helpful for
our community to use and we are,
we were all to work together as
a team, I think we can succeed
better. I know we throw things
at each other, but it's always
no work process and we can't.
the night that, you know, I go
through the same thing with my
members and my community say,
hey, we need to work as a team.
One person can't do the whole
job.
You know, you had to send a
person, OK, you do this, you do
that, and see you bring it back
and we'll work on it and see
where it goes. So that's how I
work with my community and one
that is good to be on board with
this. So she shows a lot of info
that we can work with the road
department area, so, but thank
you guys for coming. It's really
appreciated. And I hope I see
you guys again next time. Thank
you.
There was another person for
public comment can come up.
And the little person with the
thing, there's a button there,
press it and it'll turn red and
that's when you're ready to go.
Yes.
Oh, did I do it right? Yeah,
they bring it a little bit
closer to you so we can hear
you.
OK, um, hi, my name is Mia and I
am a junior and I go to Shiprock
High School.
The mic, the mic closer to you.
Go ahead. OK, can you hear me
now?
OK, hi, my name is Mia and I go
to Shiprock High School, and um
I'm gonna be a junior this year
and I was just gonna ask about
our, uh, funding that we have
going on, um, for our, well, I'm
in leadership used to be in
leadership, and we always talked
about our funding funds, um,
about our prep rallies that we
need and then our.
Um, our internet too.
Because it's really kind of hard
for our internet because it goes
in and out sometimes at our
school and it's like really hard
for us to learn.
And then, um.
And also that we need some more
technology and then um probably
help people from the like their
mental issues like, um, like
depression or anxiety.
And like counseling, more
counseling for them, and then,
um,
Funding for
Um, the sports that we have like
basketball, football, soccer.
And and probably instruments and
then um.
And
And like there's not really much
textbooks where when and
outdated technology makes it
hard for us to keep up with the
assignments that we have been
doing because of the internet
too. And then we usually put, we
usually have um laptops, but
usually the internet doesn't
really work, so it's really hard
for us, and then sometimes we
our printer doesn't really work
too, so.
It's like trying to
Keep it up with it. It's like
going up and down sometimes and
um.
And unfortunately this is like
really hard for many students
across the country due to the,
the spirits and the funding,
school funding comes from the
various social
federal states in the local
government, however, the way
these fundings are displayed
often leads to significant, um,
Differences between schools,
schools and um welfares area
trending to be more resources
because they receive more money
from locations instead of ours,
um.
Meanwhile, schools in less um
expo areas struggles to provide
the even basics like computers,
laptops, and books and um
mathematics and um the inclin
effects, not just our learning
environment, but also our
abilities to success and
graduate.
Um, well
Of spending schools can hire
qualified teachers.
Offense device program maintains
safety functions and provide in
Offense device program maintains
safety functions and provide
in
um these resources are cranes
for preparing for us college
careers and life um beyond ours.
Like, um, for other people that
wants to be aware, um, welding,
we can provide that in our
schools too and like nursing
too.
Um,
People that wants to, um, do
child caring.
NBA teacher, we should also
teach about that and then teach
about our um finances, how to do
finance.
And then we should also teach,
um, how
To, um.
Uh
How to, I'm sorry.
Yeah.
I'm sorry, I'm kind of scared.
Uh,
I'm sorry.
And um to um
college success, yeah, and then
to build up our awareness, how
to do it and what college we
want to go to.
Like, um, college in Pueblo or
college in Oklahoma in every
state, so be sure to learn about
the college and how they work
and how they operate, and then
um see if we actually like it
and go visit them or something
like that.
And, um, but, um, it's not just
about having more money. It's
about usually it's wisely we
need um accountabilities to
ensure that funds are spent
effort to improve education
outcomes. This means investing
in programs that supports all
students, students, especially
those who face
additional challenges as
students we have voices and we
have um vasive challenges we
can raise awareness of the
importance of equal fundings and
encouragement or community to
support individual and aim to
the closer gap whenever, whether
it's voting or or beyond
measures support public private
partnerships are simple speak
outs and reaction counts,
including fair fair in
application school fundings is
including for providing quality
education to every student.
regarding, regardless of their
backgrounds, let's work together
to ensure all the schools have
resource they need to help reach
for our potential and um.
This speech aims to highlights
the importance of our equisible
schools funding to encourage
students to pre to be productive
and vandicating for a better
resource and opportunities, um.
And that's all I got.
Thank you. That was a lot, but
thank you for coming forward and
traveling all the way down this
way during your your summer time
so I appreciate it. OK. Anybody
else for a public comment?
I can.
No Mayan hopi Matua Rebecca
Nahey on Bahan Matsuwa Nkoewa
bababawan it's the uncle. My
name is Rebecca Naahey. I am
corn clan and child of the
butterfly clan. I'm coming today
as a mother of Zuni children on
the Zuni Pueblo, who's also
married to a religious leader in
Zuni, and um, although despite
being Hopi and ancestrally tied
to the Zuni, um, just to clarify
that Zuni Public School District
seceded from Gallup McKinley
School District in the 1970s and
um I was
also a teacher in ZUI in 2015 to
2017. Um, during that time, I
was one of about 37 Native
American women that were placed
on administrative leave and
during that time I was
interrogated for 2 hours. Um,
one of the questions I was asked
was, is colonization 1/5 grade
vocabulary word, which it is,
it's in the social studies
standards.
Um
But I went to
Kind of illuminate what can
happen when community members do
speak out and the level of
engagement that was present in
the conversation yesterday, um,
we've had a lot of community
pushback within those systems
since 2015, since 2014, and it's
still ongoing. Um, what happens
when you speak out against a
district like this. Well, the
only grocery store in Zuni is
called Halona. The leader of
Halona was told that if you
speak out, we'll find another
vendor and um
The leaders are all non-native.
They're all mostly from, not
from New Mexico, that
collectively make over a million
dollars in leadership, all
non-native, um, and it goes
against what the Zuni Pueblo
seceded from was to reclaim
language and culture and
ancestral calendar cycles. Right
now, if you try to engage with
ZUI Public School District and
you are absent because you are
an initiated person and our um
participating in a ceremony, you
are still incumbent.
attendance laws, which I was
told in a meeting about a month
and a half ago that um they do
take you to court in Zuni. Um,
they do take parents to court if
their child is absent. Uh, they
hold you to the 5 day, the 10
day, the everything day, but if
you are kicked out of Zuni
public school district, that's
the only educational option in
ZUI and when students are kicked
off of their ancestral
homelands, where else can they
go? Well, there are two private
Christian schools on the Zuni
Pueblo that cost tuition.
There's also the nearby Gallup
McKinley County.
schools, which you can go to in
Ramah, um, however, there is in
New Mexico statute that says
that if a student is expelled,
um, that they are at the
discretion of another school
district within a 12 month
period, they can choose to not
enroll a student because of that
expulsion to New Mexico,
22-1-4E5. Um, so these students
go to different places and then
they can't enter another school
district, which is how 6
Directions got a lot of its
students, but there's a way to
circumnavigate
even that because if you're
expelled, you have rights of
appeal, you have rights that are
triggered, and most of the
students in ZUI, and I've
witnessed this, are told you can
either voluntarily withdraw your
child or you can go to the local
detention center and your child
will check in there and a bus
will take them there. You get to
choose the detention center is
the local jail. It is housing
adults in that detention center.
It's not a juvenile detention
center. There's an in-school
suspension center within the
elementary school and
Um
The staff are mostly from
outside of New Mexico too for
the core teachers. All of the
educational assistants in ZUI
are Zuni people, um, the tribal
council is aware of this and has
had ongoing conversations since
2015 when this first became a
problem when 37 Native American
administration were placed on
administrative leave. They were
told by PED that they cannot be
inter intervention unless there
is a financial finding, um, in
terms of the Yazi Martinez case.
If it's put back into the
communities and the
community is wishing for an
outside education, there's still
barriers of access because are
we allowed to educate ourselves
if the PSFA says that your
facility is older than 30 years,
you can't get a building. If we
go to ancestral practices and
build our own building out of
Adobe and Straw bale housing
that's off grid and
self-sufficient and reminiscent
of the religious households that
currently exist in the structure
of Zuni. Is that even allowed?
Not really when the reservation
has no building codes. Um, so
connected to yesterday, when
parents are locked out of
the system because they can't
speak up at school board
meetings. They don't understand
the language. They're navigating
a system that's actually
functioning because they cross
their T's and dot their I's and
they're functioning
legalistically within the way
that the system is supposed to
work. They're following the
system. They're following
attendance and truancy, but here
we have a high number of
students that are not tracked
and um I'm saying this so that
the this committee has ongoing
awareness when you enter into
these conversations of Yazi.
Latinas that you're aware of
this and that you have some
influence over conversations of
this where we can ask PED what
is the data for not just
expulsions but for different
placements that these students
go to, what's the re-entry plans
for them, and is that even
tracked because it's not tracked
at 6 Directions or in any of the
local schools that we get, um,
also, I know that this committee
probably does have the power to
call a hearing and ask for
expert testimony within these
realms. So I say this as a
community
member of a mother from Zuni who
wishes to build their own school
in Zuni, but has navigated the
same barrier systemically that I
cannot educate my own children
in the Zuni language without
also being told your children
were singing songs hundreds of
year olds and dancing, but they
didn't do their numbers, so
they're in trouble today. Thank
you so much. Um, thank you,
thank you for your public
comment, uh, representative
Johnson.
I just wanted to thank our
staff. I wanted to bring them
out here and acknowledge them.
01 more public comment.
Come on up, sorry. I apologize.
So the mic is already on, just
make sure it's you're close
enough to it so we can hear you.
Can you hear me? All right.
Um, no, believe that my unhoping
my
unhoping ma
uh no but Caleb Keller steam
Bahama to a
Um, no, believe that my unhoping
ma
uh no but Caleb Keller steam
Bahamatua
no uh no soil the uncle, hello
um my name is uh Caleb Calitila.
And I come from mm Hopi and I'm
from the village of First Mesa.
But I go to school at 6
directions, and I am here
representing the high school of
uh 6 Directions Indigenous
school and I'm I'm submitting
our voices on, on our um school
experiences and our for public
comment and
Most of my peers are from the
Navajo Nation and the Zuni res,
so yeah.
And then here's the, all of our
public comments, um, we, um.
What you might call it, um.
We interviewed the high school
and the mid school, but um the
high school did the pro uh did a
protest for why we didn't, why
we had a corrupt board and then
a while back we had another
Uh, uh, well, hey ho
ho oh my
uh
Hey yo he
oh he na na na na na.
Oh my word
well, he,
oh
he
he
he
he
uh huh.
Thank you.
Thank you. It's always a
blessing to hear our children
sing, yeah.
Madam Madam We chair.
OK, back to thank Pinedale
chapter and Pinedale chapter
leadership and officials for
helping us host our meeting
here. We've had a great couple
of days. Uh, we thank you for
everything, and I wanted to
acknowledge Carmen Martin. She
is one of the staff here. She's
the account maintenance
specialist, and then, of course,
uh, our chair, uh, Sarah
Jackson, president of the
chapter.
And the rest of the staff, I
believe, are out to lunch. So
just please help me thank them.
Yes, yeah, yeah, and I think one
of the things that we might have
to um motion for the recipe for
the meatloaf the other day, so.
But um I didn't think I even ate
dinner because I was so um it's
a great meal, but I appreciate
all our members here for coming
out here and seeing the area out
here. This was our only meeting
that we will have.
Out in um
Uh, out on the red, our Navajo
Nation, I should say our next
meeting for the Indian Affairs
Committee's August 14th and 15th
in Taos, September 25, 26,
Alamo, October, Tahajali and
Albuquerque in November, we got
back in Santa Fe, so we only
have a couple of more there and
um safe travels and
If there are no more comments or
any other announcements, I
believe we will see you Friday?
Lose track of the day. Monday
LHHS in uh Las Vegas is what I
understand is the next couple of
meetings. So yeah, thank you to
our staff. Thank you to our, our
