Everyone introduce themselves.
record and for our webcast.
And we'll start with our far
right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Anthony
Ellison I represent.
District 4, which is the 2/3
western part of San Juan County.
And you don't get no more
Northwestern than I do. Thank
you.
Thank you for the invite Mr.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Greg
Neibert, I represent Senate
District 27, which is almost the
exact opposite of uh the
gentleman to my right. I'm in
the southeast corner of the
state, not quite the far
southeast corner, but pretty
close. Chavis Lee.
Roosevelt, Curry, and Dubaca
Counties. Pleasure being here
today, sir.
Uh, good morning, everybody.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am a
representative Elio Le Alone.
I represent district 6, with its
parts of Cibola and McKinley
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, director and everyone
joining us on Zoom, I'm sure
it's a huge crowd.
I am Natalie Figueroa
representative in House District
30 in the middle of the state in
the northeast heights of
Albuquerque.
Thank you and go to our staff.
Um, my name is Christina
Vasquez, and I'm a staff
attorney for Legislative council
Service.
Very well, thank you and uh.
I'm the chair for this committee
and the state senator Roberto
Bobby J. Gonzalez, District 6.
Encompasses part of uh Salamos,
and with that, we'll go with our
first presentation and welcome
and good morning.
We're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, for
the invitation of Mark Roper.
I'm the division director of
Economic development for the
Economic Development department.
Uh
The Economic development
department, our mission is to
improve lives of New Mexicans.
But increasing the economic
opportunities.
And providing a place for
business to thrive.
I like to put it in the fact
that our, our ultimate goal is
to create job opportunities and
career paths for New Mexicans to
improve their way of life.
The Economic Development
department has multiple
divisions, the economic
development division, uh, of
which I oversee includes the
activities of JTI.
The community, business and
rural development team that
nobody calls him by that. We
always call him the regional
reps.
Um, Main Street, the Office of
International Trade, the Office
of Science and Technology, and
we also oversee LIDA, which
we'll be talking about today.
We also have uh the film
division.
The outdoor recreation division.
And in its 2nd year of
existence, the creative
industries division.
We also have two offices that
are administratively attached to
the department.
The Office of Military Based
Planning and Spaceport
Authority.
Uh, we also offer administrative
uh services to the border
authority too.
You'll flip to the 2nd slide,
um, it's the, it's the
investment, uh, that, um, New
Mexico makes into
Economic-based businesses.
Uh, what I'm going to go through
today, uh, is a little bit of
what it, what is Lita? How does
it work?
What is our process? How do, how
do we figure out how uh how much
or who to invest with and
overall, what is the benefit to
New Mexico.
On slide number 3, you'll see
that Lita is an investment, and,
and I, and it's
Read for a reason. I really want
to stress that it's an
investment. I know you guys have
a very large task every year of
putting together a budget.
Uh, and those are things that
you view as cost, um, and you
need to balance it, and it's a
very large task.
But Lea is an investment, and it
needs to be looked at the same
way you would look at your 401k
or any other type of uh
investment strategy, you're
investing in something that's
going to derive fiscal benefit
to the state of New Mexico, and
you should expect to return on
that investment.
Uh, it is, uh, investment that
can only be made uh to
A qualified entity, and the
investments can only be
reimbursements for land,
building, and infrastructure.
What does that mean? That means
that um
The investments that we do make
won't leave New Mexico soil.
We won't really invest in
equipment, rolling stock, those
types of things that could
potentially be packed up in a
U-Haul or a Mayflower.
Um, and moved away. The
investments that we make
regardless of the success of the
business will always stay in
Mexico and be a valuable asset.
Um, everybody is always, uh,
worried about Article 9, Section
14 of the New Mexico
Constitution that we commonly
refer to as the anti-donation
clause.
Uh, Lita is an exception to
that, as voted on by the people.
It is, it was uh an approved
constitutional amendment and the
uh circa 1992, uh, that allowed
for these investments for a
local government, uh, into
qualified entities.
When you look at a leader a
project, it does, uh, it, it is
uh needs to have sufficient
return, meaning that you're, the
benefit, the fiscal benefit back
to the entities will be greater,
equal to or greater than the
amount of the grant award.
Uh, to offset that, and it also
has to have a job creation
component.
The legislature amended LIDA.
Oh, it's probably been nearly 20
years ago now.
To require security.
Meaning that we have to hold
security collateral, uh, for,
uh, a leader project equal to
the amount of the grant award.
Um
Therefore, and and held until
such a time as the requirements
of the project participation
agreement are met.
That it's there in the event
that we have clawbacks that we
have something to fall back on
that that that uh we can get our
money back if necessary.
Moving on to the next slide. How
does it work?
Lita is a discretionary
incentive, uh, the amount of the
investment is at the discretion
of the executive branch, the
governor.
Sometimes you'll hear uh called
the closing fund is it allows
for public money to reimburse
the company for those expenses
that I, uh, that I mentioned.
Uh, it, it isn't intended, uh,
to offset those early costs uh
to the company that's coming to
New Mexico, uh, to give them a,
a kind of a head start and in
getting established in Mexico.
It is for growth of companies in
New Mexico.
As well as companies coming into
New Mexico. It's not just
recruitment fund. It is for any
business that is growing,
expanding, or locating in New
Mexico.
All projects require a project
participation agreement is what
we call it, um, most attorneys
would call it a contract.
Uh, it's a contract between uh
the business and the public
entity, uh, that outlines the,
the things that the company is
going to provide as far as
capital investment, jobs,
payroll, uh, those types of
things, uh, and it also
outlines, uh, how much public
investment's going to be made
back to the company, how that
public investment is dispersed.
And then there's also the
clawback agreements in there
that in the event that these
parameters aren't meant how
clawbacks will happen, and uh of
course then it also talks about
the security held in place for
those clawbacks.
Well
Qualified entities, uh, there's,
there's a long list of them in
statute, but ultimately it comes
down to their own economic base,
um, business.
Meaning their business that
makes something manufacture
something or a service business
that derives over 50% of their
revenue from outside of the
borders of New Mexico, meaning
an economic-based business.
Uh, there are exceptions for
cultural facilities and retail.
Uh, in the, in the statute at
the local level, uh, typically
the state leader fund does not
invest in those types of
projects, but there is a, there
is discretion for local
governments, cities and counties
to make those investments.
What's the process?
How do we, how do we know? Lita.
Uh, potential projects come from
a variety of places. They come
from, you know, recruitment
activities, uh, marketing from
the New Mexico partnership, uh,
they come from our local
economic development
organizations and their, uh,
they're advertising, marketing,
their business retention and
expansion, uh, programs, they
come from our regional reps as
they do their business retention
and expansion visits and uh find
companies looking to expand in
Mexico.
They also come from such things
as
A phone call to the cabinet
secretary.
A phone call to the governor's
office.
Uh, and many other ways. So, you
know, they come, uh, where the
leads come from are a variety of
places, but we try, we try to
treat them all in the same
fashion and in the same process
so that they all have that same
opportunity.
And after the initial reach out
contact, we, we always work the
project through economic
development uh division.
Uh, typically it'll be the
regional rep that initially
meets with the company to verify
the company's uh
qualifications that they do in
fact qualify for LIDA, uh, and
then start gathering uh initial
intake, uh, information.
But, you know, how many jobs is
the company adding? How many,
you know, do they need new
building, uh,
Are they buying new equipment?
What's the total capital
investment, those types of those
types of questions.
Um, that we acquire those
informations, uh, and move the
project forward if in fact the
company does meet the criteria.
At the same time, uh, we're also
talking to that company about
the other incentives that may be
available, uh, within the state
of Mexico, things such as the
job training incentive program,
the world jobs tax credit, the
high wage job tax credit, uh the
manufacturer's investment tax
credit, and if the project is
substantial enough, the
industrial revenue bonds and
what they and what they may be
able to do.
Uh, once we determine the in
fact the company is uh viable,
and we've collected the
information.
And the data necessary for us to
Uh, look, and evaluate and do an
economic impact analysis, and
economic impact analysis is done
by our internal economists, uh,
we've developed a model, uh,
that we also have reviewed with
the legislative Finance
Committee to uh go over uh our
assumptions within the model.
That's uh based on uh on a lot
of things. But what we're
looking, what we're looking at
is two things. We're looking at
the total economic impact.
Of the project, uh, and total
economic impact means, I mean
direct jobs, and then how many
indirect jobs are created by
this activity. I'm gonna
construction jobs are created by
this activity, uh, and then
what's the ancillary and
discretionary spend and how much
gross receipts taxes.
Is done and, and through all of
that, that's the total economic
impact, and we look at a 10 year
window.
But we also look and, and are
more critical about what's the
fiscal impact of the project.
fiscal impact means
Simply directed.
Direct impact that that company
has made, uh, to the coffers of
the city, the county, the state,
and any other special taxing
districts. How much grocery
receipts tax, how much income
tax,
How much property tax, uh, have,
have we collected due to the
direct results of this, not the
ancillary indirect.
Everything was just the direct
results of that company, and,
and we look at what that fiscal
impact is on the project.
Uh, as, as we go, as we go
through all that, uh, we then,
uh, assembled that we uh provide
that information to the
governor's office, uh, and then
at that point, they make a
determination as to the amount
of public investment, uh, that
they would like to see made into
this project.
And they vary. Uh, we have very
small projects, uh, such as the
one that comes to mind that uh
happened in Rio Riba County, uh,
with C4 farms, uh, that was,
that was standing up a meat
processing facility and that was
uh uh it was.
Or
4 or 5 jobs in Rio River County,
so it wasn't a really big
project from a job creation, but
it was pretty substantial, uh,
capital investment by the
Casados family, um, and we, we
approved $75,000 in in Lita for
that for that project.
To the other extreme, um, where
we had Maxion uh looking to
place their first manufacturing
facility in the state of New
Mexico, and that was at $18
million LIDA investment, uh,
that we're making into that. So
there, we work with all, uh,
existing, expanding companies in
Mexico that are very small but
very important uh to them and to
their and to their communities
that they are, uh, and then to
the very large uh potential uh.
3000 jobs, types of companies.
We, um, and we, and we work with
all of those. We do look at uh
what the total return on
investment on that and we'll go
ahead and flip to what is the
process continue one more time.
Uh, once, once the offer is
made, uh, that's
The point when we actually open
up Alita application. Everything
else is preliminary to that.
Uh, we, we don't.
We don't open up an application
until we have an offer, and
there's a couple of reasons
behind that. One is,
It's unfair to ask a company to
complete a full formal
application.
Only to be told no.
Um, and so we, we wait until
we're committed, we have a job,
uh, we have a dollar figure
offer on the table, then we go
through the full application,
which does include due
diligence, which does include
financial review of a minimum of
3 years of their financial
statements, if they are a new
company, then we uh we ask for,
uh, what, what their capital
stack is and uh what their pro
forma projections are, uh, for
the 1st 3 years.
Uh, so that's when we actually
open up the application and
start going through that
process.
Uh, included in that process
then is the public process.
Um, if we're, we're utilizing
state money but we will always
partner with the local
government where this project
is, is located either the city
or the county where this project
is located.
Because Lita does stand for
local economic Development Act,
so we, we always partner with
the local entity, uh, and, and
they act as the fiscal agent.
And that uh contract I talked
about the project participation
agreement is then negotiated and
uh worked on with the company.
We come to agreement on the
terms of when the money will be
dispersed, how many jobs are
going to be created with the
capital investment's going to be
and what the potential clawbacks
are gonna, going to be.
big projects such as Maxion,
that'll be a 10 year, uh,
Project participation agreement
of PPA because it's
Long term, it's going to take a
while to get to the return as
well as get to the job creation.
Small projects like I mentioned,
uh, well, most likely be 5
years.
Uh, and, and that, that will be
the length of the contract or
the PPA.
We also enter into uh an
intergovernmental agreement
between the fiscal agent and the
state of New Mexico. It mirrors
the PPA. It really just shows
the flow of the state money to
the local government and how we
expect the state money to be
handled in the process, and
then, of course, there's the
security agreement, uh, within
that, uh, public process, which
is the collateral, uh, whatever
we're holding for security for.
Um, that particular project.
Once we get public approval at
the local level, which is, uh is
passed by ordinance, meaning it
becomes law within the local
government with those 3
documents attached as um pieces
to that ordinance. We go into
compliance, where the company
then um meets has to do their
job reporting, their annual
economic impact analysis, and
also has to do, uh, you know,
and then when they meet certain
parameters, they ask for the the
money.
be uh dispersed to them.
Uh, the money can only be
dispersed on a reimbursement
basis. In other words, we can't
upfront or we won't upfront any
money, uh, to a project, they
have to have already spent the
money on legal expenditures,
land building and
infrastructure, uh, and then we
asked that they have the invoice
of which they paid and proof of
payment, uh, before we reimburse
them on those matters.
So that's the process, um, and
then what's the benefit? And I
talked a little bit just briefly
about uh an annual economic
impact analysis.
At the front end we do this data
gathering and we do this, uh,
Economic impact analysis over
what's it gonna look like over
10 years.
We base, uh, we base that on the
information the company's
providing and those assumptions.
And we look at that and that's
how we base
Uh, what our awards going to be,
but on an annual basis, then we
ask the company to give us what
really happened.
How many jobs did you really
hire?
What was that average payroll?
How much money did you really
spend on uh capital investment,
uh, how much money did you, um,
Spend on just ancillary
purchases, you know, within,
within the business. How much
did you really spend on your
utilities?
And then on an annual basis, we
run an economic impact analysis
to see what the fiscal impact
has happened with the overall
economic impact just happened
and where we stand,
As compared to how much money
we've
Dispersed
And where we stand on how much
money we could potentially
disperse and where are we on
that from a return on investment
basis. What's the benefit
continued on the next page.
As I mentioned, we look at the
ROI, the return on investment
based on
How much has been dispersed.
How much potentially can be
dispersed, and we also look at
The big picture of, did they get
any other incentives?
You know, it's not just leave
it. Did they get Jay tip?
Did they get high wage? Did they
get
Um, rural jobs or high wage
jobs, uh, you know, did they get
manufactured investment tax
credit IRB. We looked at that in
a total picture, so we look for
total return on investment.
On all incentives, and then we
look at the return on investment
just specifically on, on Lita.
And as you can see, uh, the both
numbers are really good, but we
like to brag about 600% return
on all investments.
Uh, on just Lita.
And uh 220% return on all
investments. So that would be
JTip, highways, all of those,
we're still showing a 220%
return on our LIA investment.
Um, and I, as I mentioned, it's
in it
Very important to continue to
remember that it's reimbursement
the company has already expended
that money before they get the
money back.
And every PPA has milestones.
They don't get the entire award
upfront. They have to meet
certain milestones.
Like complete construction, get
a certificate of occupancy,
higher X number of people, and
they um they have to meet those
milestones before the
reimbursement.
So that we, you know, we do get
some, uh, economic benefit
before any money goes out the
door.
I'm gonna go through a couple of
examples just to kind of show
what, what happens with the
leader project. This one was an
urban project that um has been
in place for about 6 years, 125.
$1000 LIDA investment.
And you can see the total fiscal
impact was $943,000. So a great
return on investment there.
A rural project, 5 years, uh,
$75,000 a liter project.
Uh, and, and also had 2 26,000
and other incentives such as
JTI, etc. but we still had a
total fiscal impact of $223,000.
So again, a very nice return on
our public investment into this
business of 119%.
A couple of more just quick
examples, uh, an urban project
again, uh, 5 years, $150,000
LIDA investment.
Plus, as you can see, the other
incentives add up. $516,000 in
other incentives, high wage,
etc.
But this particular project
created a total fiscal impact of
$4.5 million.
Uh, and direct impact to the
state, city, and county for an
amazing uh $580,000.
Uh, return on investment for
nearly $700,000 in public funds
into that project.
And then an urban project, this
is a very large urban project,
it's been in place $2 million
LIDA investment, uh, plus
another nearly $700,000 and
other incentives, uh, but still,
uh, $3 million.
Economic impact and return on
investment of 15% and just a
short 4 year time frame.
So, it works, uh, it, it's a
valuable tool and the uh and the
toolbox for economic development
to help businesses grow and
expand and locate in Mexico, but
it's, as you can see by the
numbers, it's also a valuable
investment by the state of New
Mexico, that you're getting a
return on your investment. This
is not a cost to your budget for
actually getting a return back
to the state coffers on this
investment, and uh thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, all
stand for any question.
Thank you, Mr. Roman.
Very, very much. Uh, we have a
few, uh,
Legislators that have joined us
if you can introduce yourself
for our record.
start with the far right.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
Representative Bill Ream
District 31, the far northeast
heights of Albuquerque. Thank
you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members, um, I'm representative
Cynthia Brego. I represent the
west side of Albuquerque, the
Northwest Mesa, which is around
Cottonwood Mall.
Well, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, Mark. Thank you so much
for your work and for all that
you do. You've been with us for
a while and appreciate you. Um,
I just, um, I had a question at
the proper time. I'm Nancy,
Senator Nancy Rodriguez, Santa
Fe.
Oh, very well. We'll go ahead
and we'll start with um
We have center Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just
quickly, um, let me um just ask
a quick question. Um, I went
blank here on the, the process
on this page, mark where you
said, what is the process? Thank
you, by the way, very nicely,
um, together, um, process and in
succinct information. Um, when
you mentioned that an applicant,
for example, they come from the
projects come from different
places. I noticed that one can
come for example, leads from the
New Mexico partnership.
Um, tell me, um, does, if a
private company wants to apply
for funds from LIDA, do they
have to belong to this
partnership. Uh, is that what
the private enterprise group is,
or is it something different?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam Vice Chair, uh, members of
the committee, um,
So, no, I mean, the short answer
is no.
Uh, Lita is available to any
qualified entity. So the private
part of that is the fact that
there are private.
Company.
Um, it doesn't even, uh, in most
instances there are private
for-profit company, although the
statute doesn't, uh,
Doesn't have that restriction,
uh, but it is
Most usually a, a private
for-profit for profit company.
The New Mexico partnership was
created in statute by the New
Mexico legislature.
To be the marketing and
recruiting arm for the economic
development department.
So they are created in statute,
they are actually a contractor
to the department.
Uh, so, uh, we, uh, we pay them
a fee on an annual basis to do
our marketing and recruiting, so
they do such things as do um
sales missions where they go to
certain parts of the country,
and they take our local EDOs
and, and anybody that uh that
feels like they could benefit
from meeting with site selectors
on a specific region.
Uh, and they, we call those
sales missions. They also attend
multiple trade shows throughout
the year and, and targeted
industry sectors.
Uh, and, uh, promoting New
Mexico, uh, and putting our name
out there from, from a uh
you know, business recruitment.
recruitment standpoint. So, uh,
this particular year, we were uh
given $900,000 in our budget for
the New Mexico partnership.
Um, I can tell you that next
year we'll be asking for an
increase.
OK, thank you very much. Good
work, Mr. Chairman, just a quick
follow up on that and then I
kind of defer to other members.
I don't take too much time, but
your economic developments
regional rep team is that some
you all put it together and it
is who belongs to this rep team
that we're talking about in the
economic development and that's
all I have, Mr. Chairman. They
are, they are full-time uh
employees of the economic
development department.
Um, we have the state divided up
into 6 regions.
Um, roughly speaking, it's the
Northwest, it's the northeast,
it's the
North Central part of the state,
as well as the belly of the
state, it's uh basically ernalo
Valencia, um, and
Uh
Torrance counties, and then we
have Southwest and Southeast
corner of the state, um, all but
the Northeast, uh, region have
two reps in there, uh, the reps
live and work in their region uh
around the state. We have reps
located in Mora.
New Mexico, um,
Berna Leo, New Mexico, Gallup,
New Mexico.
Uh, Albuquerque.
We have 2 reps in Albuquerque.
Uh, we also have reps in
Portalis and Roswell in the
southwest corner.
The southeast corner and our
southwest corner are both of our
reps do live in, in the greater
Las Cruces area.
Uh, but they, but they live and
work in their regions and they
cover, depending on which region
somewhere between 7 and 3
counties.
Great.
Very well, thank you Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, Mr. Rober. um, sorry,
I was a few minutes late coming
in. I, um, I've had quite a bit
of experience working with the
LIDA program in Albuquerque and
the city of Albuquerque and um
we're not certainly, Mr. Chair,
when I was uh on the city
council, we had a number of
projects and Mark could probably
attest to what those projects
are, but I just wanted to
mention, um, this is a really
great program for um even
The rural areas who may not have
um participated because it
And, and I like your, your title
strategic.
Investments because really
that's what it is, Mr. Chair,
and I just want to also mention
that um the state has clawbacks,
but also the city has clawbacks,
um, in our development
agreements when we enter into
these funding sources, so
there's a number of checkpoints
along the way to ensure that the
project is moving forward and
then it's um progressing and I
don't know if you wanna say a
little bit about that, uh, Mr.
Roper, but I,
We've certainly enjoyed in
Albuquerque working with you
guys on these, these sorts of
projects and and attracting new
businesses to Albuquerque.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Barrigo.
Uh, and it has been a pleasure
working with you on LEA
Projects. Uh,
Yes, Club acts are a part of
every project participation
agreement, whether they're state
money involved or not, if it's
just local money, uh, there.
Required by statute to have
clawback requirements in there
and to have security in place.
Uh, to back up those, back up
those clawbacks. Obviously, when
we invest in our project, we
always
Wish the best and we want to see
success and we want to see it,
uh, come to full fruition and,
and fully utilize all the monies
and close out as a successful
program.
But security is in place in
those events that it doesn't
work out.
Uh, and that doesn't mean it's a
failure, it means that it didn't
work out, but we got our money
back.
Here's a good example and um
representative Alcons backyard.
Uh, there was a company called
Rhino Health.
Uh, that, um,
came to New Mexico was going to
make uh nitro gloves.
Um, and they did for a couple of
years, make some nitro gloves,
um, but ultimately they failed.
It was a failed project.
Uh, but we did get 30+ people
working for two years. We did
get the benefit of that. Uh,
they did occupy a formerly
vacant facility there in Church
Rock, New Mexico.
Um, so we did get some economic
benefit from it and when it was
all over.
We got the money back.
We, we got, uh, we got the uh
secured money back and then the
money that they hadn't uh
Crunched out to them yet, but
came back to the state of Mexico
and back into the leader fund,
and it's there for another
project on the road. So it does
work. It's sad to see a company
that doesn't make it, but, uh,
the plate, the rules are in
place for a good reason and uh
it works.
Well, and Mr. Chair, if I may,
um, I mean the development
agreements are really the
critical piece of this, um, of
these agreements and, you know,
the city has checkpoints with
our attorneys and then with city
council because city council has
to approve the development
agreements and then um the state
also, they have their own
attorneys that um review the
projects and make sure that
they're in compliance, and if
they're not in compliance
and those clawbacks will kick
in.
And that's when um
unfortunately, some companies
don't make it, so, um, I want to
thank Mr. Roper because it's,
it's a really great project, and
I mean, it's a really great
program and for these kinds of
projects attracting new
businesses. So thank you for
that, Mr. Chi.
Very well, thank you.
No
Um
Schoo mentioned, uh, what is
your budget?
The, the lead of budget.
We try, we, we try to maintain a
balance of $50 million in the in
the LIA fund.
Um, so, as, as we encumber money
and, and promise money, we come
back to the legislature, uh,
each year and we asked for that
amount of money to get us, get
us to that $50 million.
Threshold, uh, $150 million
makes it um.
Marketable
And, uh, that where companies
believe that the money is there,
um, and, and that, that's the,
that's the area we try to
maintain.
Uh, and with that, um,
You feel that the 50 million is
working.
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
company, yes, I think 150
million, um, based on historical
Uh, data is sufficient uh on an
annual basis.
Yeah
Yeah, very well, um.
So, any other members?
And now with
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In recent weeks, a lot of people
have approached me, well, quite
a number of people have
approached me saying, since
after November 5th,
You will, you will have a lot of
time on your hands. We'd like to
get you involved in a couple of
projects and one of the projects
that has some merit is uh a
group of veterans together, um,
they want to build simple
modular homes for their fellow
veterans that are homeless, just
something really, really simple.
Something that can be occupied
by one person because most of
the homeless veterans are just
single persons. My question is,
would any of the programs that
you mentioned, the system and
the startup, well, it's not
necessarily a startup because
they, they found a building
already that's got all the uh
infrastructure, uh, they just
need direction as to how to go
about getting
Uh, available resources.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the committee, Representative
Alice an excellent, excellent
question.
So
The production of a manufactured
home is a LIDA eligible.
entity.
Um
Building the house on a piece of
land is not.
Uh, but building it, uh, in a,
in a building to be relocated
someplace else is considered a
manufacturing process, and
therefore it would be ali
eligible uh entity.
Uh, the fact that they've
identified a building.
Uh
The Lita dollars could be used
to offset the cost of the
acquisition of that building,
they could be used to offset the
costs of improvements to that
building necessary uh to go into
production, and then all of the
jobs hired there would be job
training and study program
eligible.
Uh, which would then trigger the
fact that uh if they met the
high wage threshold that they
would be high wage eligible, and
in your area, without a doubt,
they would be rural jobs tax
credit eligible. So, yes, in
that particular example, uh, it
would be eligible for virtually
every incentive that we have on
the book.
OK, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Roper,
thanks for that. So, even though
the building would be on native
land.
They still qualify for something
like LIDA
yes, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, absolutely, um,
we, we would, uh, we have and,
and we'll continue to uh support
projects on, on native land, um,
the example I gave, the
unfortunate example I gave was
on native land in Curran.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that.
Thank you.
Very well. Um,
Or
Represently welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, following
on your uh
A question about budget, you
said that you had had a $50
million budget.
That cover the $50 million does
that cover your expenses to run
the program.
Or is this just the program
alone.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, representative, that
is just the money and the leader
fund.
Mhm
So you have a,
you have a separate fund to run
near the program itself. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
representative on phone, yes, we
have, we have uh uh general fund
budget to support all the
activities within the
department.
Um, as well as a separate fund
for the job training and
incentive program.
Um, both the job training
incentive program and the LIA
fund are non-revering funds.
Um, so that, um, you know, they,
they can roll over into the
following fiscal years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Very well.
Anyone else?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Director Roper. This is
A great presentation on the
program. I'm gonna ask a little
bit about how through the
process, things progress. So in
the preliminary stage.
What say percentage of
preliminary projects make it to
the formal application stage.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee represented Figaro.
That's a good question, and I, I
don't know that I can.
Uh, I, I, I know I don't have
that a factual number for you
anecdotally, I can tell you from
experience.
That probably 90% of the
projects make it, make it to the
evaluation.
stage.
There's about 10% of them that
come in and they're just not
eligible projects.
Um, but in, in those cases, we
try to, we, we try to help them
to some of the other financing
programs that we have within the
department and those types of
things to help them. Uh, we
don't just say no.
Uh, we do try to find other
resources from them, but I'd say
the majority of the projects
that come to us are
Our
Considered eligible and move
forward. I'd say about 90%.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Director. I think that speaks
well of the marketing program
that it is reaching out.
Uh, to mostly appropriate
entities and pulling them in and
educating them on what it takes
to be eligible.
Before they get too far down the
road.
Um
The
Clawback provision.
was put in
Because there seemed to be a
need.
But anecdotally, would you give
us a percentage of projects that
we need to implement clawbacks.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee representative
Figueroa.
It's a, it's a low percentage,
uh, we've instituted clawbacks
on.
3 projects in the last 5 years.
Uh, we've had, uh, probably
another 5 or 6 that I wouldn't
call clawbacks, I call
reversions, meaning that they
never
Touched any of the money and,
and
We, we just moved the money back
from the fiscal agent.
So about uh about 8 out of
70 plus projects in the last 5
years. So again, it's a small
percentage, but, but it does
happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
director, the 600% return on
investment for Lita.
is just outstanding. It's one of
the most powerful tools that we
have.
In New Mexico. Um, I wondered if
that number
spans the entire 30-year history
of LIDA, or is it the last 10
years.
How do you get that?
That, that number is active.
Projects
Uh, plus projects that have been
closed out.
During this administration,
either through club either
closed out through
backer successfully closed out.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, that's
all.
Very well. Well, Mr. Roper,
thank you very much. Uh thank
you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the opportunity. And
there's one thing that I didn't
mention in here that I think
it's probably important as we
look at the final two years of
administration. That process
that I went through.
Has been established in rural.
Um, so, meaning that uh in order
to change that process, you have
to go back through the process
of changing a rule uh within
government. So this process is
in rural, meaning that whatever
happens after I leave, then, you
know, the, the process will stay
in place until somebody actually
goes through the public process
of, of modifying the rule.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, members were a little bit
ahead.
And uh maybe
You can't see, OK.
Something else might come up.
Oh
We could take uh
It can take a 5 minute break and
there's some sweets and get some
coffee and then we'll come back
next presenters are here, so.
We'll start in just a few
minutes.
