The educational retirement
Board, uh, with me today, uh, is
our
Deputy director, Mr Lawrence
Esquivel. And we also have our
general counsel, Mr Randall
Cherry, uh, joining me to answer
any questions you might have.
With that on the second page. We
have sort of an agenda of things
that I was going to be
discussing with you. A lot is,
uh, related to solvency in the
sustainability of the program,
But I also want to start off
with providing the committee
with a couple of quick agency
updates. Uh so we can tell you
what's going on.
If you turn to the next page,
uh, titled Agency updates new
office building, I am excited to
share with you that our building
project is well underway and it
is expected to be completed by
January of this coming year.
Initially, we were looking at a
finish time of around April of
this next year, but it looks
like, uh, according to what our
building our contractors taught
us is it's gonna be up in, uh,
by substantial completion by
January of this next year.
Currently we have three office
locations, uh, two of which are
in Santa Fe and one in
Albuquerque, Our customer
service unit and part of our
investment staff. And since
we've grown over the years in
our building has not grown. We
have part of our investment
staff here in Santa Fe at an off
site location compared to our,
uh, Main office facility.
As soon as we are ready to move
into the new building this our
current or existing facility
that is owned by the Education
Retirement Board will be sold to
the General Services Department
Facilities Management division
for their use of the Public
Regulation Commission. There was
So money authorized a couple of
years back and we'll be moving
forward with the sale of that
building. Uh, later this year.
If you turn to the next page,
I'm also excited to share with
you that we are well underway in
the development of a new pension
administration system.
It's already been a year exactly
a year today that that contract
became effective and we started
the kickoff shortly thereafter
initially was expected to take
us around four years. And as of
right now, we're a little bit
ahead of schedule. And I'm happy
to report that with everything.
Uh,
All said and done. We're
expected to be completed with
this project in November of 2026
on this slide, you can just see
the partners that we've, uh,
listed the the company that is
building this new pension
administration system that is
well versed in doing this for
other states and other pension
programs is tell us health N TT
data is the
Group responsible for performing
the end, independent
verification and validation of
the information. Siegel is our
consultant that's helping guide
us through the project and M BS
is cleaning up a lot of the data
that we have. We have more than
450,000 records, uh, many of
which are incomplete by helping
us get through that process and
make sure that whatever data we
transfer into the new system,
uh, is clean and accurate.
If you turn to the next page,
uh titled Agency updates, return
to work rule changes. Now, some
of you or most of you may have
heard about some of the
challenges we've experienced
over the last couple of years
with regard with regard to
return to work violations. Uh,
In many instances, it is
unintended, But, um, the way the
statutes and rules are written
now prior to returning to work,
an individual or retired
individual must obtain
permission from the educational
retirement board before they go
back to work.
That doesn't exactly worked out.
Well, for some people, they
don't they
Tend to forget some of the
documents that they've signed or
the agreements that they've
Basically, uh, that they signed
off on whenever they retired,
Uh, that would remind them of
that and then we do have some
violations, and unfortunately,
it's usually downstream that
we're able to detect that, and
as a result, some people, uh,
end up in a situation where we
have to, uh
Pause there pause their pension
payments as well as recoup any
payments were that were made to
them during a of ineligibility.
Unfortunately, that creates a
financial hardship for a lot of
the folks that we have. And in
recognition of that the board
adopted a certain rule changes
that became effective today that
would
Basically require us to go
through some additional, uh,
support to the member basically
in additional notification when
we detect a violation has
occurred now unless it's a true
violation, meaning they were
never eligible to return to
work. Um, we will continue their
pension payments. Uh, if they
were never eligible to return to
work, Meaning I you know, I
retired, uh, effective June 1st
and return to work on June 15th
that would jeopardize the tax
exempt status of the program
that
Penalty and recoupment of those
funds paid during the period of
ineligibility will remain in
place, however, in the future if
they were eligible to return to
work, but simply forgot to
obtain, Um, permission from the
education retirement Board as
that in writing, Uh, we'll give
him a period of time a grace
period to come into compliance
if they still fail to do so, at
that point in time is where we
would suspend their pension and
recoup all I'm sorry we would
not be recouping any payments
made during that period of
ineligibility.
One of the thing that it does,
is it? Um it requires the local
administrative units. Basically,
what we refer to is the
district's charter schools.
universities to develop rules
that are consistent with our
return to work. Uh,
requirements.
If you turn to the next page, I
would imagine this is something
that most people are curious
about. Right now. We have three
return to work programs that we
administer, one of which is the
return to work. 0.25.
Uh or we have or or less,
Basically, if you're working 10
hours per week or less, Uh,
you're eligible to participate
in this program. We have 671
people that participated in that
program this last year.
We have returned to work less
than $15,000 per year. We have
390 people that were in that
program.
Return to work 36 months based
on the legislation that was
passed back in 2022, We have 308
participants that hit against
that this last year. We do have
an uptick in the number that had
been authorized for this coming
year. It's up to about 350, but
overall 308 hit payroll this
last year.
Return to work one year layout,
a program that had been in place
for probably around 20 years or
more, um, expired at the end of
this last year, meaning that
those people are the people that
are participating in the program
and we're eligible. Parti
participate had been approved
for it and remain grandfathered
under that program. Unless they
withdraw from it. They want to
move to a different program, or
they want to exclude themselves
from it. At that point in time,
they would no longer be able to
get back in the program, but
anyone that is already
participating in it all 1600
actually more.
But 1600 hit payroll this last
year. Um
Are eligible to participate
indefinitely.
And then we have about 1000 pair
returned to work retirees all
over, uh, making it just a
little over 4000 people
contributing to the educational
system.
If you turn to the next page,
Uh, here's
Little chart that shows you, uh,
some information about the
investment performance for our
group. And if I could, I would
just like to basically steal
some of the information that was
presented as part of the, uh
most recent LFC newsletter,
which I think accurately
summarizes, uh, the position
that we find ourselves in and
that E RBS annualized returns
outperform the funds Long term
target of 7% in each period in
the fun outperformed its policy
index, a performance benchmark
and all three year periods. The
fund
The best risk return measures,
Uh, among all investment funds
with the lowest standard
deviation and the best Sharpe
ratio and lowest Beta.
So rather than have have have me
give you my interpretation of
the investment performance. It's
been verified and validated by
the good folks who are at the
Legislative Finance Committee.
If you turn to the next slide,
this is just an overall. Uh,
graphical depiction of our fund
balances going back to 2010. We
reached a new high point at the
end of march of 16.8 billion.
Uh, part of that is driven by
the increase in employment
employer contributions that
we've received over the past
couple of years, along with the
stellar investment performance
that I just reported on.
If you turn to the next page, um
A little bit of background about
the organization. Uh, we
non-executive executive agency.
Uh, What does that mean? I
answer to a board of trustees
rather than directly to the
governor. We do have governor
appointees that sit on our board
and are responsible for the
overall implementation of the
education and retirement Act.
Uh, but you can see the word led
by our chair. Mr. Russell Goff,
our vice chair Mary Lou Cameron
and our board secretary, Mr
Larry Ma. We also have a
statewide elected official in
the form of our state treasurer.
Ms.
Montoya, Uh, Mr Dr Fontana.
Uh, who represents the American
Federation of Teachers in New
Mexico Secretary Rodriguez from
the higher Education Department.
Uh, Mr Ortiz from the Public
Education department, and we're
gonna have a new appointee. That
is actually he was. Appointment
becomes effective today and
their first board meeting will
be in August. But that's Doctor
Riley White from the University
of New Mexico and then lastly,
we have a retired vice
president, uh, from Highlands
University. Mr Baca, Who's the
governor? Appointee to our
board.
On the next page. This just
basically spells out the board.
Uh, powers and duties. Uh,
basically, uh, enforcing and
implementing the educational
Retirement Act, hiring an
executive director, basically
responsible for the employment
of our staff, Uh, making an
actual aerial report, uh,
regarding the financial
condition of the education
retirement board, uh, to the
Legislature in the years,
Obviously, we come forward
every, um, interim session and
and provide an update and
typically before HFC incentive
finance.
Come session time. There's
usually an update, uh, based on
the information that is
developed in June, because we'll
go through our new actuarial
evaluation. Starting today, uh,
as well as our financial audit
here shortly, and we'll present
that information. Uh, come the
next legislative session last
year. I think Senator Stefani
asked asked me whether or not
we'd ever been bequeathed any
money to the fund and, uh, as
far as I can tell and looking
back, uh, that has not occurred.
If you turn to the next slide.
Um, in terms of the topic that I
was asked to speak on today,
basically, solvency and
sustainability of the fund. Uh,
I would like to report to you
that while we're away away from
the target of becoming fully
funded or 100% funded, uh, based
on some calculations, and we'll
talk about, uh, there are no
concerns with regard to the
solvency of the program or the
sustainability of the program.
There have been a lot of reforms
over the last decade and longer
A lot of trimming around the
edges creation, a new tiers
Reduction of colas. Uh,
Increase service requirements
they have translated into a
sustainable path for us, and
we'll talk a little bit about
what that means in terms of how
we report that on our GASB, uh,
requirements as well as our
actuarial valuation, But again,
you can see that there's been a
round of changes that have
occurred over the last, uh, 12
years or longer.
If you turn to the next page,
just a couple of key highlights
from, uh from the agency, and
this is based off of, uh,
information and data. That's a
year old again. We'll be going
through the process of providing
our actuaries with an update to
this information, uh, that then
we'll probably be able to report
back to you in November on
The process does take a little
bit of time. We have 61,000
active members over 61,000
active members that were paying
into the program last year.
54,000 retirees and
beneficiaries. Those people who
are receiving beneficiaries
being those people receiving
benefit on behalf of the
retiree, our payroll how much
money we put out there to those
folks receiving the pension
benefits was more than $1.3
billion.
The average annual benefit. It
was just over $2100 per month.
But if you combine the member
and the employer contributions
that we receive to support the
program, uh, last year it
exceeded a billion dollars.
We refund about $55 million in
any given year. That's sort of
been the average of the last
couple of years for those people
that come into the system and
leave without ever receiving a
pension benefit. They're being
refunded those dollars. Let's
say they came in, and they
taught for a year and decided
that they wanted to move.
Somewhere else are no longer
participate in the program. Uh,
they're eligible to receive that
reimbursement. And then I'd like
to report that we collected for
more than $3.5 billion in
payroll. That's up from the
previous year in 3.1 billion. I
think that reflects some of the
raises and pay increases that
have, uh, that have gone into
effect for for public school
teachers, and that's up from 2.9
billion the year before.
We have 220 employer groups
again university school
districts and charter schools.
In the actuarial value of our
assets are $16.2 billion as of
last year, so our report on
information that I feel, uh,
seems a little bit still because
it's already a year old. Uh, but
this is sort of the kind of
stake in the ground that we
always refer back to whenever
we're evaluating, Um, the health
of the program in any given
year.
So the funding period is
consistent with the board's
actuarial goals of achieving a
fully funded, uh, program in the
next 26 years, and that was
based off an adoption that they
made back in 2019 that requested
us to develop a plan that would
fully fund the program over the
next 30 years. Obviously, that
plan is subject to legislative
and executive support as the
board does not set contribution
levels to the program makes a
range of assumptions in our the
actuary evaluation, but it
doesn't actually set the
contributions that we receive.
And again the funded ratio This
last year was just under 63%.
Given the fund balance that
we're gonna report as of the end
of March at that. The 16.8
billion in the expectation that
we'll hit our target of 7% this
next year. I believe that number
will go up and we'll report that
out to you later this year.
Couple of things that affect the
solvency and sustainability of
the program, uh, to have an
ongoing and recurring impact as
the cost of living adjustment
that we provide to our
employees. Uh, beginning July.
1st, Uh, folks will be receiving
the bulk of members will get a
one point actually, not quite
the bulk. The bulk members are
going to get 100 and 61.68%
increase, and then it's gonna be
1.89% for retirees with 25
years 25 years or more of
service and whose monthly
benefit is less than or equal to
the medium benefit.
Of $1746 as of last year.
And then it's gonna be 2.1% for
all disability Retirees. Uh,
who've been a retired for at
least three years. The reason
that I bring this up is because
there's a formula in our statute
that protects
Us as an organization, the
Legislature, the board, um and
the
In any given year. The board
isn't subject to making
determinations about what the
cost of living adjustment for
its members should be, because
in any given year, I think most
would agree that probably these
cost of living adjustments.
Don't keep up with, um the cost
of inflation. Unfortunately,
given the fact that we're only
63% funded, it's difficult for
us to justify increasing that in
further aggravating those long
term obligations before we hit
that fully funded ratio, So in
statute, we have it set such
that, uh, they're getting a
range of
What the A minimum of 2%. Unless
CP I is less than 2% and a
maximum of 4% as we hit
different fund milestones, So
it'll be 80% of up to 4% until
we hit that 80% benchmark. And
then that 90% it becomes 90.
Then after we reach 100% what
they receive or be eligible for
a full 4%.
On the next page, Uh, service
credit calls. Here's another
important component in driving.
uh, factor behind, Um, the
overall health of the program
and the financial well, being of
we're in that trajectory of the
26 year period.
We have four tiers created over
the last basically, 13 years,
uh, lowers those service credit
earnings for those people,
particularly tier four, and you
can see those mentioned below so
under tiers, 12 and three for
every year service they get
2.35% of their final average
salary, calculated times the
average 60 months worth of
benefit over the year and you
can see how that calculation
works. But for those people
hired on or after July, 1st
2019, they've got a tiered
approach.
The 1st 10 years they're
receiving 1.35% of their salary
and that bumps up on years 11
through 20 to 2.35%, and then
they get a real bonus for years,
21 through 30, where they're
earning 3.35%. Then after year,
30, it drops down to back to 2.4
with no earnings limit or or cap
on that.
If you flip to the next page,
uh, this highlights some of the
information that you guys are
probably familiar with and have
seen in the past. In 2013. There
was an increase in employer
employee contributions. Uh, when
we move from 7.9% up to the
10.7% that we have today, uh
they also modified the benefits
payable to members after, uh,
2013, and that's when Tier two
was created and the cost of
living adjustments until we
become 100% funded.
And in 2019 House, Bill 360
increased the employer
contributions from 13.9% up to
14.15%. So basically, a quarter
of 1% went into the fund.
Well, that was an improvement
certainly greatly appreciated.
It wasn't
Sort of altering the trajectory
of where the program was headed,
but then fast forward to 2021
Senate Bill 42, introduced by
Senator Stewart, Uh, passed
originally was expected to go
from 14.15% up to 18.15% the
last 2% points were shaved off
in the end result was, it went
from 14.15 to 16.15 scheduled
over a two year period.
But then fast forward in 2022.
It moved it from 16.15% up to
18.15%. And we got there use a
year sooner than the bill from
the previous year had proposed.
As part of that incentive, Bill
42. There was also a requirement
that the Education Retirement
Board would develop a plan that
did not include an increase in
recurring employer contributions
to improve the solvency of the
program. And at that point in
time in 2021, we had reduced our
funding period from
43 years down to 36 years, but
it still wasn't meeting our, um
our policy objectives that have
been established by the board.
Fortunately, as of today, and as
a result as a result of Senate
Bill 36. We're now on target as
I've mentioned before. I think
the key takeaway is that most
everyone that is participating
in the program.
Previous retirees that are
receiving the cola benefits
today. Future retirees, active
employees as well as, uh,
employers are all participating
in some of the changes that
needed to take place to make
this a more sustainable program.
Again, Uh, part of Senate Bill
42 lost 2021 chapter. 44
basically required a
presentation that we made the
year before last and a
presentation or a report that
was presented to D FA, LFC and
LES C. I'd be glad to send you
guys a copy of that It's
available on our website.
But basically
In order to improve the solvency
of the program, Absent an
increase in employer or employee
contributions, we'd had to make
additional reductions to the
program. Uh, many of which would
be, uh,
It would be unfortunate to go
down that route, so hopefully we
can avoid that. And we're still,
uh, making progress toward, uh,
fully funding the program.
On the next page. Uh, this last
year, we had an actuarial
experience study, which tried to
capture some of the economic
events that have been taking
place over the CAT, Pa past four
years.
Um, highlights are listed on
this page. There were some minor
tweaks to, uh some of the
mortality assumptions that we
had slight increases to some of
those some changes with regard
to our inflation assumptions and
our over administrative costs
based on previous experience.
And the result of that you can
see on the next page is the
calculation of what we expect to
be reported to this next year
would be that our unfunded
actuarial liability is gonna
decrease from 9.6 billion to 9.2
billion.
And not only will we be expected
to we'll be about a one year
ahead, uh, ahead of schedule
compared to where we were
expecting to be last year at
this time in terms of our goal
of becoming fully funded.
And as I round third base, I
think we're coming close to the
end here As far as Gatsby
statement 67, which apply to the
education, retirement, board and
gas statement, number 68, which
applies to the employer groups
and local administrative units
that we have, um the net pension
liabilities reported for this
last year were $8.6 billion,
assuming that 7% rate of return
If we decrease that assumption
to 6%, those liabilities would
grow to a
$0.8 billion.
And if we increased our in our
in our our rate of return, uh,
assumption to 8% those, uh, it
would decrease to 6.1 billion
Over the years, they it's been
reduced from 7.75 down to 7%. I
think it's reasonable to expect
in the next five years, there'll
be some additional downward
pressure and suggestion that we
need to lower that 7%. But
there's no rush to do that, at
this point, given the track
record and performance of our of
our investment staff.
Um, just to give you a little
picture of what the accounting
and financial reporting for
pensions, Uh, scheduling
employer allocations Looks like
the bulk of those are a good
chunk of those unfunded
liabilities. $1.4 billion can be
attributed to the Albuquerque
public schools.
About $200 million to CNM 437
to, uh Las Cruces, Public
schools and about 1.3 billion to
the University of New Mexico.
And I believe that brings me to
my last slide, which contains my
contact information. So if
there's something you guys think
of, uh, that you didn't get to
ask me today, uh, which I'll try
to do my best to respond to you.
Um, you're welcome to email me
or call me.
And with that, Mr Chair members
of the committee at stand for
any questions.
Thank you, Mr Chita.
I'll talk to you.
Oh, members, So we're ready for
we have a
Senator Stefanik.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you very much for the
presentation today and for all
of your staff coming
Are you all tracking the number
of retirees from education over
the years? Like what? Where I'm
going with this is do we have
more people retiring?
Than usual.
So, Mr Chair, Senator Stanic. We
got a report. As of this morning
We were up to 906 retirees for
this year. As of July 1st last
year. It's a slight increase. I
wanna say 16% compared to last
year, we're up about 60 or seven
retirees. 22. It's about even it
was fair fairly. It was
relatively flat in 22 and 21 is
where we saw a big increase.
There was about 1300 people that
left but on average we're seeing
about 908 150 to 900 per year,
Um, with exception at 21
And there was a a fairly big
spike in it.
OK, And so the only other thing
I wanna bring up mister, uh,
chair is on page.
I'm not sure the page
Uh, page 16 when you're talking
about some options, um
I would be careful about
swapping the cola for the 13th
check. And the reason I'm saying
that is that right now we are
reconsidering, or we have heard
from many individuals as well as
associations.
That under P ER a. It's really
taking away.
From their overall cost of
living. That
State employees and
Enjoy, and this would be the
same thing for the educational
employees, too.
So that's just a comment that if
you want to respond, that'd be
fine. Mr. Chair, Senator steps
so right now, the Education
Retirement board and the board
of trustees is not expected to
be making or requesting any
additional
Modifications to the program as
part of the report that was made
as a result of that legislation.
That was one of the items that
was suggested they could
possibly be considered, uh, to
reduce some of those future
liabilities. So it's you know,
we will like 1/13 check in
addition to the coal that we're
providing, be happy to get any
of you to support and endorse
that, um, but this isn't coming
as a recommendation or request
from the board.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator Rob Martinez.
Thank you, Mr
Mr Chair, and Mr Archuletta. I'm
I'm just curious about
something.
On page um
Eight. I think
Uh, agency updates the return to
work rule changes.
Um
Talked a little bit about
The need for members to ask for
permission.
Go back to work.
Um
Says the ER B ever rejected an
application for somebody.
Put in a request to go back to
work. Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, we are required to
track and and
To both track and administer the
Education Retirement Act, and
there are certain rules around
pensions with regard to when
people can return to work. So in
general as long as they're
eligible to return to work,
there isn't a need to reject the
application. But we do have some
people that aren't eligible to
return to work. Uh, either,
because they haven't it. It
shouldn't because they haven't
set out the the appropriate
waiting period if they don't sit
out the appropriate waiting,
period, then we jeopardize
losing. That's our tax exempt
status for when you're an active
employee being able to make your
contributions on a pre tax
Access to the fund.
So that's critical for us. Um,
but in general, there isn't a
reason that we would reject it,
but we do need to track it and
ensure that it is consistent
with
Tax policies and the Educational
Retirement Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr
Archuleta and
How arduous is the process?
To for somebody to request.
And what's the What's the
timeline if I request it now?
Mister Chair representative
Martinez. In my opinion, it's a
fairly straightforward I believe
two page application. Uh, the
requests, you know?
Information. You would expect
your name when he last worked,
and then we have to go through
an audit and verify that to make
sure that you have sat out that
period of time when you're
receiving your benefits, because
sometimes we receive reports
from the local administrative
units after the fact you know,
so you start your pension on,
Uh, July 1st you retired. You're
eligible, but sometimes
information comes in reported
three months later saying well,
Your real end date was after
that, Um, so there's an auditing
process that goes through, But
in most cases it doesn't take
longer than a week. Sometimes,
by the time we receive the
application, it goes through the
process, and then we notify
them. It's longer than a week,
but it it doesn't take very
long.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr.
Archuleta. I appreciate the
answers.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we do have a
Representative that had joined
us he will introduce yourself.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, everyone. And, uh,
representative Linda Serato, a
represent the south side of
Santa Fe.
Uh, represent a Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, So when I was looking at the
legislation, um
Mr Cleta on, um
I guess there's not a page
number, but the recent benefit
and contribution reforms.
The legislation and I was adding
up.
Actually, what percentage
Total. We've changed.
The fund. It's about a little
over 7%.
You calculate 2013, 2019, 2021
and 2022.
In terms of employer
contributions. It looks like
we've actually, um
The compensated, I guess a
little bit for the
For the employer and employee
contribution, So we've changed
the formula.
Roughly about seven. If I add up
all those numbers, it's about
little over 7%.
So Mr Chair representative bore
that sounds about right. So I
was in 2013. The employee piece
went from 7.9 to 10.7 right,
2.8% 0.25%.
Percent and 2%.
So, um
We've made small, incremental
changes, right is what you're
telling us.
Mr Mr Chair. Representative
bore? Yes, I think the biggest
increase came in the last two
years, Basically taking us from
14.15% up to the 18.15%. The 4%
really makes sort of a world of
difference in terms of us never
expecting to become fully funded
versus that funding period that
we reported on the 26th is ever
fully funded, though, like maybe
80% is good right? There are a
number of pension plans across
the nation that are fully
funded. The 80% is usually
probably
The standard. Our goal is 100.
That's the recommended
Standard for us, and that's what
we're holding ourselves
accountable to.
I'm just wondering, um in the
colas.
Um
Overall over the last 10 years.
But what are the changes there?
They're really haven't been a
lot of changes We have not kept
up with with our inflation. Am I
correct? So the cola changes
that took place basically
knocked down the percent that we
receive until we become fully
funded. So once we hit 80%, then
that will jump to 90% of what
you would otherwise, actually
80%
Confusing myself here. I'm
sorry. 80% You get 80% of the
calculation at 90. You get 90%
of the calculation and then it
is until you hit 100% that you'd
get the full 4%. If inflation
was up to 8%. It's a real
minimal amount at the employee
is receiving in terms of the
cola, right? Yeah, the cost of
living Well, not the employee,
but the, uh, the retiree the
retiree or
So my point is, I guess is that
we are not keeping up at all
with our
With our, um
Cost of living.
And that that's that's really
concerning to me, and I know Pa
is in the same boat.
Uh, Mr Chair and I bring that up
because I think that that is
really
I mean we're doing. We're
working to help our teachers and
our you know, educational staff.
By making all these little
incremental changes, but really,
we're not even keeping up with
inflation over time, and and
when you start adding up every
year, the cost of living over
time. I mean, let's just say
Or or
Discussion sake. The last 10
years. Um, you know, we're we're
really doing a disservice to our
educational
And I understand what you guys
are trying to do. I understand
you're trying to
100% funded
But typically, pension funds are
not 100% funded. So I'm a little
concerned about that. Mr Carr. I
just wanted to raise that issue
because it seems to me that
And I understand why you're
doing that. You have that goal.
I think it's important that you
do have that goal. But
Usually, pension funds are only
80% funded, and that's
considered to be a healthy one.
So I just wanted to raise that
issue.
Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Very well. Thank you.
Representative. Is there anyone
else?
Senator Seville. Thank you. I
know we've had this discussion
before. And that is the funding
ratio. 100% is, um for private
pensions, and that's as a result
of the, um
If federal law having to do with
pensions required 100% fund
funding because private private
Companies were stealing their
employees' pension plans.
And and you know, so that
legislation it.
You're right there.
Thank you because of your IA but
state pension plans are not
governed by Eisa.
So my question is, is why would
we choose a pension plan
designed to protect against
fraud?
And to get in in a state pension
plan.
Uh, which is actually also
backed by
The good of our government. You
know the good name of our
government.
Mr Chairman and Senator Cilio
Lopez. So, basically, you know,
I think that the goal of 100%
funded status is is fairly
standard across all pensions
were part of the National
Association of State Retirement
Administrators and other groups
in National Council on Teachers
Retirement Association. It's
sort of a uniform.
Expectation that we're marching
in that direction, all pension
plans so basically the boards
desire to become 100% funded is
consistent with those
expectations. Um, at a certain
point in time, you know
Off in the distance in 26 years
and forever 100% funded then the
the investments that we make in
terms of employee and employer
contributions can be reduced
will be living more off of our
investment earnings than we are
off of the employee employer
contributions. So you know it's
not in law. Um, although I would
say that this protects us
against some of the
You know, developing that goal,
you know, protects us against
some of the desired to convert
this to a defined contribution
plan or to modify the benefits
further down. I know that it
goes against the grain of the
program health insolvency to be
given out larger coals because
that increases our long term
obligations. It's not something
that the board establishes being
the benefit payment. It's
something that basically the
Legislature agreed to, and the
governor signed off on and that
was based off of the feedback
that we received from all
members. There was a period of
time in which they
You traveled around the state?
That was before my time with the
education retirement board, but
basically taking input from all
of the stakeholders to this, Uh,
I'm sorry. That kind of
Around the point of view, the
question that you're asking
other than it's the board's
goal. And, um, I think it's
pretty consistent with what
we're seeing across the nation
and other pension plans. Thank
you. I think you're right. You
you said Why? Uh why you're
doing it, but not what What is
the purpose of doing it?
And I understand and I know it's
being conservative. It's it's
being, um
It's being prudent and I like
and I think it's important what
you said to fight off plans to
plans that would, um, provide
for a defined
Um, contribution plan, which
would be devastating to to so
many people because we're really
here, hitting a
I think it's going to become a
crisis with all these baby boom.
boomers who don't have
sufficient pensions.
And also having trouble getting
jobs at their age. Um so, I, I
think that the pension and the
defined benefit pension plan is
just so important. And so I
applaud you for that, And I
think that it will, you know,
having it as a goal, and I
remember the way it's going to
the way it's gonna be matched. I
mean, you you made some changes
that affected future employees.
And that's gonna that's gonna
make it. Um 100% in the future.
But it's and and it's on the
right trajectory. Um, I guess
I'm just saying 100% is a
laudable goal, but I think
And one of the things we can do
to get it. There is maybe the
Legislature would kick in some
money.
Um, now that we have so much
Um and I see that smile on your
face if we were to do that,
What? What? Um
What kind of funds would you be
thinking?
About centers. Uh, Mr Chairman,
Senator City Lopez. And And as
you were talking sort of things
are coming back, Um, about our
previous so one of one of the
major goals behind becoming 100%
funded. If you'll recall, there
was a lot of discussion about
downgrading to the States
financial rating unless we
became 100% funded those guys we
reports require us to distribute
out those unfunded liabilities
and the goes those go on the
balance sheet of all the
educational institutions once
that's done those those
obligation.
And liabilities are off of
their, uh, balance sheet.
So that was, I think the driving
momentum behind that to answer
the question with regard to how
much money would be, would we
would we request? Uh, Red 63%
funded now in order to get us to
100%. It's in excess of $9
billion. So if you gave us the
entire surplus you have for this
next year. Let's say it's in the
neighborhood of three or $4
billion and had no money for
anything else. We'd still be a
ways off, you know, achieve.
I think last year the
calculation is we'd still have
probably a 16 year. Uh, period
where we're marching toward the
100% funded status if we got the
entire state surplus, But how
much would a little you know
being toward that? How moving
toward that? I mean, I don't
know. You probably haven't
calculated this, but if you if
we give something less than
that, uh, how much time would it
shave off the time that we, uh
that we're waiting for
everything to come into place to
have it fully funded?
Mr Chair and senators to Lopez.
I think when the report came out
two years ago about what if we
got some one time dollars? I
wanna say like something in the
neighborhood of $700 million
translated to about three years
off. Um
1.3 billion. You know another
six or seven years or something
like that.
Would it be possible to give an
infusion that wouldn't go to
solvency but would go toward,
um, Cola? What would that look
like Mrs
Would it be possible to give an
infusion that wouldn't go to
solvency but would go toward?
Um, Cola? What would that look
like? Mr
Lopez? Uh, would be happy so
I wouldn't say cost of living
adjustment, but perhaps 1/13
check to make it sort of cost
neutral because if we got
Cost limit adjustment has a
compounding effect into the
future. Whereas if we receive
that 13th check it would help
them out for the year. I guess.
Theoretically, it makes them
worse off the next year if they
didn't get that same check the
following year. Um, but we can
run a calculation of what that
might cost for members.
I would encourage you to do
that. Because now this time, I
mean, you heard? I don't know if
you were there for the first.
Um, for the first presentation.
It basically was the wisdom of
investing now for our future
when we don't have as as much,
um in the in the state coffers,
So I, I just throw that out
there and then I wanted to share
with you. I don't know if you
remember this part of the
conversation. I had talked to
Moody's
To a representative Moody's Who
suggested that there would not
be any impact on a state's bond
rating. If it was it was like
between 70 80% blended. Um, is
in trying to remember why, um,
basically, the backing of the
government was one of the
reasons and you know it. Just
it's not in the same position as
a private pension plan, so the
fear was overblown in that
100%. Is it necessary to avoid a
downturn in ratings by Moody's
anyway? That's what he said, Um,
that they they reviewed state
pension plans all over the
country, and he would be shocked
if that high of a pension plan
estate pension plan tax backed
would affect the the the bond
rating.
And I remember we've had
conversations over over time.
But that was why I was really
concerned about that. I mean,
that really raised issues for
me.
Um and then, I mean, he also
gave some other information that
they were moving also toward
looking at the state's ratings.
Um, and how well the state was
preparing for climate change,
both adaptations and prevention,
And so it Moody's is changing.
And I'm sure you you you
probably know that better than I
do. Um, but I really appreciate
this is a very, very good
presentation. And certainly a
please appreciate the
stewardship, um of of the
pension plan and the plan the
plan.
Which I commend you, I I'm just
suggesting it's not absolutely
required. It's a good goal, but
it it's it. The sky is not gonna
fall and if we don't get there
in in the time period.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Or anyone else.
Not Mr. Thank you. Thank you
very much.
$3
To our next one Public employees
retirement.
Mr.
For you.
No.
Yeah.
This.
Before we start all, Mr
Trujillo.
Don't have just a little bit of
information for our next
meeting.
We have our staff.
Missus Vas you some information.
Um, I just wanted to let
everybody know that next meeting
will not be at the roundhouse.
It's going to be in, uh, Los
Ranchos to Albuquerque at the
Casa Rodia Winery. Gonna send
out um, meeting notice today to
you guys, So you'll have all
that information. I'm gonna pass
out one right now to you just so
you can have the address.
Just keep that in mind. It's
gonna be on Tuesday, July 30th
Casa Rona.
And the for the members, So it's
a very nice place. Uh, we have,
um
Being asked to
You know if we could meet there,
and there's no cost to the
state, and we're not
In any way, you know, paying for
any of the
That location so that it'd be a
nice so
Venture because so this is one
committee that hardly I don't
think you'd ever goes out.
And we also, uh
Following month. We have an
invitation to, uh
I ski.
So you know, that would be a
nice
Everyone to be a little bit out
of Santa Fe.
And let the construction finish.
All right, Mr Trujillo, take it
away.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
afternoon members. Uh, Greg
Trujillo with P ER, a
Um
Right now, Mr Chairman. The the
numbers I'll be talking about
are a little dated. They're off
our last, uh, valuation. The now
the fiscal year is closed. We'll
have our update evaluation. Um,
probably about October of this
year. Uh, but as always, this
committee has seen it, Uh, just
gives you an overview of how
many active members we have
contributing to the plan. Uh,
just over 47,000. And as of last
year last fiscal year we were
paying over 45,000 retirees.
Mhm.
Again a little dated Mr Chairman
on a slide four.
Fund value. 16.7 billion were
higher than that today. Our rate
of return 4.23 last year. Uh, we
expect to do much better than
that this year. Uh, the one that
number I always remind this
committee is just the number of
active members compared to the
number of retirees as we've
talked. That line is getting
closer. We're gonna be at a
point in the next year or two,
where we will be paying more
retirees than we do have actives
paying into the fund.
Um, we did do an experience
study this year that we talk
about, um, a little bit. Uh, but
amortization period as as of
last year. You know what we have
left on the mortgage? Uh, 53
years and, uh, we are currently
funded at 67.7%.
So I five brief reminder of what
sent Bill 72 was that passed in
the 2020 legislative session?
Uh, it changed the cola model.
Uh, for retirees, increased
contributions, uh, to employees
by 2%, as well as to the
employer by 2%. But we are
currently in the fifth year of
this starting the fifth year of
this implementation. Uh, so the
state is always has already
finalized their portion of the
contribution increases.
And this is your, um two for the
municipalities and the counties.
They were given a two year
deferral to start those
increases. Uh, so this begins
the second year of their
contribution increase.
In slide. Six. Mr Chairman,
something I wanted to point out
to the committee. Um, if you
recall in 2020 when we came
before you
Um
Explaining why Senator Bill 72
was needed. It was a cash flow
issue. Um our benefit payments
compared to compared to
contributions coming into the
plan. Um, you know, we're we're
not adequate. Um
You know, the main driver was we
needed to reduce the amount of
money going out and increase the
amount of money coming in.
Um, the slide on the top, Mr
Chairman, you could see the
numbers but to the right side at
that point in time before Senate
Bill 72 took effect.
53% of our retiree payroll was
coming from the contributions
that were coming in 47% was
coming out of the trust fund.
So that was the main issue is we
were taking out of the trust at
a faster rate. Um than we
thought was prudent in order to
continue to grow the fund for
the future.
If you look at it for this year,
Mr Chairman, you can see the
numbers to the left. But really,
uh, the main graph to the right.
The pie chart. Uh, that's
changed. Now we're 61% of
retiree payroll is being paid by
the employee and employer
contributions and what's coming
out of the trust fund is now is
at 39%. So that's that is
progress. That's that's
something that you could say
Senate Bill 72 is working. Um,
we may not be seeing the
improvements we wanted as
quickly as we are, but we are
reducing the amount coming out
of the trust fund to subsidize
retiree payroll.
And that's a good thing. And
like I said, uh, with them in to
sell the municipalities and the
counties kicking in their 2%
over the next three years, uh,
we expect to keep seeing
progress on that fund.
This year. Mr Chairman, the
board did conduct an experience
study. Uh, usually a pension
fund does that every 3 to 5
years and what that does is, it
goes and it looks at the
assumptions we use for our
actuarial valuations. And it
makes sure that those
assumptions are still, um,
satisfactory for the actual
experience that we're seeing
with the population that we pay.
Uh, I won't go to all of these,
but, uh, you know inflation.
This is a long term outlook.
They didn't recommend, uh, the
change in our price. Inflation.
Um, our investment return. We
assume 7.25%. They thought that
that was still reasonable,
especially because we adopted a
an An updated asset allocation
for investments. Um, last year,
um, our future cola. We were
expecting to be paying 1.6%.
Each year.
Uh, with what they see the next
15 years. They actually reduce
that amount. Uh, down to 1.25%
15 years after that, they expect
1.6%. And then after that, you
know, 30 Year Outlook 2% for for
a cola. Uh, payroll growth. Uh,
they expected no change. We
currently assume a 3% increase
in our payroll.
Uh, demographic assumptions. You
probably all hear this, Um
People are living longer. Um,
they are healthier and that is
reflected in our population as
well. Um so so they did, um,
recommend adopting updated
mortality tables. A couple of
things that were mentioned in
our report that I thought the
committee would find
interesting. Um
Looking at the average income in
New Mexico. It is about 12%
lower, um than nationally, um,
and life expectancy in New
Mexico. Even though we're seeing
an improvement, we still lag.
Um, life expectancy, Uh,
compared to the rest of the
nation.
And then termination,
retirements and disabilities.
Um, are retirees even though
they keep retiring? Um we're not
seeing the huge influx of
retirements like we used to. Um,
There's a number of reasons for
that, but they they do
recommend, um, changing their
assumptions on how many retirees
we're seeing per year as well
as, uh, how many terminations
and disability retirees or
estimates that we we provide.
On slide eight. Mr Chairman and
members with that all means is,
um our liability went up and the
main reason for our liability
going up. Uh, Currently it's at
8.1 adopting these assumptions
which the board did takes us up
to 8.4. And that's the the main
driver of that is just really to
reflect. Uh the improved
mortality assumptions, uh,
funded ratio. We're still you
know.
Drop 67.7% to 67.1% in our
amortization period. Uh, goes
from 53 years to 73 years, so
we're still not in the infamy,
um, funding situation. We were
in the past and I the next, uh,
the next slide? Um, I think kind
of shows that we're we're still,
uh, slide nine showing that we
are increasing. Um, future
projections show us. We still
are, Um
Para amortization period. And
our funded ratio, um, is still
increasing. If you remember in
2020. You saw some of these
charts and and the line went the
opposite way down to zero. So
even with the assumptions to
update the mortality, uh we are
still making improvement.
Um, and one big thing that I did
want to point out in in the
interim reform that was done in
2013 Senate Bill 27 that
increased or created a new tier
of members. We have tier one
members, Tier two members, um,
that that is working as well.
Um, our actuaries say once once
you introduce a new tier it
takes about 20 years for that
new tier to kind of overtake the
old tier. And, um, if you see on
this chart slide nine our
current active membership we
currently have 39%.
Of those actively working that
are part of Tier one tier two.
We have 61% of those members
that have started to kind of
overtake the system and, and the
reason that's important is these
members are paying the same
contribution amount that your
one members are. Um, but they're
working longer instead of, uh,
working 25 years and being able
to retire, Uh, they they have to
do what's now called the rule of
85, where their age and their
service has to equal 85 years.
Um, so they are working for a
longer period of time and the
sooner that
Tier one kind of
Exits in the active system and
those liabilities stop incurring
and that replaced by Tier two.
That's when we really start
seeing improvement, and that's
that's probably about, um 2030.
3 2034. That's when you kind of
see the line. Start going.
Up a bit more than just staying
static as they are now.
And when we take tier two into
effect, um
You know, last year, uh,
anticipating Q two coming in
instead of 53 years. Uh,
amortization period. We were at
46 years and even with the
assumption change now that 73
years but looking at Tier two,
fully taking over that drops us
to 61 years, so we still are
seeing improvement. It's just
not as quickly as we would like
to.
Mr Chairman, I do have a, uh
Mike Shackelford, our CIO and I.
I apologize. I should have been
in introduced my staff when we
started. Uh, my check for our
CIO is here. Anthony Montoya,
Our general counsel. Anna
Williams, our deputy director as
well as uh Juan Diaz, who is a
state member on our board is
here as well. I apologize for
that, Mr Chairman.
But if if we want to go into
the, uh, investment performance,
I'm happy to have Mrs Ford to
speak to that. Um, as I did say,
we did adopt a strategic asset
allocation last year on slide 11
1 of the main reasons we were
able to kind of change up our
asset allocation, uh, was
because of Senate Bill 72,
because the cash flow issues
that we had that were so
pressing, Uh, before that Senate
Bill 72 addressed allowed us to
take a little bit more prudent
risk, uh, to kind of try and
That seven and a quarter and so
this slide just shows. Um you
know, I expect a return, you
know, over 25 year period is
7.6%. This is something we look
at every 3 to 5 years. So, um,
if something happens where we
don't think that's gonna happen,
and this is something that is,
um, is regularly reviewed.
And finally, Mr Che Mr Chairman,
just to give the the Committee
an update on this past
legislative session, we did have
a number of bills passed. Uh, it
would say that most to or the
two most important ones to brief
the committee on was House Bill
236 that essentially brought
back uh, Perez return to work
program. Uh, the return to work
program that pera had in effect
was, uh, suspended in 2010.
House Bill 236 does bring, uh,
return to work back for very
limited, uh, situations related
to public safety, uh, it allows
for retiree or or or member that
was retired as of 1231 of 23 to
return back, Uh, to a para ail,
uh, without suspending their
pension as long as it's in an
entry level, uh, essentially
public safety position. Um,
there's a bunch of other, uh,
safeguards around it. But that
did take effect. Um, today 71.
UH, center Bill 128, sponsored
by Senator Michael Padilla also
created, uh, what's called the
state public safety plan? Um,
which consolidated state police
adult correctional officers,
probation and parole, but also
introduced a definition of the
state fire member. Uh, prior to
this bill, the state never
employed or never had a plan.
Uh, for fire members, So, uh,
Energy and Minerals Department
does have a couple hotshot crews
out there, Uh, with certified
firefighters, they are now in
the public safety plan as well
as certified
Firefighters under the state
Fire marshal's office.
Um And finally, Mr Chairman,
just to talk quickly about the
cost of living adjustment. As
you all know, uh, in the, uh
Legislation and Bill 72 stopped
the compounding of the cola for
three years or retirees got a 2%
non compounding, uh, 13th check
in 2020, 2021 and 2022 last
year. Uh,
With a new profit, share. Um
Pull a model Variable color
model R HR ES got a half a
percent of compounding cola. The
cola is currently um
Based on our funded ratio, as
well as as our investment
return. Um, and this year this
month, we will be issuing
another half a percent. Uh, cost
of living adjustment. So so over
five years, I charity got 3/13
checks and essentially a 1%
Compounding cola. Uh, the last
two
Um, legislative sessions. We
have had some efforts to
subsidize that cola. We We've
had a couple of different
scenarios. Uh, requesting for
additional funding for 13th
Check payments for our retirees,
Um, represent Lundstrom. Um
Sponsored an effort two years
ago. Last year, Uh, representing
Sanchez did the same thing. Um,
and so we're hoping to maybe
start a little bit earlier, uh,
starting with this committee,
uh, the Legislature as a whole
and hope that we can get a
portion of that surplus. Um, to
assist our retirees, II. I don't
think changing the cola formula
at this point in time is
prudent. But if we can bring
some additional relief in the
form of 13th check payments for
the next couple of years. Um,
we're we're willing and hoping
to work with you all on that.
And really, Mr Chairman, the
rest of the sides I. I included
just for information in case um,
questions came up.
But at this time I'll conclude
my remarks and in stand for
questions.
Yeah. Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Greg. Mr Trujillo.
Numbers.
Bre.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Greg. You always do a great
job. Um
So just
FY I What I've heard.
I've had a number of calls from
our retiree members.
Telling me that the 13th check
needs to go away and they need
they want their colas, and I
just heard you say that's not
gonna happen. But I have to be,
you know, because they're
calling me I need to ask for
that call was so hopefully
you'll take that back to your
board.
Um, as mr Chair as information
that I have received people
telling me we really need to get
our colas and looking at your,
um, heart kind of the same.
Um
Information that I gave to Mr
Um Archuleta, is that Arcola?
We're We're not keeping up with
our cost of living adjustments
And even with our 13th check
Um, so I just But I do want to,
um, commend you.
Or, um, your
Liability. And I real and again,
I'm gonna say, um You know what
we what I've heard.
Is that 80% is a pretty good
threshold if we can get there,
and you're pretty close.
Knowing what happened in 09 and
over time.
You know, I
I'm just I would have to commend
her for where you where you mean
13% from 80%.
Is
Pretty darn good.
So I just needed to make that
comment.
Very well. Uh, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Thank you very much for your
presentation. I, uh, also wanna
just join the chorus of folks
that I'm sure you hear from on
the cola.
I know that, uh
You and I are very we. We work
on a number of things together.
We got that the bill on page 12.
Then together. Thank you very
much for your help there, and
so, uh, Mr Chairman, just, uh,
wanted to go on down the road of
the colas again. I did introduce
a bill this year that was
designed to
And I intend to do it again.
That's designed to take the, um
Era. Um
Retirees to the same cola
adjustment that happens with the
Social Security administration.
Reason for that, Uh, everyone
is, uh, there's a ton of
research analysis, etcetera. It
happens to make that call. Uh,
design that cola for what it
becomes, um
You know, it just seems to me
like we're woefully missing out
on some free data. If you will,
That would help us to understand
what that call should be set at.
I know there are a number of
there's
New Mexico, per of, you know,
Fun Trust fund is extremely
different from the Social
Security Administration. I get
that.
But at the end of the day we we
asked our employees to do this.
That and the other
They held up their part of the
bargain. I'm worried that you
know, we're gonna make a public
service because of the way uh,
retirees may be feeling about
their retire retirement.
That we may be making a state
role or a pair of related
position unattractive as a
result.
I think it's only right that we
take care of these employees
that way.
So I understand. Uh and I well,
we got this bill done. You all
were adamantly opposed to the
bill. The other bill that I
introduced and we just, You
know, Tomorrow is another day,
and I want to find a way to get
this thing done. Um
You did provide some analysis
and I and I read it and I saw it
and I thought it was very
interesting and very well done.
Is there at all discussion by
your board on maybe a ramp.
To a cola that relates to the US
Social Security Administration.
Or something of that nature.
Mr Chairman and Senator, Uh, PAA
in just for the committees.
Information. The bill that we
did analyze last year, um, to
bring back a cola, Similar
social security, uh, was cost
about $2 billion.
Um, I have done a lot of
thinking about that. And and if
we
Could somehow find a way to
Get that $2 billion not for the
cola, but cash infusion into
Pera Arcola is based on our
investment return as well as our
unfunded liability.
So for every say billion
dollars, we could somehow get
into the fund.
Our funding increases or our
funded ratio increases 78%.
If we could somehow get $2
billion into the Perit trust
fund.
You know that gets us over that
80% mark and because the cola is
based on the funded ratio and
our investment return that, in
turn would would increase the
cost of living that we could
pay.
Um and and
You know, Social Security is is
kind of unique because when we
were doing the analysis for
seven than Bill 72 R HIE that
were retired at that point in
time that were getting the 3%
and the 2% goal was they did
about 30% better than what
Social Security was paying out.
Um, those roles have now
reversed, Uh, where security
recipients are doing better than
ours. But yeah, if there was a
way to get just a $2 billion
cash infusion of the trust fund.
Those cost of living adjustments
are gonna look a lot better,
maybe not as good as Social
security right now, but that
that would be a huge, huge
impact.
Well, and I appreciate that.
Very quick analysis. Uh, Mr
Chairman, and thank you, I. I
know that this is not an easy
thing to do. And, uh, you know,
we don't have $2 billion just
in. You know, Senator Chairman
Gonzalez's, You know, couch in
his office over there used to be
my office. Maybe there is still
there's 2 billion. You know,
I'll be over there any any day
now. Um, but it seems to me like
maybe even a ramp up to get us
there while we have the means to
do it. You know, I own a
business. I own a business for
24 years and I can't just
suddenly tell my employees
Hey, by the way.
Told you this is gonna happen
for you.
Walk right out the door and and
go down the street to somebody
else, and I wouldn't blame them
if I would do that. And so I
just, You know, I know this
isn't about you. This is about
you know what has happened here
and so I just really hope that
we will continue to
Come forward with with solutions
on this thing, because it's very
unfair to these employees. I. I
do believe we need to do
something. Mr Chairman and I
asked the committee to think
about it doesn't have to be. My
idea doesn't have to be build
the bill that I introduced. I
hope that we come to a point
where
You know, a retirees did get
raises. Yes, but to see some of
these, uh like, uh,
representative Breo and others.
I mean, just, you know, images
and checks and pictures of
checks being sent to me, and I'm
just trying to figure out Gosh,
if I were in that situation, how
would that go for me and my
family? So
This is a very serious matter,
everybody and I really feel like
if we don't do something, um,
bold.
We are going to turn you know,
public employment and public
service is something that is
less attractive and less
desirable to do. Thank you.
Mr Chairman, if I may
I should have just made this
clear to the the committee. The
two bills that we did have for
13th checks wasn't replacing the
cola with 13th checks Any cola
That parrot would, um produce
the retire would still get the
13th check would be supplemental
to that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and not
not a debate of any kind. And I
agree with you That 13th check
is invaluable when it happens,
And if we and if and if the rope
runs out and and we don't have
another one in place. Wow. How
unfair is that?
And then, uh, I think everyone
that serves on this committee
probably understands by now, if
you spend any amount of time on
this committee that, um that
that 13th check happens, but it
does not compound the base
amount that you are receiving.
So therefore, that just totally
undercuts when you see these
massive inflation issues that
that are happening for any
number of reasons.
It just takes that paycheck,
right?
Into the tank. So
Thank you for everything you are
doing.
Very well. Thank you, Uh,
Senator Slope.
Thank you As always. It's a
really good presentation. Um,
and this is kind of building on
what was said before. Would it
be possible for you? Because I
know you have a plan to, um, Now
it's a 63 year plan. Um or six.
Whatever it was, um, you have a
plan to to reach 100% fully
funded. What if you or it would
be helpful? I think to the
committee if you you could have
your staff prepare something.
What would a $200 million influx
Due to the 63 year plan. What
would
Um, 250 million just to give us
a sense so that when we're
thinking about what, Uh Senator
Padilla described as solutions,
at least we could start making
incremental steps, especially
now that we have the extra
money.
Um, Mr Chair. I is that
something that's possible,
Mr. Chair in center city. Lopez.
Um, we we have done analysis on
100,000,200 million. Um, To be
honest with you, our our
Monthly payroll is about 100 and
30. Million that we sent out the
door every month. Um with uh,
cola this year. That's pre an ad
anywhere from 12 to 15 million a
year on that, Uh so really,
you're you're paying for 1.5
months of payroll, um, for it to
be a substantial infusion, um,
that that dollar amounts gotta
be probably closer to starting
with a B rather than even even
500 million is isn't gonna make
the dent. I could do it on 5.5
million. Like I say, if we if we
got a we've
In the past if we had a billion
dollar cash infusion, um, that
increased our funded ratio by
70% if we got half that, you
know, maybe that puts us to the
low seventies range with our
funding ratio. So we It's gonna
help. Um, I It's probably not
gonna have the impact that the
committee thinks it would.
It really is. I think you should
show us um, you know, just show
us the data if you could, um,
because then, um, I mean, you're
just telling us it doesn't make
that much of a difference. I
mean, you do have a plan. Um,
but our our constituents
Also, uh, the people who have
served the state for so long and
so well also have needs And so
if you could that way, at least
we could brainstorm ideas.
And Mr Chairman.
To do a little bit if I could,
Uh, if you go to slide 16
We're not up here saying that
the state hasn't done anything.
Uh, So three years of the, uh,
contribution increases that are
coming in you look at the bottom
right hand corner. The total
recurring contributions year
three. You know, that's that's
$86 million in recurring
contributions. Um, that number
is gonna continue going up. So
by the time that the the reform
is fully implemented, I mean, I
expect that number to be at 200
a million in recurring
contributions. It just takes
time to work it in. So so one
time cash infusion. Um
Would be helpful, but it's it's
really making sure that the
reform is done and these
recurring contributions continue
coming into the fund, but but
we'll do the analysis. I'm not
suggesting we replace the
reform. I think the reform is in
place and we need to let it
work.
We're just I'm just wondering if
we could invest some now dollars
or, um
For the future. And and I mean,
if you say no, you say no. But,
um, but in
At least it would be helpful, at
least to me, and I think other
members of the committee to see
What that does.
Mr Chairman.
you
will. We'll take whatever we can
get well and just and let us
know. You know what
What That does and how that how
that affects the retirees.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. We'll go to,
uh, representative R.
And, uh, Senator Night Bird and
then represented
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um, just
on this discussion, one of the
things that I've had Mr H of us
is return to work people.
Um
So far the return to work police
officers.
Who will get no future benefit
out of their contributions have
put $32 million into the pair
fund.
Just that group.
So the return to work guys, and
I appreciate that. Mr. Trujillo
notes that it is positive to the
fund.
Um, will help the fund. But, Mr
Chairman, Mr. When will be fully
funded on its current course.
Mr Chairman represent Marie, Um
You know, fuel factoring in the
Future contributions, uh, were
at 61 to 73 years depending on
how quick tier two takes over.
And Mr Chairman. That's where I
have a problem. I really think
that, uh, we need to. I mean, I
mean, everyone knows I'm a
parent employee or retiree.
There's enough money for my
retirement. But it is those
current workers that we've got
to protect.
And they need to contribute more
money to bring that that
liability down so that they make
sure they have a retirement.
They need to understand This is
their retirement.
And, um, I think we need to go
ahead and increase those
contributions and lower this
liability over the period.
And I think it would improve
everything. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
My
Questions and really, uh,
Concern have been
The investment side of the
equation, and it is substantial.
And it seems to me that one
Way to address a significant
needs that you need to get to
that point of view, fully
funded.
Um be at 100% is maximizing the
return on the invested dollars.
And
But my my question is. Are you
comfortable with the
Rate of return, and does it meet
the benchmarks that that that
are there or do do you see some
And things that we ought to be
doing.
As a legislative body.
To
Provide a mechanism that might
enhance
Those returns.
Chairman and Senator Neb. If I
may I
Mike. She for our CIO I that Mr
Chair, Senator Nibert. Um, so if
you go to page 10
So these are our returns over
different periods. 357 1012
2030.
Um, So if you look at the the
first line is the pair returns,
the second line is our benchmark
returns, So those benchmark
returns are all public indexes
so you could actually invest in
that with, um, index funds. If
you wanted to.
You can see the bottom line to
value Add so those those are the
excess returns that we've
generated that so the investment
staff is generated over public
index returns.
So we've we've beaten our index.
The problem is, is that our
index for a long time was too
conservative. So after the great
recession so prior to the great
recession, um the fun had about
70% inequities.
And for those of you know, um
during the great recession,
stocks collapsed by 37%.
Though the fun collapsed by a
significant port since it was
almost 70% equities, it
collapsed a significant portion
more than most other pension
funds did.
Um so the board and the
investment staff at the time
became more conservative. So
they got a more conservative
asset allocation in place
because of that experience.
Since I've been here about two
years. Um, and actually, maybe a
year or two prior to my arrival.
The fund has become a little bit
more a little bit more
aggressive.
And in my two years I've made it
a little bit more aggressive.
Still.
But still trying to be prudent.
Um, still trying to be well
diversified.
So that, um, we don't have the
2008 experience the the great
recession experience, but we
still have, um some of the gains
that you can get in the equity
market.
So, um, as, uh, Greg talked
about on page 11. We
incrementally changed our
investment. Um, allocation.
We increased equities. We
increased private equity. We
increase some of our other
private assets like private
capital. A private credit
private, um, real assets.
That's infrastructure,
agriculture, things like that.
Um so we believe, um, we've
increased, um, some
opportunities for games.
But still, um, our managing our
risk to the downside.
Um, so again.
The staff has been very good at
generating excess returns over
what you would get if you just
invested in indexes.
Um and we we plan to still do
that. But we believe that this
new asset allocation that we put
in place last year we will get
us closer to that seven and a
quarter percent return over the
long term.
That sort of makes sense.
That makes sense. So, Mr Chair
and
I. I guess the challenge for for
us is to
Figure out
Is this
Mechanism, the best mechanism
for the state or are there other
mechanisms? We had a
presentation by the State
Investment Council.
Um
Who
Returns were on a similar type
chart.
And it it just seems to me that
it's not just per but but the
education retirement system as
well.
That
At some point we need to grapple
with the issue of how do we as a
state?
How do we, uh, who oversee these
things?
Make sure that we're getting,
uh, the investment returns that
that we can, uh
I'm not saying Take
100% risk but certainly trying
to maximize the returns. If you
see your benchmarks
Frankly, the benchmark, uh
On there. What kind of low I'd
be. I'd be disappointed with
some of those returns for my own
for my own account. But but
Somehow we have to to address
the investment side and make
sure that
Trying to get
A maximum return, considering
the risk that you wanna take and
I guess What I struggle with is
Each.
Board have its own.
Mm.
Make its own decisions and do
this and that and then have the
taxpayers, uh, kick in money as
they as they need or what have
you
Or do we have
A group of
People who whose job it is to to
look at market conditions and
Money around to make sure that
we're trying to
Uh, maximize the return to the
state.
Uh, whether we have those people
on board
Why that's doing that.
But, uh
Try to
If the best return for all of
our invested money, whether it's
be whether it's educational
retirement board or whether it's
a state investment.
And I
I. I have always grappled with
Why do we have all these
different entities doing the
same job?
And that's
Would it be more efficient and
what we get a better return? If
We had
One.
True.
Who's in charge of that trying
to meet these particular needs
of of, uh, Dearborn.
The Education Retirement Board
versus the, uh, Grant permanent.
What have you
Um
Not gonna be me rustling.
But
I do think that the Legislature
has to wrestle with that issue
and come up with
Um
Make sure that we are
Trying to get the biggest bang
for a buck. Because if you're
trying to get to 100%
Investment side that's going to
provide a lot of that, or
Mr Chair, Senator Nibert first,
um, you write the policy index
returns are low, and that's why
we changed them because they
were lo because it's very
conservative. Has it has a lot
more fixed income and other safe
assets versus equity. So that's
why we changed it to. Not only
should our returns be higher,
but our benchmark returns should
be higher, too. Um
The other thing, I would say is
that of the 50 states? Only a
handful have one investment
entity. Um so, uh, state like
Washington or Wisconsin. They
have a a single board that does
everything.
Um most other states have
multiple entities.
And the reason they do is is
basically what happened to per,
like per had 70% inequities
coming into the great recession
and lost 37% on those
Um, if that was, if that was the
mindset of that single entity in
an entire investments across you
know whether it's the land or
whether it's ER P or Pera would
have all lost that same amount
of money. So that's why most
states allow three or four or
more entities to do their
pensions and their sovereign
wealth funds. And what have you
is so that they're not captive
to one entity and one mindset in
one view, So we have our
investment staff. We have our
own consultants. Um
RB has a separate investment
staff. They have separate
consultants. The State
Investment Council has the same
thing. They have their own
internal investment staff and
their own separate consultants.
So at least if one of us wrong
we're not all wrong, because if
one of us is wrong, it can be
bad. It could be very bad for
the state across the board. Um,
so that's actually sort of most
people sort of think that's a
good thing to have multiple
entities rather than one because
if one's one makes a mistake,
well, then that's the one over
here with all the others are OK.
Um, because none of us are
perfect.
Right, and I'm sure whoever the
CIO was coming into eight, and
09 probably thought having 70%
equities was a really good idea,
And I'm sure they're consultant
thought it was a really good
idea, and they weren't expecting
a 37% crash in stocks.
And you know, so as far as I
know, Um ER B did better, um
They had they had better
returns over a longer period
than here because I don't think
they did have 70%.
Inequities at that time.
Thank you. Senator Represent
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mm.
You know, In all of these
discussions, it seems to me
like, um it would be really it
would really behoove us. Um, not
just for your B, but for P ER.
Who
Sort of come together. Identify
what the problems are and come
up. Come back to us with some
alternatives, Mr K that
You know, including the bill?
That, um
Um, Senator, Um Padilla
mentioned some other
possibilities. I mean, there's
always there's always a way you
know, and and I think that
sometimes there's multiple ways.
And also what? UM Senator
Antoinette Cedillo, Lopez said
is maybe incremental ways, And
that's kind of what we did. And
back in 2013, and then we did it
again later on in in the
following bill, So I think, Mr
Chair you know, I would like
personally to see a group of
alternatives and and then let us
kind of look through those and
say this might be the best way
for us to proceed.
As we go forward.
Because I you know, I. I heard
your number and your number was
pretty high and the billions.
Um, but
But in the bills that we've had
in the past
We made incremental changes, and
we've gotten to these unfunded
liabilities. We've we've lowered
the unfunded liability.
And so I, You know that that
would just be. My suggestion is
that
Somehow we look at these buns
and come up with what are some
ways to have that compounded
interest.
Or the money that is infused
whatever way That is.
So, um, that that's just sort of
my
Sure.
Oh, very well, Um
No very good point.
I as a chair, you know, we look
into it and see how we can do.
Yes, sir. Anyone else?
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I just
One question. I think we got
Billion dollar number.
For the cola. Um, but what would
be the cost of the 13th check?
Mr Chair.
Represent Foa. Uh, the, uh,
It was a we had last year was a
2%, a non com pounding cola for
two years. That was 63 million.
Um so I would expect it between
65 and 70 for this year.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, director. I appreciate
that, and I appreciate the
discussion of various ways to
potentially
Yeah, that the cola, um, issue
because I'm hearing it from my
constituents, too, But the cola
formula we have is there for a
reason. So maybe the goal is to
Move, the unfunded liability
target and the investment return
target.
So that we get the cola through
our current formula, and toward
that end
If it would take a $2 billion
cash infusion.
Um
To move it.
We need to look at the options
in terms of employee and
employer contributions.
I need to be able to explain to
my constituents that in order to
reach our
Targets.
To get the cola back.
We would have to increase
employer contributions by this
much or we would have to enter
in
Increase employee contributions
by this much If I have those
numbers, I can make it clear to
them what our options are.
We either need to put 2 billion
in there right now, or we need
to increase contributions this
much.
Um
Or what can we do with respect
to investment returns? I think
you're already doing it, writing
that line of risk versus
aggressiveness is really hard.
Um, but I think you've moved it
a little bit in the right
direction.
But to
To look at the effects on the
fund.
Um
And our cola options is going to
be part of our continuing
discussions and data on the
options or scenarios would be
helpful. I think
Thank you, mister Chair.
Very well. Thank you or anyone
else. Mister Chairman Real quick
on that question on slide. Eight
represent represent Figueroa.
Um, we do show the shortfall.
Um, at the bottom, um
What we would need in the form
of a contribution increase. It
would be the 7.17%.
Um between, however, that broke
out between employees and
player. Uh, I will say right
now, um, now that the state
increases of, uh
Taking full effect on an
employee pays 10.92% out of
their paycheck, and the state
contributes an additional
19.24%.
Um, on their behalf. So, uh,
right around 30% if we wanted to
really put us on a path, it
would have to go up to about
37.37%. So right above the
7.17%. That's that's the
contribution shortfall.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Director for pointing me to that
number, and that is to get full
color. That's not to reach the
80% target. Correct.
Mr Chairman, and we can look at
that sooner on the projections
that would get us, um, on the
path to 100% funding and as the
UM funded ratio increased and
the callers would follow suit.
Sir. Anyone else?
No, no, thank you, Mr Trio.
Thank you.
Your staff would be here.
Point to our last presentation,
and we have, um
Legislative Finance Committee.
And, uh, we have a Brandon Gray.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Mr Chair Committee
members.
My name is Brendan Gray. I'm an
economist at Legislative Finance
Committee.
I'm gonna be presenting off of,
uh, this document. Uh, looks
like it's being handed out now,
so I'll wait a second. Uh, this
is the, um, investment report.
Uh, quarterly, Uh, investment
performance report. Quarterly
report, Uh, for the third
quarter of FY 24.
Uh, so this covers through march
of 2024.
So a little bit backwards
looking, but it's the most
recent data we have right. Looks
like everybody's gotten it at
this point. And, um, you know to
start, uh, investment
performance. Um is, of course, a
function of market performance
generally, uh, the market in
that period had been doing
pretty well, uh, the optimism
for a soft landing, as you all
know, um, was good at that
point, and so markets in general
were were performing well.
Uh, so the goal of my
presentation this afternoon is
to kind of
Take a step backwards. You all
have been, um in the weeds with
the agencies hearing about each
individual one and my goal is to
look at a 30,000 ft level.
Here's what's happening across
the state. Um and then have a
conversation about what that
performance means.
There's really two big takeaways
that I wanna leave you all with,
Uh, the first is something you
heard from Mr Clerk John Clark
This morning. Uh, that
Really what's propelling our
investment portfolio as a state
right now is record oil and gas
revenues.
Um
And you can see that in a couple
of different funds that I'll be
covering, Uh, this afternoon.
The second point I wanna make,
uh is that our
Funds are generating a good
strong returns, certainly, but
that are generally more risk
averse. Uh, positioning is
Making us perform worse than
pure funds in the near term, and
I'll talk about that. In the end
of the of this brief. We start
by drawing the committee's
attention to the chart on the
bottom of page one with the blue
blue bar graphs.
So this shows fund asset values
over time for the five funds
that I'll be talking about. You
have the two pension funds era
and ER B and then you have the
three long term investment funds
Land Grant Permanent Funds
Severance Tax Permanent fund and
then the early childhood
education and care Fund Early
Childhood Trust fund as
reflected there.
And the gray Bar is one year
ago. So March 1 year ago and
then the light gray bar is March
5 years ago.
And really the story here as you
can tell, the pension funds have
been growing steadily over time.
They've been ticking upwards as
you can see, And then the land
grant permanent fund severance
tax for for an early child.
Those have been absolutely
skyrocketing as you heard from
Mr Clerk. And really, this is
the result of our record
revenues flowing into these
investment funds, uh, to endow
the state with ongoing, uh,
revenues.
I'll also draw the committee's
attention to the text box in the
bottom right hand corner of Page
one. This shows the five year
annualized returns for, uh, four
funds, and so you'll see at the
top of that table. Um
You have the educational
retirement board. Uh, they
fiveyear annualized returns were
over. 8.2% Land Grant Permanent
fund was the next highest 7.7%
per at 6.8 at 6.7% and then
severance tax at around 6%.
That's a general snapshot of how
our investments are performing
overall. If you turn with me to
page two of the report
I'll dig into the pension fund
agencies in particular. Um, as
you all just talked about
pension funds are really
important because they offer a
big benefit to state employees.
Me your other legislative staff.
Uh, they also represent one of
the largest liabilities to the
state in general. And so you, um
you all as appropriators your
staff pay really close attention
to the health of these funds for
that reason.
The table on page two shows the
UM ending asset values.
Over that one year period for
the pension funds you'll see at
the bottom. Um bolded pension
funds increased by $1.8 billion
or 5.7% over the year.
EB increased by 6.7% per by
4.8%.
The next thing I'll cover is the
each of the pension funds
performance and you'll see that,
um, reflected in the charts on
the bottom of Page two.
I'll go ahead and walk through
what those charts indicate. So
the light blue bars if you're
following along, have, uh,
represent the returns of each of
the funds. So that's what that
agency was able, the value that
agency was able to generate on
the market over that period, the
one year three year five year 10
year
The Red Bar is that agencies
long term target.
So for Pera. The long term
target is 7.25%.
And then the dark blue bar
represents the policy index as
you heard of a performance
benchmark based on um asset
allocation of the fund.
In the one year period per
outperformed both the long term
target. Um, but underperformed
at the policy index. Uh, Pera
did not outperform the long term
target in any other period. Uh,
but tracked at or above policy
Index, um in each of those
periods.
Uh, ER B. In contrast, uh,
surpassed the long term target
in, um each of its, um
In each period and tracked
Right at about the policy index
for each of those periods.
I also draw the committee's
attention to the chart on the
bottom Left hand corner of Page
two. This shows the historical
three year annualized returns or
PE B in blue and then pera in
red. So this is that three year
bar chart just plotted over
time. You can imagine that
And, you know, I think the
takeaway here first off is that,
um
Our investments are really
driven by the market. You can
see those market fluctuations
over time, and then you can also
see the different, uh, return
performance of the two pension
funds.
Our transition to, um, talking
about our long term investments
Managed by S IC You turn to Page
three. This is the deep dive
onto that.
Long term investments as you as
you heard Mr Clarke talk about
this morning are very important
because this is how the state
intends on managing the decrease
in oil and gas production in the
long term.
Overall, uh, in reflected on
table two. These funds increased
by $9.2 billion or 24.2%, So a
really tremendous increase.
Out 60% 58.5% of that increase
was attributable to increased
oil and gas, Uh oil and gas
inflows.
So most of this is being driven
by, um oil and gas there.
You also also point out that the
early childhood trust fund, uh,
the third row there increased by
100%. It doubled over one year,
which is really quite
tremendous, uh, severance tax
permanent fund 24 almost 25%
Land Grant Permanent fund 14%.
So these funds are growing very,
very fast.
Similar to the last page. I'll
walk through the performance of
each of these three funds. Uh,
these are the charts on the
bottom.
As I just talked through, Uh,
the lamb Grain permanent fund
surpassed its long term target
of 7% in the 15 and 10 year
missed it in the three year
Uh, the severance tax. Actually,
I pause there. Land Grant permit
funding.
Surpassed the long term target
in the one and the five year and
missed it by just a hair and the
tenure. Wanna get that right?
The severance tax permanent
fund. Um in contrast,
Surpassed its long term target
of 6.75% in the one year but
missed it in each other period.
um, and was tracking at or above
its policy index.
Point out there. The severance
tax permanent fund has a lower a
long term target than the land
Grant permanent fund, primarily
because of its allocation to New
Mexico investments, which
generally have a lower return,
uh than standard investments.
And then, lastly, the early
childhood education care fund.
Uh, that fund does not have a
long term target at this point,
so reflected here is the
returns. And then the policy
index you can see in the one
year period. It was below the
policy index by a hair. Um, and
in the three year it was above
the policy index.
And then similarly that there's
a chart on the right hand side
that shows the three year
annualized returns over time of
the Land Grant Permanent fund in
Blue and then the Severance Tax
permit fund in red and shows
those market swings and then the
difference in performance over
that period.
I, page four. I have three more
things I wanna cover hopefully
won't take too much more of your
time. I want to start with
comparing, uh, our investments
with pure funds.
So we've talked about balances
how balances have swelled
really, really fast, thanks to
oil and gas revenues that we've
talked about.
Returns performance and we can
also compare our funds to
similarly sized public funds.
See how we're doing in that way.
They have era in Blue Year B in
red languor, permanent funding
green and then severance tax
permit funded purple and then
you have it across each of those
periods. That pure, uh, returns.
Um and you can see that New
Mexico investments were in the
bottom quarter of pure funds in
the quarter and the one year
period as strong markets
outperformed are generally risk
adverse portfolios in the 35 and
10 year. The story is
A little different more of our
funds. The majority of our funds
were above the median. The three
year um, several of our funds
were above the median. The five
and the 10 year. Um, and we
still had some some stragglers
over those periods. But in
general, we performed better in
the long term and worse in the
near term compared with our peer
funds.
One thing I want to point out
here, something that jumps off
the page to me, certainly is the
performance of the ER B, Um,
over that period in the three
year I think in particular
deserves a shout out, um, ear be
performed in the top five top
fifth percentile of pure funds,
So really good performance
there. Um
Similarly on that note. Um I
want to get into a bit of the
weeds. I know that it's the end
of the day. Uh, but it's worth
pointing this out. So on the
upper, right, um, upper left
hand corner. Uh, there's a table
that shows risk portfolios. We
were just talking about, uh, the
risk to return relationship. Uh,
one measure of that risk to
return is called the sharp
ratio. You may or may not have
heard of that before. Um, the
sharp ratio is a measure of
performance that
Adjusts for the risk of that
investment, so you can think of
it as how much additional
return. Are we getting for the
additional risk that we're
taking on? The sharp ratio of
one is good. A sharp ratio of
two is excellent. Sharpe ratio
below below one is not as good
You can see the ER B had a sharp
ratio of one in the, uh, in this
reporting period. That was the
first time I've seen a New
Mexico investment hit that
benchmark, uh in the last couple
of years, um, in general, our
investments are trending in the
right direction there, but
you'll be surpassed that
benchmark. So wanted to, um
Point that out to the committee.
Last thing I'll cover is, uh,
the state's general fund
investment pool. This is a new
part of the report that we
haven't talked about before. Uh
but an important component.
Nonetheless, if you think about
state finances in terms of your
own finances, you have your long
term retirement finances. You
are putting those out on the
market trying to earn as much
return as you can. Um, those are
pension funds are long term
investments. The things I just
talked about. We also have a
checking and a savings account.
Maybe you have a high yield
savings account.
And really, that's the state
General Fund investment pool.
In that pool. We have two
portfolios. We have a liquidity
portfolio, which is like your
checking account. That's the
everyday immediate needs of cash
for state agencies.
And then you also have the core
portfolio, which is more like
your long term. Um, High yield
savings account. Uh, and the
core port portfolio is invested
by the state treasurer to earn,
um a bit of return on cash
That's not immediately needed by
our agencies. So Table three
shows the increase in the core
portfolio and then Table four on
Page four shows the performance
of the core portfolio.
You can see in the quarter
earned, uh, just about 0.4%
percent. Um and then, in the one
year 3.53 0.6%, which is above
the benchmark in both periods,
So that's a good thing and just
want to point that out, And this
is something we'll continue to
keep an eye on and report back
to you all. Um as as needed.
With that, Um
That covers my presentation. I'm
happy to answer any questions.
If there are any
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Brendan New. It's very formative
and
Start off with, uh
Representative Borrego.
Thank you for your presentation.
Um, just one quick question,
because I know that everyone
wants to go home. Um
How many? How many, Uh, risk
profiles do you use
Besides, this one shown here.
Mister Chair, representative.
Great question. Um, the risk
for, uh, profiles that we have
report on Standard deviation,
Sharpe ratio and the Beta as you
can see reflected here. Um, I
know the agencies have are these
the only three? Those are the
ones we collect the state. OK,
Thank you. Thank you. Mr Chair.
Representative. Certainly don't
want to imply. I know the
agencies have many more risk
for, But these are the ones we
report out and then yeah.
Centers.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
This the general, uh, fund
investment pool.
I know you have to keep it
liquid, so they're they're
smaller.
Um you take less risk and keep
it liquid and and and earn more
Does this also include the
reserves when we talk about the
reserves?
Um, that we used on our budget.
Is it sitting there or is it
sitting in a in a higher earning
Mr Chair, Senator. Great
question. You are testing the
edges of my knowledge of our
reserves.
My understanding is
The reserves are managed by
State investment Council so they
wouldn't be reflected here.
Potential some of the most cash
Liquid reserves. Maybe
And we will follow up and get
you a more
Answer after this. Thank you.
Appreciate that.
Oh, that all in mind, though,
and correct me if it's not
correct.
But, uh, it's with a reserves.
They have already been accounted
for.
I know, but but are they?
They're earning money.
Yes.
And in
But in the state State
investment fund or with this
this pool
That's my question might have
another
But
I. I just want to know what what
return we're getting on the
reserves.
Mister Chair, Senator. I
certainly know there's some
portion of the reserves that are
managed by S IC. I think you're
probably right that some portion
of the reserves are reflected in
the General fund core portfolio.
Um
But I don't have an answer. I
don't believe Bowie has an
answer, but we will get you one.
And just as a follow up Mr Chair
and who makes the decision about
where that money goes. And
where, you know, um, and how
much it's which plot because you
could see the plots have
different returns.
First for clarification. There's
different type of reserves.
OK, so you have to specify I I'm
talking about the reserves that
we allocate when we prepare our
budget. We budget for so much
reserves, and so my
understanding is that money will
be coming in.
Most of it will be going to the
general fund, but the amount for
the reserves will be going into
My question is, does it go into
this General fund or investment
pool or or is it managed at a
higher rate was my question.
Oh, it's interesting Little
pussy would be
It would be the General fund.
Would be with state investment.
And once they leave
The General fund.
Would be with a different
entity.
Whatever the agency.
It.
Exactly, but the reserves do
they? I guess they just always
sit there.
In in the General fund
investment pool.
See what I'm saying. I just We
put a lot of money aside to my
knowledge, they're always
accounted for.
No, I understand. There are
power for my question is is how
much do they earn?
Well, well.
Go ahead.
Mr Chair. I think I have an
answer. Great question. Um
So the, um
That tax Stabilization reserve
is the largest reserve fund in
the state. That's managed by S
IC, um, generates return. I
believe Mr Clark talked about
this.
I mean, I could pull up a
reserve amount the return amount
on that and then the operating
Reserve, which is the next
biggest reserve pot in our
reserves that is managed.
My STO, um and is in the core
portfolio. So great question.
You're absolutely managed by by
the state, the state treasurer's
office OK and reflect it here in
the General Fund Investment
pool? Yes.
Thank you.
And who makes a decision? I
guess it is. It represented a
percentage.
The percentage we specified or
Um
Um
I guess he operating reserves
would just sit there.
In this and then
Eventually those reserves are
going to turn into a big pot of
money.
That we don't spend
Then where do they go?
Mr Chair, Senator. Great
questions. Testing my knowledge
here. Um, my understanding is
that tax Stabilization reserve
receives some portion of unspent
money at the end of a fiscal
year, uh, and grows accordingly.
And then the operating reserve
is
My guess would be appropriated.
But I
I want to speak to that, and I
can get a better answer.
Appropriated by you all is what
I would imagine.
And until then, sitting in this
low return pool of money.
I just remember our reserves
were so huge.
Um, I. I don't have the book now
to look it up. But there it was.
The operating reserve was a lot
of money.
And it seems to me kind of not
Not prudent to have all that
money just sitting in a low
return pool.
If we could get more money.
And I mean, maybe we can't
because of other rules. I don't
know.
That was my question.
Mr Chair and Senator. I'm sorry.
I don't have better answers for
you. I'll follow up via email
and and
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Or anyone else.
Members so
That completes our agenda.
And, uh,
Motion for adjournment.
OK, there's a motion there's a
second
All in favor of C five by, say,
nine.
