It's too young. I'm sorry I
wasn't here when you all uh
Started. I didn't know you were
in town, so our paper is gone to
4 days a week and you don't
always find out about everything
early enough, um.
You know, this is kind of unique
for me 45 years ago, I was
chairman of this committee, and
so I remembered and we had, I
had a lot of fun here, uh, did a
lot of things, lowered the
school age for kids with
challenges and
Did some 94142 things and uh did
some
We did a lot of funding together
and worked a lot with the Native
Americans and, uh, on their
education and funding and it
was, it was something new. I'm
probably the only person that
was ever a single unmarried,
didn't have any kids chairman of
this committee. So.
Of the education committee ever,
so it's been fun. I, I would
just tell you thank you so much
for coming here, uh, this is
kind of I'm dressed a little
weird, but you know, we're in a
transition between storms and uh
after a few floods, it's been
called the first flood on
October 19th.
was a could have been 1000 or a
2000 year flood. It depends on
which one of the or the uh
weather people you talk to and,
uh, but we had a rebirth of them
here a little bit. We've had
some, uh, in the last 4 days
there's some places here that
have 13.5 inches of rain in the
last 4 days. Our airport, uh,
Has had, hadn't had anything
like that, but the, the whole
north side of town, west side of
town, and uh.
We've had a large amount of
flooding. We have a lot of
places that have flooded that
have never flooded before, never
even been close, uh, so it's,
it's really a, a strange thing
that's happening, uh, but while
you're here is to look at our
schools. I, I want to tell you
you all went to Mesa next door
to that.
Is uh where the new Nancy Lopez
school is gonna go and, uh,
I can tell you that site was
chosen. We used to have a state
hospital there that worked with
people with alcohol issues and
we got the state to give us the
land so we can put uh Nancy
Lopez and um.
In, uh, in Mesa can use the same
health clinics and thing for,
for students. This is one of our
more economically deprived areas
and, uh, so that is very
beneficial that we could do all
that and in working together
with with him and, uh, with the
state and the Department of
Education in, uh, and getting
that land transferred, uh,
To the schools we, we worked in
an agreement with the New Mexico
State Police. They're going to
use the old Nancy Lopez school
as a training site for an active
shooter in a school and, uh, so
we think that that's extremely
beneficial to everybody
involved, uh,
You know, it, uh, we've had one
of those shootings here that
is extremely difficult for your
community to get over with and,
and for the kids and everybody,
and so, uh,
That, that I think is going to
be a very beneficial thing to
have, uh, and when you
When you look about this, the
New Mexico Military Institute,
please, please, every legislator
can send somebody to our, our
school, and they have other
funding available for kids that
can't make some of the cost and
so look at the military
institute and send people from
all over New Mexico, uh, you
know, New Mexico is kind of
unique. uh Albuquerque and Santa
Fe in Las Cruces.
And the other rural parts.
No, they never get together.
They're so different except
Farmington and in the South and
the um
In the North, uh, Northwest and
southeast get together because
of the oil and gas interests,
but we have to work on the on
the development of all of New
Mexico, including all four
corners and uh and then we have
to be a tune of the ideas and
the problems that they have in
each corner of our state,
whether it be Ratton or, you
know, or
Lordsburg or, you know,
anywhere, we have to be able to
do that, so thank you all, thank
you for coming. We're gonna have
our air show you all were a
great help to us on our air
show, um, in the 2022 air show,
which was the last one they had
or the one after or before the
last one that they had that was
a complete air show and air
race.
Um
They did 20 or so many days
before the, uh, air show, uh,
for the 22 they had in Reno,
they had 85,000 people attain
went to that deal. We at the
same number of days before the
event, our reservations and
ticket sales were 20% higher.
than they were in Reno when they
had 85,000 people.
And you all, you all helped us a
lot with that, and we thank you.
Uh
Uh, when you go back, I would
tell you, I would hope that you
could look a little bit on the
flood thing, uh, Riodosa and,
and, uh, up in northern New
Mexico, they've got, they got
some, a little more help. We
didn't get much help from the
legislature. We did have our own
bill that, uh,
To raise our own taxes, uh.
To, to pay for we have about uh
We lost
You know, in that we lost our
museum, the, the civic center,
the civic center is gonna be
able to go back. The museum, we
have a $300 million art
collection. It's probably the
one of the largest ones outside
of Santa Fe.
Uh, and we can't put a bad
facility is flooded 4 times.
There was water 4.5 ft to 5 ft
deep in that building downtown.
So we, and I don't want to be
the mayor that put it back for
the 5th flood in there, uh, I
don't wanna put this stuff back
and say who did that and they'll
say, Tim Jennings. I don't know,
we have to build us a new museum
and I'm hoping we can partner
with the Institute and include
in that music.
uh,
some areas for the
For
to bring forth the starting of
the New Mexico Military
Institute. It started in 1891.
Rosville started in 1873, but
they, uh, if, if we can work
that out, it's on high ground
and we won't have to worry about
flooding, but that museum, uh,
right now has 51,000 square
feet, uh, the cost of replacing
that is at least $1000 a square
foot.
And so, uh, if we put the
institute in there and and with
10,000 ft, we're probably
looking at building a $70
million museum.
And I, we got to figure out how
to fund it, so, uh, that's just
the cost and we FEMA has been
very good to work with.
They're real slow with paying
and real slow about getting back
with us on ways to alleviate
future floods.
Uh, and that's where we are, so,
uh, but all in all, you know, I,
I want to thank you for coming
and when you, you look, uh.
When you look at schools and,
and like Nancy Lopez.
I would just tell you that if
you watch it for years ago, the
best math school in the whole
town of Roswell was at Mountain
View.
It's another out by the base.
It's now another totally uh
Uh, economically deprived area
and they always had the highest
math course. The reason they did
was they had.
3 or 4 teachers.
That knew each other, worked
with each other on doing all
their math curriculum.
And so by the time those kids
went through,
They knew it. Nancy Lopez is
developing that same level of
expertise at their, at their
school.
And, uh, and it's another one of
those poor schools that's doing.
It's doing very well.
And, uh, so,
Uh
You know, it's, if you look at
that, we have to work on, on
different ways to get teachers
to where they can, they actually
work together and learn to work
together. So everybody is, uh,
it's a seamless transition from
grade to grade.
It's, it appears to me that that
seems to be something and now
that's from a guy that has 5
kids now when I didn't have any
before, so I've learned a little
bit, so, but thank you all for
coming and thank you so much for
your help with getting the money
for the air races and, and
putting those funding the
emergency situations we had.
And for Riodoso as well. I would
tell you Ruidoso has, we were
given a two-hour notice that
they would all be here.
And the Institute opened up and
our college opened up and we
were able to house those people
here in 2 hours. I mean, it was
an amazing thing, but when we
had our floods.
Riodosa was one of the first
people here to bring fire trucks
and everything else because we
lost 4 fire trucks. We lost a
fire truck last just the other
day trying to get some sheriffs
out and some people who were
stranded, uh,
You know, those may.5 million
dollar fire trucks but it was
the only thing we had. We've got
to get other vehicles that can
Travel better. We do have swift
water rescue from the National
Guard. They have been very good
to help us now. We have 6
vehicles that can work in that,
uh.
In high water, so we're, we're
doing better, but
You know, thank you all and uh.
You know, please, if you the air
race is here are, are going to
be phenomenal. Uh, I, every
hotel in town is booked.
Uh, we did have some things
where hotels.
Uh, people made reservations and
then they called in the hotel
called and canceled them and
would only rebook them at $500 a
night instead of $100.
Uh, where we've, I've written
them all letters about that and
a lot of that's been corrected,
but uh there's some strange
things that happen, but all in
all the air show air races are
really coming along well and you
all helped us a lot. Thank you
very much and
Welcome to Roswell.
So, and if you'll tell me, do me
one favor.
When Candy Ael comes back, would
you tell her the rancher was
here this morning and it's
obvious the farmers slept in.
You got to, every time I can
stir the pot with that lady, I
do it, so it always helps, but,
and if you have any questions of
me, I'll be glad to answer them.
Thank you, Mayor. Any quick
questions, uh, Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mayor,
my dear friend Karina Jaeger
heard that I text her that you
were here and she said to
please, please talk to you about
making more interstate
transportation.
Uh, she lives here, has to rent
a car to come up to Albuquerque
and it's concerned that there's
no more greyhound, I guess.
Yeah, we don't have all the
Greyhound buses, I mean, it's
They used to have an awful lot
of freight that went between.
Uh,
all the from Amarillo, we go all
the way to Crus and on 70 and we
have one going to Albuquerque.
We had, there was a lot more
packaged goods, but anymore, uh,
Amazon it's kind of shocked the
That freight business between
areas uh
We have to try to, we'll have to
do that together to work on
level kinds of transportation,
uh, it's very.
We have
Uh, we have American Airlines
comes in and flies into here,
but some of the things uh.
My daughter was or my sister's
daughter was trying to fly. She
had surgery trying to fly in
here and it was $948.01 way and
1050 the other way back.
From Dallas.
And, uh, we can't afford that. I
mean, that's and that's,
there's.
Ways that uh
You know,
You just can't and now Santa Fe
has a problem. I know Las
Cruces. You all are close enough
to El Paso. It's hard for you to
get.
Fights, but we're 200 miles from
everything.
For 500 miles from any city and
so.
You know, if we had
If we could have United Airlines
flew in here too.
It would probably
Give them a little more
challenge, and they would keep
the rates down.
And uh so that's and but nobody
wants to fly 200 miles to
Albuquerque. They don't want to
fly just that short, short jump.
It's not economic with the bus
transportation, it is hard.
Thank you
Thank you. Any other questions
for the mayor?
If not, again, thank you, the
hospitality here in your town's
been wonderful. Very much
appreciate that. When you go by
our museum, just remember one
thing, nobody knows.
And that
Jets
Engines were invented here,
rocket.
Engines were invented here by
Doctor Goddard. Texas is real
good about stealing heroes. I
mean, you're, everybody knows
that in the Alamo, you've been
to Alamo? What what happened
there? Davy Crockett got killed.
But we all knew Davy Crockett
got was famous because he killed
a bear when he was 3.
And you know, here they go down
there and they take the space
center and have all those space
things here, but all that stuff
was started right here in
Roswell in the 20s and the 30s
by Robert Goddard, and he came
here and he loved it. People in
Massachusetts thought he was
crazy and we thought he fit
right in, so.
It's good, but thank you all for
coming. Thank you. Thank you,
Mayor.
Uh, and now, Colonel David West,
if you would please, you know,
inform us, let us know what's
going on with Nimi.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Colonel David West,
Chief of Staff in Mexico
Military Institute. Thank you
for inviting us this morning.
Uh, to be in front of you,
welcome to Roswell and uh I was
just chatting with someone
earlier. It's my norm is to go
to Santa Fe quite often during
session and otherwise I've seen
you familiar faces there and.
Certainly General Mick Burnett
sends his regards. He's doing
general stuff in North Carolina
this morning and so he's not
here but he certainly sends his
regards and asks us to go ahead
and uh meet with you all and do
a presentation. I was asked to
kind of focus in a couple areas
this morning. I have with me
Doctor Nina Leacock, who's our
head of school at the uh
intermediate preparatory Academy
and so we'll cover some of that
here in just a little bit as
well, but the first area was
about uh
You know, Senate Bill 280, which
you all unanimously supported
this past year and we certainly
appreciate that and all that you
do for the institute, um, I
often get questions about the uh
legislative scholarships, um, as
well, and you support that
annually as well, and we've
taken some extra steps along
those lines to provide and
assure New Mexico resident
students can come to the
institute for zero cost. They
have to meet the minimum
requirements of GPA of 2.0 and
have a
See and deportment. That's the
leadership grade. That's the
grade they get for being in the
core.
And I've included some packets
this morning for you, uh, has a
lot of things there and as the
mayor mentioned, uh, this is
your school, so no matter where
you're from in New Mexico, it is
your school and the idea that
you have, uh, young people from
any of it and then all of your
districts there, I think, uh,
bodes well for the ideas of what
we are. We're not in everything,
but what we are is very unique
and uh substantial in the world
of academics in the world of
leadership as well. If you've
never had the opportunity to
detour.
in them and I, I certainly
invite you uh to take time, come
there. I personally will take
you if you, if it's, if you
wanna do that or if you wanna go
around with a cadet would love
to have our cadets take people
on tour and, and they certainly
take other cadets on tour or
potential cadets on tour because
they don't want to hear an old
guy like me talk about things,
so they, they like to to see
those cadets and we're very
proud of them and what they've
done. As you're aware, we send
cadets to all of the academies,
Air Force Academy, West Point,
Naval, etc. and
We we support um our early
commissioning program if you're
not aware, NMMI is one of just
4, military junior colleges in
the United States and we produce
somewhere in the neighborhood of
35 to 45 2nd lieutenants every
year to go into the army,
particularly uh our tag, General
Aguilar is an alum from Dexter,
and of course he's a very proud
of his institution as well, what
NMMI did for him, and he'll
speak to that on hand as well,
but also get, get on with our
presentation, uh, Mr. Chairman,
if that's OK.
See if I can figure out the
buttons. I'm only an engineer. I
just wanted to redesign
everything.
It's the one to the right.
There we go. OK. So the focus
this morning in regards to our
alignment with the Senate Bill
280, which uh made NMI as a
designated special school and in
line with the PSFA I'll get to
the point of that here in just a
minute, but just to uh provide
some background and where NMI
gets its funding, particularly
capital funding.
And my sources of capital
funding are your general
obligation bonds, of course,
statewide. Uh, the issue with
those, uh, you know, it's
typically $2 million or more in
the dollars for our institution,
uh, the institutions are, are
allowed to pro provide two
projects if you're a 2-year
college or 3 projects if you're
UNM or New Mexico State or
somewhere like that.
It does. It takes up to 5 years
once we identify a capital
project by the time we can
actually turn shovels and start
doing something about those
projects. It's, it's a tedious
process of where we have to get
the board to approve, then we
have to get HED to approve, then
it goes to the legislature.
Governor signs, you all know we
have to go to a vote that
following November, then it
takes the whole next July before
it's funded, so that process
takes quite a while to get
through, so we have to have a
long term plan.
Uh, to be able to to use the
general obligation bonds and
they only come every other year
as you're aware as well. And so
we're limited typically in those
is in timing but also in
capacity.
Severance tax bonds, of course,
are another statewide issue.
They're typically half a million
to 2 million in, in, in dollars
and it takes up to 3 years and
some not, we don't have to go to
a vote of the public in
November, but we do have to go
through the processes, uh, that
I mentioned prior to that.
And then finally revenue bonds
are kind of a key area for us.
We're limited. We're not a huge
institution financially, uh,
they're limited on on our
revenues, uh, every year and so,
uh, we have about a $15 million
cap on our revenues and you know
the all that's tied back to what
is the current uh uh borrowing
rate and what is the condition
of NMI's payback. What's the
condition of the states, they
also consider that as well. So
those are some of the big, uh.
Ticket ways that we can do
funding.
Others obviously are legislative
capital, uh, allocations, and we
thank you again about a year
ago, uh, cycle you provided in
my $5 million for our what we
call sink rooms. Those are
bathrooms with showers, they're
common.
Um, there's a, there's a reason
you had to do that in a direct
allocation versus going through
HED and I'll get to that in just
a second as well.
Otherwise, there's also
institutional funds such as the
ING, which turns in some BRNR
and ERNR uh type funds, uh,
those are not typically very
big, uh, fund balances,
everybody always asks us about
our fund balances, uh, certainly
we have some, uh, revenue that
covers some of our ongoing
maintenance items. We're a
historic facility, as the mayor
mentioned, uh, some of our
buildings are 1907 is I think
the oldest and then bringing
those up, but the entire
quadrangle of NOI on both the.
state and national registry for
historic places, uh, that's
romantic to some people, but to
an engineer that's kind of uh
expensive and difficult to deal
with sometimes.
Uh land trust sales. I'm
currently the chairman of the
Land Trust Advisory Board. I
represent the beneficiaries on
that board. Uh, the point about
that is they're about every 5
years or even more. You all
heard the land commissioner this
year delaying some land for
sale, uh, for the point or for
lease for the point of trying to
get that 25%, I think it was
royalty or whatever, and she
actually identified some of that
is in my property and this is
what we just call.
manna from heaven, so if it
happens, uh, the entities that
want to bid and lease this land,
they take a little haircut on
the top for management and then
of course the rest flows
directly to NMMI, whereas normal
royalties, not revenue, but
royalties from those lands go to
the permanent fund and they're
managed by the SIC that you all
are familiar with as well.
And then finally we have a
limited number of institutional
trusts, uh, such as the Daniels
Fund. Bill Daniels, and alumni
in the 1930s, uh, left funds for
the maintenance and building of,
of a certain facility there at
EMMI and of course those trusts
are small $7 million is what the
value of the trust is kind of
thing and then of course we
don't spend the whole trust, we
spend
earnings uh from those uh from
those trusts so that's kind of
one of ours as well.
Um, getting back to the point
about the sink rooms as an
example in a my barracks, uh, we
call them barracks. I use a
bunch of different terms, so
forgive me if I, if I use a
military term, uh, people don't,
we don't have a campus, we have
a post.
But people don't know what a
post is, so we have a campus.
But analy barracks or dorms,
athletics facilities, uh, other
typical what, what is deemed as
revenue generating spaces do not
meet HED's definition of
supported spaces for
recommendation of projects going
forward. They use the term
auxiliaries and so the point is,
I get it at UNM you have, you're
competing against people trying
to rent apartments or things
like that at NMMI we don't have
such a thing. everybody is
required to be on the post, and
everybody is required to be in.
those barracks.
Uh, I, I get it with the, the
pit, um, they might sell a name
or whatever and boy, 14,000 of
us go watch a basketball game,
etc. Well, I love it, but it
just doesn't happen at NMMI.
We'rejuco. We have great
athletic sports, we have great
support, but we don't have
anything close to that and no
one's come to us for naming of
of the uh facilities is a point.
So those type of spaces don't
fit and so we have to find other
ways to fund those spaces.
Our typical and I have a whole
spreadsheet on this. Our
participation from all those
sources that I mentioned above
is around 50%, so people ask
about our revenue and how much
you guys carry in, in, in your
capital side, uh, you know,
about half of that is paid for
through NMI revenues from all
those different sources as well.
So if it's, if it's uh land
grant or or whatever, that's how
we pay for a lot of those
projects.
And one thing that people don't
know and often miss is NMI is
not a local taxing authority. We
cannot levy a tax like the
school district or eastern can
do against the local populace.
We are a state educational
institution as defined in the
Constitution and so we're what
what is commonly deemed as a
special school and we do not
have that taxing authority, so
the idea of us matching or
something through that process
is not readily possible.
Talk a little bit about our
facilities, aging facilities
always have uh what we call
deferred maintenance, uh, from
day one, it begins and Dr.
Leacock's fighting leaking roofs
here lately as a point, but, uh,
full facility assessment. The
last one real full facility
assessment was done in 2006.
I've been with the Institute
since 2007, so I was privy to
being a part of this outcome of
this 3DI Parsons report that HED
funded back then.
Um,
so that was the real, the last
real full uh facility assessment
done at NMMI. What we've been
doing since then, of course, is
a building by building, so we
have a master plan and we try to
assess building by building.
Uh, what our needs are for those
particular areas.
We also have individualized
strategic operations, so our
needs outside of what just the
deferred maintenance of the
building is. IPA is a great
example, uh, lately we've been
talking to you about Title IX
and women's sports, particularly
women's softball that we're
trying to add in women's
softball to the school. We've
been blessed to have, um, almost
30% female participation at the
Institute, which is up, and I
will tell you as comparison to
the national academy Air Force,
West Point, etc.
That's exceedingly high and the
idea that uh our, our women are
there and uh under Title IX
require that equity in sports.
We're excited to try and get
that for him as well and
softball obviously is something
that's well promoted in, in our
area. Um.
And then a limited assessment to
single facility or areas, so as
I mentioned before, if we're
going to tackle this uh uh
academic building or whatever
we, we'll do a full assessment
on those particular buildings so
we know going in what we're
facing.
Um, we have contracted for
another full facility assessment
this year and again, 20 years
since the 3DI was done.
So what is, what is the
relationship with the PSFA
opportunity and Senate Bill 280,
uh, Senate Bill 280 as you're
familiar, simply added in in my
to the capital outlay as a
constitutional special school,
so it's simply identified us as
that.
Under the uh act that it added
to us the, the public school
capital Outlay Act, uh, to
ensure that the physical
condition and capacity, so the
size, uh, educational stability,
technology, all those things uh
were done so to me, uh, the idea
that it's number one, an
assessment of the needs and 2,
the opportunity of funding of,
of those needs as well. So it's
simply another tool in our
toolbox is what this has done,
and it's a huge step in our, our
opinion.
Um, it does require that
assessment and obviously uh
those funding resources, so with
that I'll, Mr. Chairman, I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you. You have anything to
add or you're just here for hers
is the next session portion of
it. OK.
Great. Any questions for
Colonel West.
Yes.
Doctor, Doctor Laycock will
speak on the IPA in that
operation. You're just.
OK
I guess no questions at this
point, so Doctor Leecock.
I'll, uh, actually start lead in
for her, um.
Myself and the CFO started this
initiative with an NMI, uh, back
in 2019.
Um, we had a little problem, and
I think, you know, no group
will, will know it better than
you, uh, with education in the
state of New Mexico and as
you're familiar, MMI does have a
um academic requirement. We're
rigorous in our academics, and
first thing we don't want to do
is to, to, uh, cause a young
person to have to go home
because they can't withstand the
rigor of the academics, so we're
serious about our academics.
And the point is, is that in
2019, we started a process
looking at if we had 10 students
that applied to NMMI 7 of them
couldn't, could not test out at
grade level. In fact, the
majority tested out maybe two
grade levels below.
So recognizing the issue, we
said, what, what can we do? and
so we, we talked about this to
reach out in a more formidable
years, the younger years, to
better prepare our young people
to uh obtain this rigorous
academic um process that we have
at the Institute. So we started
that in 2019 to develop a feeder
middle school.
to the high school and junior
college in 2023, we started our
inaugural class of 6th graders.
We had a large committee work on
this issue, um, from across the
state, quite frankly, and uh we
had uh Doctor Leacock was part
of that as well as others and
started that whole process.
The primary purpose was to
address that academic issue and
provide a potential solution.
I want to emphasize it was
unanswered, not the answer.
Uh, in a Maya's unanswer, not
the answer, and the point is,
for our young people that have
the tenacity, the wherewithal,
the desire to come to a school
like you know my wow, what a
special opportunity.
And I talked to you about the 7
of 10.
Uh, bottom line is we can talk
about a problem or we can move
to address the problem and so we
moved to address the problem.
Well.
Mr. Chairman, committee, I'm
going to speak to 3 topics on
the IPA, uh, who we serve our
program and our growth, and I
need the uh.
Right, right.
All right. Thank you.
Perfect. Got it. OK. Um.
Though we are not a public
school in the sense of a school
governed under PED, we are a
school that serves a broadly
diverse public. Over 2/3 of our
students identify as students of
color, our financial aid officer
estimates that more than 80% of
our families qualify for tuition
support.
Our families come from
southeastern New Mexico. We are
a day school, no boarding, an
area with a historic.
fact of multi-generational low
attainment in terms of
education.
When we ask 6th graders why they
are at our school, they give
answers like better
opportunities, better life, you
know, they didn't come up with
that on their own. That is a
family answer. Our families are
looking not just for the
education of one child, but for
the advancement of the family.
To echo Colonel West, I will say
that this school is not
designed, never was designed to
be the answer for all students.
It's written into the mission
that it is a choice and option.
And it's an option that not
everyone is going to choose or
should choose, so I would never
set this school up as the model
that every student in New Mexico
should be going to a school just
like this one.
Our students have two things in
common.
First of all, they are willing
to play their part in a
structured environment, a highly
structured environment, and we
know that our students engage in
behaviors all day when they're
not at school, but then when
they walk through our front
door, they are there to learn
and we have a higher behavioral
standard, um, and we need
students who commit to
maintaining that.
The second thing that our
students have in common is that
they are up for a high academic
challenge. What challenge means
depends on the student. We are
not an elite school academically
in the sense that we are serving
students who are already high
achieving before they came to
us. That's not our mission or
the reality of our school. We
are serving students who are
looking to learn and move at
that time in their lives. And
then later on
They have a range of
trajectories. I have um one
young student who is interested
in welding. It seems unlikely to
me that he or his family will
choose college. Nonetheless, I
think that his excellent math
skills are going to serve him
should he choose to start a
business or in any work that he
goes into.
Our program
Sorry about this.
right
So as a part of NMMI, we have a
leadership curriculum. Students
start every day with a
leadership morning meeting, a
chance to get centered, take a
deep breath, get ready for a day
of focused work.
Oh, it's a laptop. OK, my
apologies. No, it's OK.
There we go. OK.
Thank you. My apologies.
The most visible part of our
program in Roswell is our
immersive learning component. We
do a lot of hands-on lab-based
and outdoor field learning.
That is tied into our structured
environment in a way that I
didn't anticipate when I moved
into this role in the sense that
because our students know how to
self-regulate, they know how to
manage their own behavior. We
can trust them in environments
where you wouldn't necessarily
take kids who were not ready for
that and, and already aligned
with the program.
Equally, we emphasize
fundamental skills. If you walk
into a math classroom, an
English classroom, you're likely
to see desks in rows, a pretty
traditional look, and you will
see students doing daily
practice, most of it offline. We
do not use calculators in our
math classes. Um, we do not use
computers most of the time in
our English classes, so our
students are doing a lot of
work, pencil and paper. Um, our
families say that they like the
lowered screen time.
It's not the case that they're
going the whole day without
screens. We do have a 1 to 1
Chromebook program and in in
this world, you really can't do
a screen less education, but we
do try to minimize screen use to
situations where there's a
benefit that cannot be achieved
any other way.
Oh.
All right, our growth.
The school started in the fall
of 2023 with a very small
founding class of 6th graders
only and 5 teachers. Last year
in our 2nd year, our 6th graders
became our 7th graders. We added
new 6th grade this fall we are
heading into our first year with
a full academic program.
We're still actively in startup
mode, so it is certainly bumpy,
um, and we get through that with
the excitement and the energy
and the feeling that we really
are serving the students who are
with us, our teachers are
excited. We have incoming
teachers who are moving to
Roswell in order to work in our
middle school. They're excited.
I had a candidate ask me on his
way out the door, um, after an
interview and a tour of the
building, he said, what's the
catch? And I said, it's, you
know, it is what it looks like
it's a chance to
work in a place where you have
the potential to change lives
and to use everything you've got
as a teacher to deliver what you
believe is best for those
children in front of you.
And then again, uh to Colonel
West Point, um, it is a very
particular school model. I think
it's a model that could be great
for a lot of students, but not
for every student, so not the
answer, but an answer. Thank
you.
Questions from committee
members.
Represents Onana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, just a couple of questions,
uh, what is your female to male
ratio.
I don't have an exact number,
but I would say we're probably
2/3 boys, maybe a little more
than that. When we schedule, we
have to work pretty hard to make
sure we don't have only 2 girls
in the class, for example, so
we're, we're not, we're not at
half and half. Yeah. And um so
it's only kids from the area
corrected today's school, we
have no boarding, boarding, OK.
Are you looking at?
I have a student who's
interested from Albuquerque who
wants to come and uh I just, I
didn't know if you were not at
all interested, no, not at this
point.
We're still working hard to
build the initial program.
That's all I have. Do you want
to speak to that.
Uh, remember, if we do have a
couple of families where
ironically,
um.
Well ironically, they have an
older sibling at the Institute
and the family is actually.
Purchased or leased a home here
so that the younger one could
come to the IPA and then mom, I
guess, or dad or whoever, but
somebody who stays there with
them, but we're not up for
keeping them overnight.
Thank you.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, how
many students, uh, will be in
the school in this coming year
now that you have all three
grades.
Our target size at this location
is 210. We will be at about half
of that next year. Uh, we
actually do not have our
building completed, so I won't
even have all of my classrooms
next year, so target is 210 at
this site. We're several years
away from that right now, about
50.
Thank you. And what location,
um, I understand it's not on the
actual post-campus. We're about
an hour, an hour, 1 mile north
of the campus, um, so it's a 5
minute drive and we do make use
of the campus facilities. We use
the the library on main campus,
occasionally we use the sports
facilities, um, and obviously we
want our students to be
comfortable on main campus, so
we do a lot of visiting over
there, but it is, it's adjacent
but not, um, it's not.
part of the main campus.
Thank you. And then what is the
actual um tuition cost.
I'm gonna have you look that up
for me. We'll get you the exact
number in a second. Um, it's
8, I think it's 55. I'll look it
up for you in just a second. Um,
we're right now, so far we have
met 100% of need-based, um,
financial support, obviously
can't guarantee that because
that depends on the money being
available. I will look that
number up for you. I apologize I
I did not have it memorized.
If I made the exact number, but
we, it was $4500 for tuition and
fees if you'll hit your button.
get an echo.
It was $4500 for tuition and
fees did not include lunch.
Remember NMY uh fabulously is
somehow not part of the lunch
program, so our students are
charged lunch as well, uh, this
past year, we had a number of
elements that Daniel's
Foundation provided over 300,000
in scholarships to Dr. Leacock's
point, they address.
A third of the population to be
full need 1/3 of the population
to be part, part need and and a
third non. That's their.
Perfect formula. We also had
elements here in the community
that went to work and provided
funds for students for ancillary
costs such as uh the lunches,
etc. um, we don't put them in
uniforms like we do the
institute and, and the land that
they're on, by the way, is owned
by our MMI Foundation.
And the building is as well
currently, so.
Thank you.
Thank you and is that the
Daniel's Foundation out of
Colorado.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, it is,
it, uh, they Bill Daniels again
was an alum 1930s era and made
billions of dollars off cable TV
setup supports, I was just there
last week uh for the Daniel
Scholars, Daniel Daniel
Scholars, 250 students from four
states, New Mexico, Colorado,
Wyoming, and Utah, and so he's
done a lot in that foundation is
very large, but it, it supports
the institute as well. Thank
you, ma'am.
Thank you. And then in my last
question is, when I talked to
General McBurnett up in Santa Fe
at the last session. He did
outline a hope that there would
be multiple middle school
campuses.
And down the road, um, do you
imagine those also then being a
uh.
But essentially it would be a
private school then.
Is that
Are you coming up with a new
model.
Uh, if, if I may, um, Mr.
Chairman, uh, one of the things
that I found remarkable when I
began to learn about NMMI is
that it is not a private school
and it's not a public school,
and I have worked in both public
education and in private
education. And I think that is
profoundly true that it is
neither. It has some resemblance
to a private school, um, and
some real resemblance, not just
superficial resemblance, um,
real similarity, but it is
serving a public.
in a way that is quite different
from private schools. So for
example, in admissions in the
private schools that I'm
familiar with, admissions comes
out of a pool. People apply and
then the school picks the
students that they want to
compose. Our admissions is of
course approved by the Board of
Regents and the policy is that
we open enrollment and we have a
matrix, so we look at a number
of different factors. There's a
minimum score. The first
students to clear the minimum
score are in and we're not.
sculpting a class or um looking
at a wide range of factors. We
decide what are the factors that
lead to success, and we take the
first students who show up and
when I, I mean, I began my
teaching career in California in
a program in which I was for
many years, usually the only
white person in my classroom,
and I thought of that as a mark
of diversity. That program was
not diverse because all of those
kids were elite kids. They were
going on to great careers, um.
security with or without the
program that I was in this
school is diverse in every way
that I can think of. Um, and it
is.
You know, when I look for
alignment, I'm looking to NMMI,
which of course is a school
that's preparing students for
the service academy, so
fundamentally a public purpose
in that sense. Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
And my last question is just the
existing high school program and
junior college program. How many
students are in high school? How
many are in junior college, and
then what percentage are non-N
New Mexicans who could be from
another state or based on my
friends who've had kids here
from another country.
Mr. Chairman, uh, represented
the, uh,
Student high school to junior
college ratio, roughly is 50/50.
Remember we have 4 grades of
high school and then 2 grades of
junior college. So our turnover
obviously in junior colleges
twice the rate of the high
school.
Um, the number of uh percentage
of New Mexico resident and I've
been to the the legislature for
a number of years now, and I've
heard you all say we need more
New Mexico resident students.
I'm very proud to say over the
last.
2 years, uh, and one of them was
with the address of the Knowles
scholarship to provide the zero
cost option.
We've raised that bar from 30,
roughly 30% historically, and I
can show you decades.
To 48% this last year.
And I believe this next year
we'll actually go over the 50
percentile mark and I'm, I
personally am doing a hooray
about that. The other point
about that is, is the diversity
that Dr. Leacock talked about. I
went to a large university in
Texas. And of course, we were
diverse, but we were 45,000
people, you never saw them all,
right? And so the diversity was
who, who's in your classes, that
kind of thing.
These people, uh, these young
people live together, go to
class together, eat together,
um.
Go through difficult issues
together. They go through the
fire, as they put it, uh,
together kind of thing, and they
learn about cultures in
different places, and we have a
large contingency from Brazil,
from a military police school
down there, and they find this
school to be fabulous and those
students are really, really
good. They're from very poor
economic backgrounds, typically.
Uh, they're not a bunch of rich
kids from foreign countries that
come here and they perform very
well at our school as well. Of
course our neighbors in Mexico
make up a lot of our foreign
students as well, but the
diversity doesn't stop there, we
have Koreans, Vietnamese, we
don't, we're not really loaded
with, we have maybe.
345 Chinese.
Uh, at a time kind of thing, uh,
smattering of different European
countries, that kind of thing,
uh, so the diversity is, it's,
it's unique and my wife and I
are ambassador parents, so we
actually look out after some of
these cadets that are here,
they're young and their families
are concerned, so we, we step up
to provide them that kind of
family setting. They come to the
house occasionally, um, during
COVID, we had one young man from
India who was with us for 7
months.
He's now at New Mexico Tech
finishing up his engineering
degree and is working to UNM for
his master's in engineering.
Um, we get to learn a lot. We
get to understand culture. I, I
thought I had Indian food
before, but I didn't till he got
there.
And uh so it's, it, it's very
different tasting for me, but
anyways, but I appreciate that
question.
And just the last clarification,
how many students?
are in the high school now and
how many are in the junior
college.
So we have 965 beds on the post
and generally we we're last
couple of years after COVID,
it's been difficult. We've been
in the 700s, so about half of
that 350 high school, 350 junior
college, uh, right now, I looked
at the CRR yesterday, we were
over 800, so we're looking at a,
a nice rebound. Remember, NMMI
doesn't provide online classes.
So as I go around the state as
as the chair of the land trust
advisory Board and listened to
our institutions. A lot of them
talk about increasing in
enrollment, but a lot of that
increase is online.
So we don't have that online
component.
If, if you're coming to NMI,
you're coming for that
leadership role and the point
that you're learning there with
boots on the ground.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, both of you.
Thank you, uh, vice chair
Romemeto.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
So with the passage of Senate
Bill 280, um, now, New Mexico
Military Institute is eligible
for public
funding for public school
facilities. Um,
We found out at our public
school Capital Olay, um, task
force meeting that um PSFA is
going to have to come up with
rules surrounding your your
special status as you all talked
about, um, what are you all
looking for in um their proposed
rules.
Mr. Chairman, uh, yes, uh, vice
chair, we, we're looking at the
opportunity, I think like the
assessment, that's the first
step, right? And, and we talk
about capacity. Uh, NMI is not
really looking at a capacity
issue there. We're not looking
at going to 1500 beds or
something like that.
Um, but we are looking at the
facility issues, aging facility
issues. I have buildings that
the roof, for example, are still
made of asbestos tiles.
Um, they last a long time, but
if there's any issue with them,
any damage, any repair needed,
we can't touch them.
And have to have people come in
and and fix those. Over the
years we deal with that and say
insulation or the mastic that
holds tiles to the floor or
something. Uh, we deal with, uh,
lead and paints or, or in, in
the windows, etc. so we deal a
lot with those issues and we're
just looking at through that
assessment to understand what,
where we are and where we need
to be uh from those facilities
and concerns with the IPAs, one
of the things is, you know, the,
the big
dream is that the IPAs don't
just exist in Roswell but might
exist in other other towns,
other cities, Santa Fe or
Albuquerque or wherever. And
now, and those opportunities
also are, are things that we
would look for with them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just had
a quick question is when is your
cut off for applying to the
school and as well as um the
deadline for the scholarships
applications. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'd love to speak
about the scholarship. It's,
it's part of the statutes in
there as the General Knowles,
uh.
Scholarship that you all have
been such a great part of it
since its inception and the
trust itself, uh, that we manage
also has built up and that's
what allows us to have the funds
to, to provide those for
students. Again, the way that
works by statute is, is that a
legislator may submit a name to
NMMI. You're not required to,
but you're all in this business
with us, and the point is it's
your school and if you have a
young person that you're
identifying that could, uh, you
believe potentially be a
cadet at the MMMI send us the
name uh in the sheets there,
there's a just a one page sheet
what a legislator could do,
should do, but if you, I have
received phone calls personally
from different legislators, hey,
I have this young person from
whatever town. He's their name
and so I follow up on those and
I get back to you, the
legislator, uh, to let you know
what the status is of that
student. To answer your question
about the cutoff, we really, we
really work that.
Close to the end, our first
cadets will start arriving on
July 16th. Uh, that's the cadre
and then uh the latest we take a
new cadet is 2 weeks after the
matriculation of our uh uh new
cadets, which is a roughly
around the end of August, but we
cut off our uh acceptance of
students prior to the arrival or
matriculation of those very
first students, so about mid
August.
But um we're, we're certainly
open right now if you have a
young person that you know, uh,
might consider this and
understand as a New Mexico
resident student, then there's
not really a cost to the family.
And I'm not, I'm not, you know,
it's not a hidden cost in there
somewhere where they're gonna,
oh, yeah, well, there's this
$2000 bill. Uh, we try to take
care of all of it when they are,
they are kids.
So we're trying to take care of
it, so your kids or my kids, so
we're we're trying to take care
of all of them. Thank you, Mr.
Good, thank you.
Thank you. Other questions?
Couple of questions that I have
and, and more about the
The preparatory one.
Do you have special ed students?
How many students are getting
special ed services or things of
that nature.
So by design, the school puts
everything into the teachers.
Um, we have a skeletal admin
staff and no support services,
so we have no counselors, no
learning specialists. We have
some students for whom we can't
support them, um, so we have
students who either don't choose
us because we lack the support
services are common, it's not a
good fit. We do have some
students who, in my experience,
I'm not an expert, but I would
say the student has a learning
difference who are thriving with
us.
And I have the conversation with
the parents that we are not the
ideal school for your child, but
we may be the best school in
Roswell. And so we have some
families who continue to choose
us, either providing that
support themselves or, I mean, I
can just use a kind of anecdotal
illustration. I've got a student
that I, you know, my guess is
that that's dyslexia, but he was
very unhappy in school and
didn't do any work, and he now
loves school as happy as a clam
when the teacher says, let's get
writing.
He's writing a lot of errors,
but the sheer volume is bringing
him along in a way that was not
happening in its previous
school. I was in an English
class a few weeks ago, actually,
near the end of the year and the
class started with handwriting a
story, so there's a prompt,
everyone wrote a story, he
volunteered to read a story,
stumbled a bit over a couple of
words, um, but when I look at
his writing now compared to his
writing at the beginning of the
year.
I have no doubt that he's
learning.
Excellent question.
Thank you. Um,
You indicated, you know, they
it's for the structured
environment. If you have a
student that's got discipline
problems, do you handle it or do
they get pushed out back to the
public schools. How has that
happened or how is that managed?
Another excellent question. We
attempt to handle it, so we
would start with intervention
with the teacher. From there we
would move to intervention with
the director of the students or
we sometimes use a strategy they
call it a circle sometimes where
you've got several teachers who
talk with the student that wants
to try to impress upon them. We
do what we can, um, if the
behavior is disrupting the
learning of others that would
move to an out of school
suspension and eventually that
student would been, would be
dismissed. Um, to date, we have
not dismissed any.
students yet, but that's
something that would happen if
we were not able to get the
behavior corrected. We're a tiny
school and to go back to that
point about everything is put
into the teachers. We don't do
in school suspension. I
literally don't have a room to
put a child in, and I certainly
don't have an adult to be in
that room with them. So we are
functioning in a really
streamlined way, um, especially
at the beginning of 6th grade,
everybody needs a couple of
months to get on board and learn
what we're about. It does go
back.
to that point is that if we were
going to only have one kind of
school in New Mexico, this would
not be yet. We are not able to
take care of our children. We
are able to take care of
children who
are diverse in many, many
different ways. Excellent
question. Yeah. Thank you. Um,
after, you know, when school
starts in the 6th graders, do
you have parents that say, uh,
this isn't right, and, and
disenrolled their students for
traditional public schools, uh,
do you have that happen or they
for the most part, trying to to
stay there. I, I was a middle
school principal and, you know,
I dealt with all of the parents
that, you know, they're, you
know,
Not sure that where their child
ought to be or the kid's unhappy
about something, and so they're
quick to
To change the situation.
We've had, so if, so among
students who are maintaining the
2.0 GPA, we almost never have a
family choose to leave. I think
we've had two instances in the 2
years of a family choosing to
leave and what was reported to
us is that the student wanted to
be with their friends at another
school, um, and I, uh, have all
respect for those families. I
really think that this is not,
it's not a school for everyone,
and I think that many wonderful,
the students who left us.
I think are going to have great
lives. I think they're going on
to to wonderful lives, um.
We're, we work hard upfront to
make sure parents know what
they're choosing. We do have an
expectation of parents that they
support our homework policy,
which doesn't mean that they're
teaching the child. It does mean
that they're providing a place
and time for the child to do the
homework. So the homework, it's
part of what we're doing, um,
learning to learn, I would say
is the heart of our goal. We
don't ask the parents to do
something that we're not doing.
We have a study hall twice a
week, and the goal of that study
hall.
is to gradually bring children
along from not being able to
learn autonomously to being able
to sit down. Now, they're little
kids. I'm not talking about
sitting down for an hour, but
sit down for 10 minutes straight
and work on their math, take a
quick break, 10 minutes
straight, take a bigger break,
so we have got to study hall
where we're trying to cultivate
that if a student can't learn
that over time, they're not
going to stay with us, um, and
that is the, the hardest part of
my job, um, is recognizing that
we're not a good fit for those
students at that time, which
doesn't mean that 2 years.
later, they won't be ready for
NMMI um.
Thank you, and you kind of just
brought up something on my next
question, you indicated if they
don't maintain a 2.0, are they
coached out and head back to the
traditional school or what kind
of interventions are there to,
to assist. So we have the same
policy that NMMI has, which is
that the 2.0 minimum has to be
maintained. If a student falls
below that at the end of a
semester. If it's a little
below, they go on academic
probation and they've got one
semester to hit that 2.0 point.
again, if they, um, are below
1.5 or if they're below 2.02
semesters consecutively, they
are an academic suspension,
which means that they're out for
a full semester, realistically
in Roswell, it would be unlikely
that that student would be
coming back, um, they have to
apply for readmission. We have
had more than a few students
leave on those terms, um.
Yeah, and I'm just, that's part
of the how the school is
functioning, that's a reality.
We also have a waiver option,
and I have had students who came
in well below grade level, did
not hit that 2.0 mark, but I
take a report from every single
teacher when a student is in
this situation, those students
were a member of the community
contributing to the learning of
others we're not having them
disrupting class. I waiver those
students through and what I've
seen, um,
Wonderfully is that it just took
them a little longer and then
they're off my watch lists and
they're cruising forward. More
typically when a student is not
hitting the 2.0, I mean, it's,
it's a middle school, so
consistency alone is gonna carry
someone to that right, um,
either consistency or flashy
listening in class and knocking
out of the park on the tests.
Typically when I have a student
who's not hitting the 2.0, they
are also all day disruptive
because they haven't caught on
to what we're doing, which is
focusing on the learning.
and those students do not stay.
Thank you. And the last question
is you said it's, it's only a
day school. There's no, and
regionally is there
transportation provided for
students or is it incumbent upon
the parents to get them there
each day.
We are minimalist in every way
except the academic program. So
we've put everything into the
academic program, we don't have
bussing, um, we don't, we don't
have clubs at this time, um, so
we're really chosen by families
who want that focus. We are
building our sports program over
time, I think that there's going
to be a game changer for us in
terms of making us attractive to
more families, but it is a
school design that by design,
it's not a smorgasbord, it's a
5, core curriculum of five
academic classes.
leadership, physical education,
and art.
Thank you. Other questions,
anyone?
Thank you. I appreciate you
being here and any closing
comments, Colonel?
Sir, uh, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, again, thank
you for inviting us to be here
this morning and we're always
open to questions or and tours,
like I said, if you wanna come.
Uh, I've done tours on a
Saturday in a snowstorm, so it's
so anytime it's, it's your
school too and uh we left you
with a lot of paraphernalia, so
you have my permission to put
your stickers on anybody's car.
That you wish and uh and if if
they don't like it, just tell
them to call me or something,
but anyways, thank you again for
hearing us and uh uh again, uh
welcome to Roswell. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for being
here.
Will transition to
rule review, Connor.
Hunter, whenever you're ready.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I know
everyone's been waiting with
bated breath for the rule
review, so we'll get right into
it. Um, I anticipate this will
be a pretty uh brief
presentation. These have already
been adopted by the department.
They're published in the New
Mexico Register, uh, these are
also the same rules that
Natasha, my colleague, uh, went
over with all of you at last
meeting in May. So this, there
are very minor changes to only
one of the rules, so there
should be relatively brief, but
first one will be
The adopted rule in New Mexico
administrative code 6.30.19
public uh Purple Star Public
Schools program, uh, that took
effect on June 24, 2025, and
just as a brief reminder, it
outlines application
requirements, eligibility
criteria, and responsibilities
for maintaining the designation
of public schools in New Mexico
as Purple Star Public Schools.
Uh, this can and so the Purple
Star Public Schools program is a
quick refresher is primarily
designed to be a program
allowing to, uh, allowing for
recognition of efforts by
schools either what they serve
military student and military
connected students directly or
they don't to allow them to er
to receive recognition from the
state, uh, in their efforts to
recognize and honor military
service and provide services to
military connected students and
their families, particularly,
uh, with an aim towards reducing
any
learning disruptions that may
come about as a result of
frequent relocations or
deployments or separations.
Uh, so this, there have been no
changes between the proposal of
this rule and the adoption of
this rule, uh, but I'm happy to
answer any questions you may
have about it, but it's pretty
straightforward, stayed the
same.
Any questions about the rule.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Connor,
this is a specifically about the
rule, but does PED notify all
the districts and charters about
this.
Uh, so,
uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, as I understand it,
conversations are ongoing in PED
to implement this. They have not
yet reached the stage where they
are notifying districts, but
We have Denise Terasas here as
well.
Good morning, Dennis Raza is
director of policy at PED, um,
Mr. Chair and Representative, do
you mean if PED notifies schools
and districts or schools, um,
and charter schools of the
rulemaking.
Uh, no, actually, Mr. Chair, I
mean.
Some people like with so much
turnover superintendents,
principles, they're not aware
that this is available.
Um, I mean I've been on the
military committee so I'm very
aware of it, but the average
person might not know that they
have this ability, so I'm just
wondering, is it communicated
that you, this is what a purple
Star school is, if you're
interested, you know, contact
you or whoever.
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for clarifying. Yes, that'll
be part of the process.
Thank you.
Any other questions about Purple
Star Schools?
Representative San. I missed the
presentation, sorry.
Too much tea this morning. Um,
so,
The importance of this is that
every military person can decide
which where they what base they
go to. And, and they expect
support from their schools. So
how many, I missed, so since I
missed it, how many Purple Star
schools do we have right now?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Sanana, so there are districts
around the state that have
implemented their own uh
Alamogordo is a great example
that influenced their own Purple
Star programs. This is the first
rulemaking that has been done on
the Purple Star program at a
statewide level, so there we uh
don't have an exact number in
terms of the statewide program
yet. I'm sorry.
Work clarification coming.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you
turn to your minutes, the
department actually reported
last month that there are 10 to
15 schools that they expect to
apply for this.
And Mr. Chairman, um, are they
primarily um schools by by the
bases or within certain, yeah.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, primarily in areas where we
have bases, but they did
anticipate that across the
entire state, it is the schools
that show the higher proportions
of military students and
military affiliated students, so
they'll be doing active outreach
to them and do you expect that
10 to 15 number, um, but that
they would be able to provide us
the specific list once it's
finalized too.
OK, Mr. Chairman, so you, so,
um, so you will get a list of
where our military goes, because
I know at Monzano, we had
military. I don't know if
they're probably not designated,
but, um, even a few students are
important.
Uh, this is just so important
because, you know, with all the
changes that are being made at
the federal level and so many
programs being taken away and um
our our military are being hurt
and we want to make sure that we
have what they need that every
school, I think almost every
school needs to have this
designation if possible. And,
um, just because, like I said,
people, they can go anywhere in
the United States and um we
don't want to lose our bases
because we don't have the people
who
even go there. And right now in
Roswell, it's our Art and
Clovis, you know, things are
happening that are not good, and
in almordo, so the likelihood
people want to go there or
airmen want to go there. It is,
is getting more difficult. So,
but OK, thank you.
Any other questions about Purple
Star Schools.
Not Tunner?
All righty. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, so the next portion
of this will be
No worries, you're good. Uh,
will be the adopted amendment to
NMAX 6352 implementing the
Indian Education Act. Uh, so
between the proposed rule and
the final adoption that took
effect on June 24th, there was
one slight change. The proposed
rule, uh, had eliminated, had
proposed the elimination of
language about the assistant
secretary consulting with the
Indian Education advisory
Council on both funding
priorities as well as processes
for uh requests for information
and applications. And in the
finalized rule after a period of
public comment and the public
comment hearing that language
has been restored in the rule,
but all other proposed aspects
of it, including the 80/20 split
between 80% of the
allocation-based awards being uh
given uh to all tribes, nations,
and pueblos at a fixed amount,
and 20% being based on student
counts from the 80-day uh
reporting period. All of that
has remained the same. Uh, in
addition to, uh, since last
We've also provided it's behind
not this the next tab of the tab
after that, we provided a
supporting document and memo
from the secretary, which
provides a table that will show
the breakdown of that 80-20
split and the funding that can
be expected to be allocated to
the tribes, nations and pueblos.
So we wanted to make sure you
had a chance to view that. Uh,
this has been adopted, uh, and
there are no major changes
beyond that aspect of it, but
happy to answer any questions
there may be.
Thank you. Any questions?
You know, my only, I, I still
think the 80/20 split.
is inequitable, but that's not
my role with all of this, so not
about the actual rulemaking,
any.
questions of others
Oh,
sorry, Mr. Chair, 11 other thing
I did want to mention is uh
there have been questions the
last hearing about some
specificity around what types of
factors would go into how this
funding is decided, especially
the 20% that is based on student
counts. Uh, and so we did get
more information from PEDs. We
thank the department for that.
Uh, so.
The student count, as you can
see on that table in the in the
memo, uh, in line with the
department's commitment to
increasing funding to support
students special education
students in particular. Students
with IEPs will will generate a
greater per pupil amount than
students without. The base
amount per student is going to
be $108.94 whereas for those
with IEPs, it'll be $217.88. Uh,
so that is the main factor that
exists within.
This new within its new funding
formula.
Thank you
again, any questions?
Thank you, Connor.
Director's report.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members, uh, we have, I think
1 and 15 minutes left, so I
thought I'd just read the
newsletter to you.
Uh
Mr. Chair, we are behind tab 13,
uh, and I'm gonna go through a
couple of different things. Uh,
while I get started on the
newsletter, if I could ask
Wesley and theater come up and
and join me for a second. We'll,
uh, we'll get to them in just,
just a minute.
Um, but very quickly, um, when I
want to run you through our uh
first newsletter of the 2025
interim.
And for those of you, I think
most of you are familiar with
this, all but maybe
Representative Cullen, so I'll
go through it just for you,
Representative
not the newsletter itself, but
the way that this is formatted
because we do this on a pretty
standardized um template every
month. So at the top of your
newsletter, you have what we
call bite size little news bits.
Some of these you may have
already seen more information
about um
In the weekly activity report
that we send out to, to the
committee and to to members and
other folks in the public, and
so we sort of summarize some of
those um highlights from those.
Activity reports here.
On the left hand column is our
monthly letter from the chair
and you'll, you'll see, uh, the
chairman's welcome essentially
to the interim and some of the
work and his hopes for the
upcoming interim.
I should say that while we
obviously we provide this for
you all. It's available online
in our, at our um
Handouts in materials and so
it's, it's both hopefully for
the legislative audience, but
also for anyone else who might
be interested in some of the
work of the committee, and so
you'll see, um, as an example.
An update on the Martinez Syzi
lawsuit that sort of summarizes
some of the things that you all
learned at our last interim
meeting as well as any other
updates that might have come up
between then and now.
The on the backside is a story,
uh, article about health
insurance premiums again
discussing what you heard from
uh Daniel yesterday, so that the
other folks who didn't hear that
or the general public might be
able to learn a little bit about
that. And then the, the staple
of the last uh back page here is
we, we try to put some sort of
graphic element on this
newsletter to help you visualize
some, something that's happening
in education and what you have
for this month is, uh, a chart
that
Demonstrates graduation rates
and uh either an increase or
decrease by each of those
population subgroups, uh, from
last, from school year 20 to
school year 2024.
And so you'll see here that uh
PD released a graduation rates.
We had a rate of 78%, which is a
1.3%, uh, increase from school
year 23, it's the highest
graduation rate for New Mexico,
uh, in more than 10 years. So
small improvement but
improvement nonetheless, and
then you can see, uh, in the
chart itself in the graph
itself, that each of those blue
dots represents an increase for
for particular subgroup and so
you'll see increase
is for all students, but
specifically for Hispanic
students, English learners, uh,
Native American students.
And students with disabilities.
And so again, some small but but
notable progress across um many
of the subgroups, uh, clearly
there's a couple of groups here
specifically African American
students where we saw a
significant decrease in
graduation rates, and I think
it's something that we'll be
looking into as staff as well.
So, Mr. Chair, members that's
your newsletter for the month.
Uh, the next thing on your
agenda that I'm gonna talk about
is our personnel update. And as
I said, uh, on Wednesday and
introducing staff, we have a
couple of new temporary new
members to the team and so
rather than me talk, I'm just
gonna go ahead and let them
introduce themselves, um.
Tell, tell you a little bit
about why they're, why they
decided they wanted to do this
and where they're coming from
and anything else they might
want to share. We'll start with,
uh, Wes.
Good morning, Mister Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Wesley Geyer. I've had
the pleasure of talking to many
of you, and I hope to get to
talk to more of you throughout
the, the time that I'm with LSC.
I'm currently in elementary
special ed teacher in Rio Rancho
and have the pleasure of getting
to spend my summer up in Santa
Fe, uh, working with this group
on all of their research and
learning about all the different
things that that go on in this
group. Um, it's been pretty
eye-opening. There are a lot of
things that I
didn't know existed, so having
the time to, to get to learn all
of it has been really, really
interesting, and I'm taking away
a lot from this.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee. Hi, my name is
Sofia Gonzalez and I have the
honor to be a summer intern with
LESC this summer, um, a little
bit about me. I was born and
raised here in New Mexico, but I
am a student at UC Berkeley
studying biomedical engineering
and minoring in public policy.
Um, I want to use, uh, my
growing knowledge in both fields
to advocate for reformed
healthcare and tech policy in my
local community, um, looking to
the future and I truly believe
that the intersection between
STEM and policy allots for us to
build equity and use budding
technology as an opportunity to
bring up people who are
systematically disadvantaged.
Um, I think it's dangerous to be
passive in a world of growing
technology when we can be using
that to bring other people up
and make sure to just advance
equity as a whole. Um, I really
do feel lucky to have attended
this meeting and to see
firsthand the genuine passion
and heart that goes into our
legislature. I think that I grew
up hearing a lot of poor.
sentiment about New Mexico and
hearing about how um poor and
low ranked it is and I think
that being here and seeing just
how much goes into changing that
sentiment and changing how we
view New Mexico is very, very
powerful to me, um.
I also grew up hearing that the
legislature was seen as like a
scary and separate entity, and I
just want to say that talking
with all of you and seeing just
how passionate you are and how
much you bring to representing
your communities is really
powerful and it's, um, I think
opening a lot of doors for me
and really just changing how
I've seen, um, our legislature.
Um, thank you for everything and
I'm really excited to be a part
of the next meeting too.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. As you
can see, uh, I should have
started off by saying, um, and I
think I mentioned this before,
um,
Our intention in in both of
these programs, both are teacher
on special assignment as well as
uh a more traditional internship
program is to expose New
Mexicans, uh, to the legislative
process so that they can learn
about what happens here as as
both of them have said they've
already learned a lot and I
think sort of a look behind the
curtain that you all are
carrying in passionate people,
but you're also just people and,
and not just, and not scary
legislators, uh, and so I'm, um,
we
hope that through these through
these programs, but you all are,
are also scared. No, you're not
scary.
Um,
through these programs, we grow
and expose more New Mexicans to
this process. We, we, we need a
deeper pool, a deeper bench of
folks who understand New Mexican
communities to do this level of
policy work, bring their
community expertise and assets
to the state level. And so we're
really glad to have Sophia and
Wes and um we're looking forward
to a really positive uh summer
with them.
And they're welcome to stick
around here while I go over the
next thing. No need to get up.
Uh, the last thing, Mr. Chair,
that you'll see in your binders
is a copy of a memo that we sent
to the public education
department and this is in regard
to the Martinez Yazi, the latest
motion in that, in that lawsuit.
And the court's decision that
PED would be responsible for
creating that remedial action
plan in the courts ruling, it
did not, it did not require LESC
to participate, but said that
staff could participate in you.
participate if we wanted and at
the last meeting, we got an
indication from you all that
we're able to use our resources
and capacity to support the
department in both selecting a
consultant to help them
coordinate that planning
process, as well as lend some of
our resources in that process
itself. And so what we wanted to
do for you all as well as for
clarity in terms of our
partnership with the department
is uh say explicitly the kinds
of things that we could do.
As staff to support that process
so that there were no, there's
no muddiness around who's doing
what and who's responsible for
things. This is what we can lend
our support to do. So I'll just
highlight a couple of things.
Obviously the first bullet there
talks about staff attending any
stakeholder engagement meetings,
that's both so that we can learn
about what's happening, ensure
that there's good participation
and then report back to you all,
uh, what's happening in those
stakeholder engagement meetings.
Uh, to identifying some of those
uh areas of inquiry and
questions that we should be
asking stakeholders. I, I, from
a, from a personal perspective
and I think from, from you all,
we want to ensure that um we
have a really passionate group
of what I like to call the usual
suspects in education. These are
folks who are really invested
and we see them at our meetings.
We see them at a lot of other
stakeholder engagement, uh,
opportunities, their voices are
very powerful and important, but
I think it's also important.
that we make sure we're hearing
from community members and a
diverse group of folks that
maybe we don't always hear from
and so we'll, we'll be.
Putting that in that feedback
forward for the department to
consider as they, as the
consultants, um, put those
engagements together.
We'll do what we try to do best,
which is to provide uh relevant
national and international
studies, as well as original
LESC analysis to help with that
process.
Um, we'll try to provide some
statutory review if, if asked,
so what, you know, if, if the
department or in the planning
process we hear feedback about
the need for statutory changes
to particular aspects of how we
handle education in the state.
We'll help the department along
I assume with their policy team,
um,
Figure out where, where in
policy, where in statute does
that need to change, and we'll
do again some of the work that
we do for you all anyway.
Uh, policy research and fiscal
modeling, um, you all know this,
and I think the general public
is is learning a little bit more
about how we put together things
like, uh, staff compensation
estimates and how much a bill
like HB 63 is going to cost. So
in the, in the case that there's
additional funding or changes to
things as part of this process,
we'll provide that level of
analysis and modeling.
And like I said at the
beginning, we are um we did have
a conversation with the
department about some of the
applicants that they had for
their consultants. They had a
pretty broad range, I think, I
think it's fair to say a broad
range of both national and New
Mexico organizations who were
willing to be a part of that,
uh, planning process.
I don't need lights to talk, but
I'll wait for them anyway.
Um,
and from what I understand in,
in talking to the department, we
should be getting an
announcement about their
selections either maybe today or
early next week, so that, uh,
again, there's a pretty tight
timeline that you heard that
you've heard about in that
planning process, and they want
to get moving with that. And so
I believe they're
And they were asked to select
someone by July 1, so we'll hear
that announcement's very uh
announcement very soon.
And again, just wanted to share
with you all so that you have a
clear idea of the work that we
as staff are willing to do to
support the planning process as
well as make sure that you're
all aware of what's happening on
a regular basis with that
process.
And with that, Mister Chair, I
can stand for questions about
any of the things Sophia and
West can also stand for
questions about anything you
want.
We have open for questions of
the director and I have uh
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I get to be
first this time, um, thank you,
and I want to thank both of you
for applying for these roles,
uh, you know, when I saw you
here, I just kind of assumed
what they hired new staff
members because of your
professionalism and the way you
conducted yourself. So thank you
for volunteering and, and just
the ongoing thing, John, of, you
know, all year we get different
people that shadow us, and I
think it's really, really
important that the committees
and the roles get shadowed, uh.
to me now, economists have
become the sexiest members of
state government they're
incredible, Daniel over here.
Um,
no, it's like one of those areas
like I used to think, what the
heck does an economist do? Well,
understanding the fiscal stuff
in education and state
government is an incredible
thing that it's no longer boring
for me, frankly, because I'm
understanding profoundly about
your budget is what you believe,
but anyway, both of you, thank
you so much. It's a pleasure to
have you here.
Oh, how many, uh, one more
question, how many people
applied for the consultant or
how many groups, do you know?
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, I don't know the exact
number offhand. I want to say
about 1410 to 14 or something
like that. It was a, it was a
pretty uh robust um turnout, to
be honest.
Thank you
Other questions.
So, I did have you on the list.
I just didn't look at my list
when I asked that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have
a little different question. So,
um, between Ellis LFC and LESC
so they've lost a lot of
educator, um, representation. So
are you, do you have somebody at
those meetings all the time?
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sainana, uh, as long as we're
not here, uh, yes, we, so
obviously I was there on Tuesday
to present and, and normally,
especially when there are
education topics being
discussed, either I, Jessica, or
one of our staff will be there,
um.
It's really important for us
that even when there isn't
education stuff, Daniel's
closely monitoring what's
happening there, um.
We pay particular attention
obviously to revenue estimates
and those kinds of things that
affect our thinking around
budget proposals, but yes,
generally we're, we're paying
attention.
I, I just, Mr. Chairman, worry
that, um,
Uh
That with every meeting almost
overlapping, it just seems not a
good thing, but um
We have to maintain a presence
there and uh just even one
person in the audience sometimes
will, I think, make a
difference, but Mr. Chair
Representative, absolutely, and,
and I should also add,
obviously, and we've say this
all the time, but we work pretty
closely with their staff, uh,
and particular their education
analysts, both Sonny and Rachel
Ma, so.
The other questions.
If not that looks like we've
come to the end of our, of our
meeting here in Roswell.
Uh, any last comments, anyone?
I, I'd like to thank
Superintendent for the great
hospitality, city of Roswell, a
little swag bags and nice little
cups and things in there and
appreciate that and always
having snacks and coffee and
such for us, a nice facility,
um, I think we had.
Some good presentations, you
know, I loved yesterday always
when we get to see kids when we
hear from superintendents in the
area. It gives us a better feel
for what our roles are within
the state around education. Um,
I think our next meeting is
about a month away in Las Vegas.
Uh, I will not be there the
first day, uh.
Vice chair will be running the
first day. I might get there
late in the afternoon. We'll see
how other things go, uh, but
with that, you know, please mark
your calendars. Uh, there's
various other education things,
uh, if you get to CSG West,
there's lots of education focus
there and CSL in Boston, CSG
West, I think is.
In uh Wyoming up in uh Jackson
Hole area. Those are important
things also that we have good
representation. Mr. Chair, I
just wanted to remind members if
they hadn't already seen it
behind your announcement tab in
your binder, uh, there's
obviously the announcement for
last night's reception, but I
think the next thing that you'll
find is uh hotels for Las Vegas,
you have, if you haven't already
seen it, so there are some
options for you there already.
And I want to thank the staff
for getting that prepared.
And that's all I got.
We are adjourned
