Seeing Cindy, uh, Maya who's
here, um, and the work that they
do to ensure that our finances
are solid and again, no, no
findings, uh, solid, um, audit
for 6 years now. And so that's
something we're really proud of.
In addition to the staff that I
started with 6 years ago, is
still remaining with me, so I'm
grateful for that because they
really are the ones that make
the office work from a budgetary
standpoint, um, knowing the work
that you do of coming in with
the request for a flat budget,
uh, because you as a committee
and as a
have provided me with the
support that I felt that I
needed to best meet the needs of
people across the city of New
Mexico. You provided me with
that assistance to make sure
that constituent services are
met in a timely manner and I'm
happy to report within our, our
areas there of uh nearly 99% um
uh uh rate of closure with
those. So I think that is
something again that is a
testament to my team. Um, so
coming in and mostly in
gratitude and thanking you for
the support that you've given
over the years. The increases
that
been done and recognizing that
trying to be responsibly
physical, physically responsible
that uh there's no need for an
increase but to request a flat
budget at this time.
I thought you're gonna question
new airplane that you're gonna
quest a new airplane or a
helicopter. No.
So finish here real quick and we
are on 360 in the pink sheets.
That's the agency code. Did I
hear him right? No, no increase
that he.
If we had a doctor look at him
recently.
Oh, he's healthy. I
If you wanna have a one on one
basketball game, I will, I'll,
I'll take Howie on that one.
I just, I'm just worried about
his mental capacity there was no
increase, but, but thank you.
Not a doubt in my mind.
Any questions from committee
members? No.
Governor
skated the LFC. Oh wow.
Thank you again. I appreciate
the uh the secretary for
allowing me to come in and to be
able to jump the line if, if,
if, so to speak, but more so for
the committee and the work that
you guys do. So thank you very
much. Waitresentative Garcia
does have a question for
lieutenant Governor.
I think it's gonna be, are you
hiring thank you Mr. Chairman.
Lieutenant government, I don't
have a question. I do want to
thank you for all you do for our
veterans. Really appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the work you do. See
you, thanks.
Need to motion. No, we don't
need to do anything, all right.
Thank you.
Thanks.
There's ice cream in your office
available for every legislator
on the LLC correct, Lieutenant
Governor?
And there's there's
refreshments.
Sorry, we're running behind
today, but
Quickly as we can get through
these.
Great.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
and uh our LSC committee, um,
Jason, the cabinet secretary for
Veteran Services. Thank you so
much for the opportunity to, to
brief you and uh I'll take
whatever the lieutenant governor
had, uh, with a slight increase
of $2.4 million. I'll stand up
for questions. We're done. Have
a nice day
is you could just get to your,
to your main topics and your
main points, I think.
And
And the funding request, cause
we're just
running behind for those LLC
members that
I haven't been here for a long
time, usually, usually here
after 5 anyway.
I, I understand and I'll I'll,
I'll do my best to, to
facilitate. But, but I, if I
could take the liberty of just
pointing to a couple of, of the
increases, so you'll understand
why I'm asking, and it'll help
preclude some of the questions
at the end. If we go to page 6.
Uh, our field service operations
on, on our, on our brief.
Um, I wanted to, um, identify
very quickly.
You can see all those green
arrows that are, are, are
pointing upward, the percentage
of increase that our, our
services have been hit within
the, within the state of New
Mexico. The office visits the uh
in-person opportunities and the
total interactions with our, our
veterans has been extremely
Uh, important for us and have
have identified that.
On our state benefits. The next
slide on, on
On page 7, the tax exemptions um
have gone up considerably due to
our outreach and the, and the
education that we've been
providing to our, to our, our
veterans and we've held several
uh tax events out with the
county assessors working in
partnership.
And I, I wanna put stomp that
one because with the two
amendments that are pending um
on our general ballot now in
that are available now, that is
gonna increase and we anticipate
our disability claims to
skyrocket from
The
original tax exemptions which
are now 4000, which could go to
10,000. Those will be easy
adjustments working with tax and
Rev and uh our county assessors.
Those people who are veterans
who are also disabled and have
probably a 20% or more
disability.
We'll probably be filing because
it'll be more beneficial to the
veteran, and that's going to
increase our workload for the
validation and verification once
we work with tax and rev and the
assessors as we set the rules.
To move forward for
implementation should that pass
the general election and uh I
just wanted to make sure we
point that out to our projected
increase may go higher than
that.
Or, or transportation program,
we expanded from 250,000 last
year we did 300 and
We served 356 veterans this past
year with uh door to door
services, which meant to 669
round trips in our
transportation. That's been, I
know, an issue and everybody's
um
Legislative area and many
concerns from our veterans. We
continue to build off of that
program. We've been able to add
4 new contractors statewide and
with the help that we got from
you last year in the legislative
session expanding to serve the
other uh 18 counties that were
not served by the HRTG program
has been, uh,
Successful in, in providing
services for those outlying
areas.
And to the meat and potatoes
that you asked for, uh, on page
14 is our budget request.
Um, we are asking for an
increase in the general fund of
$2.249 million.
To accomplish the objectives
that have been set forth by to
us by the legislative session
and the requirements that our,
our veterans have laid out for
us.
That is an additional 3
full-time employees.
To, to, uh, accomplish the two
VSOs and one social worker to
work with the uh suicide
Prevention Act that was also
instated last year and have that
full-time capacity and oversight
of that program as a full-time
employee.
Um, I think that's gonna be very
important as we continue to, to
see the uh behavioral health
professionals not available in
our rural areas and providing
some other uh
Opportunities for oversight in
the prevention pieces, so we're
not having to rely on behavioral
health professionals so much for
our veterans in the outlying
areas. Those would be uh
veterans talking to veterans and
other type of uh
Um
Working groups that veterans
themselves would lead up and,
and be have provided oversight
by us.
Um, on our contractual piece,
we're asking for 200,000 for the
suicide prevention uh act to be
funded in the general in the, in
the general fund. Right now
we're, we're operating off a
special this year of 200,000,
100,000 was put in in FY 24 for
the act, but that um is is not
gonna be sufficient for us to
continue to, to meet the
requirements set forth by the
legislature last year. We're
asking for 200,000 in there and
the additional $25,000 in our um
Homelessness initiatives, which
was, went down from 150 in FY 23
to 125 this year. We're asking
to be pushed back up to the 150
for next year.
Um, I think those are both very
important programs as we
continue to grow there.
And the, the additional pieces
in the 400 category is a
$620,000 to accomplish the
improvement in our office spaces
and moving to office spaces from
current office spaces that are
either too small or not
conducive to veterans' access
any longer based on some
modifications and the location
of the offices.
And um
So we're, we're just uh trying
to push that piece.
To ensure that our veterans have
complete access.
Our capital funding requests, we
have 2 priorities.
We talked to you last year about
the veteransource Center of
which you um very generously
gave us the $1.2 million last
year, and we are currently
working with UNM, the Bureau of
Business and Economic Research
for the feasibility study and uh
pending uh our A&E with GSD to
initiate that study to start
the, to understand what that's
gonna lean forward to in the
future and that's a $15 million
asset based on current
construction costs.
And our key initiatives for the
capital funding request for our
maintenance and upkeep of our
cemeteries and our facilities
was impacted this year due to uh
some
Work construction that was done
previous in uh on all of our
cemeteries, GSD is now um
Entertaining legal action
against the former contractors
and um
We have used the funds that were
given to us for this FY and
diverted them for the mitigation
efforts immediately to ensure
that it doesn't get worse and it
doesn't impact any services for
our veterans in, in the Gallup
and Angel Fire Cemeteries, the,
you can see some of the photos.
The photos there with the some
of the contract, the concrete,
we have settling in and around
the columbarium areas.
As well as a lot of the uh
irrigation work that was done
was not done to standard, so GSD
is actually um going after these
contractors, but that's gonna be
a long term process to make the
state of New Mexico whole. And
if we waited for, for that to
come through to fix these
things, we would be in much
worse shape. So we've verted our
funds this year to work with GSD
to do the mitigation starting
this FY.
No
In summary, I'm asking for the
uh $2.249 million dollar
increase on our general fund
budget to ensure that we
continue to move forward with
the programs that we have in
place and to continue building
on the ones that uh were
mandated in the last couple of
years. I, I think we've done a
very good job of our outreach
and uh the the last thing I will
say is that we've been in front
of this committee or
Myself only the last year, but
much of what was put in front of
me last year to fix has been
accomplished. We've worked very
closely with Spo, uh, to ensure
that, that we upgraded our VSO
positions. So we realigned.
Our VSOs and our cemetery, uh,
uh, specialist positions, as
well as we reclassified the
VSOs, they have their own
classification now, and they're
in a space where they're equal
or better than our federal
counterparts. So we have stopped
the flow of outbound employees
with the opportunities that
we've provided with the
realignment and the
reclassification of those
employees.
And um we currently have 5
positions that were granted us
last year, uh, they've been
cleared by Spo and they're all
actively being recruited right
now.
For the VSO.
Uh, the two mobile VSOs.
And our, our, our appeal
specialist.
And our uh training and quality
analysis person so we can make
sure that we're tracking closely
what the trends are.
So, with those 5 positions being
filled here in the next 30 days,
that will really uh start moving
the ball to get that done. And
the last update I have for you
is the um mobile unit which was
600,000 was funded that is under
construction. We've had several
meetings with the contractor,
and we are anticipating delivery
mid-April for that mobile unit
to be on site in New Mexico and
starting to serve our veterans,
uh, stand for questions.
Thank you. Uh, I'd be remiss if
I didn't go to a representative
Garcia first.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thanks for the presentation,
secretary. Uh.
What is your vacancy rate right
now?
Our vacancy rate right now is
about 13%. Um, we've had several
retirements this past year.
We've had 6 retirements. We've
had, um,
I'll give you a quick run up.
I've had 35 transfers, 3 to
federal agencies, 2 to other
state agencies for promotions
and there were a couple of
departures due to a lack of
accountability on the employee's
part.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chairman. Uh,
it shows on this uh briefing
that we have that you're at 20%.
You have 77% uh funded and 13%
unfunded vacancies. Is that
correct?
Say again on your, on on this
briefing that we have here.
It shows that you're 7% funded
vacancies.
And 13% unfunded vacancies.
I'm, I'm not sure what what
briefing you're, you're you're
referring to.
With the total number of
vacancies we have right now is
is 13. Excuse me.
We'll have our agency codes in
Kelly.
With this budgets are done
budget uh quid facts, it states
right here, personnel funded
vacancies at 7% unfunded visas
you 13%.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Committee, Kelly Clint
Legislative Finance Committee.
So, uh, Representative Garcia is
looking at the PS calc in your
packet, which is page 7 in your
packet.
I'm looking at page 5.
She wants you to look at page 7.
She wants you to look at.
So the quick fact sheet is a
combination of reports,
including the PSA, but the PS
calc is the originating document
for those.
Uh, vacancy calculations. This
is a form that every you see,
every agency gets in your
packet. It's a snapshot, um,
informational pool that we pull
people's operating budgets, um,
and their personnel filled and
we do an estimate for you that
shows you how many of their
positions are funded, how many
of their positions are funded
unfunded and vacant or funded
and vacant, and it shows you if
you look in your columns, so all
of your row or columns.
through IR FTE calculations on
funded and unfunded, and your
columns J through R are that in
financial means. So for example,
when this was run for veterans
services, 7% of their total FTE
you'll see on E.
Are funded and vacant FTE. Now
if you go down, what does that
mean in dollars? So you'll see
on N, it says estimated funded
vacancies in dollars. So those 7
FTEs according to this snapshot
calculation is about 465,000 in
funded but vacant personnel
dollars now.
What I will say is, again, this
is snapshot and so as they hire
people, this number changes. We
do update this form once we go
into the legislative session, so
we have updated calculations for
you all, but it's just a
guiding, a guider so that you
all know what's going on in
personal spending.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, next question that
I have is, uh,
How are you on your audits?
Mm
Well, right now in our audience,
we are, we've, we are winning on
our outbre, actually, that'll be
happening at the end of the
week. Um, we have, uh, the
finding that we've had for the
last 3 years, which, and thank
you for asking that and I
overlooked it was the $881,000
that has been on our audit for
the last 4 years, um, that we've
asked for.
Um, assistance with
To, to ensure that that comes
off our books. That was done
with the reversion of the
Veteran's home back to the
Department of Health in 2019,
and that was, those were payroll
records that were reflected upon
DBS when all the paper was
passed, those bills still hit
the accounts under DBS and
that's, we have a, a deficit
there of $881,000. It's never
been remedied and, and we've
tried every uh possibility to
remedy that situation with DFA
and um they won't
allow us to pay down that debt
utilizing any of your funds or
any other type of fund. So we
are, we are asking for uh for
that to be uh
Uh, a deficiency request for the
full 881,000.
And Mr. Chairman, secretary, the
reason I asked that because I
know about that 881,000, yeah,
because every time you ask for
money, it comes back out and it
slaps you in the face all the
time, you know, and uh I don't
know how this committee can help
these people.
He that audit. It's not there,
it just happened to be there and
it's still there, and we need to
address that issue, um.
And the, this uh, this is not a
question for anybody. It's a
concern of mine, you know, on
the hearing uh issues uh LS you
recommended includes a general
fund increase of 2.7%, and I'm
gonna go through all that, but
it's states right here.
Including 110,000 for VSOs and
you need 3 of them if they give
you that little of money, you're
gonna wind up paying these
people $36,000 a year, and you
cannot hire a vehicle for that
kind of money. These are issues
that we need to address through
the
Mary, because the LFC is
recommending that, not the, not
the committee, I usually
recommended and uh we need to
address that. And another issue
that I have a problem with this
is a slap in the face is
$130,000 for suicide and
homeless prevention.
You know, with the 2nd highest
in the nation and highest on, on
suicide, uh, in the, in the
country, and what are we going
to do $130,000. Can you explain
that? You know, I know you can't
explain it, but Mr. Chairman, we
need to address those issues.
This is a real slap in the face
with a Cit, not the committee,
the staff to recommend this to
this kind of money for this,
these problems we're having for
veterans.
You know, and, you know, I'm not
gonna be here next year, but we
cannot stand.
this to be happening to our
veterans, you know, this is a
real slap in the face to me.
So I don't know who can answer
that chairman.
How, how do we address this
issue? That's the question.
We'll, we'll address it and, and
this is an LFC budget wreck.
It's not like, uh, what's gonna
happen during the session, but
this is the starting point for
the LFC.
The budget hearing, so, as
members look at those, those,
those pink sheets on the front
page is the LOC rec.
And that's for our discussion
and to look through and then we,
we get a basis and we start from
there.
Um, so we have to look at the
unfunded vacancies to see what's
happening, and then backfill all
that, so we'll get there. One
thing I am gonna tell Charles
and Kelly I don't know where
Kelly went. Clear the 881 up,
put that in the line item so we
can get that.
Make that ancient history and
don't have to hear about it
again. So make sure that in the
budget wreck right now, so we
could.
Clear that.
Uh, but, the reason I brought it
up because I'm not gonna be here
for, for all the hearings, but I
want to make the committee aware
and, and the people on Zoom and
the people in this in this
building to be aware of what's
happening with our veterans.
Thank you. Thank you.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh
My question is about the uh
behavioral health.
And uh I just see droves of
people out here on the street
homeless.
And on, on each and every
corner.
And Albuquerque, I think I heard
a number of 2500.
Uh, I don't know if that's
correct or not, in Albuquerque.
Santa Fe.
Running a pretty solid race.
Do we know what percentage of
these people are veterans. We're
working with our, our local
partners to identify the the the
veteran population amongst
those, those individuals. Some
people choose not to identify
that they're veterans, um, when,
when they're homeless. So we are
trying to find those, those data
points and find out.
How we can get them into the
system that veterans for the
services that that we provide
for them and not get caught up
with, with the rest of the
homeless population, um, when
they're being processed or
provided services.
We coordinate closely with every
uh local community as well as
the nonprofits and our veteran
service organization partners
for the stand downs throughout
the state to help identify those
populations and give them the
tools they need and find out
what resources they're willing
to accept.
Thank you for that. I, it's a,
it's a serious thing.
And uh we need to deal with
everyone out there.
And uh especially those that
serve the country and uh I, I
appreciate the fact that you are
doing something.
The second part of that question
is about suicide prevention.
And um just curious what types
of services you have to help
prevent suicide. So, uh, Mr.
Chair and uh Representative
Chatfield, we are not a service
provider, so we coordinate with
uh Goodwill, we and other
service providers throughout the
state that provides the suicide
prevention activities and make
sure that they are available
for, for the state. We also
co-chair the Governor's suicide
prevention, um, and this is not
just New Mexico's governors,
it's
The nationwide program that we
collaborate with statewide for
all of our partners to ensure
that there's resources in place
to identify those veterans. I'm
sure some of you saw the 988 um
advertisements on TV, uh, in the
last year, we, we were the uh
point people for that and we
ensured that that was done in,
in 3 languages in Navajo,
Spanish and English throughout
the state of New Mexico to
ensure that people understand
that there's a lifeline as well
as our veterans.
Specifically impress one to get
there to speak to a veteran
versus having to talk with,
with, um, just somebody who may
not know uh the the veteran uh
requirements, and that has made
it a little more open in
communication and transparent of
what services are available. And
then they will receive services
local to them, as well as uh any
referrals that are necessary and
then again, making sure that
they're signed up for the
benefits for long-term care
because
Many times the 988 is a crisis
line and we're responding to an
emergency, we want to continue
that long-term care and get them
to the proper services as we can
through those, those uh those
channels through higher our, our
local partners are veteran
service operations as well as we
work closely with the VA to
ensure that they're signed up
for whatever uh VA.
Oh.
Benefits that they have either
through the main hospitals or
their community uh based
outreach clinics.
So
Yeah, I think that's a good
idea. I mean, you can't somebody
calls up and
They're having a crisis, you
can't really say, are you a
veteran, you know, but uh.
They just push one, is that what
I understood? If they, if they
are and that that's correct when
they call that that crisis line,
they're able to, to press to
identify as a veteran and, and,
and speak to a veteran. And I
know I see some of these suicide
hotline advertisements on TV.
I suspect not too many of those
people that are living on the
street have a television.
Uh, do you, is there some other
type of outreach or maybe cards
or something that you
Pass out at at some of the soup
kitchens or some place that deal
with these folks as are posters,
how do you reach there are um
again our, our, our community
partners like the Veteran's
Integration Center, any people
doing these outreaches that have
access to this population do
have this information as well as
well as handouts that are done
to the governor's suicide
prevention um activities
through, through us as well as
through the VA. So it's a
concerted effort wherever we are
at, we're communicating those.
things and doing the outreach
tables because we will still
engage with uh homeless
personnel and some of our
outreaches, and they're provided
that information to share, and
there are apps that they can
actually download. You'd be
surprised how many homeless
people actually still have cell
phones, um, and that's their way
of, of reaching some of the
outside resources and in there
we've also advertise on
Instagram, um, on, on X, as well
as on Facebook to ensure that
these resources are out there
and it links to other
local resources for people to
tap into.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for the time.
Thank you. We're gonna have to
be real quick in questions and
responses, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
I don't have a question. I just
um want to thank you and uh
thank uh the governor's office,
uh, it's been quite a few years,
but um we're having a ribbon
cutting ceremony for the Taos
County Veterans Cemetery. This
Veterans Day.
And it's through all the
efforts, you know, that everyone
has put into it, but on another
note, it's such a beautiful
setting. It's uh with the
mountains in the background and
what a beautiful setting to uh
honor and to have our veterans
in this place, so thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Gonzalez,
I mean, Senator Rodriguez. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, uh, Brigadier General
and uh your staff, everyone who
helps so much. I appreciate you
very much. I just have a quick
question and I, I have to echo
the sentiments that are
representative Garcia mentioned,
um, I've been here a long time
and I have not seen the Veterans
department be augmented in their
budget as they should be, and I
know the needs are great and we
have to balance things out, but
there are some priorities we
need to consider.
and consider very seriously.
Just a quick question here, uh,
Brigadier General. I noticed
that you mentioned you only
asked for $25,000 to add uh to
the 1 125 that you have for
homelessness, and I guess that
would make it 150,000. I, I
can't fathom in my mind at all
what you can do for 150, I guess
what I'm saying is that it's so
little considering the
homelessness problem that we
have, and especially with
veterans, so, um,
Tell me a little bit briefly
cause I know we're short of
time.
Well, I'll, I'll, um, Mr. Chair
and the Senator Rodriguez, I'll,
I'll give you the
Right,
I'm asking for what I think is,
is feasible for the, the
atmosphere upon which I'm
asking. Um, I would, I asked for
twice last year and I got
A 3rd. So I'm asking for a
moderate increase so we can
continue to provide the services
to ensure that we, that we
continue that program and
continue to build the importance
there while using some of the
other resources I have within
the general fund to augment that
if necessary to essentially have
a proof of principle to show the
success and where we need to go.
Um, because I, I'd be asking for
a million dollars if, if we for
that program alone if, if we
could actually solve
the problem.
Yeah
OK, thank you very much. I know
you're always very reasonable
and resourceful, and we
appreciate that. I noticed you
asked for 200,000 for suicide
prevention also is what I saw,
and I know you have to contract
out and so on, as you said,
you're not a provider of those
services, but you can contract
out, you know best where to go.
We shouldn't dictate to you
where you should be going to to
contract, but um, anyway, just
wanted to bring that up, we'll
look at it very seriously here.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Mr. Secretary. um, first, uh,
the last year I think we were
around uh 17% increase uh for FY
25 over FY 24, correct?
Uh yes. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and uh it seems like in
most cases, what, where did most
of those resources go to? Was
that mostly on the VSO side. I
know that's been a very high
priority. We owe a great debt of
gratitude to Garcia for his
service and also for his
incredible advocacy, um, yeah,
helping us understand how you
programmed that, that increase
is helpful. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Small, all of
those were VS
positions. I was, I was only, I
asked for 17, I got 5 and um
those are all being placed in
the VSO positions so we can
continue to uh move the services
and henceforth the reason for
the ask of additional two VSOs
and a social worker to for the
homelessness, suicide
prevention, and continued
outreach for our veterans. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. And that um one also
very much uh appreciate the um
The sort of setting the pay
bands in appropriate ways and,
and you have VSOs who are on the
ground working who received the
training with constituents that
I represent. I've known that in
the past, it's been a big
challenge. Somebody was hired,
but they hadn't gone through the
training, therefore, they're
sort of what they could, the
services they could provide were
much more limited. Um, so that's
great. Uh, Mr. Chair, the, um,
As it relates to the social
worker, so that, that's, that
helps me understand the 130,000
is mainly around that social
worker position. Is that
correct?
That's, that's about the, the,
the going rate for, for one
employee and then the pay rate
for the VSOs on their upgrade,
it's right about 100, 105 per
person, so that's why we're
asking for, I believe, is
289,000 is the estimate I put on
the, on the budget ask for those
3 employees to be encompassed.
Got it. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, that also helps me
understand that the, the money
for the social worker, we're
not, they would frankly be maybe
not, it would sort of be.
fixing things to say, ask
veteran services to all of a
sudden become a housing agency,
right? And to go build a ton of
homes or to maybe even
administer all the vouchers or
to build a ton of apartments.
You're in a unique and really
essential position to reach
veterans all across the state.
In the social worker position
will support that so that then
you interface with the other
housing resources that are
available. Am I understanding
that correctly, Mr. Chair
Representative Small, that's
exactly right. through our
intake with our VSOs, there are
many other problems that
veterans will bring forth that
they're, that they're dealing
with and our VSOs are working on
their claims. We can do that
warm handoff within our own
agency to a social worker and
they'll reach out to the
community partners to ensure
that they get whatever financial
housing, um,
Education, we try to manage
everything there, manage where
it's at and do a warm head up to
the serving agency, so those
veterans can have a long-term
solution for the, for the issues
that they're facing. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. That, that sounds
very well thought out, and it
seems like something where the
investment really makes a lot of
sense and that if, you know, as
we think about in the future, if
this works and there's still
unserved need then finding more.
more of those and filling more
of those um uh social worker
positions, which is a huge
priority for the state. That's a
route that's sort of an
efficient use of funds for you
all. So that's great and
something that we can monitor.
um, Mr. Chair, so that's, I
think we've and want to note and
I wanna celebrate. I think this
is very reflective of Sam Garcia
and others. I know
Representative Sareana who's not
here, um, there's been almost a
61%
increase in our veterans
services department budget since
FY 21. Is that accurate
from the general fund. OK, and
this year, um, which we need to
continue to build on, I think,
but it just sort of noting for
all of us some of the progress
this year when I look at the,
the sheet here, uh, all sources,
it's a 6.5% increase. That
includes additional federal
revenues and additional other
revenues.
Um, and I think as a committee,
it's good for us to know and to
thank our analysts and to thank
the director 6.5% is right and
exactly in that sort of
At or even potentially a little
bit above the recurring increase
that we've said in our budget
guidelines.
And so this is sort of a, you
know, it's, it's the guidelines
that we've set as a committee
does not mean that we can't
adjust and increase from these
guidelines, but it's what we all
as a committee have
At the end of the day, asked our
analysts to give us, and that's
what they're giving us. And this
is sort of our dynamic process
to be able to um flag
appropriate concerns but in no
way, if anything, this work
reflects excellent analyst work.
Following what the committee has
asked for and now the committee
we're getting to here again in
the areas where we need
additional investment, which uh
Representative Garcia has guided
for us for a very long time in
which we'll continually have to,
to remember.
So does that, does that sound
fair to you, Mr. Secretary?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Small, um, yes, I, to be in, in
line with, with, with the
direction you're going. But I
wanna, I wanna be clear, I mean,
the, I know that the 25%
increase looks like a lot, but
it's all relative to the size of
our agency as well. We were
asking, I mean, if we had an
agency of 10 people asking for 2
more people is a 20% increase,
it's a very small increase to
accomplish the objectives that
we've been asked to do. So I
understand the longevity of the
60% increase over time, asking
for a 25% increase from last
year to this year, but it is
minuscule to the mission that we
are being asked to accomplish.
If we had 500 employees asking
for $2 million is budget dust
and we'd be looked at like
that's all you're asking for. So
And I, I want to keep that in
perspective as we continue to
move forward. So a 6% increase
from last year to this year will
not get us where we need to be
and to continue the services
that we provide to your
constituents. So, um, I really
don't believe that the 6% is
gonna be adequate.
To mention that the
reclassification and the
realignments that are necessary
to maintain the employees and
the specialty skill sets we
have.
Will not continue if we keep
getting underfunded. And we've
got to get to a point where I,
I'm in an ideal world, I would
have asked you for, uh, you
know, $5 million and make it
right and then we wouldn't ask
for anything else and we'd
continue to operate, but I know
that's unrealistic, and that's
why I'm taking these small bites
to eat the elephant, one bite at
a time here and uh I don't want
a nickel and dime the committee
or the state of New Mexico, but
the growth is necessary for the
number of veterans that we're
bringing in.
and the amount of veterans that
are now coming forth because
they now understand what we
provide to them. So I, I think
we've done an excellent job over
the last year in the outreach
and, and increasing all of our
numbers and getting veterans to
come to the table to get what
they rightfully deserve. And uh
there's still much work to do.
Mr. Chairman Secretary, that's
very well said and thank you and
thank you for the clear, strong
advocacy and that's what we're
lying, we rely upon you all as
the agency and the experts to do
and
I was just, just mainly really
reflecting that our analysts
brought back what we ultimately
as a committee asked them for as
a starting product and now we're
in this much more dynamic
process and welcoming very much
that strong sense from you all
about what you all are, are
bringing to the table.
Um, Mr. Cherry representative,
by no means, uh, Kelly's been an
enormous asset to us as well in
working through this process to
get the product in that that is
in front of you. So I, I, I
truly, you know, don't, I don't
want that to be taken that
somebody's doing something
wrong, but I just think that uh
added emphasis and I'm not sure
that we need to be treated
exactly like everybody else with
the small percentages that are
set based on the small.
size of our agency.
Totally fair. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Just to kind of wrap
this up on page 14. Help me
understand the 200 level, 1.3
million for
Uh, 3 FTE expansions.
But then you have, and I'm
looking at your PS calcs 77
vacancies for a total of
400,000.
Were you getting the, the 3
positions expansions for 1.3
million.
Or does that include taking some
of these other vacancies and.
Expanding
The unfunded vacancies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so 1.3 is not
equivalent to the 3 FTE. You
have about 300,000 of that is
for the 3 FTE on on the ask, but
because of the realignments and
the reclassifications that were
there and the unfunded FTEs that
we currently have are accepted
positions. You have the ASD
director and our general
counsel, and that equates to
$323,000 of, of, of our
reversion this past year. So the
$1.3 million is to
Do the
Proper realignments, pay for the
ones that we were asked to do
last year to get the BSOs on,
on, on the right path and to
continue that. I've absorbed
those this year with this budget
to ensure that that um that
increase there will allow us to
continue to grow. So the 3 added
uh
positions as well as under the
200, um, I, I fully believe that
that is a fair value to, to
apply there for the increased
benefits as well that, as we
continue each year, those
benefits are going up. So we
might be a little high on, on
the estimate, but I'm not sure
that we're that far off.
You might be a little bit high,
he's right.
Uh, so we'll have to dwell into
that. Let me ask you something
on the contractual services.
So I know I put grow money for
suicide prevention for veterans.
Is this 200,000 that you're
talking about is that the grow
money that I placed in the
budget that you're for 2 years
that you're now wanting to make
reoccurring.
Where's the 200,000? That that
is correct. The, the special
that was put in last year, I
want to make sure that that is
for longevity, and we're able to
maintain that program.
You still have one more year of
200,000.
Including the girl?
Or, or is this a special
appropriation on top of the girl
cuz.
I, I know I put my gro 200,000
for mental health services. And
is there another special
supplemental that has another
200,000 on top of that. And I'm
getting, you know, I'm getting
on my short 200, is that why
you're asking for 200?
It costs 400,000. The answer is
yes, Mr. Chair. Um, it's
providing for growth and the
additional funds to be put in a
recurring status instead of
having it as a special.
And and so how many people in
the behavioral health system.
Correct me if I'm wrong, cause I
think, I think I got it right
now. It takes 400,000 a year to
operate the the behavioral
health.
portion.
And you're asking for an
additional 200,000 for the
This next year, but you're
asking that it be placed and
reoccurring. So how many people
do we provide services for
suicide prevention for 400,000.
I think you mentioned that's all
contractual through goodwill
and.
And others. And so how many, how
many are we servicing? What is
the total cost? Is it really
$400,000 a year?
What's the total cost?
So, uh, Mr. Chair, I owe you
some metrics on that because
being that the act was enacted
last year, we've been using
internal funds to assist with
the governor's uh suicide
prevention Act that was in place
there, and that's in
coordination with the Department
of Health and all the other
service partners. So some of
those metrics that we've uh been
participating with haven't been
directly attributed to DVS. So
last year with the act being
enacted in the 200, we had
100,000 in the act last year and
200,000 from you in in
in the special, we're trying to
make that 300,000 recurring
every year to ensure that that
that is in place and it's not
per uh pertaining to a special
any longer.
And so I think my legislative
intent was pretty clear on
behavioral health and suicide.
It wasn't to do the governor's
advisory council funding. It was
for behavioral health issues and
I hope that money wasn't spent
for the governor's council.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I can tell you
that that is not being spent
towards the governor's of
Veterans Advisory Council.
I, I take that out of my budget
directly, um, but it
Again, if I'm spending money,
For suicide prevention, I
understood your intent and the
legislative language is very
clear and that is what we will
be spent on. You have my word.
And and then so you mentioned it
costs 300,000 annually, so you
would just need 100,000
additional for the next 2 years
in order to
To maintain that suicide
prevention because Gro is
designed to, is it working? Is
it happening in what are the
numbers and then we're gonna
roll it into your budget. So I
mean, maybe a little bit early
to
See if you're short of funding,
then we can, we can add some
extra money but maybe through
grow, um, to make sure that that
program is working the way it's
supposed to be.
Mr. Chair, I, I, I concur.
I just, I just didn't want to be
late to the game and need
resources and not have them
available. OK?
It,
you may want to remind me when
Gro comes again, he said he also
needs some more here to grow
money. So, so we're gonna assist
you with that. So then, so then
we can place it in the budget
and move it into your budget,
but we want to see. Thank you
for your time. What, you said
you reverted 323 this year.
Correct? 24. No, it was a a
reversion of 529,000.
Um, 323 of that was for the,
the, the except the accepted
positions, exempt positions, um,
which is our general counsel and
our ASD director.
Which are appointed positions
and the other 206,000 were some
uh contracts that were not able
to be filled by by vendors, some
of which were impacted by uh
the, the Rio so um disaster and
some other uh outlying areas.
But Riaosa would have happened
in May.
And you would have had your
Budget's pretty well set, so
that must have come on pretty
quickly. It, it, it did
actually, because we, by the
time it was identified that the,
the services could not be
rendered. It was too late to
execute by June 30th.
OK.
In the year before you, you
reverted 300 which was largely
our, our accepted positions and
uh the, the other piece of that
is that we've have hired our
deputy secretary as well and
filled one of the three
positions that had been
outlined.
OK, I think that's, we, we just
got to get an understanding
what's happening. And you're
correct, the percentage of
increases relate to the, your
annual budget, right? And you're
$2 million agency.
Right? 2.2 million in your base
10% is only $200 million dollar
agency, so.
And we need to watch it, but my
caution to you and
To everybody else.
That's gonna start presenting
their budgets in the next couple
of hours and days is.
This is not a scenario where
you're saying I, I need, I want,
I want, I want.
And then you don't succeed.
Uh, and you want to ask for more
FTEs, but we can't get them
filled.
Um, it, it's, it's not a
situation that we're gonna,
we're gonna be very tough on
FTEs and question very hard in
those expansion. It's not saying
that there's not a need in the
veterans department and that we
won't fulfill it, but
We need to make sure we're right
size as we move forward and we
see reoccurring flatten.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time. I
apologize for running late, but
Indian affairs.
So, you're gonna have to help us
catch up on time.
So hit your highlights and
They actually made under 10
pages, you're doing good.
We listened last year.
You're gonna have to speak
closer to the mic or green
lights got to be on and you got
to pull it closer advice.
OK.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. Thank
you for having us. We will try
to get through this pretty
quickly. Um, so, uh, we're
asking for our overall total
that we're asking for.
is 538,000.8. Um, that includes
5 FTEs.
And then $100,000 in the 400
category. Uh, so if you, I can
kind of go through the FTEs if
you'd like, moving on to page 3,
we're looking at um one of the
FTEs that we're asking for is
for an attorney who can focus on
contracts with IED. I'm sure as
many of you know, we have
hundreds of contracts that go
through IAD. We've only got one
general counsel, that is our
only attorney in Indian Affairs
department, and so
When I was sitting as general
counsel, I realized that it
would be really helpful to have
another attorney who could focus
on, um, or I'm sorry, on
contract review so that the
general counsel could focus on
other things as well to help the
agency. Uh, so that's one
request the other request is for
a chief procurement officer, we
currently do not have a CPO, uh,
we did have a CFO slash CPO and
she is no longer with the agency
we currently have a mobile CFO.
Um, and we just had a couple of
our staff members take the CPO
training, uh, but we don't have
a CPO on staff right now, so we
are working to get a mobile CPO
as well, uh, so.
Thank you.
Um, so, so we would also, uh, so
we are asking for a CPO to
ensure that we are following the
procurement code as much as
possible, of course, and doing
what we need to do. Uh, the
other two positions are program
coordinators, um, or, you know,
some, some type of position
related to that might help IED
have a liaison for education as
well as water. So, uh, I'm sure,
again, as many of you know, um,
I think, here we are, um, as
many of you know that IUD
Indian affairs touches
everything in New Mexico. So
there's a possibility at any
given point that Indian affairs
can be pulled into any number of
different areas, substantive
areas, and what is important to
me in these next couple of years
is to ensure that we have the
personnel and the expertise to
be able to actually provide some
good assistance in working with
our other sister agencies to
make sure that we are able to,
uh, effectively communicate and
serve as a liaison and serve New
Mexicans appropriately. So one
of them is an education policy
analyst who would work with um
serving as a liaison between
Indian Affairs departments and
the education departments of the
state, so HEDEC CD and PED so
that we can stay up to date on
what's going on in the
educational world that IAD and
also ensure that our voices are
heard there as well, uh, and
then the other one is a water
analyst in IAD we currently have
an environmental just
This specialist, uh, which I had
to learn was a little bit
different than just working on
environment, but was more
focused on environmental justice
and so he is on a number of
boards, but as many of you know,
there are lots of water issues
related to tribal interests in
New Mexico and so we want to
make sure that we're ensuring
that the tribal voice is heard
in those water conversations and
I'll say that we're able again
to have a liaison to serve in
those committees and um having
that access.
And then the last one is having
an office clerk. Uh, we did do
some moving around and our, our
orchard is the last page of this
presentation for you all, uh,
but one of the things is we did
get an executive admin.
Who helps me and my, my
deputies, but we don't have an
office admin who really helps
the rest of the, the agency and
so she helps as much as she can
with the rest of the agency, but
it'd be nice to just have
somebody who can really be there
to answer all those calls from
the front end and constituent
calls so that the um executive
admin is able to really assist
myself and the deputies. Uh, so
those are, those are our
position requests, um, and just
hopefully, I'm, I'm thinking I
might get some questions.
vacancies, so just to answer
some of those really upfront and
quickly. We are looking at the
parts we are doing a quick uh
reviews to make sure that the
positions that we currently
have, that's one of my goals,
ensuring that the positions that
IED does currently have, our
positions that are absolute and
necessary for the agency, and if
they're not, then we need to
determine what we need to do
next with them. But as of right
now, uh, we got several new
positions, so couple of years
ago that um
The tribal environmental justice
specialists, our tribal
consultation specialists or
behavioral health and suicide
prevention specialists, as well
as our AO which is our program's
manager working title. Um, all
those positions are fairly
within the new within the last
couple of years. Those are all
filled now. And so what we're
really working on is ensuring
that we know how those positions
fit into IAD and the role that
they're gonna do and continue to
do and solidifying them with
IAD, um, so we're looking at the
To ensure that we're also
looking at how do we, you know,
ensure that we can hire people
and getting the best people and
uh to that, um, moving on, I'm
sorry.
Moving on to page 5.
Is our 400 category. We're
asking for $100,000 there.
The biggest chunk of that would
be, um,
The biggest chunk of that is for
rent of land space, uh, if any
of you have ever been to Indian
Affairs department, um, we have
a very tight space. If you
haven't, I welcome you to come
join and see our office space,
but we are pretty packed in
there. We have, um, not a lot of
space and we only have one
office right now, which is our
office down in the one Delcino
building. And so, if we are
lucky enough to get um some more
positions, we will absolutely
have no space to put them in.
And so we do need
to rent some space. So that's,
that's the largest portion. And
then again, taking into
consideration if we were to get
more people, um, more FTEs, this
$100,000 could also be used, of
course, for the equipment that
the additional equipment that we
need, any training that are,
are, um, that are employees may
need an office supplies, etc.
So that's our 400 category.
Um
Moving on to page 8. This is
just a breakdown of how our
operating budget basically
looks, and so, um, assuming
there might be questions about
reversions, etc. uh, so one of
the things that I really made a
dedicated effort to this year is
ensuring that we are looking at
what is the intent of this money
and how should it be expended?
And so we often have budget
meetings. Our next budget
meeting was supposed to be at 3
o'clock, um, for ID.
but we are working on getting
this money out for the intended
purposes for um IEDs so that we
know that we are spending the
money as prudently and quickly
as possible and getting it out
for the intended purpose. So
that is our goal, um, for that.
And then, um, the last page is
our organizational chart. So, as
I stated when I came on, I did
do a little bit of moving around
with some positions when I
started as the secretary to try
to make sure that we were
filling in positions and getting
the positions.
That we needed. Uh, we do have
still some vacancies and of
course we're pushing to fill
those, the big ones right now is
we need a, we need a CFO and we
also need a capital outlay in
TIF manager, um, we did have all
of the capital LAIF manager and
the four administrators filled
for a little bit of time, but
one person retired and one
person went on to another place.
Um, so we're actively working on
those, um, right now.
So sure that is all I have. I
sent for any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon. Thank you secretary
for uh coming by this afternoon,
uh, a few questions, uh, first,
in the, uh, recently closed
fiscal year 2024, uh, did you
have any uh reverting funds?
Yes, we did. Um, so, Mr. Chair
Representative, we had, um,
1.
016 was our overall total. So we
had a larger version, right, in
the 200 category.
OK. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman
and secretary, um, in regards to
your shuffling of your
organizational chart or the
positions they're in.
Did you make mention that you're
keeping the positions, but
you're just
You're looking to provide a
little bit more, I guess.
Focus on some other, some other
aspects of the organization? Is
that what I understand? Mr.
Representative, what we're doing
is having all of these positions
right now. We're ensuring that
they fit within what IAD needs.
We're making sure that they fit
right now. This is how we fixed
it and I, um, these positions
all seem to be working for what,
for the goals of what IAD needs
and how we need to move forward
with the agency, uh, but, you
know, if we had to say, you
know,
move something because we said,
OK, well, maybe, and this, I
can't imagine it would happen,
but maybe environmental justice
isn't something that IED needs
to focus on. What is something
that we might need. So we are
taking that into consideration,
but that position is currently
filled. We are trying to, like I
said, my goal is really to
solidify, standardize, and, uh,
ensure that IUD is embedded, uh,
for good. And Mr. Chairman and,
and secretary, you made mention
that perhaps
Environmental justice isn't
something that your department
needs to focus on and then
you're asking for some other uh
Some other positions here that
include um a tribal education
policy analyst and a tribal
water policy analyst, we all
know that in tribal nations that
these are extremely important.
Aspects and subject matters that
need to be attended to, but why
not rely on uh public education
assistant secretary uh for
Indian Education aspects and or
uh the state liaison, the tribal
liaison and the state engineer's
office for water issues.
Mr. Chair, Representative, we
absolutely do. We, we work very
closely with the education
agencies, um, our thing was just
to make sure it would be nice to
have somebody at IED who's able
to ensure that we can be part of
all of those communications with
the other agencies and be part
of things in the event their
conversations like G2G, um, that
we are sure that IED is part of
those as well, because sometimes
we get questions that IAD and we
do often refer them to the to
our sister agencies.
But I think it's important, uh,
one of the things I've realized
is we got, there's a lot going
on in education and and maybe
part of it somewhat selfish, but
my education is awesome back or
my background is also in
education, and so I care about
what's happening in education,
especially for our native
students and so wanting to have
that, that bridge there. Thank
you. And Mr. Chairman and
secretary, my, my focus on that
question was simply, it tends to
get a little bit difficult after
me being here for the past 8
years is who's driving the
policy is in regards to
education, for instance, in an
education.
Is it assistant secretary in PED
driving the policy aspects or
would it now become a quasi
shared responsibility of PED and
IED. Same with water, and so I
think there needs to be a focus
and and really just one point
where we can focus on policy,
uh, as legislators around this
table.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes, I
absolutely agree with you. IAD
does not intend to take over
that work from any place other
than our goal is to be a liaison
of sorts. So really just working
with the other agencies and
really keeping our leadership at
IED up to speed on what's going
on and making sure that we have
kind of the information moving
forward. Thank you. And a final
question, Mr. Chairman, is, uh,
I've seen some of the billboards
and I appreciate the work that
your department has done on the
MMIP or missing and murdered
indigenous.
persons, uh, task force and
initiatives around the state
and, and I think when you're
visibly passing by a billboard
and see that you're like, OK,
thank you for finally coming to
light and bringing these issues.
To the public. And then I seen
on I-25 closer to Islero pueblo
driving south uh just a a
general Indian Affairs
department billboard.
And I thought, why?
Why, why would you have a
billboard just to say IAD?
So part of the goal was to get
out, so we actually have several
initiatives out there in our
billboards. Um, excuse me, Mr.
Chair Representative. We have,
uh, our MMIP is out there. We
have, uh, our behavioral health
is out there. There is one for
behavioral health, uh,
initiative as well, our
indigenous youth council, which
is the kinship pledge, those
billboards are out there. So we
had a conglomeration of
billboards out there to try to
bring awareness to IED overall.
OK. And I lied, Mr. Chairman, 11
last question or clarification.
So in your organizational chart,
you have been 6 open positions
in your department.
Mr. Chair Representative,
currently, yes.
That's all, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Senator Sindo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Madam Secretary for
presentation. I had similar
questions with regards to what
the representative uh Lente.
Uh
Asked about
The education as well as water
because we do have specific
individuals in those.
Uh, departments and so forth,
so, uh, that's fine. uh, the
response, uh, your, um, Mr.
Chairman, uh on the uh contract
attorney.
I know that I got a lot of
complaints of
Uh, intergovernment agreements
coming up really late.
In the process sometimes and,
and so forth from tribes and so
forth. So is your thinking that
this individual would be able to
when you have a review
contracts, would that be
specifically, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
The, the intergovernment
agreements or is there anything
other
Then it can expand on that.
Mr. Senator, yes. So it would be
to review all contracts. So
IGA's professional service
contracts, any other contracts
that IED has to review, that
would be the intent for that
position to really focus on
those contracts, but of course,
having um really the big one is
the IGAs because we have some
for capital outlay and tribal
infrastructure fund because we
do have so many, although I do
want to note for the committee
something that I'm proud of that
um IED was able to get all our
capital outlay.
Um, and TI IGAs out within the
first couple of weeks in July
this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chalet. That was,
I appreciate that. Yeah, no, I
think, uh, you know, we have a
certain timeline for these
projects and, and the sooner
they go out, I think, you know,
labs are able to start working
on those, so thank you. Thank
you just to continue on that
point. I mean, one attorney to
handle the IGA just for the
Navajo Nation, just for their
capital is.
A massive undertaking they see
your staff were sitting there
smiling with a grin. I mean,
some way you're gonna have to
get a handle on, on, on those
IGA contracts, and I don't know
if one is enough, but let me,
let me make some key points.
Uh, since 2021.
Your budget then was 2.6
million. It's 4.7 million
currently.
So we've doubled the expansion.
And we still don't have any
containment. We keep expanding
and expanding. You averted a
million what for this year?
1.01615050,000. What was your
versions in 23.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, let's see, in
2023, it was 1.2.
So, roughly if, if we don't do
anything in, in leave you in a
flat budget you're 1.3, which
was in the 200 category,
correct?
That is correct, Chairman to
shuffle shuffle the, the
The 200 categories for what
they're for, whether it's for an
attorney for IGAs, but the the
million has been reverted two
years in a row, which pretty
much sets a trend on where
you're where you can function
and where you can be.
Uh, and then come back and look
at it once we get a handle on
reversions, but a million in
reversions.
If 23 was 3, so just call it an
average of a million, so can you
can, you should be able to
handle that if you come back and
tell us.
Um
Leave me at a flat budget. I
have a million and I need to
shuffle some stuff around, uh,
cause I'm looking at, at your
agency in the 400 category,
you're only up 100,000.
But that's doubling your only
thing we're doubling is the
agency operations from 180 to
3:30.
That doesn't.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, uh,
For the 200 category, and then
just really quickly go back and
I don't know if this will go
back, um, to some of the, what
we were talking about earlier in
terms of
We really are focusing on
Ensuring that our budget is
expended this year. And so
actually some of our budget
projections for this coming year
have shown us that significantly
less than a million dollars. We
are trying, my goal is to build
positions. We have filled most
positions, um, and, you know,
assuming we are able to get
those positions filled that we
will be sitting, um, at a
comfortable area, but we were
worried quite
honestly that we were gonna
potentially go over, um, so like
I said, we have been very
consistent in keeping track of
what is our, what are each of
our categories look like? How
much are we spending in our 200
category? What can we reasonably
expand and so, um, well, well, I
do absolutely understand that
there, there have been a very
high reversions for the last 2
years in the 200 category,
there, there were as many, you
know, several changeovers in the
last.
Couple of years. ID has gone
through some major changes in
the last couple of years, last
year, um, I was serving in in a
dual role as general counsel and
the deputy secretary for
significant number of months,
our deputy secretary didn't join
us until late October, our other
deputy secretary didn't join us
until I believe January or
February this year, our general
counsel didn't start until
February of this year and so
several of our key larger
positions did our go exposition.
in particular did were vacant um
or not being fully expended for
a number of months of the last
fiscal year, so, um, so yes,
sorry.
Listen, there's nobody that
wants to fund your department
more than me cause my district
represents is 80% Native
American, right? And and
everything I see in my capital
outlay sheet is red.
And, and so the only way to fund
that is to make sure you got a
lawyer to do the, the grant
agreements and then what happens
at Navajo was completely
different story.
And so
I, I, I think this is my, and
I'm gonna get your 22 reversions
because as we doubled your
agency almost.
Over 4-year period.
The reversions are still, as you
know, the 2022 reversions you
want to tell me.
I do, um, or
So at 2022 at 2 $2.4 million
agency reverted.
400,000.
And at a at a $3 million agency
reverted to a million and.
For at the same in the $4
million agency reverted million.
So we've outpaced your growth
and your ability to grow. You're
using the money but it's a slow
timeline and that may be because
of turnover. But as we move
forward, I mean, you're gonna
need to prioritize what you
really need if we hold you flat.
You still have a million
dollars. Focus where you want
that million dollars to be set.
In that agency, so you can use a
million and not revert it.
reverting it is just wasted.
And so figure out where you're
gonna be at with that million
dollars to expend that million
dollars cause you, you're not
expending the million over the
two-year period.
million each year.
And then, um,
You know, uh, some of this, some
of this is, I don't know what
why suicide prevention that you
have in here twice. We pay you
and them under, under, uh.
What are they called?
RPS pieces.
Or
Indigenous uh suicide
prevention. So how many times
are you repeating the process in
suicide prevention among
natives, and so I I don't know
why there's no coordination
there and then.
You mentioned liaisons, but
every agency has a tribal
liaison inside the agency.
And then you want another
liaison to do water and then
when we already have a tribal
liaison.
I don't know if we need to shift
those liaisons from
One agency to the next.
The, the, the liaison.
It's like a cake, you got
liaison layers or something and,
and so we need to figure that
out if it's not working and make
it function correctly for you.
I think those liaisons do what
they're supposed to do in terms
of their connecting the outside
entities and nation's hubs and
tribes with those state
agencies. The liaisons that I'm
talking about would be more
internal for IAD, so they would
work with IED and other state
agencies to really ensure that
IED is staying in the loop with
the other agencies on what's
going on and how we
coordinate our efforts together
for various areas.
you're gonna have to get into
the real weeds of how that's
gonna work when we already have
one set.
Liaisons, and then we're gonna
have a lay on the inside IED for
liaison with the liaisons.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll,
we'll have it ready, although I
do, just to note again, it is,
it would be similar to like the
specialist, and if we need to
change it from liaison or, you
know, the, the nomenclature, it
really is to serve, to ensure
that IED can work with our other
agencies in that when I'm in
meetings with other agencies as
well, I know exactly what's
going on as well.
But you don't do that in cabinet
meetings?
We do
We do.
Thank you. No, I don't have any
further questions. I'm just
trying to figure out that, so
make sure you come back. I mean,
we're gonna look hard and it
seems to me like.
If you revert
500,000 in one year, and we did
minimal growth, 200,000 that
year. And then we look and, and
we increased you by a million,
and you reverted a million and
then we increased you by another
million and you reverted a
million. At some point we gotta
let you catch up if we can
really get it spent and not
reverted.
Mr. I understand and I, I hear
you and I think, I think we're
doing a good job at expanding it
and like I said, my, my focus is
on filling our vacancies and so
only time will tell. Thank you.
Send already asked this
question. You have another
question, Senator,
Mr. Chairman, just to make a
comment, I, I, uh, Mr. Chairman.
You know,
One thing I forgot to ask, but
I'll, I'll ask that in private,
but I just want to say that I
think, you know, in the last
couple of years,
Indian affairs, you know, have
been really kind of unstable, a
lot of folks leaving, but I
really appreciate Secretary Moet
and, and the stability and, and
increasing, you know, these uh
folks. I think I, I, I'm hoping
that with everything that's
going on, there, there'll be
significant less reversion at
the end of next fiscal year,
which I appreciate and I think
the staff is doing a great job.
Just want to make a point on the
liaison. The liaisons in water
and education are very specific
focus on those areas of uh
Subject matter. But when you're
affairs and I've sat in that
seat.
When you're in an affairs, you
get pulled into all kinds,
whether it's education for
veterans, education for
everything. So I can understand
from uh the secretary's
standpoint that education pretty
much pretty much permeates uh
Mr. Chairman, all other areas.
Where water, you know, is water,
education, education, but when
you're Indian affairs,
And you're getting pulled
across.
Every agency.
education is very hard when you
don't have anybody dedicated to
that. So I appreciate what
you're doing because I think
it's needed, uh, and so just
apply all the work that your
staff does. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I think Senator Shenando was
selling your liaison story to
me.
Thank you for your time.
We're gonna break into
subcommittees now.
Uh, sorry, we're running late.
To members, I, I would make sure
you remember a couple of things
as you're going through
questioning. Number one, have
they overspent their budgets?
Make sure you know that number
if they've overexpended over the
last year without authorization
and, and they're gonna come back
for supplementals, um.
And that you.
caution you on the number FTE
expansion or any new expansions
they want to do if they have
reversion and they have unspent
reoccurring dollars that haven't
been spent.
Uh, I'll give you the perfect
example. I talked to the
judiciary, they're asking for
200 more FTEs and they have 78
million of bonds spent
reoccurring, so that's like a
nonstarter for me when you have
that that dollar amount. There's
$3 billion or $1 billion of
unspent non-reoccurring money
sitting out there right now that
the legislature is gonna take a
hard look at spending up. So as
you guys head in those
subcommittees, subcommittee A is
stay in here, Senator Rodriguez,
or Senator?
I mean this represent diction is
staying in this room and B is
going to 321321 is.
Yeah, take your minders. 321 is
somewhere in the circle.
Can you
you
OK.
Yeah
I go to my committee room.
Oh
All right,
we are, um, we're getting
settled.
We'll just take another minute
to make sure everyone has what
they need.
All right, I think we are ready,
uh, committee, subcommittee.
This is subcommittee A.
Everyone's in the right place.
Um, we are gonna go ahead and
start with item number 2, which
is the state treasurer's office,
uh, agency 394.
Yes, hi, good afternoon, chair
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Hilla. I am the
LFC analyst for the state
treasurer's office, joined with
me today is Laura Montoya, the
state treasurer, as well as the
deputy treasurer Janice
Farrella, and their new CFO
Kristen. So we are in tab 3 of
your binders business unit 394.
To jump right into the agency
request. The state treasurer
requested a general fund
increase of 636,000, which is
13.5% over the current fiscal
year of FY 25. The request
includes an increase of other
state funds by $145,000. This is
because the office of the state
treasurer manages the local
government investment pool, the
state treasurer has been seeing
more revenue from the local
government investment pool, so
the request is to utilize more
of those funds for these
operational costs that come with
the local government.
Investment pool.
Currently for FY 25, the state
treasurer has $401,000 in
personnel from other state
funds. However, the other, uh,
the FY 26 request from the state
treasurer is requesting to
reduce other state funds and
personnel by
Uh, to be $239,600 to then
replace that with general fund
revenue, um, and increase other
state funds in the other
category and contractual
services to cover new licenses
such as Bloomberg licenses and
JP Morgan aggregation Services.
Um, with that chair, that is all
that I have for the overview of
the request. I believe that the
state treasurer has some remarks
prepared for you all.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm happy to be
in front of you today. Um, I
have Vicky Henges with us, our
chief investment officer, just
in case anyone wanted to talk
about any of the investments,
being that we have the most
money we've ever had in the
treasurer's office and the most
earnings that the treasurer's
office has ever had
approximately $2 million a day
is what we've been earning in
the last couple of months, um,
many of you have never met
Janice Barela, that's our new,
uh, deputy treasurer. She is a
former county treasurer, uh,
Deputy
County treasurer
Former county manager, and so
we're happy to have her with us
and Kristen, you may have met
before, is the um former uh CFO
for Department of
Transportation, and now we stole
her and she is ours. We're very
grateful to have her. She's been
with us for one week. We also
have our programs and outreach
director in the back who's
helping with financial literacy,
baby bonds, and um our stable
program which we've brought a
bag for each one of you, uh,
with a piggy bank and um
We also have our special
projects director Christina
Knight. So, uh, going into the
presentation, I have a lot more
pages there for you for later,
um, but I did want to remind
everyone that I am on 13 boards,
councils, and commissions, it's
about $120 billion in total. So
if anyone needs help on any of
those, we did the whole
festivity of balloons for this,
uh, this month, um, we have $17
billion. It's broken up into
several pools, general fund
core, liquidity, the bond
proceeds both.
Taxable and non-taxable
severance tax, the LGIP, and
this year we have our first time
ever, the midterm or medium term
LGIP which is a billion dollars
only with the state investment
council.
Some things that we also work on
our technology notes and general
obligation bonds. That helps a
lot of our local communities and
our school districts, and we did
about $35 million on general
obligation bonds and 60 million
in technology notes, uh, this
last fiscal year.
We have uh currently 26
positions that are filled out of
27 that are funded, and a total
of 35 unfunded for this fiscal
year, we're asking for 30
positions, um, so 3 new
positions. Um, the vacancy on
the left hand side is the nacho
requirement that is uh a new law
that went into effect this last
year, so we're putting out a job
description for that position.
That will be the primary, um,
responsibility under cash
management for that nacho
represent
ative or employee, the other two
vacancies in cash management,
uh, we are looking at the pay
band, the job description, and
those two positions will be
filled probably within the next
month, and we'll use our cost
savings from this fiscal year to
be able to assist us with it for
next fiscal year, and that will
take care of the three positions
that still need to be hired and
that we're requesting to
currently have the 30 full-time
positions. What I wanted to show
you it's very unique in the
treasure's office is that um,
Several years ago when we were
at less than $6 billion. There
was more than 35 full-time
employees. Right now we have 26
with almost $18 billion. It's
been 168% increase on assets
under management. You'll see a
52% increase on physical
activity.
424% increase just on the
general fund investment pool
earnings.
And then 170% increase with 222%
increase if you take out repo.
The bank deposits has gone up
49%, and the AP transactions is
going to be more than double.
So
To the nitty gritty on the
fiscal year, we are requesting
those 3 full-time positions. We
are also needing to make sure
that we have enough money for
repo as interest rates have gone
down, we'll use our repo a lot
more, and that is going to have
a significant cost. And in
addition to that, on the 400
category, we have added in uh
something called G Treasury,
which helps with the cash flow
analysis, and we also have
increased our Broadridge, um,
agreement to allow for a
connection between cash
management and um the investment
division and helping with
pre-trade and post trade
compliance. And um the rest of
the presentation is um mostly
what our investments look like.
The only thing I would show you
that I think is critical that
you could see later on each one
of the pools. For example,
General Fund core. We made 175
million just in the general fund
core. If you look at 2 years
ago, it was less than 50.
So you'll see what each one is
broken down into as far as what
we've invested in and it's all
based on 6-10-10. The one that I
really wanted to show you that I
think matters to a lot of your
constituents is the local
government investment pool. That
helps counties, cities, school
districts, uh, tribal entities,
any type of local government
quasi-government group can
invest with us in this last
fiscal year, um, Vicky and Anna
have earned, uh, with their
work.
Over $93.5 million and that
money goes back to um those
communities, whoever's been
investing with us, and in
addition to that, they only pay
5 basis points. So it's a good
cost savings. It diversifies
their portfolio. It allows for
liquidity. They could take it
out within one day. We have an
IPAs program that's the
technological aspect so that
even in small communities,
someone can be both the
authorization on one side, and
then the other authorization on
the other depending on who's in
in the office for staffing. Um,
In addition to that with the
LGIP, it's been a great
partnership and collaboration
with DFA and SIC. They've made
$6.2 million and we didn't have
the full billion dollars, uh,
when we started off in April and
the 5 basis points was only
376,000 that they paid. So they
also had the savings and not
having to pay more for outside
consulting, um, or investing,
and um
The last thing I would say is
we'll be coming before you all,
uh, with our baby bonds
initiative and uh we are very
thankful for our New Mexico
stable program uh law that you
guys helped us get passed last
year to help our disability
community. We've increased the
accounts dramatically, we're
second in the nation now, with
the most dollar amount for
people with disabilities in
their account, they get
liquidity and they're able to
utilize that money when they
really need it, so they don't
have the concept of use it or
lose it with their Social
Security disability.
Um, financial literacy, of
course, is a key component.
We're traveling all over the
state talking to schools and
superintendents on the local
option to support financial
literacy as a graduation
requirement, and we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Madam Treasurer. Uh,
we'll start with Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
So, you're asking for some,
you've got some unfunded
vacancies in your.
In your, uh,
Agency right now.
Mr. Chairman, um, representative
senator.
Don't worry about it.
It's only a minor slip.
Madden chair senator, um, we
have only one position that is
funded that we have not filled
at this time. All the other ones
we have done really um a good
job in starting to fill them. I
think for me, I needed to see
where the needs really were, and
then we needed to um review all
of the pay bands and make sure
that the appropriate pay band
was for the appropriate work,
and so it's taken me a little
bit of time, but we're finally
there, and now we're gonna be
hiring the
next 3 positions that are
considered not funded right now,
but because of vacancy savings
will be able to last till the
end of the year and then
hopefully, you will allow us
these other 3 in the next fiscal
year. So
Tell me this, and this is just
my
And I don't have the knowledge,
so I'm gonna ask you a question
or two to
Increase my knowledge.
On your investment counsel, when
you, you have a lot of funds
that are invested.
And you have a state investment
council that helps you with
that.
Um
Do they contract?
With a lot of people to or with
some people to make those.
Determinations on what to invest
with.
So, um, Miss, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, I will show you the
balloons on page 3, the State
Investment council is completely
different. I am a council member
on that council, which has now
about $58 billion and they do um
have a lot of different, uh,
Outside contractors that they
utilize, the treasurer's office
has their own state treasures
investment council, which is
about $17 billion and that is
made up of 5 people, including
the board of Finance, uh,
director Ashley Leach, myself,
treasurer Eric Rodriguez from
Donana, uh, treasure Celia
Aguilloto from Albuquerque and
Steve Marsco, who's the cash
manager in my office.
And we, we only invest in-house.
So Vicky and Anna are the two
people who invest all of the $17
billion. We have no outside
contractors that we utilize. And
the only investments that we do
are treasury's agencies,
mortgage backed securities, um,
commercial paper A1P1 and
Corporate bonds rated A or
better.
Which is very different from the
SIC who invest in private
equity, real estate, and other
items that are higher risk, uh,
longer term. Ours is much more
short term, and we've had a AAA
rating for the past 19 years.
OK, and this, uh, Madam Chair,
these are the, the funds that we
send out to agencies once a
month.
Is that right?
I mean, we, we have a state
budget that we're investing.
You invest the
We appropriate a a budget. We
have a budget, we send it to
you.
And you
Invest that and then send it out
monthly to agencies. Is that
true? So, Mr. Chairman, we do
send out some money, for
example, the early child
education money, but if you look
at page 4, the pools that we
have are the general fund core
and liquidity. That's our, our
regular cash, and then the bond
proceeds both taxable and tax
exempt, and we pay all the bond
payments. We have the severance
tax bonding fund, and then the
two that are not part of the
state but are managed by the
state treasurer's office.
the LGIP short term and medium
term, and those ones are very
uniquely separate from the other
five pools. But
But I'm getting at, I think I'm
getting it. Maybe I'm all wrong,
maybe it's.
I need to be taken in the back
and give further education.
But
Always understood that, that we
sent money out to agencies
monthly.
We don't, we don't send their
whole budget to them at one
time, do we?
To an agency.
And we invest that.
Until we send it out to him.
Yes
That's your general fun core,
uh, Madam Chair, senator.
And your general fund liquidity.
OK. And, and you do that
in-house.
Yes, the Department of Finance
and Administration issues out
all of the checks that go out to
To be dispersed and the
treasurer's office manages the
account and does all of the
investing for these particular 5
poles. And that is in-house
that's all done in-house by two
people, the chief investment
officer, Vicky Heis, who's right
here, and Anna Murphy, who's the
portfolio manager that assists
with 33 of these 7 poles. OK,
and
And so those people are in
place. You've got those in
place. Those aren't the people
you need to hire.
No, they're in place, but they
need to get paid more because
they get paid about 25 to 75,000
less than all the other uh
portfolio managers equivalent to
us at Para ERB and SIC.
And I'm not comparing apples to
apples, to be fair, um, because
we invest very differently, but
the skill set that Vicky and
Anna have is, is really
brilliant because this picture
on page 13 will show you the
blue line is all of our general
fund core, and the green line is
our general fund liquidity,
Vicky and Anna need to make sure
based on our cash flow analysis
and based on our payments and
based on the cash coming in and
what needs to go out, how
long we need to invest out in
order to have enough money to
pay the bills and to pay out the
disbursements. And when I'm
talking about disbursements, I'm
talking billions of dollars for
some of those disbursements. And
so, for example, early childhood
education had a billion dollars
come out recently. Another one
was $2 billion that goes out to
the SIC and has to be done on a
timely basis. It's actually a
pretty strategic process between
DFA SIC and the treasurer's
office, and so it is important.
To be able to support them and
make sure that we're paying them
accordingly.
I'm sorry, madam.
Mm
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
what you're, you're coming to
is, is a really important
concept, because when you
contract out the investments,
you're paying a lot more money,
whereas we have Vicky and Anna
who work in the office and are
classified employees that know
the day to day, and they know
the legal responsibilities and
are still have the fiduciary
responsibility, whereas other
people who have to be um
outsourced. It's a lot more
costly. There's a lot more.
fees attached, um, and that's
why I brought up the SIC and
being able to partner with them,
we saved them a lot of money by
being able to do that and allow
for liquidity and
diversification on their end, so
it's a great partnership. Thank
you.
Well, it
Mm
The whole deal is, Madam Chair,
and Madam Secretary, is the fact
that
This is so much money and your
job is so important.
And
You know, but all
Looks of this deal looks like
you're doing a wonderful job to
me.
Uh, but it just, you know,
Only real thing I can look at is
kind of audit and audit findings
and and things like that to make
some kind of judgment and for
the amount of money that you
You know, you deal with, it
seems that the only
23 audit findings.
had to do with the
Gaming receivables.
And
I'm assuming that is taken care
of. You've, you've got a
process.
To uh not do that again. Do you
foresee
Anything
As an audit finding going
forward.
Madam Chair, senator, so, uh,
two questions. The first
question is actually is a
frustrating audit finding. It
was not calculating the sum on
the last line of a column, and
so that caused it to be an audit
finding, so that that was
frustrating this year, I will
say we will probably have a
delayed audit. We just are
finishing our audit now. I
didn't have a CFO for a month,
and so, uh, DFA was kind enough
to lend us, um, Miss Kathleen,
and she's been brilliant and
very helpful.
to us, but we were delayed in
getting the work done, and we
just got Kristen last week and
so, um, it'll probably be a
delayed audit finding, um, but
nothing that is uh significant
deficiency.
And, and when you go out for
employees.
How wide a net do you? Madam
Chair, Senator, we've been um
implementing a lot more on our
social media. We've also
followed the normal processes,
um, putting it on the newspaper,
going through spo. I think for
us, the important aspect of a
new administration was making
sure we knew where our needs
were first instead of just
hiring for the sake of hiring,
and then making sure that the
pay band was appropriate for the
amount of pay that they should
be receiving for the work that
they're doing. So I'm really
hoping.
once we get these other two
auditors that we will really be
able to focus on the 1,049 bank
accounts that we help audit and
manage and really audit instead
of just trying to make ends
meet. Um, the cash management
side of the office is, is always
uh forgotten, but they're really
the foundation of the structure
of the banking um for our office
and so that was why I wanted to
start off with the increase in
how much we've done on their
end, and that that increased
some people
might say that it's just added
to zeros, but the amount of
trades that are happening on
both ends is significant, and it
does take a lot more work and a
lot more time on staff side to
be able to do something. The
other thing that we have to look
at is longevity. We have a lot
of staff who are going to get
close to retirement, and we need
to make sure that this office
has that continuity of staffing
so that we can continue to do
the great work that the
treasurer's office has been
doing.
No more questions, I think she
answered every one of them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Representative Lujan and
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, uh, ma'am, uh,
treasure treasurer and all your
staff that are here, um,
I'm just sitting here thinking I
can answer some of these
questions because Maamtra used
to work for the agency, but I, I
worked in the, in different
field. I was a HR director, so
I'm gonna go on page 6 in, in
your
Your chart here. Um, my first
question is gonna be, why do you
have your HR generalist down.
On the list here when when HR is
like an autonomous, supposed to
be an autonomous position that
is managing everybody.
And madam uh Madam Chair
Representative, they're still
autonomous. They're completely
separate. It was just the design
so that we'd had enough spacing
for all of the different
positions. But if you look,
there's still specifically under
the deputy treasurer, as is all
of the other staff other than
the admin assistant.
Yeah. Thank you. I just wanted
to clear that and I'd like to
say that um we're talking about
the investment team that you
have, um, Madam Chair.
I've known them for a while, and
I can say that bar none, they're
incredible, the work that they
do is, is
is commendable, and I want to
say, you know, you know, I'm I'm
glad that you've you've
retained, um, your team because
it shows through all the things
that are going on here as I'm
reading through here and I'm
still learning though too. Madam
treasurer, but can you tell me,
um, skipping to the next thing I
wanna say is, uh, your special
programs, and you touched on a
couple of them. Um, how are they
all, how are they going? You
mentioned
Able
Program, but more particularly
the New Mexico work and save and
others. How are those?
Going for the, for the agency
and for the state, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. So
you'll notice on page 6, they're
all in dark gray because they
are not funded in any kind of
way. That's something for the
vision of the future. So
Christina is the programs and
outreach director, many of you
might know her as uh someone who
worked at Perra, uh, before or
Department of Health, or that
she was the two-terria de Santa
Fe, um.
But um she's been doing an
amazing job in not only um
getting the word out on the
stable program, but looking at
financial literacy and how we
can connect with others. We have
a new program that's for state
employees, that's free. It's
called New Mexico and Rich, and
so we send it out through the
personnel, uh, SO website. Uh,
they send out emails and they
ask people whatever you want to
learn about on the financial
side, you can go at your, um,
your pace and pick what you'd
like to learn about. The other
thing we've been
doing is working on baby bonds,
so the baby bonds symposium just
happened last week, Thursday and
Friday. We had a state treasurer
from Connecticut, Eric Russell,
and Doctor Hamilton, who's the
creator of Baby Bonds come in
and um some several others to
talk about the cost analysis,
the needs, how it bridges the
gap of inequity, and what this
does is basically it allows for
legislation to utilize
government funds, put it in a
pool, uh, earn interest on it
over time and the first baby
born.
July 1st of next year, we'll
have basically a trust fund
that's available to them at the
age of 18, once they turn 18,
they'll be able to utilize those
funds. There'll be barriers or
guardrails so that they don't
get the money themselves. It
goes through the Department of
Finance Administration or
whoever the legislature decides,
and they'll be able to pay for
school or pay for a car payment
or a business, anything within
New Mexico, building New
Mexico's economy. Um, so thank
you for that question. On the
stable program, we have almost
2000 accounts. We
are now, I believe, 2nd in the
nation. We've had a 40% increase
on stable in the last fiscal
year, the numbers to the right
are the fiscal year, the numbers
to the left are as of today, um,
so we had a 20% increase on
active accounts, and there's
about 12 to $11,000 in each one
of those accounts on average, so
it helps people with the
disability to use it or lose it,
um, mentality to go away. In
addition to that, this body
approved a piece of legislation
that aligned with federal
government to allow people
who are over the age of 26 who
get an onset of a disability, be
able to utilize that. So for
example, any veterans that come
back, if they end up with a
disability, they're a perfect
example of people that can still
be able to utilize this program
on the financial literacy side,
um, I mentioned a few of the
things, but we've been on the
road talking to schools. I think
it's important for them to see
representation that reflects
them and someone who was born
and raised in in rural New
Mexico, um, and work and save,
uh, work and save is a piece.
The legislation that was passed
by this body, uh, they did an
RFP process to allow for uh work
and save to try to be
established in New Mexico.
Nobody wanted to apply for it
because they didn't want the
idea of not everyone being
included in it last year and the
year before there was a piece of
legislation that was pushing to
make every business owner, uh,
participate in the work and save
program, and it, it did not
pass. And so at this point that
one is at a standstill, um.
But there is a board that is
aligned with the treasure's
office and we've offered our
assistance whenever they'd like
to meet. And I believe, Madam
Chair, that's all of the
programs.
Thank you man, I think that um
these are great programs and I
did, I was actually one of the
sponsors for the, the work, the
work and save bill. I just would
like a
uh another update on that and
see where we're, if we're ready
for any uh type of legislation
for this session, Madam Chair,
this, these are, these are
programs that bring um equity to
our state to to populations that
really um enhance their lives,
and I want to commend the office
for having these types of
programs, but
Um, they, they're unfunded, is
that what you said? So
That would be what would, what
would get them to, to be funded
programs. Would you need to do
that, I'm sure that's my last
question. So Madam Chair,
representative, we were very,
very cheap with ourselves and
only asking for the 30
positions. Um, I learned from
last fiscal year that it takes
quite a bit of time to get the
pay bounds correct and get the
positions filled. Now we're
doing an excellent job in doing
so, and we basically are already
at our max, um, with those three
new position.
will definitely need to have the
30 positions for next fiscal
year. I'm assuming that by next
fiscal year I'll probably use
any vacancy savings that I have
so that I could utilize for the
needs that we have. Right now,
um, Christina, the director of
programs and outreach, has been
able to do most of it on her own
and teamwork makes the dream
work of the people in the office
have been filling in where they
can fit in, um, but we've
definitely looking
futuristically that this is
something that will come back
before you all, uh, when we're
ready. The other one is the
forfeiture program.
It's a piece of legislation that
got passed by the legislature
several years ago. We do not
have the funding for the
position or the spacing to put
all of the forfeiture items,
including guns and bikes and
other property anywhere within
the treasurer's office. We have
two little small buildings that
look like medical facilities and
so that's something that we'll
have to be looking at in the
next, in the next fiscal year
too.
Thank you for that update. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Baca. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you for
your information. I will be
brief and so I also, you know,
you don't, don't feel you have
to give a long extended answer.
Um, caught my attention with a
couple of things I'm not sure,
and that is
Tell me about in brief, and how
do you interact with a school
districts selling of bonds,
because that is, there's a need
out there because quite
honestly, those bonds are used
for capital outages.
Ones
And there's not, or there are
very few districts that I know.
That are having enough money for
their matching funds to build
the buildings that they have,
and we have agent buildings. So,
Can you please, in short, tell
us about your interaction with
the, I guess the go bonds,
right? Is that
general,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Baca, the educational technology
notes is part of that, and
that's on the slide.
31, and that's about 60 million
and the general obligation bonds
um has now hit $35 million and
those are some of the schools
that we impacted, um, Miss Vicky
can give you a little bit more
detail of the of the cost, but
it's basically free for them for
the fee that
There is no real fee, but the
treasurer's office does. It's
something that Senator Gonzalez
had put into the law books a
long time ago that the
treasurer's office can assist
the schools, um, and so we have
always been able to do that and
um it's it's a job in itself,
but they find at the time to
make sure that we can do it so
that it supplies, especially for
our rural communities.
And, and I'd like to touch base
and follow up there so that I
understand because you're right.
I'm talking small community
world New Mexico that does not
have some of the other funding
sources and then Madam Chair and
my to the to your point about
financial literacy literacy, um.
As a 32 year educator, um.
I think that there's a place for
financial literacy. I know that
was Senator Padil and I went to
middle school and high school,
we had an elective wheel, and
where we took culinary arts, you
know, I still make the pizzas
there, um.
the out of the, the buns and the
biscuits and can still so,
right? So requiring financial
literacy as a requirement.
I think we can, I I do think I
see the importance of it, but as
an elective wheel and especially
his high school preparation,
these acres are going up to the
high school.
That to me is some what I think
that we need to be kind of
targeting that, but
I do appreciate it. I want to
touch base offline so that I can
understand that, so that we can
fix the problem because quite
honestly right now, our schools
do not have enough money to
build the facilities that they
need.
For all of the areas, you know,
much less their school
buildings, much less any
extracurricular activities as
far as fine arts, athletics, any
type of stuff like that. And
that is the hook and the carrot
that gets our students to want
to come to school, which will
ultimately impact the success of
our schools.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Representative. Any
other comments?
All right, so at this time we
are going to entertain emotion
to table. Uh, thank you very
much, Madam Chair. I moved to
temporarily table without
prejudice, please.
I will second
Thank you.
Any opposition?
Re
Uh, so, we are tabling someone
taking. OK, great. Taking the
notes. Uh, wonderful. Thank you
so much.
Next up is our state land
commissioner, um.
Which is uh agency 539.
All right. Welcome.
Whenever you guys are ready.
Good afternoon.
I'm Helen Gois. I'm the um LFC
analyst for the state land
office, um, with me today is
Stephanie Garcia Richard, state
land commissioner and the deputy
state land commissioner Sunole
Stewart. We will be discussing
the request for the state land
Office, that's Agency 539, as
you've already been told in the
materials are behind tab 5.
The state land office manages
state trust land for designated
beneficiaries. It does not
receive general fund, it is
funded with income it generates
from activities on state trust
land that do not deplete the
resource, such as grazing or
bonuses on oil and gas, um,
leases, uh, the state land
office does not receive general
fund, but the beneficiaries do,
so it's important to remember
that any money that you spend on
state land office operations is
money.
creates um an additional need in
the beneficiaries because that's
a dollar that they do not get
from the state land maintenance
fund.
The office is asking for a
nearly 14% increase, primarily
for personnel. This includes
funding to maintain their
existing personnel spending
levels, which they have been
covering with um the last few
years with transfers from other
spending categories. They have
also asked for a 3.5% increase
for um spending for both of the
other category and the
contractual service categories.
With that, I will turn it over
to them for their presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we
just want to begin by thinking
Ms. Gasois for uh all of her
very diligent and hard work in
helping us pull our budget, uh,
requests together and, and, uh,
she has a lot of very pointed
questions if you've ever worked
with her, Madam Chair, you will
know that. Uh, but we're very
grateful.
Um, yeah, John is laughing.
Uh, Madam Chair, we're gonna go,
we're gonna fly through these
slides, um.
Because we want to get to our,
our request, obviously, um,
before I begin, though, if I
could just let you know that
everyone that I'm gonna ask to
stand is here from the land
office to provide.
It's here from the land office
to provide uh any expertise that
you may require, including our
facilities manager Bobby
Gallegos who put on a blazer for
this event.
Uh, slide to just shows what
we've been able to do with the
very generous appropriations
that we've received from this
committee in the past, your
advancing renewable energy,
helping communities meet their
affordable housing needs,
strengthening tribal
partnerships and addressing
legacy oil and gas issues, uh,
of course, we're making record
revenue and uh you heard Ms. Gas
mention that we are funded from
our non
Oil and gas royalty revenue,
which is the highest it's ever
been this year at basically $215
million. That used to be the
full hall for the state land
office back not too long ago.
That is only the portion we
earned on non-oil and gas oil
budget request. Uh, yes, we are
asking for a sizable increase,
and we will talk to you about
why we feel that's necessary.
Um, it basically includes an
expansion request of 3 FTE we
will get
get into that in just 1 2nd.
Hold on. Um, and then very
modest increases in the other
categories.
So
With historic revenue comes a
historic workload and uh our
rights of way applications this
year were the highest they have
ever been at 1400, um, our
business leases, uh,
We'll show you a grasp a little
bit later that that shows the
increase that we've experienced
in those applications for
business leases. Remember that
business leases are incredibly
complex.
Um, they have a lot of moving
parts. They take a lot of time
to, to, uh, administer. However,
that is real revenue that we uh
receive from business leases. So
we're asking for uh an
additional rights of way
analysts, and additional
business leasing analysts, and
then the legislature has had a
heavy emphasis as well as the
governor's office on
cybersecurity.
Um, while we do have robust
programming in place and just
that, that little graphic to the
right I made sooner I make it
tiny, so I hope you can still
read it, um, shows how well
we're doing with cybersecurity,
but we don't have an individual
dedicated um to ensuring that we
are meeting national standards,
uh, per the national NIST
standards for the governor's,
um, executive order. We don't
have someone who's who's
dedicated to that. It's, it's
mostly our IT, our entire IT
division.
Kind of pinch hitting and
pitching in, we would like
someone to, to be responsible
primarily.
Their job be cybersecurity,
because we manage billions of
dollars. Our, um, IT systems are
incredibly
Well designed, complex, they,
they carry, you know, a lot of
transactions, and we would like
them to be protected.
OK, so that's our
FTE increase. Here's the
increase in commercial demand.
Um, I'm just gonna let you all
know this does not include,
especially the business leasing
side does not include what we
call reissues, which is
basically all of the chickens
coming home to roost that were
at least 35 years ago are now
coming, um,
Do for reissue this year.
And so we've got hundreds of
those in addition to what you
see on this. Um, so, the book of
our request, in addition to
those three FTE uh increases is
around supporting our land
office team.
Ensuring that we have proper
Ability to recruit, especially
in hard to fill positions, and
you know that we've got oil and
gas workers that for their
salary and benefits are
competing with those very well
paid positions in the oil and
gas industry. Um, we are located
around the state some very rural
areas. So recruiting folks to,
to live and work for the state
land office in those areas, it's
difficult. Um, in addition, we
want to ensure that we are
Properly retaining.
Uh, our employees because we
rely on them heavily to do this
great work that I'm outlining
today, Madam Chair. So, uh, we,
we're gonna get into very
specifically our request because
it has to do with something
actually the LFC found they
would like agencies to start
doing. And some of these are
listed out here. Um,
Obviously collaborate with Spo.
Ensure that all positions are
right size, are properly, um,
Uh, classified, ensure that that
there is parity among uh
different people who have the
same job classification.
Uh, bring manage your positions
in line with other similar.
Our sister agencies, um, target
recruitment and retention, not
just a broad brush, but very
targeted actions around
reclassifications and um
And and pay band increases. So
we have a very detailed
Um
Personnel plan.
We have invited Spo to sit with
us. We showed them, we showed
all our cards to Spo. We let
them know what we're planning.
Um, we've got like
The
Um, reclasses kind of phased out
into groups.
Some of that we are paying for
this fiscal year, Madam Chair,
and so part of our request is to
ask to be made whole, but that
those reclasses will continue
through the next few years. And
so we need to have, we need to
be able to pay for those.
Um, so that is the dollar amount
that we need.
As you can see, we maintain
A razor thin vacancy savings
because we like, we live right
on the edge of our vacancy rate.
And so, um,
We don't have a lot of extra.
To be able to spend on some of
these initiatives of recruitment
and retention because our
vacancies are so low.
The appendix does have our
capital outlay request in case
you want to talk about that, but
remember, Madam Chair, um, we
didn't ask for any specials or
C2s or anything like that this
year. We, we don't need
supplementals. We want to build
into our budget this program
that we are requesting.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Um, I have a quick question to
um to start. Could you, um,
provide a couple more examples
of what business leasing.
Well, that would entail.
Absolutely, madam chair, very
happy to, um, a perfect example
is the Netflix studio up at Mesa
del Sol.
So essentially what that is, is
Albuquerque, City of
Albuquerque, through a municipal
lease, uh, something you all
extended to 40, a 40-year term,
a couple of sessions ago, is
leasing that land and then
subleasing it to Netflix.
Netflix essentially pays us, um,
But the details of all of the
financing around that plan had
to be worked out within the
lease terms. Uh, another prime
example is the two affordable
housing projects we have on East
Central. One is called
Luminaria. It's already, it's
already been built. It's in your
district, I believe, or close to
it. The other one is Faralito,
um, which is set to be built,
lots of moving pieces, lots of
complexity in those, uh,
business leases and so we need
folks with with expertise, not
only in economic development,
but sometimes in
Real estate in valuations in
understanding uh
Comparable pricing, uh,
mechanisms.
Um, understanding financing
issues.
Those folks, you know, really
need a lot of expertise in order
to
Um
To draw up these, these leases.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna start
with Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Welcome.
Um
Um, I am trying to understand
how we make money on wind.
I know that on oil and gas you,
you have an oil and gas lease.
Uh, you have severance taxes.
Most people don't think about
the royalties, so you, you get
royalties off of production.
Uh, right of ways.
Uh, so much for rod.
wind.
So, you know, the things that I
know about, you probably get us
so much for the tower location,
uh, so much for
Uh, from the, uh, right of ways
to carry the power out to
transmission lines.
Uh
There's no severance tax.
Because we're not severing
anything. You're not severing
anything.
And, and I'm, I'm not saying
there should be, I'm just
comparing.
Do we make money? I have wind
where I live. I don't have any
oil and gas to be, well, got a
little bit of CO2, but it's not
worth much nowadays, Madam
Chair. It, it seems like you
shouldn't be able to make money,
but in fact, uh, and we can, we
didn't put it in this
presentation, we should give you
our projections over the next
Basically we did for like the
next 40 years, maybe 30 years,
something, the life of the, the
wind leases we've just, uh,
inked.
It is of royalty on the
are produced. Just tell me some
of the ways you make money off
of. So Madam Chair and, and, uh,
representative, it's similar to
oil and gas in that a company
rents the land, rents the raw
land, but it is different
because there is no royalty
being paid. However, we do get a
revenue share.
And that revenue share is
phased, uh, depending on how
much power or what phase the the
um production of the, of the
wind farm is in. If they're just
in under construction,
obviously, they're not making
any money, so we don't, uh,
charge, we charge a lesser um
percentage. But if they start
generating uh electrons and
selling those electrons, we get
a percentage that is negotiated
within the lease of whatever
they sell. In addition, if some
of the wind farms use our land
for something.
called Gea, which is basically
uh a tie-in from a wind wind
farm into a larger transmission
line if they go through our
land, we get an additional
amount for, for that, uh.
Process as well. So, I, I will
make just one statement and this
actually came out in another
committee, uh, where the deputy
commissioner was talking about
um
Uh, revenue diversification, we
could potentially those hundreds
of millions of dollars that
we're talking about and when
wind revenue, we could
potentially
The legislature could consider
putting a portion of that
revenue into the permanent fund.
Right now, it goes straight to
the beneficiaries. We're not
earning any additional money off
of that revenue. Um, but like I
said before, we're talking about
hundreds of billions, 100s of
millions of dollars in wind
revenue that used to be the the
amount from oil and gas, uh,
royalty.
So it sounds to me like
The, uh, progressiveness where
you, they pay you hardly
anything when they're going,
coming in and and then as they
begin to produce more and more
and more, they start paying
more, that's very similar to an
IRB that we used to do with oil
and gas.
Secondly,
Uh, the
Paying uh, paying a certain
dividend on the electrons
produced.
That sounds like a royalty to
me.
So tell me the difference.
Um, I guess, madam Chair, the
difference is we get a percent
of whatever they
They, uh, how, what, how would
you describe it?
Representative. So a royalty
technically is when you have a
permanent depletion of the
resource. In this case, because
wind isn't being permanently
depleted, it's being utilized.
We call it a percent rent, but
essentially it's a revenue
share, as the commissioner
stated. We get about $4000 per
megawatt, um, uh, and then we
also, it's a little bit
complicated formula, but then we
can also get um uh 4, 4% riding
on that, but that's just one
aspect of the fees.
wind, we have, uh, every time
you put in a turban, there's a
surface disturbance fee, there's
annual rental payments that
climb up as they go from the
initial due diligence stage to
the operational stage. So if you
looked at an invoice on a Win
project, you might have 12
different line items of
different ways that we would get
revenue from them. But uh in
this context, we would call it a
percent rent, but essentially,
you know, it's a revenue shared
like a royalty.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Woods,
then Senator Campos and
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
I noticed, uh,
Land trusts stewardship.
And I noticed that
You know, there's a, a purpose.
Listed for that.
It is to uh potentially to
generate the sustainable
revenues from state trust.
To support public education and
other beneficiaries.
So
I noticed that there's some
recommended language. So,
Is this your recommended
language?
Or is this the committee's
recommended language.
That chair
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. uh, Senator
Woods, the um recommended
language is um committee
recommended language. Some of it
about half of that of that
paragraph you're seeing is
standardized language which
we've had, we've had for um
forever. I don't even know when
it started in the other is
something we added this year
concerning um uh specific need
at the department,
Madam Chair, and under that
Just quickly explain when you
start talking about tax credits
under section 29.
What is that?
This is why I bring the deputy.
Madam, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
um, that is the legacy of the
past. So, um, uh, back in the
90s, there was an effort to try
to monetize tax credits that the
land office could, could take
for uh non-conventional, uh, uh,
um plays essentially which now
are very conventional in the
general sense. Um, and as part
of that, we
essentially sold um we had
contracts and we have to have
suspense language.
In our budget to essentially
clear those payments, uh, that,
you know, we're no longer doing
anymore. It's basically a legacy
accounting issue from the 1990.
Well, I was wondering if you
could.
The kind of.
Pathetic words and put it on a
piece of paper and send it to
me.
To explain that better because
uh
What I was wondering about, it
says, uh,
You know,
Um
Down here at the bottom.
It said it might use such money
to repurchase.
Royalty interest pursuit of the
agreement.
And
What royalty interest are we
talking, Madam Chair, uh,
senator, so we had the, the
agreements basically we, we sold
our royalty interest uh to be
able to take the tax credits,
um, and
The, the payments, they're very
small, like, I mean, I think
we're talking about 10s of
thousands a year. We're we're
not outside of most of these
agreements expired. So we have
very few that are still in
place, and I think you're
talking about 10s of thousands
of dollars each year that we're
still processing. There's,
there's very few, but we can, we
can send you right up. Greg
Bloom.
Madam Chair, Senator, Greg
Bloom, I'm the assistant
commissioner for Mineral
Resources at the Land Office.
Um, we almost get this question
every year from one of you, and
I forgot to print the one
paragraph, very uh succinct
explanation, uh, that we have of
this. We will get that to you.
But this uh relates to cold bed
methane, tax credits to the
federal government offered uh
Mr. Stewart mentioned that, uh,
we were, the state was unable to
take advantage of those tax
credits, so we uh sold those.
Sold those off, sold off part of
the, the royalty interest in
those. And then this money in
the budget and that's in
suspense, um, goes towards uh
paying for those obligations. In
the long run, uh, we could
repurchase those, um, a number
of the uh sales, I think there
were 5 of them, 3 of them, uh,
have since wrapped up.
Yeah, I think this mic's cutting
out, sorry, and, and uh there
are 2 remaining and that's what
this money goes for. We will get
you more information.
Yeah, I would appreciate the
information you could give me on
that.
And
Because
This is kind of where I'm coming
from, and these are probably two
very unrelated deals.
But uh
At one time, uh, we had about
So I'm like
34% of the, I don't know how to
say this exactly. 34% of the oil
revenues are 34% of the land
was.
was leased out for all revenues.
And now we're down to around
24%.
And so
Are we not actively trying to
But those lands out for lease
and two unrelated things that
we're talking about here
totally. Sure, um, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator, uh,
You're right that there has been
a real change in how our state
trust lands are used. For
example, these coal bed methane,
uh, wells that we're talking
about those, uh, I believe were
up around Ratton in Colfax
County. Um, cold bed methane is
no longer seen as uh
particularly uh revenue
attractive, and uh we have not
had leases up there any
inquiries of interest, um, in,
in the same for some, uh,
northern areas or areas north of
the Permian Basin, we have uh
the Tatum Basin for example.
For example, um, in, uh, Upper
Chavez County, I mean, there's
some uh oil and gas that extends
up towards Toumari, and you
know, wells have been drilled
throughout these areas, but they
simply cannot uh compete with,
with other state trust lands,
um, the other thing to remember
is, uh, we've certainly
increased the uh per dollar
amount of revenue that we
generate, uh,
From, from each acre, yeah. And,
and I think the committee is
very well aware that nearly all
our, our, our best lands have
have been leased. We don't have,
there's not much that we're,
that we have in, in reserve, uh,
at any given time.
Again, I'm a little bit
confused. I get easily confused,
so I just
So
There's been a lot of talk about
increasing
The, uh, uh, up to 25%, the, the
royalty rate.
But we don't have much land that
can be leased at all.
Yeah kind of.
Madam Chair, I'm getting too far
off. I don't have anybody
around.
Hope
they generally get with me if I.
If I'm OK still, I'll ask this
one, yeah, get over here close,
Pete.
If you could just kind of
elaborate a little bit on that
and then I'll, then I'll let the
folk in real quick.
So Madam Chair and senator, um,
so just, you know,
I get easily confused with
section 29 as well. Um, usually
they have a nice little summary
for me to read. I didn't have it
this time, but Kobe Colbed
methane, let's just put that to
the side for now because that is
conflating two issues a little
bit. Um, so when we're talking
about the royalty rate increase
that we're seeking, and we will
be seeking it again this, this,
uh, cycle, um, that is only on
oil and gas, on oil and gas
wells. And, um, the way you can
basically think of it, Madam
Chair and senator.
is that yes, we do have maybe
fewer acres that we're leasing,
but the formations within the
acres we're leasing are so
lucrative.
That this is the reason for the
historic.
Revenue. So fewer acres, but,
but much better um rock.
than we ever had in the past.
Sure, we could do wildcatting,
we could, we could allow um
leasing of, of state land in Qua
County, you're not going to see
this kind of revenue, you're
going to see lots of acres being
used.
For very marginal wells. Um, the
land office does not consider
that to be a lucrative
investment, quite frankly, of
the use of our state trust land.
So what we would like to do
instead is
Get every dollar that we can
from that really those really
good formations of the wolf camp
and the bone spring and all, you
know, that, that richest.
Uh, reserve and essentially in
the world, that is in the
southeast part of the state.
Um, when we say we have very
little left to lease.
We do have the best of the best
still.
That is
A handful of leases.
Very minimal acreage.
But if we were to lease it at
that higher amount, we are
talking an additional
$50 billion.
With the 25%.
Increase.
Couple of days ago, I was in
another committee.
Madam Chair.
And it was talk someone made the
statement that
That the state land office was
requiring the permittees.
To
Pug wells abandoned wells.
If they leased a uh a lease.
And there happened to be
abandoned wells on it.
That they would be required to
plug those, even though they had
nothing to do with that to start
with.
Are those wells, are those
wells.
Um
Known
At the time of those leases.
Does that make sense, Madam
Chair.
What
Madam Chair, Senator,
absolutely, that makes sense.
Um.
What we do require when we find
uh wells that are inactive, um,
we require that they be plugged
and abandoned, essentially
plugged, or, or reworked, that's
another option. They could be,
uh, put back to use. Um,
Mm
If
The uh lease uh comes up for
sale. Uh, we want to present
that lease, uh, to the public,
people that can bid on it with
no, um, inactive wells on it. If
we release the land, the land
office, and it has an active
wells on it. The new lessee
would not be responsible for
those. So our effort has been uh
to clean, uh,
leases up entirely before they
are released, get those wells
plugged, clean up any spills so
that the state does not get
stuck with um those
responsibilities and today
we've, I think, uh,
had lessees at their own
expense, plug uh somewhere
around 550 wells, uh, saving the
state at least 50 to $75
million.
OK, well, I, uh, evidently I
misunderstood the line of
questioning altogether.
Uh, in a previous meeting.
So
Excuse
Thank you for explaining that to
me.
Because
It, it should be, you know, the,
the, the state's job, we've, we
put a fund together to do that
very thing, so.
Why wouldn't it be the states?
Job and opportunity to do that.
So
Madam Chair, Madam Chair and
senator, uh, it's our
understanding of that
reclamation and
Reclamation fund that it is to
be used where there are no
responsible parties to look to
for for plugging and clean up.
So the, the, you're exactly
right, that, that, uh
Fund exists at OCD.
For the purpose of clean up
where there is no response. In
our cases, we do look to our
lessees as the responsible
party.
If you do have a previously.
Previous. Yeah, and, and
You can tie those wells to here.
Um, Madam Chair and, and
Senator, yes, because we have
the contract, our lease, our
contract, our legal, legally
binding contract is with the
lessee. Yeah, with, with that
was a question I was getting at.
is
I'm talking something I don't
know, Madam Chair, I'm not gonna
argue the point no more. Thank
you very much for the.
For the answers I
I will try to figure this out.
Through other means. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Campos. Uh, thank you very much,
Madam Chair, and of course,
Honorable land commissioner, uh,
there's really no need for
responses right now. I just want
to go through a few things just
in the essence of time, uh, as
we go through this and to the
other agencies that would be
presenting not only today, but
as we go ahead and we get in
closer to the session. So, um,
audits, those findings are gonna
be important if there are any,
uh, to be sure and divulge that,
uh, with the budget outcomes.
Uh, are you meeting the targets,
and I know what this agency, of
course, uh they're meeting 8 to
9, um, budget reversions in
terms of the amount that has
been reverted and uh and and the
and the rationale behind that,
um, what percent of the, the
bars, uh, uh, have been part of
the approved budget. So what I'm
getting to there and what we're
really trying to do is to become
smarter in terms of budgeting
and I know there's always the
unknowns, but as we deal with
that, it's gonna be
How are we going to uh uh take a
look at uh how we're going, if
you will, with the budget
adjustment requests, uh, how
those have been approved and
then from there what percentage,
if you will, of uh your approved
budget for the fiscal year, uh,
that has been again trying to be
as uh precise, smart with the,
with the budget as we move
forward in this process, and one
of the questions I'll get to,
uh, towards the end of this.
Really ties into, if you will,
in this case, uh, let's say by
the year 2030 as we start to go
ahead and see if you will a
shift or decline in our energy
natural resources, uh, how are
we going to go ahead and depict
that and how are we going to
prepare for, uh, possibly a
shift or if you will, the uh the
decline in, in uh some of our,
our natural resources. And then
uh also with the change in
economy, um,
What are some of the smart
budgeting uh techniques that you
all are using, uh, that's
changing very quickly, and I
know that we might say, well,
we, we, we're very traditional
in what we're doing, but with
the uh demands, if you will, for
uh higher skilled labor, how
we're gonna be able to
compensate and to compete, if
you will, with the private
sector, how we're gonna be doing
that.
And then in terms of uh as the
chairman of the Legislative
Finance Committee has indicated
uh in terms of budgets and we
all know that we have to stay
within those, those confines,
but if there have been any of
the particular uh areas that you
see that there's gonna be a need
for additional resources, how
we're going to handle that.
And when it comes to the the
vacancies, vacancy savings,
vacancy rates, uh, along with
that, uh, our internal resources
being used to
Offer, if you will, uh, salary
increases and along with that,
uh, how are you utilizing or if
you will, moving resources uh
through your agency in order to
go ahead and meet those needs.
In other words, we're becoming
more focused and prescriptive in
terms of what our budget
analysis is as we get closer to
the 60-day session.
And then also, if there is any
uh specific legislation that you
hope to reintroduce or to
introduce this next session that
ties in specific to some of the
areas that uh you're working on
or that you believe will
definitely assist because those
usually have uh fiscal matters
tied to it as well, and there's
several other areas, but uh the
whole key with it is I'm just
asking as you move forward to uh
consider those issues.
And uh I won't be asking any
other questions this afternoon,
but I will be making, if you
will, a temporary table motions,
and the reason for that, we're
going through the information
and you all understand this, uh,
we want to uh continue to create
the analytics in terms of how
we're going to move forward
because we're already starting
to see in terms of the resources
that we have, uh, and if you
will, with uh some of the funds
that we've already created,
that's smart and resources are
coming back.
But within that, in the next 5
to 10 years, we want to ensure
that we're going to be very
sustainable in terms of uh the
fiscal approach and uh the
services that we do provide to
New Mexicans. So, uh, with that,
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
make those statements and I'm
ready to move on. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
Representative Lujan, or did
you, uh, commissioner, did you
wanna
Respond, Madam Chair, if, if I
just could make a couple
comments. I just wanted to
reiterate, Madam Chair, that we
have never outspent our budget,
um, since I have been the head
of the agency. I actually
learned budgeting in these
rooms. And a lot of the emphasis
on this budget request is
exactly in line with, with what
you've just mentioned. I just
wanted to highlight a couple of
different things, um.
Madam Chair and Senator, you
don't have the privilege of
sitting on HFC, but we made a
commitment to the chair and vice
chair of that committee, that we
were going to work with the LFC
to not only ensure that we're
meeting our targets, our, our,
uh, performance measures, which
we've already met, but that we
would even increase them. So we,
we are looking at an increase of
performance measures year over
year. Uh, we have met our
performance targets. We are
looking to increase those and,
and, you know, just
Sort of reached that much
higher. Um, the other thing that
I will say, um, Madam Chair, is
that we have done some bars.
They have been, uh, primarily
out of contracts and other and
into PS&B, um, to ensure that
we're meeting all of the
obligations that I talked about
at the very beginning of this
hearing, um, we, we are doing
reclasses that we're paying for
ourselves, um, and so when some
of our contracts fall through,
we just use that money to ensure
that our personnel is properly
supported, um, and we
properly compensating them.
Uh, Madam Cha again, thank you
very much and thank you very
much, uh, honorable and
commissioner for the
explanation.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Ma. Most of
everything I was
And ask was answered. I just
would like a little bit more in.
Expansion on the the the
legislation we're going to see
on the royalty fees. We can just
expand a little bit on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And that was uh actually a
question that was asked as well,
so I, I appreciate the
opportunity, Madam Chair and
Representative, to talk about,
um, our, we're gonna continue to
seek an increase in our royalty
rates. So remember that we share
a formation. It is a geologic
formation.
That can't just be picked up and
moved. It, it, it is, it exists
in one place in the world.
And that is in West Texas and
eastern New Mexico.
Um, we have resources there that
Are unmatched.
In terms of their uh their,
their oil production potential.
We share that basin with the
neighboring state of Texas, who
understands that the market
going market rate for royalty in
that basin is a 25% royalty
rate. We are capped in statute.
You all set the royalty rate.
That is your purview.
At 20%. We have not leased
anything at 25%.
Um, because we're not allowed
to. It would be against the law.
So, uh, what we have done
instead is
But a temporary pause on the
acres that we feel.
Because of folks that we have,
um, in our, uh,
In our oil and gas and minerals
division that are experts in
this, uh, arena, folks that we
have talked to in our um leasing
clearinghousey net.
And, and they all feel that this
These particular acreage, this
particular acreage is worth a
higher royalty. Um, so we will
be going, again, it's a very
simple change. It just changes
the choice in statute in the oil
and gas lease in the oil and gas
Act to 25% on the best of the
best tracks only.
That's all I have. We're short
on time. I have others, but
thank you for that, that, that
relay information. Appreciate
the time, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, we also have had no audit
findings. I just wanted to make
that clear because that was
asked.
Wonderful. Thank you. Um, I have
a couple of questions, uh, I
don't see it.
I think we're good for the rest
of the committee. Um,
Uh, the spaceport.
Um, I am not a member of the
Restep, uh, but I understand it
came up, uh, last week. Um,
could you, uh, provide a brief
update on that. Um,
Yeah.
So, Madam Chair, we, we
appreciate the question and you
know, obviously the it came up
with our with our um our folks
here at the table, uh, Deputy
Commissioner Stewart. So we had
been in a number of negotiations
with uh Spaceport on the base
lease and talking about the base
lease.
I think what we've kind of all
decided is that
In the interest of getting those
folks the activity they need.
We're going to focus on the
sublease template.
So we are negotiating the
sublease template right now. Um,
we, if you have any
conversations with the spaceport
folks, we would encourage you
to, to ask them to stick to the,
the sublease template because
those, that's the bottom line of
what state land office requires.
Um, I, I think that's
understood, but um it seems like
that's, that's a kind of a
sticking point, um, and we're
committed to getting those
subleases, uh, you know,
negotiated, um, we did talk
about renegotiating.
Bass. I think that came up in
the hearing at this time, I, I
have no intention of doing that
just because, uh
We hit a snag, quite frankly.
I'm going to let you know, Madam
Chair, um, some of the subleases
that Spaceport would like to go
out for, will outlast the terms
of the base lease.
So it is in their best interest
to
Come to the table and
renegotiate the base lease with
us, but at this time, we're just
focusing on the subleases.
Thank you. I really appreciate
hearing that, um, you know, as
we talked this morning about um
future of um oil and gas in the
state of New Mexico. Um, I
really appreciate, um, you know,
the state land office and your
willingness to, to support
economic development um
activities that will help to
diversify our economy. So, so
thank you for um working with
the spaceport um to make sure
that, um, they're able to
You know, do everything that
they need to do to to bring in
revenue for the state as well.
Um, along those lines, um, I am
curious, um, you know, in
additional positions, if you
have sufficient folks on your
team to deal with some of the
emerging technology issues. Um,
I'm particularly interested in
um the state land office
supporting um carbon dioxide
sequestration. Um, we have some
of the best, uh, rocks, uh, in
the country for that, and we
know that it is a long term
stable, safe way to remove
carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. Um, so curious about
that and um if you'll be looking
at additional staff members for
that, for lithium, you know,
other potential opportunities.
So
So, um, Madam Chair, at this
time, you know, we feel like the
staff that that Greg oversees in
his division is sufficient for
the applications we have, um,
the reason we asked for the
expansions in the other areas
because that's what we're seeing
that just significant increase,
um, but, you know, we, we do
have experts in minerals in at
the state land office. So, yeah,
we, we feel that we have that
expertise. Wonderful. Thank you.
Um, I think, uh, Senator Campos,
thank you.
very much, Madam Chair, I moved
to temporary table without
present.
Great, we've got dueling second
from Representative Chatfield
and Senator Woods. All right, I
don't see any objections, so
we'll go ahead with that and
thank you so much. Thanks for
patiently waiting around, uh,
for us as we go through all of
these, uh, exciting topic.
Um, next, uh, this afternoon for
those watching on television, we
have the ethics commission.
Uh, so agency for 10.
All right, whenever you guys are
ready.
Good afternoon. Oh, sorry.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Hernandez, and I
am a senior fiscal analyst for
the LFC.
Today we are reviewing a request
from the state ethics Commission
Agency 410 behind, also
presenting today is executive
Director Jeremy Ferris.
The commission was created in
legislation in 2019, the
commission's primary duties are
receiving, investigating and
adjudicating complaints against
public officials, public
employees, candidates, persons
subject to the Campaign
Reporting Act, government
contractors, lobbyists, and
lobbyists employers.
The ethics commission requested
a total budget increase of
$262.2,000 in fiscal year 26 or
a 15% increase, creating a total
budget of $1.98 million. The
commission's starting budget in
2020 was $947.8,000 and FY 25,
the commission received an 11%
increase, which amounts to 77%
overall increase since 2020.
A vast majority of the increase
in general fund comes from a 19%
increase in personal services
and employee benefits. The
requested increase accounts for
a base expansion of one FTE.
Additionally, the commission
provided out of cycle salary
adjustments for staff above what
the legislature appropriated for
in fiscal year 25 and had to bar
$60,000 from contractual
services to personnel services
and employee benefits in order
to account for out of cycle
salary adjustments for senior
staff.
Additionally, the agency
requested a non-recurring
special appropriation of
$275,000 for operational costs
associated with the departmental
personnel costs contracts and
security infrastructure
upgrades, equipment leases and
training, these items are
typically considered recurring
by the LFC.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
believe Mr. Ferris has also
prepared comments.
You, Mr. Paris. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so like the, the
two agencies that you just heard
from the State Ethics Commission
is also a constitutional agency,
but unlike those agencies, um,
we haven't existed since 1912,
the commission began in 2019.
And so, I just want to begin by
thanking the members of this
committee, um, for helping to
support and grow the state
ethics commission, um, for its
first, it's 1st 5 or 6 years.
Um, the, the state ethics
commission, we, we have
responsibility for our state's
procurement code, our state's
campaign finance reporting laws
and our state's governmental
Conduct Act. And we
We handle that responsibility in
3 main ways. We provide advice
and trainings.
We adjudicate and investigate
third party complaints.
And we bring civil lawsuits.
Um
The staff is mainly an attorney
staff. We have 10 FTE, um, 6 of
whom are attorneys, 4
non-attorney staff members.
We have more work than we can
handle. Our, our, the size of
our agency versus our our
constitutional and statutory
mandate, the discrepancy is
large.
But just get getting down to the
brass tacks to Senator Campos's
point, um,
We were hurt very little. We
revert less than 5% of our
budget. We have zero vacancy
savings, like the state land
office, we move in money from
our contracts into our 200s. We
don't have turnover. People come
to our, our agency, they're
committed to the mission and,
and they stay.
Um, so that means we run very,
very tight.
Um, and so the, the, the FY 26
section 4 request. Some of that
money we we need in order to not
see a deficiency. The other part
of that money is for um an
expansion of another attorney
position.
We're receiving far more in the
way of um requests for advice
and complaints, then, then we
can responsibly handle. And we
need, we need more staff to do
so.
Um
This, the request for a special
to be candid with you is, is
redundant. I understand that the
state's beginning to phase back,
the large kind of recurring
increase uh
That's kind of what you're
telegraphing as a committee. And
so the request for the special
of this 275,000. A large chunk
of this is also for personnel,
and it would be, you know, in
the hope if we don't have a
recurring additional FTE, it
would be for um a temporary FTE.
Some of this request, however,
is for other things that we
absolutely need, and I want to
tell you about a security
incident that we we suffered in
in September.
Um
This happened um to Bernalillo
County's poll workers as well.
We had a self-proclaimed First
Amendment auditor come to our
offices.
Create video content.
Post that content on YouTube.
With a half a million
subscribers.
Um, dox us.
Post all of our contact
information.
And the commission was exposed
to thousands of hostile and
threatening.
Um, voicemails and emails, um,
death, including death threats,
including threats that people
would be coming to our office to
hang us.
That we would hang in Gitmo.
We enforce our state's elections
code.
Um, we're not poll workers, but
we have, we have a response
code.
In no state or local employee.
That works in our state's
elections should be subjected to
what our employees were
subjected to. It's completely
unacceptable.
And we need some more funding to
ensure that our office can be
safer. When you go to the
Attorney General's office,
there's flexiglass and a guard
in a metal detector. Now we rent
space from UNM.
We, we're in a university
setting. We understand that we
can't have that level of
protection, and we want to stay
at UNM. We, we like our
partnership with you and him
very much.
But we need
We need more security. We need
an intercom system, we need a
camera system that feeds
directly into uh UNMPD, and
we're working with you in MPD.
We're working with the FBI, US
Attorney's Office, DPS, the
state police to respond
adequately to to what we
sustained. And some of this
request for a special
appropriation is. Um.
And
And I'm sure that's, that's the,
the breast tacks of our, of our
a request and and and.
Um
Yeah, in deference to the
agencies behind me, I'll just
stand for any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Ferris. Uh,
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
I just, I, I appreciate the
brevity of this. How many cases
do you have you guys dealt with
or did you deal with last year?
Uh
Madam Chair, Representative
Boco.
We see, last year we saw
About 100 submissions.
Um, 40 of those submissions were
Non-discretionary things that we
have to adjudicate and
investigate. About 60 of what we
saw last year are are items that
the commission has discretion to
To choose to bring a civil
action.
This year we're on track for um
About 450 submissions. About 100
that we have no discretion. We
have to investigate and.
And we're on track to see about
350.
Um, submissions that asked the
commission to to look into it
and to bring a civil action.
We're, we're just receiving a
lot of volume of. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you so.
Um
Can you just in 3 or 4, what are
the broad categories or the
agencies that you are getting
these submissions from? Is it?
Uh, is it just campaign finance?
Is it businesses, schools, other
governmental agencies.
And then my follow up question
is, what is the time that it
takes to process and get to
these investigations because
When somebody files a complaint
if they're having to wait 68
months.
I think that kind of is
counterproductive to what we're
trying to do and what I believe
your agency is tasked with, that
I'm sure, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Baca.
There are 4 broad categories.
We, we received complaints
alleging violations of our
state's campaign finance
reporting laws.
We receive complaints alleging
violations of the procurement
code.
We received complaints alleging
disabling conflicts of interest
and abuse of approaching
traditional concepts of
corruption.
And we received complaints
alleging violations of the
antido. Um.
In response to your second
question,
The
The formal
Complaints which the commission
investigates and adjudicates as
though it were operating as a
court, kind of in it's
quasi-judicial posture.
The legislature has created an
enormous amount of that process.
And
Those cases can, from the time
the complaint is filed,
Through a hearing on appeal.
Can can take up to 2 years to
finish. That's, that's better on
average than than if you filed a
civil action in state district
court.
I mean, I think, I think
comparing to
If we're looking across the
exercise of the judicial power,
we do pretty good at moving our
docket.
Um
With respect to actions that the
commission has discretion over.
We make decisions on that very
quickly.
That this is a case.
It's, it, it's not a good use of
our resources, this isn't the
case at all. This is a case, and
it's so important that we have
to commit resources to it, and
we're willing to follow civil
law. Thank you. And again,
that's kind of what I suspected
was it's, it's a long process, 2
years, and that's not, that's
not a criticism. I'm just
talking about.
When we're trying to adjust and
address.
Certain concerns you brought
forward.
Much time and much more damages
mean.
Kind of cause her in that. You
guys, uh, Madam chair, you guys
oversee local government, school
boards, councils, and those
types of things and
What are the majority of those
complaints?
Madam Chair Representative Baca,
2 years is a maximum to go from
the, the, the falling of the
administrative complaint all the
way through an appeal. Average,
about a year, maybe less.
For the administrative docket.
For that docket, the commission
does not have juris. The way
that the commission enforces our
state's governmental Conduct Act
and procurement code and
anti-Donation clause vis a vis
locals, is through civil actions
and state district court.
And yes, we received
submissions.
Every day, all the time about
local government actors and it's
mainly the procurement code, the
governmental Conduct Act.
Thank you,
Madam,
uh, Madam Chair and
representative, uh, I just
wanted to point you to page 3 of
the packet, uh, where I have the
state ethics commission
performance measures, and you
can see there the second one is
the percent of ethics complaints
within the within the agency's
jurisdiction that are either
disposed or set for public
hearing within 180 days after a
complaint is received and 79%
were done within fiscal year.
Thank you.
Uh, other questions from
Committee members, um, I just,
uh, I don't actually have a
question. I just wanna, um, say
that I really appreciate the
work of the ethics commission.
Um, I think some, some things
are public, you know, and that
we can follow in the newspaper,
um, others are not, um, you
know, the advisory opinions and
all of that, so just wanted to,
you know,
Say thank you for your work.
Um, and I think I'll take a
motion from
that, that's great. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. I move
uh a temporary table without
prejudice on this.
Great. Thank you. Motion made by
Senator Campos, seconded by
Representative Lujan. Thanks.
All right. Ah, public school
insurance Authority. Mr. Simon.
Good morning. Authority, Patrick
Sandoval and uh the deputy
director Martha Quintana and uh
the agency code for this agency
is agency 343 behind tab number
3.
342, I'm sorry. I
That's the other agency.
Uh, anyway, uh, as, as I was
saying, so, uh, the public
school Insurance Authority
provides uh both uh health
benefits and risk insurance for
88 of the 89 public school
districts in New Mexico.
Everyone except for Al
Albuquerque Public schools, as
well as all charter schools in
uh the state, and I will uh I
will uh allow the director to
get into the details of their
budget request, but, uh, Nips
requested a uh
Premium rate increase for the
benefits fund of 10.25% for FY
26. So, uh, that would, um,
raise about $33.5 million for
the agency, uh, and, um, about
22 million of that would need to
be added to the state
equalization guarantee, uh, for,
uh, public schools with an
additional 4.4 million from
higher education institutions.
On the wrist side, the uh agency
is uh requesting uh a 16% rate
increase, uh,
That would, uh, that would, uh,
raise, um,
I'm sorry, I'm, I'm, I'm having
trouble finding it. Well,
anyway, I'll, I'll let the, I'll
let the director say that, uh,
real quick, um, in addition to
the operating budget, uh,
Proposals, uh, the agency asked
for a couple of very significant
uh special appropriation
requests to uh help the agency
rebuild some fund balance.
So the agency requested $62.9
million from the general fund to
help cover uh COVID-19 costs,
uh, for the benefits fund. In
addition, the agency requested
120.5 million to the risk fund
to offset some large claims that
they've been seeing as well as
support sexual abuse prevention
and training. Uh, Joey, I'm
sorry, could you repeat that
number? Yeah, so 120.5 million
for the risks for the risk fund.
And uh uh
62.9 million.
For the uh benefits fund, so
that would come to a total of
183.4 million.
And with that, uh, Madam Chair,
I will hand that hand it over to
the director for his
presentation.
Thank you, Joey.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, as
Joey said with me today is
Deputy Director Quintana, and
then also our CFO Philip
Gonzalez.
So we do have a lengthy
presentation, but we can get
through it pretty quick, about
20 minutes or less, and we do
explain everything in our
presentation from our request to
why it's needed and then also
our expenses and any offsets
we're doing to help offset
those. So turning to page 2.
NIMSI is comprised of 88 public
school districts, 99 charter
schools, 10 higher educational
entities and 18 other
educational entities. The
authority serves 77,800
employees and dependents with
46,567 lives insured under
medical insurance. NIMSI is made
up of 12 FTE and is managed by
an eleven-member board of
directors.
Turning to page 3.
Slide 3 represents Nipsia's
appropriation request for fiscal
year 26, the authority is
requesting an increase in
expenditure authority of
18.5454% in benefits 16.28% in
risk and 5.58% in program
support.
We have additional slides for
risk and benefits to show the
need for the requested increases
in expenditure authority. Most
of the increase in program
support is in salaries and
benefits with minor increases in
contractual and other services.
For FY 26, the projected impact
on public school support is 39.7
million to fund the employer's
share of premium increases.
The increase consists of 22.1
million for employee benefit
premiums with an average 66%
employer contribution and 17.7
million for risk premiums.
Going to slide 4.
The FY 26 risk appropriation
request consists of a total
increase of 21,655,200, 355,200
is attributed to contractual
expenses, 14,492,500 is
attributed to claims and
6,744,100 is attributed to
excess insurance. There's a
slight increase in transfers to
program support of 50,000 are
anticipated.
ending FY 24 fundal is a
negative $11,663,492.
And we expect the deficit to
grow to $38,527,390 by the end
of FY 25.
Nemsia submitted a special
appropriation request to help
address the fund balance
deficit, reduced premiums,
offset the increased
self-insured retention for wind
and health claims and assist in
sexual abuse and prevention
efforts.
Turning to slide 5, effective
July 1st of 2024, the risk
increase.
Rate increase was 14.99%. The
NIMSO board of directors had
initially passed an increase of
31.86%. However, however, after
a meeting with a committee
consisting of the legislative
Finance Committee, legislative
education Study Committee,
public education department and
the Department of Finance and
Administration.
The board reconsidered the rate
increase and reduced the rate
from 31.86% to 14.99%.
With the intent of submitting a
special appropriation during the
legislative session.
The FY 26 risk increase can
range from 16.91% to 13.03%
depending on whether the
authority is granted an
appropriation. The goal is to
pass future rate increases that
are as minimal as possible.
Looking at slide 6, the FY 26
benefits appropriation request
consists of a total increase of
75, 56,900.
2,598,700 is attributed to
contractual expenses.
70,553,800 is attributed to
claims.
And 1,851,600 is attributed to
self-insured premiums.
There is a slight increase in
transfers to program support of
50,000.
Are anticipated ending FY 24
fund balance is 1,428,602, and
we expect to be in a deficit
fund balance of 15,886,732 by
the end of FY 25.
Nemsia submitted a special
appropriation request to help
address the projected fund
balance deficit, see COVID
reimbursement and reduced
premiums.
Turning to slide 7, the benefits
rate increase effective October
1st of 2024 will be 10%. The
NIMSA board of directors had
initially passed an increase of
15.53%.
However, after a meeting with
the committee consisting of the
LFC L E S C P E D and the
Department of Finance and
Administration, the board
reconsidered the rate increase
and reduced the rate from 15.53%
to 10% with the intent of
submitting an a special
appropriation.
During this legislative session.
Turning to page 8.
The risk program consists of
property, liability, and
workers' compensation.
The authority ensures
approximately 35.5 billion in
assets, of which 23 billion are
framed stucco construction, the
most flammable type of
construction. 60% of properties
are located in protection class
9 or 1010 being the worst
protection class and 60% are
located in 100.
Turning to page 9.
A slight line displays the cost
of property and liability and
workers' compensation claims for
fiscal years 18 to 26 fiscal
year 24 is unaudited and fiscal
year 25 and 26 are derived from
our risk actuaries and were
updated as of June 30, 2024.
During fiscal year 2024, large
property claims were paid out
due to hell losses.
Turning to slide 10.
Slide 10 includes sexual abuse,
molestation, and inappropriate
touching claims.
These claims include faculty on
student, faculty on faculty and
student on student.
Fiscal year 2023 and 2024 are
still considered immature to
help reduce the, reduce these
types of claims. Nimsio was
instrumental in passing House
Bill 128 school personnel
background and training.
Lim Xia also procured an
anonymous reporting system
through StopI solutions and FY
24 for school districts and
charter schools.
Going to slide 11.
This slide displays property
losses for the last 10 fiscal
years. During fiscal year 2019
to 2023, members suffer
significant losses of 65.5
million due to hell and wind
damage. The projected excess
insurance amount to be received
for these losses is 54.5
million.
These losses caused our wind and
he deductible to increase from
2.5 million to 10 million with
an aggregate of 25 million for
FY 24.
For FY 25, we have a
self-insured retention of 10
million for wind and he.
Going looking at slide 12, slide
12 displays the top 10 claims
paid in FY 24. It is important
to note that the date of loss on
these claims was prior to FY 24.
All 10 claims consist of
property and liability and 8 are
attributed to how damage alone.
Looking at slide 13 or page 13,
NIMSsia offers loss prevention
services through a contract with
Palms and Associates. These
services include prevention and
ergonomics, threat assessment,
active shooter, employment
practices, policy and
consulting, school facility
audits, reunification and
restorative practices.
MMC also offers a technical
assistance program for special
education through cooperative
educational services.
Turning to slide 14.
House Bill 128, school personnel
background and training was
passed during the 2021
legislative session.
House Bill 128 requires reports
of ethical misconduct by school
district personnel, employees,
volunteers, contractors and
contractors employees to be
reported to the superintendent
and public education department
requires school boards to adopt
policies to track child abuse
and ethical misconduct
allegations, enhances
requirements for work history
and other information on
applications for school
employment and contractor
positions.
Requires school district
personnel, contractors.
And volunteers to complete
school training programs.
One of the training programs is
offered and paid for by NIMSia
through Vector Solutions. On
sexual abuse prevention, student
boundaries, grooming, and
electronic and social media
boundaries. Palms and Associates
goes to school sites and
provides in-person training when
requested.
Palms and Associates has also
started completing HR audits and
training for districts and
charter schools with the primary
focus being House Bill 128.
Turning to slide 15.
Palms and Associates has
completed training for school
districts and charter schools as
a pre-audit for House Bill 128
compliance. The pre-audit
educates the school on what a
House Bill 128 audit will cover
and help schools understand all
the requirements of House Bill
128.
Since the inception of House
Bill 128 ethical misconduct
complaints have more than
doubled from 2021 to 2024.
So we believe the bill has made
a big difference in reporting at
the turning to slide 16.
Nimsia has seen a need to
educate students on navigating
healthy and unhealthy
relationships due to lawsuits,
the authority has received
concerning student on student
sexual and physical abuse. Palms
and Associates has created a
training titled Red Flags and
Green Lights, navigating healthy
and unhealthy relationships and
is currently completing training
for school districts and charter
schools.
The training focuses on defining
relationships, identifying the
impacts of unhealthy
relationships and building
healthy relationships.
It also focuses on resources and
support.
This training is new for this
school year and so far 10
districts and charter schools
have completed or scheduled the
the training.
educating over 6600 students.
Turning to slide 17.
MMCI entered into a contract
agreement with StopI Solutions
to provide an anonymous
reporting system for NIMSO
member school districts and
charter schools.
42 districts and charter schools
have enrolled in StopIt.
At the August immia board
meeting, the NIMSO board of
directors approved an amendment
to add a 24 hour vetting service
to alleviate the administrative
burden on districts.
We understand that some
districts can't hire additional
personnel and current personnel
are already assigned, turning to
slide 18, slide 18 displays
statistics from StopIt currently
over 119,000 students have
access to the system. During the
2024, 2025 school year, students
are accessing and reporting in
the system at a higher volume
than 23 and 24 school year.
Some schools have alternative
anonymous reporting systems in
place and NIMSA is not asking
schools to switch to stop it.
The goal is to help every NIMSA
member implement and make an
anonymous reporting system
available for students.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to Miss Quintana.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
I'm gonna start reviewing uh
benefits program, uh, starting
on slide 19.
And here we have uh
Uh
Picture of how claims uh for
medical and dental and our fees
associated with uh vision,
disability and life insurance
and our prescription drug claims
have increased over the years
and continuing to increase.
So, as part of our appropriation
requests, some of these
statistics, um, support those
increases because if we take a
look overall, um, between, um,
Uh, FY 24 and FY 25, we see an
overall increase of um $42.8
million in claims and over 40
million um
From FY 24 to FY 25. So it um
claims costs discontinue to
rise.
We move on to slide 20. This
information um is uh from uh
January 23 through December 23,
that is a comparison to the same
time frame, the same year for um
2022.
Um, what we can learn from these
slides is that 15% of our
members account for 82.8% of the
medical claim cost.
If we look to the right, um,
basically what we're seeing here
is outpatient hospital has
increased um $10.9 million or
about 9.7%. Medical benefit, um,
drug increases, this is a
prescription drugs, um,
administered while someone is
seeking services, um,
Uh, have increased by $5 million
or 19.4% and uh total
prescriptions have increased
$24.8 million or 29.7%.
If we move to slide 21, with
this represents is our high-cos
claimants for that same time
frame in the prior slide. Um,
some, uh, key things to know is,
um, if we look at asthma and
COPD to the far right, we have
just seen an increase of 14.3%
on asthma case uh conditions,
uh, 17.1% increase in, uh, per
member per year in the cost for
um COPD. We've also seen an
increase
For breast cancer, and then a
prevalence of prostate cancer.
But what this light is trying to
show show that 267 unique
high cost members account for
$60.5 million in claim costs.
We move to slide 22.
Here's a summary of, uh, from
July of 2023 through June of 24
of our 10 high-cost claimants
that have um caused uh the
public schoolsurance Authority,
a little over $12.1 million.01
thing to know is that these
members are still on the plan,
still have these conditions and
incurring claims.
But what we can see from this
list is we have 5 cancer
patients, um, someone with, uh,
you know, infections, kidneys,
high cholesterol, immune system
disorders, and then we do have a
newborn on the plan with was
very ill.
If we move to slide 23. This is
a summary of our prescription,
uh, cost management by
condition. You can see similar
to um our health plans, we're
seeing, you know, diabetes at
the top of the chart. Um, one
thing, um,
Uh, one of the things that
really pops out is obesity
management and the cost raising
and soaring, um, not only in
number of prescriptions, um, the
total cost, um, we're looking
at, you know, an increase of
38.4% and the per member per
month cost, um, rising over
607%.
Um, so we're seeing, you know,
the same, um, increases, um,
increases on the medical side as
well as on the prescription drug
side.
If we move to slide 24. This is
just a summary of our COVID-19
expenses uh from March of 2020
through June of 2023, uh, New
Mexico lifted the public health
emergency, um, on, um, uh, March
31st of 2023. Um, the federal
government, um, uh, ended the uh
public health emergency on May
11th of 2023, but due to the uh
federal requirement of member
notification.
of ending the public health
emergency, NIPSA did pay claims
through June 30th of 2023, and
on the medical side, except
expenses consist of testing,
treatment, and vaccines. And
when we think of the
vaccinations, it's the cost of
administering those vaccines,
you know, the vaccines were
free, but the cost to administer
um those vaccines, um, uh, did
increase those costs on the
prescription drug program, we,
um uh those claims cost.
consists of antiviral
medications, uh, over the
counter tests, and again that
administration of vaccinations.
Um, under the American rescue,
uh, Plan Act, um, also known as
ARPA on March 11th of 2021, um,
and, um, as we were directed by
the New Mexico Department of
Homeland Security and Emergency
Management, NIPSA, um, was asked
to uh submit a request to um the
Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or FEMA, um, in the
amount, and we did submit uh 6
separate uh requests that
totaled.
almost $20 million of incurred
claims uh from March of 2020
through September of 2021, but
as you can see on the
determination from FEMA, um,
they identified that we were a
state agency and a private
payment agreement and a uh a
pool of funds to pay for claims
and um uh
Although we made this expense,
um, we are a self-funded health
plan and we are not eligible for
funding as it would be a
considered a duplicate, uh.
Spend basically.
And as you can see from this
slide, um, just with our total
spend, it was uh over 50, um,
uh,
$50.5 million. We did get that
$15 million appropriation, um,
and, um,
We still were left with um over
$35.5 million of spend.
But as Nipsey is, uh, we want to
do uh remind everyone that we
are doing our due diligence by
promoting wellness and
well-being services to encourage
members to be more proactive
with maintaining their health,
um, with services provided as
part of the premiums that the
employer and the employee pay
for, um, uh, as part of their
premium. So we offer a plethora
of weight and health resources
from our health plans, we're uh
uh offering again the same thing
for mental health.
And behavioral health resources
for our members. We move on to
the next slide. Some of our cost
uh cost saving solutions on our
pre uh prescription benefit
programs. If we have, we have a
transformed diabetes care
program. Um,
Members are identified for this
program by our health plans, um,
the program is voluntary, but it
is a program that helps those
members with diabetes to um
monitor and track um their
diabetes and overall, overall
health. They remind them of
screenings and um needed testing
a system with lab results, um,
and how to take their insulins,
and there are dedicated
specialists, um, uh, to assist
our members, um, such as the
team of pharmacists, nurses.
specialists. We have our
Caremark cost saver program, um,
basically trying to determine
the lowest cost comparison, uh,
for that membershi at point of
claim when they go to the
pharmacy, um, and at the same
time by utilizing this program,
it retains the claims on the
benefit which applies the cost
to deductibles and out of pocket
limits, but the way you think
about this program is the
prescription is filled and at
the time of uh that prescription
is getting filled, um,
The uh pharmacies are trying to
see if there's another uh lower
cost option, such as the GoodRX
or single, single carer that we
see on TV and of course that
lower cost is going to be passed
on to the member for that
prescription.
If we move on to slide 27. Um,
we have a drug savings review.
It's designed to eliminate
unnecessary medication, um, as
those medications are coming in
from prescribers. It's gonna
identify members who might be at
risk for drug-induced
conditions.
Um
And once those situations have
been identified, there is an
outreach to those prescribers to
recommend, um, uh, an advise of
those situations and in that um
little snippet. I just wanted to
share that, you know, total
savings in 2022 were $3.9
million. We do have a point of
sale estimated rebate program
where uh cost an estimated
rebate for an ingredient cost is
calculated before the member
cash your amount.
At the point of sale to reduce
the price to that member. Um, we
have, um, started, um, doing,
uh, and participating with
biosimilars April of this year,
we uh removed Humira from our
formulary and went with the
Humira biosimilars, um, and, um,
we're anticipating, uh, savings,
uh, by that, making that move.
We do have channel management
where not only do we have, you
know, the 90 day supply through
mail.
order, we have participating
pharmacies that um uh dispense
at a retail 90 for 90 days, and
then we have a specialty
pharmacy, um, uh, through
Prudent RX. What they do is try
and find the most cost
effective, um, uh, medications
for our members and in most
cases, the cost would be zero
cost share. We do have
utilization management with
formulary tiers required uh uh a
prior authorizations on
medications and then step
therapy.
Um, steering the member to try
lower cost therapies, uh, first
before they jump to that, uh,
very expensive drug. If we move
to slide 28, another cost saving
measure is our stop loss
insurance, um, the example in
the middle describes how um uh a
plan can leverage or mitigate a
trend in um the stop loss or
aggregate deductible, and we can
see or whatever that we can, um,
CS savings if, if we're um
setting these deductibles, um,
uh, on our stop loss program and
as a side note, um, and, um,
The uh last calendar year, um,
2023, we were reimbursed
$330,000 out of our stop loss
insurance. Some other cost
saving solutions if we move to
slide 29, we do have an annual
audit cycle on all our plans,
um, uh, one per year. We have um
And are in the process of uh
releasing an RFP hopefully by
mid-November, um, with our
partners, the retiree Healthcare
Authority in Albuquerque Public
Schools for claims integrity on
it that will do uh um be
reviewing a 100% of a healthcare
provider's claims to ensure that
um they're being paid correctly
and determine um and collect any
recoveries from those improper
claim payments. We have ongoing
medical claims and
administrative procedures,
audits.
again to make sure compliance is
being followed. We've, uh, also
have pre and post-implementation
audit for new vendors to make
sure they're administering our
plan correctly, um, with our
pharmacy benefits manager. We um
also have a claims and a rebate
on it to again, making sure that
the pricing um is um uh uh as
designed in our agreement and
that the benefits administration
is being handled correctly.
Moving on to slight
3D, we, this year we did conduct
uh what we call a PBM market
check where we're seeing what's
out there, um, what's the
national trend out there and
make sure that the cost that
we're getting for prescriptions,
um, is, uh, um.
You know, meeting that trend and
we anticipate that for July 24th
through June 25, we have an
estimated price improvement of
um up to 2.1%, which is about
900 a little over $900,000. We
do have a claims data warehouse,
um, that we had since 2014 to
help us uh monitor these trends
over the years and year over
year on our claims costs and um
some of the examples would be
the slides that you saw in uh
21.
through 23, um, that produced
the shape and radar report that
gives those details, um, into,
um, uh, multiple elements to try
and uh follow trends.
If we move to slide 31, we do a
repricing exercise to make sure
that um providers, networks, um,
are, um, uh, analyze the
provider network so we make sure
that we are, um, uh, collecting
and, um, you know, paying the
correct prices and making sure
that, you know, we're um they're
meeting the standards that
they're required to meet. We are
in the exploration of near sight
and mobile clinics, we are
planning in the planning.
stages of releasing a request
for information. We've
identified uh um uh looking for
identified provider and member,
uh, care gaps, and we wanted to
place, um, thinking of placing
these across the state and make
them accessible and collaborate
with other partners with
membership and those identified
locations. And lastly, I wanted
to share that we implemented um
Lantern previously branded as
Surgery Plus, which is a
musculoskeletal surgical
services for episodes of care
for non-emergency surgeries. It
eliminates the cost share
completely for that episode of
Care for the Member and the
savings comes with bundling the
cost of that uh orthopedic
surgery or pain intervention and
um those procedures, um, cost
less because of the favor
favorable rates and negotiated
uh pricing with the
Providers and facilities, um,
there is strict, um,
credentialing for those
providers that participate in
this program, part of this
program is a travel, um, uh,
program that provides mileage
reimbursement, hotel per diem,
and meals and travel-related
expense expenses for the patient
and the companion, including
airfare if appropriate, and
there is guided support for a
person from a personal care
advocate for these members going
through um those services.
and our transitioned from their
orthopedic surgeon any, any
physical therapy to that episode
of care and then transition back
for uh post-care for that
surgery.
And stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Um, that, um,
was excellent uh and uh
I have to say I learned quite a
bit.
Um
We have questions.
Uh, Representative Garrett, then
Senator Wood. Thank you. Thank
you for the presentation. So if
we had no hail, wind,
Uh, ethical misconduct people.
Our rates would go down.
But
Here, here's my real question.
It says over the last 10 years.
Uh,
you paid out 80.6 million for
143.
Sexual misconduct claims.
So that's the last 10 years.
What about
Uh, since the reporting
statistics have gone up.
How does that relate to paid out
claims.
Because it's, you know, it's
very significantly higher.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, the last 10
years, the claims have gotten
higher, the cost to defend these
claims have gotten higher. Um,
the settlements have gotten
higher. Um, they're not
decreasing by any means,
especially with any claims we
hear in the national media that
affects us as well. And of
course our own claims affect us.
Um, I can say that
unfortunately, 2022 and 20.
2022 to 2024 are considered
immature. These claims take time
to develop. They take anywhere
from 1 to 4 years by the time a
claim can be settled.
So during that time, there's a
lot of cost that goes into the
claim to defend the claim.
Until we get to the actual pay
up.
Thank you. So actually we're
talking possibly about much
higher.
Figure which you'll report to us
when you have it.
Um, my other question is, um,
He
Regarding all of the drug and
pharmaceuticals do you work with
the New Mexico Healthcare
Authority and other
Things to try to provide more
cough cost saving measures.
Madam Chair representative, we
have started working with the
healthcare authority, that
relationship is very new. We've
been working with them since
July. They are the chair of the
IBAC. So we have had a couple of
meetings. I think we need to
have more meetings and we will
talk to them about that and see
what the emphasis is going to be
on PBM. I know there is
different models out there right
now for PBM, um, there's an ADA
pricing and there's pass through
pricing, um.
So we really have to evaluate
those models because what we've
been exploring is getting a
repricing of NADA pricing on our
current plan from our
consultants to see if that would
actually save us money, because
as soon as you take that
pricing, sometimes you eliminate
your um
You eliminate your, the rebates,
I'm sorry, I blanked out there.
So I know a lot of times rebates
are looked at as negative, but
sometimes in the scheme of
things, when you look for
overall value and overall cost
to the member of the rebates do
play a big part, and sometimes
it's beneficial to have a plan
with rebates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just one
more question. It's, I'm sure
you know how frustrating it is
to educators, they get a raise,
half the race goes to health
insurance premiums going up.
So, I just hope we can work on
that. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam Chair of the
Healthcare Authority took over a
lot of work.
Our, our different healthcare
funds.
And I see that you're requesting
quite a bit of appropriation
here, 183 million.
So
How is your fund?
In relationship.
How's it
How are the increases in yours.
Insurance program compared to
the healthcare authority.
Are they, they
More or less equal or
Is there apples to apples.
A comparison we can make to
this.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods, um,
displayed on the screen are our
increases over the last 10 years
and our employee benefits fund.
So,
The increases are not gonna be
equal. We've passed on the
needed increases that we've
needed to pass on to become
solvent. Currently at the end of
June 30th of 24 for our employee
benefits fund, we are still
sitting at a positive fund
balance of $1 million. Now, we
do expect that fund balance to
go into the negative this year,
but up to that point, we have
been solvent in our employee
benefits fund. We passed on
larger increases than state
employees.
But
The maintenance of our fund is
positive.
And I
Somehow I didn't. I don't think
I understand.
The madam, Madam Chair and
Senator Woods, I think maybe
what you were asking for is how
did the, how do the rate
increases compare. So for um
state agency employees, the
healthcare authority, uh, and,
and Department of Finance had
agencies building a 10% rate
increase roughly 26. Nipsey is
requesting a 1010 and 1 quarter.
So,
10, 10% versus 10 1 quarter. OK,
with that in mind,
This one is asking for 183
million.
Increase
Uh, from the general fund, what
is the other one asking for. So,
um, Madam Chair and Senator
Woods, so I, I'm not recalling
the so healthcare authority
doesn't handle the risk side.
Most of Nipsey's special
requests on the risk side. The
general services department did
submit a request um for the
public liability fund. I'm not
recalling what that is at the
top of my head. I think it's
somewhere in the neighborhood of
50 million, um, for the public
liability fund, uh,
So there was not a request, a
special appropriation request
from the healthcare authority or
the employee benefit fund that
we've seen at this point, uh,
but as we'll cover on Thursday
when we talk about specials, we
think some supplemental in
deficiency um requests have not
come in yet from agencies, uh,
DFA provided a later, uh,
deadline for those, for those
requests. So it may be possible
that we receive a request from
the healthcare authority that we
don't know about it.
OK.
So, and the other question I
have and, and there's a lot of
this answered here on.
On page 35 of
That's, it's up on the screen
right now.
And you offer how many uh
healthcare plans.
To your, it, it shows at least
2.
And then when it gets to 23, 24,
it looks like there's
3 healthcare plan.
Is that right?
Madam Chair, senator, so we
offer two carriers we offer Blue
Cross Blue Shield and
Presbyterian, and within those
carriers for Presbyterian, we
offer a low plan and a high
plan.
And for Blue Cross Blue Shield,
we offer a low plan, a high
plan, and an EPO plan.
OK.
So there is
Of course, anyone outside of
A Presbyterian.
System
would go to the other.
Blue Cross Blue Shield, I'm
assuming.
Madame Chair, senator, up to
this point, that was true.
However, Presbyterian has just
entered into agreement with
Aetna.
It is a national agreement, so
that will expand providers and
doctors all over the US.
OK.
I guess what I'm asking and, and
there is
I know that that
If I have
Two kids, 2 teenage kids, or 2
elementary kids, a family unit.
The, the
Health care costs could be.
Premium could be different
according to exactly who you're
insuring.
And so it's hard to
Hard to say apples to apples on
any of this stuff.
Um, the, I'm assuming the choice
we have to make is
Is how much
There's the state
General fun
How much will we have to
supplement or how much are we
going to supplement to keep the
rates.
Increases lower.
On these funds because
I'm assuming we have a big
enough pool that we've
negotiated the best.
Deal we can negotiate with the
insurance companies.
Um
With a bigger pool help you on
that.
On that.
Particular
negotiation with these insurance
companies.
Madame Chair, senator, so right
now we go out and negotiate with
the IBAC, which consists of the
state of New Mexico used to be
GSD now the retiree healthcare
Authority. Um, we go out with
the retiree healthcare and APS
and NIMSA, we all go out
together. It's possible that we
could gain other municipalities
or others to join us. However,
when we go out, we are
self-insured for medical. So we
would save on administration
fees, we really wouldn't save.
On the contractual cost or the
claims cost because the provider
our medical carriers go out and
contract with providers
individually. We do not contract
with providers or with doctors
or with facilities.
OK. That's the extent of my
knowledge, Madam Chair, I
believe I'll quit. Thank you.
Quit while you're ahead.
All right.
Uh, Representative Lujan for a
quick question that was my
question is the pool and and
growing the pool and we know
that Madam Chair, you know, with
their local governments, we know
that we have to supplement, uh,
and we probably will have, we
probably will see a special
request from
Um
From our states, uh, and
I guess that's, but but you
answered that, but I'm still
questioning whether how we can
build out a bigger pool
insurance pool for the state so
that we can see those lower
costs across the board, but it
takes input from everybody. Is
that correct? I'm sure.
Madam Chair representative,
that's correct. And right now,
that's limited to the IBA, but
we could expand. Thank you.
Um, thank you, director and, uh,
deputy director for the
presentation. Um, I have one
question, um, hopefully just a
short answer, um, cause I would
just like to know, um, if you,
if Nipsia, Eysia.
Um, is considering, uh, rates
setting policies that
concentrate losses.
Um
From sexual misconduct claims
among those entities
experiencing the losses. Um,
And um if you might be looking
Uh
For entities that declined to
adopt policies designed to limit
exposure, um, charging them a
higher rate.
Madden chair short answer is we
have started looking at it and
we are going to become more
aggressive with it now in
November.
Thank you. That was a lovely
answer.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Madam Chair. I move for a
temporary table without
prejudice, and again, thank you
all very much for the
presentation. Thank you.
OK, we've got one final
presentation. Yep. All right.
Retiree healthcare authority,
uh, 343.
Um, and is there a presentation
for this?
Oh, OK. OK.
OK.
Everyone's gone.
OK. Well, and it looks like it's
10 slides, uh, so maybe we can
just whip through it, uh,
online. Christina is gonna get
the presentation for you, Madam
Chair.
um, I'll just, I'll just go
ahead and dive in real quick
though. So this is a, this one
is agency code 343. It's uh
right behind the public
schoolsurance Authority, and
that is the retiree healthcare
authority, which provides uh a
health benefits for retired uh
employees of state agencies,
public schools, and, uh, local
governments in
uh New Mexico. Uh, so this
agency is not uh directly a
general fund agency. It uh
maintains uh $1.5 billion trust
fund.
And uh
Collects both premiums uh from
retirees as well as
contributions from uh current
employees and employers as well
as um a distribution from uh
from the Texas suspense fund,
which I'll cover in just a
second. So for FY 26, the agency
requested a $4.9 million dollar
increase, that's about 1.2%. Uh,
the relatively modest size of
that increase, I think has a lot
to do with uh how the current
year operating budget is um
is compared to what they're
actually seeing, uh, in, in
healthcare claims. So, uh,
basically the agency uh for FY
um
Uh, for FY 24, uh, saw about 330
million, so you can see there's
there's quite a bit of um
Of authority in their budget
that they don't necessarily
need. Now, what happens to that
money if it's not spent, that
reverts back to the retiree
Healthcare Trust Fund. So, um,
uh, that for of that 4.9
million, about 4.6% of that
would go into the Health
Benefits Administration program
to pay uh medical claims and
about 288,000 would go to
program support for the
administrative costs of that um
of that of the agency, uh, that
An increase for program support
of about 7%. Most of that is in
the personal services and
employee benefits category where
the agencies is requesting one
additional FTE to help manage uh
customer relations and uh
financial reporting matters and
sort of provide the agency with
some red redundancy, uh, in case
they experience a loss of uh of
an employee. So, um, with that,
I will hand it over to the
director to talk about his
budget.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee for the
opportunity. I thank Mr.
Joseph Simon here for the great
introduction in regards to the
agency. I just want to take one
second to introduce two
individuals with me today for my
staff. I do have our deputy
director Linda Attencio to my
back right here, and our chief
financial officer, Sherry Ayani.
Uh, with that being said, we can
move on to slide number 2.
Um, and slide number 2 does give
you a, a overview of kind of our
agency in regards to how many
active participants who are
currently working that are
paying into this program, which
is a little over 93,000 as far
as retirees, we're just under
66,000. We do see our average
age of retirees about 71.7% and
the average age of retirement at
61.6. Uh, on the investment
side, one of the new changes I
just want to kind of highlight
is we did actually hire a
consultant to help us with our
investments. Um, it is a Mikita
that did come on as of July.
Uh, prior to that, we would do a
biannual asset allocation
reviews, uh, previously it was
done with Wilshire who had did a
review in 2023, uh, they
reaffirmed that the 7% uh target
that we had was, was doable. Um,
and then as far as regards to
the investment pools that we
utilize, it is through the State
Investment council.
Moving on to the next slide, um,
one of the things I did want to
highlight because it does kind
of tie into our budget of what's
kind of driving a little bit of
the cost this year and that's
really just kind of looking at
some of the challenges that the
agency faces. Uh, the first one
is really the inflation
reduction Act. This was actually
passed at the federal level. Um,
there's some great things that
are happening in regards to
helping our members with this,
um, as far as looking at the
prescriptions, they're actually
putting caps, uh, this year they
put a cap of 8000 next year in
2025, that's actually moving to
2000. So while it helps a lot of
the members
knowing exactly what's coming
out of their pocket and what
they're gonna have to pay. In
many cases, they're not even
gonna pay the $2000 because
there's actually a formula that
goes into place that actually
determines what they would pay,
but where this really comes into
play is the dollar amount that
we as the agency would be
looking to pick up as the
employer.
Or the plan sponsor, um, with
the, the change that occurred of
not only putting this cap in
here, uh, as far as the federal
reinsurance that they would
assist us with on the
prescription side, there's been
some changes to that as well.
Uh, previously, the federal
government would pick up a
larger share of, you know,
closer to 80% and then we would
be, you know, um, responsible
for the for a difference. Uh,
but we're really seeing where
that's kind of shifting. Uh,
we're seeing now where the
federal government would be
picking up a lower amount. Um,
the manufacturers will pick up a
little bit more.
However, we're gonna be picking
up about 60%. So there's gonna
be a little bit of a swing
that's gonna be additional
costs. So we already, already
seeing that coming into fruition
with some of the premiums that
are in place with our Medicare
Advantage plans. Uh, we've seen
where some of our plans have
been able to maintain uh the
current premiums that they had
assessed of staying flat, uh,
but we have actually seen one
plan that came up with a 42%
increase. Um, so this is a lot
of uncertainty as far as how
this is gonna play out with some
of these uh health plans that
are unaware. We also know
In regards to some of the
Medicare Advantage star ratings
that you'll see in that second,
uh, kind of, uh, topic there or
title. Um, there's been some
changes in the star ratings.
We've seen some of those plans
actually go down.
And when they look at the star
ratings, it actually plays into
how much they get reimbursed
from the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. Uh, it
also looks at the risk scores.
So these are all things where
they're getting a little bit
less dollars, and so therefore
they're having to look at ways
to make up some of that
difference for their plans. So
that's where we do see some of
this playing out into some of
the premium costs for us. Uh,
other challenges that I know
have come up in other meetings
and continue to be a topic is
just the, the, the shortage that
we have in medical
professionals, um, it's an
ongoing effort. We continue to
look at.
Uh, the, the different
committees that are talking
about this, the different
organizations, uh, we recognize
it too. We definitely want to
continue to help and in any way
we can to support those
endeavors. And then the last one
is just the increase in
prescription drug costs. Uh,
we're just seeing a lot of new
prescriptions that are coming
out, driving some additional
costs there. I'm sure a lot of
people are also aware of the GLP
ones that came out. Uh, we
actually do see that too on our
commercial side that helps drive
some of those costs. So it's
some of the things that are
adding to our budget in
particular, uh, when it comes to
paying for those benefits.
Um, with that being said too, as
far as one of the studies that
we do with all these changes, we
want to make sure uh we're
looking at as far as where we
stand with our other
post-employment benefits. So we
do have a GASB 74. Uh, I will
say the numbers in green are
just the preliminary results.
This has not been finalized. Uh,
we're working through our audit,
working through our GASB 74, so
we hope that it will be soon.
Uh, but we're trying to monitor
this very closely to see what
kind of impact this would have.
Um, but long story short, we are
seeing some of our, our
liabilities going up because of
some of those uh cost increases.
that I, that I discussed, uh,
but when we look at our funded
status towards the bottom, we're
still seeing that we're moving
in the right direction. Maybe
not as much as we have in the
past where we moved from 25 to
33 to 44, uh, but we are still
expecting to move into 46, so
we're still making our path
forward with it.
On the next slide, you'll see
our solvency for the 2024. Uh,
this is in relation to in
relation to the solvency, uh, we
do see too.
Um, in regards to, uh, what
action was taken at our annual
board meeting. There was a 2%
pre-medicare increase, um, as
well as 2% uh medical supplement
rate increase. These are the
benefits that we're
self-insured. Uh, we did see a
slightly higher increase for
dependence of 3%, uh, but
relatively, uh, a lot more
modest than many of the other
increases you may see out there,
um, or what we've even had in
the past, uh, with our MAPD
plans, uh, like I said, that we
did see a range of 0 to 42% as
far as increases, uh, but we
also did see that some
the plans are going away and FOI
20 or or calendar year 25, uh
due to some of those changes,
the donut hole for Medicare
Advantage plans was going away,
also known as the coverage gap.
So, uh, as likely with our MAPD
plans, uh, the plan twos that we
had, they did have those donut
holes, so with that going away,
we were actually removing those
plans as well. Um, but when we
look at our solvency, we do look
that we're solvent. We start
deficit spending in 2034,
meaning we are having to tap
into some of our funds, uh, but
we continue to show that we
actually do come out of it. Uh,
there is
Some detailed part of that is uh
not only what we're doing on our
side, but some of that has to do
with the tax distribution fund
as well, uh, that does support
us in regards to coming out of
that deficit.
Moving on to slide number 6 that
gets in the healthcare Benefits
Administration.
Uh, I know Mr. Simon really did
cover a lot of that, but we're
I'll just draw your attention to
and looking in that first chart
is in that line item number 3.
You'll see for Medicare
Advantage, that's actually one
of the drivers in our budget, as
I did talk about the inflation
reduction Act and some of the
additional costs. That's where
we were budgeting for the
anticipation of it growing. So
we have that 3 million and then
the line item number 4 for the
voluntary coverages, that would
be our dental, vision, and life
insurance, uh, for the last RFP
that we released, we did see
some increased cost as it
relates to.
a little bit to our dental and
vision and that was driving it
as well. So those are some of
the dollar amounts that are
equating to about that 4.9 or
1.2% increase. moving the
program support.
Uh, we could see as far as with
the personal services, um, for
particularly for the 200, 300,
and 400 category codes. Uh, this
is where we do take a little bit
more time to look at as we are
requesting the one FTE to once
again help us. I know there's
been a lot of talk with the
vacancy rate. We've been about
10.8, uh, for our agency, we're
only about 28 FTEs, so when we
do lose one or two people, it
really makes a big difference on
our percentage, um, and what
we've seen as far as some of the
people leaving has either been
due to retirement, people
looking at promotions that are
outside our agency, uh,
that's been internally where
they've been promoted. So once
again, it kind of creates that
vacancy on the back end that we
have to fill, so that's kind of
contributing to the vacancy, uh,
but once again, uh, with the
staff that we have, we need
every single one of those
individuals. Um, so we are
looking for that one FTE that
would be administrative
operations manager to really
support us with some of our
endeavorors creating additional
efficiencies within the agency,
uh, to hopefully create some
savings as well. Um, the
contractual services, we do
break it out. I won't go into
everything within that bullet,
uh, but pretty much every one of
those dollars is spoken for.
Um, especially with the, with
the addition of the uh new
consulting investment services
and we know that with uh our
audit contract, it will be
ending, and we anticipate that
will be growing, so we do see
some increased costs, which is
contributing to our contractual
services going up. And then the
very last category being our
other category, uh, where we
have a few main cost drivers
with uh do it uh IT services,
rent and postage in the mail
that's really kind of driving to
that 4.6% uh increase as well.
Moving to the next slide.
is really our trust fund as it
was mentioned before. Uh, we've
actually hit a new high of the
$1.5 billion but now we've added
some additional dollars to that
where it's actually 1.5 uh 73,
um, and we continue to show
growth over the last 10 years.
Uh, you, you can see back in
September of 2014 where we had
377 million and we've continued
to slowly and steadily with the
board's help, continue to
progress and grow this, uh,
where this really helps is going
back to that Gatsby study, it
lowers our liabilities, helping
our agencies.
but also helping those other
participating agencies or
employers, uh, such as cities,
counties, ones that rely on
having to report these
liabilities of their financial
statements, and it really helps
them with their bond rating.
And moving on to number 9 as it
was stated with our uh trust
fund growing and kind of
reaching these new highs, uh, we
are gonna be having a
legislative proposal to file a
joint resolution, uh, where
we're doing similar to what the
pension plans have done, uh,
with ERB and Perra and wanting
to protect that $1.5 billion
ensuring that that money stays
there and that is specifically
allocated and dedicated for the
beneficiaries of the individuals
who have been paying into the
system. Uh, so we will be
bringing that through this
session, uh, as, as that comes
around if you're here for 20.
25.
And with that, Madam Chair, on
the last slide, it will get to
my contact information. Uh, I
know that was rather a brief,
but I know you've had lots of
information today. Uh, so I
really just wanted to kind of
highlight and hit the key parts,
uh, but I do stand for any
questions.
Thank you, director, uh,
Representative Chatfield.
Uh
Couple of years ago, we worked a
lot on the ERB and the PERA
bonds and that, you know, I, I
was always looking for a 100%
funded and uh and I was told,
no, you know, you get up there
60%, 70% funded you, you're kind
of in good shape. So I'm looking
at, at the page.
Or
And uh it looks like since 2021,
your% funded is going up, up,
up, which is better, better,
better, but you're still just at
46% funded. Is that?
Is that OK? I mean, is that uh
in a dangerous area or is it
good or just helping the cowboy.
I understand that. Madam Chair,
Representative Chatfield, um,
the progress we've made has been
very good. I, I mean, knowing
that this agency when it
started, it was not pre-funded.
And so there's really had to
been the growth over this since
the time of 1990, uh, really
having to grow this trust fund.
So that part is good. Now, as
far as how it relates to the
nation, I think we're probably
in the top 15, moving closer up
probably into the top 10 as, as
we speak and
Uh, the funding status, uh,
there's definitely still some
more work to go, uh, but we seem
to be trending in the right
direction and showing positives
of where we, we, we've kind of
accumulated over the last few
years.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
you, Madam Chair, for your time.
All right, Representative Lujan.
Man, I, I think he's falling
along the same lines of which uh
Senator Woods and I were asking
in the previous conversation
about expanding the pool, uh,
insurance pool for a state.
Where do you think that, or can,
do you think that that could
happen with our retiree plan.
I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, uh, I do agree that there
is opportunities out there, so
we continue to evaluate it. Uh,
I do know within the IBAC, as
was mentioned before with the
previous director with NIMSia.
We do utilize that as purchasing
power. We take all the
membership between the
organizations, the last PBM RFP,
UNM actually joined us in that
particular RFP. So I think
wherever anybody else would like
to join us from in the state as
an opportunity. However, we are
not just stopping there. We've
actually had meetings with other
states, uh, I've actually talked
with the Kentucky, uh.
Know your RX uh as another
coalition that's out there
purchasing to see if there's
actually a way that we could
maybe work together. There's a
few other coalitions out there.
So we are looking and kind of uh
really kind of investigate where
there might be opportunities
that we can align, um, and
seeing if there is ways that we
could leverage not just our
purchasing power, but maybe some
partnerships that are out there.
Uh, we have seen it in other
states that are doing it, so
sometimes they're a little bit
different and how they their
organizations are working. I
know there's actually going to
be a presentation on Thursday,
uh, with one of those group.
groups that actually had bid on
our business back, uh, I'd say
maybe a few years ago, uh, which
is to be the Northwestern
Coalition up in uh the
Northwestern side. They're now
referred to as a ray RX. Uh, I
could tell you at the time when
I was evaluating him, one of the
things that we could not do with
them is they did not have an egg
we plan for retirees. So at that
time, it was not feasible. Uh, I
know they have made changes, uh,
but we'll be continuing to
evaluate uh those types of
organizations as well as other
coalitions because there's many
more and then attending some of
the national conferences that I
go to.
does allow me some opportunity
to talk to those groups and see
where there's opportunity.
Thank you, man. And what it, it
would take legislation then for
us to help you with when you
find the right venue, so to
speak, to do that, or would it
be more simple to just uh have
Medicare requirements for the,
the plans that we have.
Now, to expand the pool manager.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, I believe
with the procurement rules,
there are procurement rules that
would allow us to go out and
actually strike these deals
staying within them, uh, you can
actually do certain multi-state
as long as we're following the
procurement rules. Um, so there
is opportunity now there has
been some talks, uh, I know of
other procurement options that
are out there. I think in those
cases, there would probably need
to be action, but if we were
still following our normal
procurement rules and we were
just kind of coupling up with
some of these entities or or
they were bidding on our
business through the RFP, uh, I
think.
That would still be an
opportunity and, and Ray RX is
one that, like I said previously
responded to an RFP we put out,
they just were not at the time,
uh, the best.
Response for us at that time.
Appreciate your time and work
and, and all the, the due
diligence that you're doing on
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Excellent.
Uh, Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, I move for a temporary
table without prejudice on this
one particular presentation.
Thank you very much for it and
Madam Chair, thank you very much
for a wonderful job that you did
today. Thank you.
Well, thank you.
Um, thank you, uh, for the
presentation. Thank you to all
of our subcommittee members, and
we are done for the evening.
