that um
Uh, this morning, the vice
chairman and I will be slipping
out a little before 11, we're,
we're scheduled for a
presentation at the LFC at 11 on
our um
priorities. So we've just made
up some priorities. I hope it's
OK with everybody.
No, we talked about these,
uh the uh LFC staff that have
been meeting, meeting with us
all summer long have been
identifying things as they come
up, so we have a very long list.
over with them and will be
presenting them.
Um, lunch is scheduled for
11:30. There is nothing except
the current presentation on all
morning.
But if we, if we end early,
we'll just take a little break
or, or um um uh.
Hang around in place until lunch
arrives at 11:30. It's not a
working lunch today. We don't
have a presentation scheduled. I
think Marla Schultz is providing
the lunch today.
So, um,
Those of you who want to go out
might have enough time to slip
out, but there will be lunch
provided here today.
And with that, we'll get started
with our agenda and the item
this morning is one we've, we've
been talking about quite a bit
over the, over this, this
period, the uh opioid settlement
funding. What's happening with
that, with the money coming in,
it's not forever, it's not a
forever account. So we want to
hear how we're going to spend it
in the way to get the most
benefit from it.
And with us this morning, we
have um Barbara Ben Como, the
chief administrative officer of
the city of Las Cruces, we have
Shawna Hartley.
So worker and consultant with
the opioid remediation
collaborative.
Stanford Kemp
The deputy director of
Behavioral Health and wellness
division at the city of
Albuquerque and uh Doctor Wayne
Lindstrom, the deputy county
manager for Bern Lea County's
Behavioral Health.
So, I'm not sure what order you
all are gonna go in, but we'll
turn it over to you.
Uh,
thank you so much, Senator, um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and members of the committee,
um, there's still a few of you,
um, on this committee from my
days, uh, at the state
overseeing uh behavioral health
services, so some of you haven't
seen in a few years and uh
It's good to, always good to see
familiar faces. Um,
We're listed on the agenda as an
update on the Burley County's,
uh, behavioral health, opioid,
um, settlement fund strategic
plan and uh we thought it would
be well talking uh to the uh
committee about these
developments that we not just
focus on what's going on between
Burley County and the city of
Albuquerque, uh, but also
includes some other
other significant, uh, opioid
settlement fund initiatives that
are going on in the state as
well, and that would be more
informative, uh, for you and a
better balance between, you
know, what's going on in the
major urban metropolitan area
versus what's going on in rural
sections of New Mexico as well.
Again, I'm Wayne Lindstrom, um,
I oversee a new division for
behavioral health in Burlio
County. We had an ordinance
passed uh back in June, uh, to
create this new behavioral
health authority and to elevate
behavioral health within county
government and create the deputy
county manager position which I
currently um occupy. Um,
I, I think I'd like to um have
members here, uh, just say a few
things about their background.
As well by way of introduction.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Stanford Kemp. I am uh with the
city of Albuquerque and a deputy
director role, over receiving
behavioral health and wellness
division, as well as the health
social service centers, there's
4 of them and uh looking to
expand community access to
different types of interventions
around Albuquerque as well. Uh,
I was with the state for about 5
years working with behavioral
health service division, the
Behavioral Health Collaborative,
Department of Health.
Primary focus overdose
prevention and substance use
treatment prevention and harm
reduction.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair, Vice Chair
and committee members. My name
is Barbara Bencomo. I'm the
chief administrative officer for
the city of Las Cruces, and I've
been at that organization for 14
years, um, very grateful to be
able to partner with our Donana
County um department of Health
and Human Services and Jamie
Michael, she and I co-facilitate
the effort that we're gonna talk
to you about this morning, uh,
prior to that, I have, um, 8
years' experience in healthcare.
Consulting primarily in
hospitals across the United
States, but very happy to be
here, serving my local
government and communicating the
results of our efforts here to
you this morning. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair and members of our
committee. My name is Shawna
Hartley, and I am an
independently licensed social
worker and have worked in New
Mexico for almost 28 years now.
Um, my career actually started
in one of my rural counties,
which is Valencia County. I've
worked at CYFD, um, the
nonprofit sector with Valencia
counseling Services for
approximately 15 years, I've
held various administrative
positions, including a hospital
administrator.
Turquoise lodge for a decade.
And I'm very proud today to
represent um 7 rural counties in
New Mexico, which include
Valencia, Sierra, Cibola,
Hidalgo, Guadalupe, Socora, and
Catrin.
Thank you.
Um, and the, uh, second page of
uh the presentation, um,
Just a brief overview, if you
will.
Uh, vital strategies is a um
international consulting firm,
uh, that received $10 million
from the Bloomberg Foundation,
uh, to work with seven states
around their opioid settlement
funds strategic planning, and,
uh, we were fortunate, um, to be
able to join with the city and
contracting with vital
strategies to do the strategic
planning.
Uh, since May, a group of us
have been meeting to share
progress regarding our
respective work around the
opioid settlement funds, this
group represented officials from
the city of Albuquerque, the
county of Berlio, the city of
Las Cruces, the county of
Donana, uh, the New Mexico
Department of Health, uh, the
counties that um Shaw had just
uh outlined vital strategies and
the association of New Mexico
County.
And so our presentation is a
summary of our respective
efforts relative to this
initiative.
Today, Berlio County has
received $24.6 million.
Uh, from the opioid settlement
funds. Um, I want to point out
that it is expected that the
distribution of these dollars
will extend until 2038.
And I want to stress that this
is a bit of a moving target. We
do have projections in terms of
what the anticipated
distribution of dollars will be
each year over the course of
that period of time.
Um, but there are some uh
litigation that are still in
process. So for example, my
understanding is that the
Sackler family, um, who agreed
to a settlement, uh, they
oversaw Purdue Pharma, uh, the
producers of OxyContin, um, they
have gone back to court and are
attempting to change that
settlement agreement. So that's
a bit of a moving target in
terms of what we thought was.
Uh, a very concrete amount of
dollars that would be
distributed nationally,
including the state of New
Mexico. And then there's also
some litigation, uh, that is not
yet part of the overall
settlement. Um, so like I said,
uh, as we talked about this
distribution of dollars, um,
over the years, uh, they're
subject to change given those
variables.
Uh, thus far, uh, Burley County
expanded roughly a million
dollars around our keep New
Mexico, a live campaign which is
a statewide campaign. Uh, we've
also had annual fentanyl summits
that have been part of that
campaign and we anticipate, um,
continuing that initiative, and
we've contributed over a half a
million dollars to the
Metropolitan Detention Center,
um, medication-assisted
treatment program.
Um, so we have an available
balance of $23,463,000.
I'll turn it over now to
Stanford.
Good morning again.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee.
Uh, the city of Albuquerque
received $27.7 million.
Uh, of which, so far we have
braided funding of 1.5 million
for Metropolitan detention
center for the buprenorphine
program. Uh, we also added
another 300,000 for the keeping
him alive marketing campaign.
Other support services and
treatment and recovery, about 2,
and there's other uh strategies
for opioid treatment support
programs, that's not just for
opioids, but there are some uh
uh linkage to housing and other
social needs involved in that
$900,000 and in a separate
bucket of money, uh, we received
500 or $5 million for the micro
village or the pallet home
Community 50 pallet homes, uh,
that is still
scheduled to open January 1st.
Uh, if anybody, uh, attended or
watched the city council meeting
on Monday. There's been a hold
on our vendor selection for a
couple weeks, we'll be bringing
that back to the table, uh, 2
weeks from last Monday to talk
about uh getting our vendor
endeavor, uh, out of state.
To get that contract approved,
uh, to start on January 1st. So
that's a little fluid right now.
That leaves a balance of
18,800,000 of current dollars.
Um, to further, um,
Wayne, could you just clarify
one thing? When you said the
money will be available.
Through
Um, 38.
that this money, or is there
more money coming in annually at
that that's what we don't know
about, but
So, um, do you have to stretch
this money out until 38, I guess
is what I'm wondering.
Um
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
The money that we're reporting
on is money that we have
received to date.
Uh, we're expected as the county
to receive approximately $2.55
million annually.
For a total of $60 million.
Plus
Um, and the cities is expected
to receive 3.11 million per year
for a total of 73.88 million.
Thank you.
Yeah.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And what
you just said is there's 18
million right now you have not
spent, correct? Is that what you
mean by 18 million pounds.
The city. Yes, for the city.
So relative to this joint
strategic plan between the city
of Albuquerque and Berlio
County, uh, vital strategies was
contracted, um, basically to
over facilitate the development
of the strategic plan, um,
they've provided in-kind
technical assistance on legal
and regulatory communications,
uh, data collection and
evaluation and drug policy
issues and development of a
strategic plan.
followed, uh, 4 stages. One was
a coordinated technical
assistance to both the city and
the county.
Uh, they did a rapid, uh,
landscape analysis that extended
from April through August of
this year, um, they went through
an extensive, uh, community
engagement process, um, that
was, uh, overseen by uh Cindy
Sock and some of you, uh, might
know, uh, that included um
The facilitation of town hall
meetings, uh, focus groups and a
uh survey of over 700 community
members, um, who, in fact, um,
I can't say they've been
diagnosed with substance use
disorder, but these were people
on the streets who we would
presume, um,
Suffer from substance use
disorders.
And they presented a strategic
plan draft to the local
government coordinating
commission, you might not be
familiar with that term. It used
to be known as the ABC GC plus
APS and I think that became a
mouth mouthful, and they are now
the local government
coordinating commission, and so
the initial draft uh was
presented back in October, uh,
to the LG um CC.
And the LGCC
elected to, um,
For a subcommittee, um, that has
convened once and uh we'll
elaborate in a little bit
further about uh the work of
that um subcommittee.
If you look at the next page,
Um, there have been, um, 28
strategies that are recommended
within the strategic plan, and
they are categorized.
Um, and when we get to Q and A,
we can uh talk about, uh, any
questions you have in terms of
how these are being prioritized
to the LGCC.
In addition to the presentation
to the LGCC, uh, the draft
plan's also been presented to
city council, as well as the
Board of County commissioners,
um,
The recommendations from the
LGCC will then be presented to
both of the respective governing
bodies of both the city and the
county uh for deliberation,
potential revision, and, and
adoption.
And um, Mr. Chair, if we can
move to uh next steps.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee.
So, uh, as Wayne just said,
there was the original
presentation by Vital Strategies
to the LGCC, uh, talking about
each of the 28, the body was not
prepared to adopt the 28, uh,
and, uh, set up a a subcommittee
for that of which we've met one
time, uh, in that one meeting,
we focused on 7 priorities, uh,
5 I would consider as direct.
inventions to uh for prevention.
And uh when and I are getting
together to make sure that the
city and the county are uh
working in sync and not
redundant, uh, for these
efforts, uh, it's workforce
development.
Focusing on peer support,
recovery housing is another one,
community access to medicated
assisted treatment, uh,
prevention strategies for
disconnected youth and uh
education as well, uh, not just
in schools, but other uh youth
prevention strategies yet to be
determined. And uh
Thank you. Recovery housing peer
support, oh, naloxone where it
counts, of course, and so, uh,
looking at ways to access
naloxone, we found, and I
haven't followed up yet, but
some of the settlement is not
just financial, it's also by
product, which would include
naloxone. I have not found that
pathway, uh, when I worked with
state government, we were
purchasing through grant,
federal grants, our own
naloxone, but, um, we'll be able
to report back.
on that, uh, to let you know if
there are product settlements
where we could actually get the
naloxone and set up a
distribution pathway through the
community and the state
actually, and city.
So I could talk about each of
these if you like, but those are
the 7 priorities of the uh was
identified by the LGCC Wayne and
I are on the subcommittee. We
meet again on the 5th to present
a breakdown of these strategy,
these uh priorities, and then,
uh, and then they look to vote
as our entire commission on the
12th and hopefully adopted for
the council and commission.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, one other members
of the committee that I'd like
to emphasize that it's not in
the recommendations, uh, but is
in the body of the strategic
plan and is allowable under the
settlement agreement, and that's
the establishment of an
endowment. Um, I've often said
in working with uh provider
organizations over the years. If
you live by grants, you die by
grant, and I'm sure you've all
experienced a wonderful program,
gets developed.
The grant might be 3 years,
might be 5 years, um, the
funders typically want to know
from the grantee, how you're
going to sustain the services
have been funded by the grant,
but in the overwhelming majority
of cases once the grant monies
are gone, uh, too often the, the
tent gets folded in terms of
what.
Potentially could have been a, a
wonderful service that was
worthy of of being sustained,
um, but unless there's a way to
fund it through, you know,
recurring resources like
Medicaid, uh, reimbursements,
um, it's easy for.
Uh, services to um basically
cease and we don't want to
repeat that history with this
money, so one of my major
concerns has been that we build
Oh,
a greater continued care invest
more in prevention services and
in 1939, we potentially are
threatened by the loss of these
funds and um potential
termination of whatever it is
that we've built by that time.
Um, so there is a provision in
the settlement agreement to
establish an endowment, which
would enable us to set aside a
percentage of funds, uh, retain
the principle.
make
annual contributions, build up a
dividend, so that by 2038, we
potentially would have.
If we've invested it well, a, a
pool of money to basically
sustain a lot of things that
we've dealt with this money over
time.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the community, uh,
the city has a different
perspective on the endowment
fund, they're treating this as
an emergency as it is and uh
they're looking to establish
some interventions and trusted
sustainability through Medicaid
and other options will maintain
these programs, but we hope that
these, these problems, this
emergency won't exist in 18
years from now. So, we're
looking to go full on uh on the
settlement funds as a city.
And with that, oh excuse me,
with that, um, Mr. Chair, we'll
turn this over uh to Las Cruces
and Donna County.
Good morning again, uh, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
For the record, again, my name
is Barbara Ben Como, uh, from
the city of Las Cruces.
Very happy to be here this
morning to talk to you about the
collaboration that the city of
Las Cruces and the Donana County
have with respect to the opioid
settlement funds. We've come
together to coordinate, uh, in
order to leverage our resources,
avoid duplication of effort and
to spend the funds in the best
interest of the community in the
best way to meet the needs of
our community. Uh, we've done
this.
by establishing a joint
community advisory council,
which I'll talk a little bit
more about uh later and having
the goals for one spending plan
for our local governments, um,
and of course coordination with
the state and other entities.
With respect to the funds
received to date, I'm going to
echo what Wayne said earlier
about the distribution of funds.
It, it's a complex matter we're
expecting a distributions from
the current settlements, also to
go through 2038, some of the
settlements with manufacturers,
retailers and distributors are
one-time payment, some are front
loaded, some are small payments
over many years. Some are
payments over a few years and
So we are carefully tracking the
expected payments, um, and, and
those that were actually
receiving just to make sure
we're addressing the complexity
of the flow of funds our
distributions were actually
scheduled to begin in 2022, but
we didn't start receiving them
until FY 23, and you'll see from
the chart in front of you, just
a small amount coming in in 23,
and then most of what we've
received to date came in the
latter part of um FY20.
4. So we began our planning
process in anticipation of
having funds available to
address the needs of our
community, but we hadn't yet
started receiving material
amounts of funds. However, we
feel we're well positioned now
to, to move forward at this
point, the city and county
together have received just over
$9 million.
I like to talk about other
partnerships, uh, that this
group has formed, most
critically with two entities,
New Mexico State University,
Crimson Research, and vital
strategies, as Wayne talked
about earlier as well with their
effort in Albuquerque and Berlio
County.
With New Mexico State
University, Crimson Research has
been a critical partner in
helping us to develop and
execute a needs assessment study
for community. Um, they are also
participate on the advisory
council, and we anticipate that
as we move to the expenditure
phase that Crimson research will
be able to help us evaluate the
efforts we're making, uh,
collect data for us and help.
Hopefully help us measure our
progress.
With vital strategies, they also
provided um incredible technical
assistance for us and uh
financial assistance as well and
Um, funding a settlement
coordinator position, um, and
the needs assessment, which was
conducted by NMSU Crimson
Research, so we're very grateful
for those partnerships as well.
I'd like to talk a little bit
about the opioid settlement
advisory council. In the fall of
2023, the advisory council was
formed, and the guiding
principles for the council and
for the use of the funds that
we've, we've talked about many
times, are, are 4. Number 1, to
spend money to save lives.
Number 2, to use evidence to
guide spending.
Number 3, to invest in youth
prevention.
And number 4, to focus on racial
equity.
This advisory council is made up
of 11 members of our community
who have a wide variety of
expertise and experience that
includes people with lived and
living experience of substance
use disorders, public health
professionals, youth prevention
specialists, treatment
providers.
Recovery, um, and other social
service entities, and we have
other local stakeholders as well
on the panel. We also have
representation uh and linkages
to our State Department of
Health for coordination. I
co-facilitate this um advisory
council along with Jamie
Michael, director of Health and
Human Services for Dona Anna
County. This advisory council
has provided periodic updates to
the county.
And this city council in joint
work sessions so that we can
advise them of our progress and
get input on the direction that
we're going in with respect to
the overall process, what we've
accomplished, some of our
milestones and benchmarks, um,
we've spent an enormous amount
of time developing and executing
our needs assessment,
understanding the data that's
available to us developing asset
maps of community resources that
are
with the allowable uses for the
settlement funds, um, Crimson
research recently completed the
needs assessment, we had gotten
some feedback from the county
and the city council about some
uh additional data that they
wanted collected when we went
through the needs assessment,
um, initially, so it
It lengthened the term a little
bit of that needs assessment, we
feel it's well worth the effort
with the product that we
received and the and uh the
ability of the report to really
highlight community needs. The
needs assessment involved
collecting data from various
sources to provide information
about local opioid and substance
use issues.
Um, we included the community's
perceptions of substance use
issues, and we gathered
community input on how
settlement funds may be used. We
do this. We did this by
conducting focus groups. We had
7 focus groups that include key
informants, first responders,
behavioral health professionals,
etc. We, um, included
individuals with lived and lived
experience, including those who
are marginalized, um, and we
make sure that
o gra ph ically we were uh
conducting uh input gathering in
the north part of the county in
the south part of the county,
and not just where most of the
population is around the city of
Las Cruces, we had two town hall
forums conducted in hatch and
chaparral, and we conducted
147th Street outreach surveys,
um, with individuals who
indicated using a substance or
participating in treatment for
substance use disorders, so it's
a very thorough uh data
gathering effort for.
For the needs assessment.
So with respect to next steps,
the advisory council has taken
the needs assessment and
recommends 3 core strategies for
the council and commission,
number one, to improve access to
medication assisted treatment,
uh, 2, to expand warm handoff
programs including comprehensive
treatment approaches, case
management, peer support,
continuum of care services and
early intervention, education,
and prevention.
programs. The advisory council
is developing the indicators and
activities that align with these
core strategies that were
selected, we are using the Johns
Hopkins Osprey tool in order to
to do that, and we'll be
presenting those recommendations
to the city council and County
commission in January. Once we
get direction from our local uh.
Governing bodies, we will be
developing the implementation
plans, contracting for services,
and then, of course, um,
monitoring, reporting, and
measuring the outcomes of these
efforts that we'll be, um, we'll
be making for the benefit of our
community. So with that, thank
you very much for the
opportunity to present on this
collaborative effort, and I'll
pass it along. Thank you.
So again, good morning, Mister
Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee, um,
again, my name is Shawna Hartley
and.
I have a different approach, I
think to this presentation. Um,
I'm really telling the story of
The rural communities, which is
a very different project, um, I
think then what you've heard
thus far.
Um, I have the benefit of
actually being a behavior health
provider in New Mexico. I've
been working in New Mexico for a
really long time. I've worked in
the rural areas. I've worked in
the urban areas and I'm not only
the consultant on this project,
but I'm also a part of the
implementation team.
So I'm very proud here today to
represent the opioid remediation
collaborative.
So who is the opioid remediation
collaborative, we are 7 rural
counties who have chosen to pull
our opioid settlement dollars
together in hopes of improving.
Both prevention and treatment in
our rural counties.
One of the questions that I get
quite a bit is why did you do
this? Why did these seven
counties choose to pull these
dollars together and one of the
biggest reasons is that.
Rural areas have very different
challenges than urban.
Communities do. Um, some of our
rural counties do not have a
substance abuse providers, um,
you have to drive.
Many, many hours to get to one
part of the county.
Um, if there are substance abuse
providers, there's very uh few
days that they work, so they're
only there on a Monday, um, some
of my counties don't have
detention centers, so when law
enforcement, um,
Intervenes with somebody that
has a substance use disorder, it
could take almost 8 to 10 hours
to process that person. They
have to take him to the
hospital. They have to get a
medical clearance. They have to
sit with that person for many
hours, um, that person can say
yes or no, and then they drive
them hours to a detention
center. So, um, the issues in a
rural area, I think are very,
very unique, and we hear that,
you know, quite a bit, but it's
true.
It's true. I'm telling you that
as a provider, um, who has
worked directly in rural
communities that the issues that
rural communities face are very,
very different.
So our collaborative, wanted to
be a part of a team. You know,
when you have a big challenge
when you have a big problem. You
don't want to take that on by
yourself, you want to do that
with a group of people, um, a
group of counties that share the
same challenges that you do. So
one reason why the opioid
remediation collaborative came
together was because we wanted
to be a team. We wanted to share
ideas. We wanted to um tackle
this issue together and
not have to do it by yourselves.
The other reason one of that,
the other reason that the opioid
remediation collaborative came
together was resource sharing.
We recognize that um with one
county allocation, um, that
there's very little progress
that can be made.
And so we decided to pull our
dollars together, um, and a good
example of one of the ways that
we're spending our dollars,
we've just um.
been fortunate enough to be
putting together what I call my
recovery team.
And my recovery team is um some
of the best people I've ever
worked with in this business. I
have 2 addiction medicine
physicians. I have myself who's
worked in behavioral health um
for many, many years. Um, I have
Bryce Pittener who I think some
of you know, um, who's very,
very versed in behavioral health
in addition to um state uh
billing and how do we create a
sustainable system, so on and so
forth, I have Nicole Mayo who's
an RN, and I also have.
Uh, Brenda Frik, who's been, um.
One of the longest standing um
behavioral health providers in
New Mexico and has worked at
numerous places, um, great
curriculum writers, so.
Part of our approach is that we
are putting the best minds that
we know together.
And we are working together to
assist um current providers that
work in our counties.
Um, to shore them up because one
of the things we know is that we
need to look at existing folks,
um, how do we help them be
sustainable because that's what
happens in a rural area is that
people come in, they want to
start a business and then they
can't be sustainable because
they don't do it from a real
business model.
And so what we're really looking
at doing is um assisting with
technical assistance and um
consultation, um, really helping
providers who are there, uh, be
sustainable, but then also
looking at other opportunities.
So our 7 counties really wanted
to come together and share
resources.
Um, another reason why our rural
counties came together was we
wanted to make a greater impact.
Um, we know that, uh, together
we are a lot stronger than we
are by ourselves.
So, um, on my first slide.
I have, um, also who are 7
counties are. We are 7 counties
that have very different
populations. We have very
different diverse demographics
and on this slide it really
outlines um some of the
challenges that we have, but
also some of the rich resources
that we have, which we believe
we do. My next slide is an
identification of all of the
county allocations, so, um, as I
stated earlier, the seven
counties that I represent are
Valencia.
which is my largest county.
I have Sierra, Cibola, Hidalgo,
Guadalupe, Socorro, and Catrin.
And on this slide, it identifies
the county along with my board
member for each county, in
addition to the funding
allocation for that particular
county, so.
Altogether, it's about $6.3
million.
And that's going to be on a
reoccurring amount, very similar
to um my colleagues here today
talked about.
My approach to this project, um,
I actually started in June of
2023.
And um I started with a needs
assessment very similar to my
colleagues. Um, I took a
quantitative and a qualitative
data analysis approach, I looked
obviously at all of the national
data, uh, New Mexico data, um, I
was very fortunate because I had
been the hospital administrator
at turquoise Lodge for 10 years
and had a bird's eye view as to
what substance use disorder look
like in New Mexico because we
serve the entire state.
I conducted 7 county stakeholder
groups. I conducted 7 community
listening groups, and then I did
over 50 interviews with a
variety of stakeholders that
either worked with people that
had a substance use disorder,
um, individuals that have impact
over policy, um, people who
worked in the schools, um,
religious affiliation groups,
um, and I collected, you know,
quite a bit of information.
The next couple of slides I'd
like to share with you my
outcomes of my qualitative data
analysis, um, when it came to my
focus groups, you know, these
dollars fall into two different
categories, so they can either
be used for prevention or they
could be used for treatment.
And so what I did is I conducted
um 7 focus groups in all 7
counties, um, and my questions
were guided by the federal
guidelines for opiate settlement
spending.
The way that our focus group
shook out is that um the
prevention side youth was
identified as our priority
population.
It was unanimous that our
counties wanted a youth driven
media campaign and they wanted
to have a best practice
prevention program in the
schools.
That, um
Basically assisted um high
school students primarily with
understanding both abstinence
and harm reduction strategies
for opioid use disorder.
Our focus groups revealed that
we wanted to have.
Narcan training. I know there's
a lot of Narcan training out
there, but um one of the things
that came up in our focus groups
is that oftentimes Narcan
training is for first
responders, um, and we really
wanted to add the schools to
that group, um, we wanted to add
the community to that group
because what we know is that
oftentimes when a first
responder responds or being
called by somebody else, and we
wanted to basically give
individuals who might be at
risk, the skills to be able to.
um address such a thing, or
Focus group also revealed that
in the rural areas there's a
million different resource
guides, um, everybody has a
different document that says,
you know, these are the
resources in our community and
sometimes they're not updated
and so, um, our focus group
wanted to have an updated
resource guide for um.
The rural area. On the treatment
side, our focus group.
Hands down, identified adults as
our priority population.
Um, across the board, um, our
rural communities want to have
local services in their
communities. They don't want to
have to drive 3 or 4 hours to
another place to be able to get
those services, and we'll talk a
little bit about telehealth, and
we'll talk a little bit about
Internet connectivity, um,
because that's one thing that um
is been presented to me quite a
bit in this project. Well, why
can't you just do tehealth, um,
and I, and I'm gonna talk a
little bit about that.
Our focus group, um, identified
the need for housing for people
who were transitioning out of
treatment and or jail, so
because um impatient medical
withdrawal programs oftentimes
are located in Burnleyo County
or in a larger community, people
are not getting treatment in
their own community. They're
going somewhere else for that,
and then they're coming back and
they're coming back to that um
environment that had something
to do with them being at risk or
using drugs or alcohol.
They requested navigation
resources to help link people to
treatment, um, which is, you
know, back in the day, um, these
were called warm lines, um,
somebody who really could be on
the phone with you, um, really
help get you from A to Z, um,
provide you with that support so
that you really follow through
with the idea that you wanted to
when it came to, you know, you
really want to go in for a
treatment program, or you really
want to get help with this
addiction that you perhaps have
been struggling with.
For a long period of time.
Um, and one of the biggest
requests is non-medical
transportation, so we know in
New Mexico that um individuals
that have Medicaid, they can
call Safe Rite and they can get
a ride somewhere, but you have
to call 48 hours in advance. You
have to make an appointment, and
any of those, any of us who um
have worked with people with
substance use disorders, we
recognize that when they want
help, they want help, and they
want help right away. They can't
really sometimes maneuver
through all those different
things that you have to do, um,
and so non-medical
transportation was identified as
a need.
The next slide is my community
listening request outcomes and
keep in mind that our community
requested.
Quite a bit of the same things
that the focus group requested.
And so what I did on this slide
is I identified some of the um.
ones that really stood out.
So something that happens in a
rural area is stigma, um,
unfortunately there's
communities that I represent
that can't have AA groups or any
groups um in a building or in a
library because they fear people
seeing them going in there and
everybody knows it's 6 o'clock
on a Tuesday. That's exactly
what's happening, um, because
sadly, you know, today, uh,
people that have a substance use
disorder, um, are judged for
their character.
Um, because of their situation,
and so one of the biggest.
Requests in our real areas was
to reduce stigma, to really take
that on in a community, um, in a
bigger way to assist the
community and understanding that
recovery is actually a good
thing.
Um, the community wanted to
improve um the availability of
AA and any groups and really
focused on, there's a lot of
families in New Mexico who have
lost their loved ones to
addiction and really providing
them services as well.
Improving the Internet
connectivity. I can tell you
Katrin is one of my counties,
and you, you don't have any
Internet connection in
Katherine. You get there and
your phone doesn't work for
days. Um, and it's really
difficult to
Think about telehealth services
when.
That is an option, but it has to
be something that's sustainable,
so the community really talked
about internet connectivity.
One of the things that came up
is that prevention and treatment
providers oftentimes stand on
two sides, um, they either
promote prevention or they they
either promote treatment and
unfortunately they don't work
very collaboratively together.
And so one of the requests from
the community was to really um
start to pull these individuals
together and say we're doing
both very important parts of
this work, and how can we work
more collaboratively together.
Um, there's a lot of faith based
organizations and um our
counties, particularly Cebola
and um some of the churches, um,
were very active in our
community groups saying, you
know, we really want to be a
part of this. We really want to
help people heal and how can we
have a part in this process.
Law enforcement is a really,
really, um, strain system in
rural areas, particularly
because they are oftentimes a
first responder for someone that
has a substance use disorder and
um I went through some of the um
hurdles that that individual has
to take in order to actually get
someone to a detention center,
which oftentimes they really
should go to a treatment center,
but there really isn't that
decision making option.
One of the requests is very
unique to um some of our older.
Um
Counties is that oftentimes, um.
Family members are caregivers
for people who are dying in
hospice.
And one of the things that I
found out, um, in my older
counties was that there's some
diversion issues with opioid
medication, so sometimes when
people are in hospice and
they're passing, they are given
opiates for comfort and in these
older communities, these family
members are not really educated
on the issues around diversion.
So what do you do with this
medication once that person is
passed, or how are you safe with
that medication.
And so that was one of the
requests that um our counties
had and then basically um to
improve some of the basic needs.
When it came to my interviews,
um, again, you know, repeated
information, everybody um had
some duplication and what they
needed to say, but one of the
things that is particularly hard
in rural areas is access to
methadone, um, methadone is a um
important um medication assisted
treatment option for people and
in my seven counties I have 1
methadone clinic and that is in
Berlin.
So when you think about
individuals that use methadone.
That's a daily dose.
And it's impossible for people
who live hours and hours away
from a methadone clinic to drive
every single day to get dose for
methadone and come all the way
home.
It's impossible for somebody to
be productive and hold a job and
be a part of a family if that is
what their routine is every
single day.
It's very hard to improve, um,
to fill prescriptions in these
rural areas. I actually did um
kind of a uh test. I called
every single pharmacy and every
single county that I have and
A lot of the challenges that I
ran into was that when I finally
got to a pharmacist, they said,
OK, um, we don't carry
buprenorphine in stock.
So, um, if you need that
medication, you're gonna have to
call and really again jumping
through a lot of hoops if I have
an addiction issue, and I have
to call 3 or 4 days before my
medication is up, right? Um, or
I'm being discharged from a
hospital that is really um a
barrier to people being able to
be on their medication assisted
treatment and continue with
their recovery.
There were a lot of callouts to
employ our support, our peer
support workers and our
community health workers and so
we plan to do that in this
project, um, there was a
significant desire to bring back
uh drug courts, um, support law
enforcement, and there was a
really um.
High level of appreciation for
the rise program.
In the detention centers.
Um, with respect to my
colleagues with this
presentation and time allotted,
um, I do have slides that
identify what we're working on
in this first year, so this is
my last slide, but I did want to
share with you that in the last
year, I've worked really hard on
creating branding and a logo for
our um seven counties. I think
it's really important that
people remember who we are and
it really resembles the
connection of of what we're
trying to do.
Um, we've also created a really
great website that um identifies
who we are, um, the counties
that I represent and if you
check it regularly, you'll see
all the activities that are
happening, so I'm updating that
on a pretty regular basis so
that people um can know what
we're doing is really, really
hard to communicate to 7
counties, um, and to keep that
information alive.
So thank you.
And does that conclude the
presentation? Good. Let's go to
questions. I'm gonna start with
our vice chairman, because in
case we have to slip out, uh, we
want to make sure she gets her
questions answered. Uh, and then
we'll go.
Uh, we're going to give
everybody a chance to ask
questions. We have plenty of
time, I think, so it take up to
4 minutes
Yeah, I mean, but, OK, OK, 34
minutes. So, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for your
presentation. And just, I wish
you slides had page numbers so
that I could refer, but on the,
the funding status page from
Berlio County, which is towards
the front.
Um
Page 3, OK. So, I, I'm just
wondering, um,
If
Buprenorphine is
The, I mean, is the best answer.
Are there people who do better
on different things. I see that
you have it specifically for
buprenorphrine.
So, you know, if that doesn't
work for someone or or whatever
is, are there other um other
options for medication assisted
treatment medication.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, yes, there are other
options, and please keep in mind
that this is a strategic plan
that was developed by Vital
Strategies and they emphasized
the probably more familiar with
uh the um label name Suboxone,
uh, which is one medication used
in the um
Um, Aratorium with that's the
correct term, uh, relative to
these medications, um, it was
mentioned earlier, uh by Shawna
about the efficacy of methadone,
that's another, uh, when we talk
about um alcoholism, uh, there's
no truck so, um, so there are
different medication options and
uh when we talk about medication
assisted treatment more broadly.
Um, our way of thinking that it
encompasses all of the
medications that have efficacy
in treating um opioid and other
substance use disorders.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So you're
saying that it isn't just
buprenorphrine and, and so just
to be clear, you know, I, I
think
You should spell that out, kind
of, instead of saying that,
saying, you know, medication is,
uh, you know, clinically
whatever so that it's broader
cause if someone sees this and,
oh well, I, you know, I, I'm
used to, to um prescribing this
and whatever. So, and then just
another part of the language on
um on Berco's proposed
strategies.
And I don't mean to be a member
of judiciary and uh be nitpicky
but our number 7.
Native nations, there's really
only one native nation, which is
Navajo, so you're leaving out
tribes and pueblos. So I would
just encourage you to be
inclusive and, and state that,
uh, you know, that it's Pueblo's
tribes and nations and Matt vice
chair and Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, if I might, uh,
there's another.
phase uh to this process, it's
got to do with implementation
planning.
And vital strategies is offered
to provide a full-time, uh,
consultant.
That would be available to us
till October 26th in terms of
these being the recommended
strategies we talked about the
LGCC setting priorities because
we didn't think that if we took
these, this money and spread it
across 28 strategies that we
would have done any of them
justice. So in the
implementation planning, the
specifics that you're calling
for, uh, will be in that plan.
OK, thank you for that. And then
my final um
It's not really a question, but
Hopefully, we can get ongoing
updates from all of you. I know
that you have reporting
requirements to DOH or to
whoever and if when you do
those, if you could share those
with
With us so that we can share
them with the the members of the
committee so that we know what's
going on moving forward. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
OK, let's go this way then, uh,
Representative Cates will go
around and then after
representative Martinez, we'll
come back to Representative
Garcia and then burned in and
around this way.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and thank you very much for your
presentation. It was um very
detailed. Thank you. Um, uh,
are, are there plans? Are you
asking, do you have an idea of
an area for additional methadone
clinics in your area.
So Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee.
Because of the regulations
around methadone.
And the likely, well, let me,
let me step back actually,
Sierra County just got a
methadone clinic that happened,
um, a couple of weeks ago, so we
have one in Berlin.
One of the challenges with
methadone is the regulation
around it, and I know that
there's been bills put forth
around should pharmacies be able
to actually dispense methadone
in rural areas because um it's
very challenging to have an
actual standalone methadone
program in a rural area because
of the volume, you're not gonna
have um a bulk of people coming
to a methadone clinic every day,
um, so the likelihood of a
methadone clinic being in
Katherine County.
Or Hidalgo County, um, and be
able to be sustainable, I think
is really challenging.
Um, I would hope that we could
really take a look at the
legislation around the
dispensement of methadone,
because if we looked at our
pharmacies as being a
possibility, which all of the
seven counties have, that might
be an option, um, or a
workaround.
Or methadone in rural areas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for that feedback. I
would caution that not just any
pharmacy as in methadone has to
be ingested on site and have a
medical provider nearby, so
maybe uh in-house uh facility
maybe in-house pharmacies of of
uh federal clinics, those kind
that have medical providers. Um,
I, I think there's a little
nuance there we will have to
iron out, but, um, but
Please do and and bring it back.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A Mister chair if I might, um.
There, there's another option
that we're also looking at and
it's long-term injectables, uh,
supplicate, uh, Bigati, um, we
have a problem, uh, because the
metropolitan Detention Center
has really been a pioneer
relative to medication-assisted
treatment being offered in a
county detention facility. Uh,
the problem we found is that um
those who are released get leave
with a script.
Um
And it turns out that 20% plus
on average ever fill that script
so the investments we make,
while they're incarcerated,
don't translate to, uh, their
ongoing treatment and support in
the community. So long term
injectables are an alternative
that might be workable in rural
environments, but there are some
caveats there as well, um,
because one is
cross, although I know that at
least 3 of the 4 Medicaid MCOs
have these longer term
injectables on their formulary,
um, but the reality is is that
uh unless you're a provider who
also has a pharmacy.
You have to order it and pay for
it. It's $1200 plus per
injection, and so it's quite
expensive and if the person, the
patient doesn't show up for that
appointment, then the provider,
uh, potentially can be liable
for that cost. So we've got some
things to sort out there, but I
just want to point out this is
another alternative that's
available to us.
If we can figure out um how to
overcome some of the barriers,
just to follow up on that, if
Is it Vivitrol that they, one of
the injectables, is that
Is that not in terms of a longer
term injectable.
Um, if you started somebody on
an injectable, when they got
out, do they have to stay on
that or can they then switch to
Suboxone or methadone. Uh, uh,
Mr. Chair, yes, they would have
the option of, of making a a
switch, but again, when you're
talking about something like
methadone where you've got to be
at a clinic daily, uh, being
able to go 30 days without
having to do that. It's a real
boon in terms of being able to
be employed, etc. and have a
higher quality of life.
in the community. Thank you very
much. I just because we got
sidetracks just to comment. I I
know that you wanted to talk to
me about the long term
injectables that was why you
interjected and I do appreciate
that. But what I heard is we're
um giving people prescriptions,
which can be sold.
Only 20% of them are filling
them.
And that is a concern to me as
well.
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and thank you all for being
here. Just uh one question that
was going through my mind during
the presentation, Miss Hartley.
I don't know, rural versus
urban, the sources of these
opioids.
Are they mostly people abusing
current medications from, from
the community that has been
dispensed, or are they coming
from a different source,
majority, because I know we have
fentanyl, we have Vicodin, we
have, we have all these, these
opioids, which ones are the most
abused, which ones?
Where, where are they coming
from? And are they coming from
urban areas to rural areas
where, what's the source, Mr.
Chairman.
So Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee.
I don't have data on that.
There's no data that tells us
that that's what um
Where the where the drugs are
coming from because there's not
a lot of people that like to
talk about that.
However, what I'll tell you is
when I've talked to um when I've
conducted my community listening
sessions and I have law
enforcement present or have
family members, um, who have
lost loved ones.
I would say that.
Here are the big ones that come
up.
One is that in rural areas.
There has been somewhat of not a
culture, but.
At times there might be a
provider that.
is not able to work in more
urban areas because they perhaps
have gotten into a little bit of
trouble with prescribing
methods.
And they have gone to a rural
area to actually start working.
That is not as um.
That doesn't happen as often now
with the prescription monitoring
system where that's monitored in
a bigger way, but that's a story
that I've heard is that um
people have kind of gone to
rural areas to work because uh
they've gotten into some issues
and more urban areas, um, so
there's been overprescribing and
individuals have become addicted
because they were prescribed
OxyContin or an opiate and then
they got cut off.
Because of the prescription
monitoring.
Issues, um, they were red
flagged, they can't get that
medication anymore and then they
went to start using heroin.
And, um, Sierra County in
Hidalgo County. I'll tell you
that there's a lot of fentanyl.
And I think that that has
something to do with it being um
law enforcement would tell me
that it's the proximity to the
border.
Um
I really believe that um.
You know, the, when you look at
the counties that I represent
Valencia, Sierra and Socorro had
um one of the highest overdose
rates, um, in New Mexico, um,
and it really, really, uh,
skyrocketed during the pandemic.
Um, I think it's also a lack of.
Treatment options in those
areas, but I think it's also
stigma.
Because individuals in rural
areas, you know, they don't have
AA groups, they don't have any
groups. People aren't talking
about recovery as if it's a
positive thing. They're talking
about recovery, they're not
talking about recovery, they're
talking about someone's
character and how they use drugs
or alcohol and how they can
become oftentimes a menace to
their community.
So I think that those would be
the 3 I would say that I've
heard when I've collected
information from either
stakeholders or community
members.
OK
Mr. Chair, if I could add, uh,
there's a report that comes out
of Department of Health
epidemiology that has shown for
the last several years trending
down on uh overdose by
prescription opioids. So,
Translate that, you can see the
fentanyl curve going straight up
illicit fentanyl and heroin's
actually making a comeback too
after a couple of years of going
down, so, but that's available
through Department of Health
epidemiology. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
pretty much all I had. I
appreciate it. I yield all my
time to the next person.
Thank you, Representative. I'm
sure Senator Savia Lopez
appreciates that
Jeez, that's so generous. Thank
you so much. Um, I really
appreciated this report, and I
was particularly impressed by
the processes that you're going
through to make these funding
decisions and, and, um, I, and
some of them in like didn't
write all of it. Some of them
involve people who have been
impacted by this, but is that
true for all of the processes?
Do you have some
somebody who um has been
impacted advising the group
about what the best strategies
are. Yes, I, I'll just take that
as a yes and it and um I noticed
that one of the priorities was
adults. It was for the rural,
um, for the rural areas.
Why is it a
adults because uh I is that uh I
guess it's more of a pro well,
could you explain that? Yes. So,
Mr. Chair, um, madam, vice chair
and members of the committee, so
the
The moneys fall into two
different categories and so it's
prevention and treatment. So
when they picked adults for
treatment, you're exactly
correct. It's because adults
when they're using drugs or
alcohol, they tend to impact the
community in a bigger way. OK,
and so they really wanted to,
um, actually for two reasons,
that one and that they wanted
the adults who had SUD issues to
be healthy for their kids.
So there was a a thought that if
we helped adults that in turn we
would be avoiding generational
transmission of substance use.
Um, the reason I ask is because
My nephews participated in the
DARE program in Valencia County.
That's the first time they got
exposed to drugs.
was through the DARE program
and that was um really
disturbing to me. I learned that
much later when they're adults.
I'm not saying it happened now.
Has now, but um,
And there were no treatment
options.
And so I just think that
treatment.
Is also important, and I
understand priorities. Well, can
you explain to me what it means
when you
When you state a priority, is
that just more resources or how
does it work?
So when I identify priority that
outline what our first year was
gonna look like. So that doesn't
mean that we're not going to
invest in youth and treatment,
but my focus groups and my
community groups and my
interviews, basically outlined
my first year of my strategic
plan. So we're investing in
actually both we're investing in
youth and media campaigns. I
have some posters here for you
guys if you want one that the
kids made, um.
But on the other side of that.
We're also doing treatment, and
it's not that we're focusing
primarily on just adults, um, in
these rural counties, there
tends to be more providers that
treat adults.
Than youth. So we're hoping that
over time that we're able with
my team that we're able to
actually improve treatment for
youth in these areas, but at
this point I can tell you from
my landscape analysis, there's
very few youth providers.
In the rural areas.
And that's really unfortunate
because that's exactly what I
saw and the irony of them not
even being exposed to drugs
until they participate in a DARE
program and then not to have
treatment was just disheartening
and, and that's why that just
jumped out at me, um, as I
looked at it, and I understand
that the rural areas um are
different, and I think that
there's um
sort of less support systems,
um, and I think and a lot of
stigma.
And I really hope that that
changes, because unless that
changes, these kids are going to
suffer in silence, and I can't
tell you how many.
Time I've seen that all the way
from
Some, an older friend of mine,
um, whose brother, I guess, uh,
came back from Vietnam addicted.
And never got any kind of
support. And so I'm really
thrilled by the report. I'm
thrilled by the detail, and I'm,
I'm really um glad that you're
working on it. I just wanted to
share that concern. Thank you,
Miss, uh, Mr. I add one thing?
So one of the strategies that
we're working on is that I
actually have you involved in a
youth media campaign, so every
county is making a prevention
poster, and that's really the
first step in awareness is
starting to include.
that population into this
discussion, because that,
unfortunately, has been a very
separate thing no one talks
about having a substance use
issue in in any of these
counties. And so I've been
facilitating, um, and I have
some posters I wanted to share
with you guys. Um, but I'm
actually including the youth and
making our youth media, um,
prevention posters which are
posted on digital boards that
we've stood up in the high
schools and eventually we're
gonna have a contest.
Oh,
sorry I'm getting really
excited. All right, well, uh, I
would like one of those posters.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Before we go on, I, I just want
to make a correction about the
lunch, um, we, we, we didn't
include it on the, on the
schedule, but we are scheduled
for a working lunch, so there
will be a presentation during
the lunch hour. It'll be by the
center on law and poverty, Maria
Griego from the Center on Law
and Poverty speaking on housing
issues. The other
thing of uh housing equity
issues specifically, um, the
other thing that I should have
mentioned is besides Marla
Schultz, the other person who's
buying lunch for us today is
Charlie Marcus, so we have two
people to thank for lunch today,
uh.
And uh
We'll go on to you then, Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to just build them first
of all, thank you. Um, I, I
apologize, I was late, but um I
try and use the technology to
try and listen as I'm driving,
right? Multitasking, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Senator Serio
Lopez. She was alluding and
taking on some of the, I think
same train of thought with
regards to our youth.
And I was looking through um
Burco.
Um, on, on your proposed
strategies, and it does list on
number 17.
Connecting disconnected youth.
So if I may ask briefly, what is
it that you're looking at? What
is that referring to when it
says connecting disconnected
youth.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
there are several interventions
for disconnected youth, uh,
could be broken family, violence
in the family, uh, could be just
uh judicial involvement and so
forth. So there's uh the idea is
to break the cycle, not just
through prevention strategies,
but also addressing the social
needs and determinants that are
affecting that child's life.
Um, I wish I had more specifics,
but it hadn't been approved yet.
No, and I thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, and I, I kind of hear the
theme that you're, you're
speaking about, so I would be
interested, Mr. Chair, to learn
more about what it is that maybe
you're waiting approval for, um,
because Mr. Chair, I think
that's all related to some of
the other issues that will be
coming before the session as
well as the presentation, kind
of maybe interconnected,
interwoven, um, from the uh
Justice Center that gave a
presentation to us yesterday.
shooting.
And then in um looking for Las
Cruces, right? There is also um
on your advisory council, you
have 11 individuals, and it does
mention um people with lived
living experience. May I ask
what is that referring to?
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair and committee members.
Thank you for the question. Um,
that refers to people who have
experience with substance use
disorders. Perhaps they are now
working as peer counselors or in
other um realms with respect to
um behavioral health or
substance uh use uh use
prevention. And so um they are
able to provide a tremendous
perspective to us, a
particularly along the lines of
some of the.
access issues that we've talked
about today and how it's
difficult, for example, for
daily methadone, transportation
issues, um, access to providers
or facilities, um, just put a
challenge that is and uh so they
provide a tremendous uh
perspective to the advisory
council with respect to some of
the discussions we've had about
uh potential expenditures to
address the opioid crisis.
No, and I appreciate that, Mr.
Chair, cause I
In, in many different
Task forces and such, I always
find it um added value when we
have persons with lived
experience, because if you've
never been down that road
before, were easy to accuse and
do other things unless you've
actually been down that road.
And many a times, Mr. Chair, um,
they do give us a very clear
picture as to how we can assist
um in, in helping them along
their, their journey.
if I may, I, I'd like to add one
of the other um guidance, um,
items that we got from the
county and the city council was
to not only include those, the
voices of those who have
experience, but also maybe the
family members or loved ones who
are trying to help those who
have substance use disorders,
and so that was a very important
um aspect of the data gathering
that we went through and I'll
say one of our um
Focus groups with was with a a
local high school students, and
we had a lot of input there
about family members, uh, who
had substance use disorders and
the impact that it had on them,
uh, growing up, being able to go
to school, participate in
activities, etc. So those are
very valuable viewpoints to
include.
And thank you, Mr. Chair, cause
that was, you just kind of went
right into what my other
question had been if I had more
time, um, talking about our
youth, because our youth also
have, I think, a good very
necessary perspective. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And just a quick
comment about disconnected
youth.
Typically for us connected you
to the ones in schools, we can
get at them.
When they drop out, they're
disconnected, and that's
We need to figure out a way to
stay in touch with young people
who've dropped out, um, and our
programs for that, I'm afraid,
are, are way too weak. Uh,
Senator Pinto, your turn.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you all for your
presentation and Shawn, I really
appreciate the work you've done
in Hidalgo County. I understand
that because of your efforts
that are detox facility will be
open soon for overnight stays
and uh.
Uh, County manager Green just
gave you a lot of credit for
that. So I appreciate that very
much, and I understand you'll be
doing a presentation in Luna.
We need you and Luna too. How
are these um
These counties decided upon the
seven counties.
So
the 7 counties were already a
collaborative, but when I came
on to.
The project.
But I know that, you know, it
goes back to the presentation
that I gave earlier that there
were 7 counties that really
didn't want to do this by
themselves.
And I know they reached out to
other counties and I've actually
done some presentations, um,
with some other communities.
However, not everybody wants to
spend their opiate dollars, um,
in the way that is a collective
group, so we're doing it
together. So that's one thing
that I get asked quite a bit is
because Valencia County is your
largest county or are they going
to get the most money.
It's
Equal.
Across all 7 counties at this
point and at one point in this
project, there might come a time
where Hidalgo, for instance,
it's a really good example. So
that building has been sitting
vacant for the last 4 years. And
there's been money that have
been put into standing up a ARTC
or social rehab program for
those that have uh a substance
use issues.
And
With this project, what we're
able to do is actually help
Tisha stand that up and go
through the whole process,
because that's what happens in
rural counties. People have an
initiative and it just stops
because they don't have the
expert to be able to finish it
up or consult with, um, and
I think that
The counties that join us and
Luna might be one of them, and
Grants might be one of them.
What I find when I do these
presentations is people
understanding that we're doing
this all together.
That we might have a hub and
spoke model moving forward. It's
not just about these dollars
going to your county.
This is about us creating a
sustainable system for those
that are a part of our program.
Thank you, thank you so much,
because I see that in almost
every area, every issue that we
face, we have to work together,
collaboration in in these rural
counties. So you mentioned
housing being in need.
And, and how do you see this
money going toward, and that
might have been somebody else
that mentioned that money going
toward the need for housing.
So in what I'm looking at in our
rural counties is actually a hub
and spoke model, Valencia is my
largest county. Um, they have
the biggest resource for
employment and potentially
treatment programs.
So what we're looking at is, you
know, can a program gets stood
up in a county individually,
that's our first goal is to see
if that can happen in each
county, um, but the problem with
that is finding a vendor to be
able to do that. Someone who is
a treatment provider that has
the staffing to be able to
support that, so on and so
forth. So I would say for um
RORC collaboration. I'm looking
at both. I'm looking first
inside the county. Do we have
the resources?
stand it up locally and if not a
hub and spoke model.
OK, thank you very much. I could
add to that if, if you like, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee, um, I'm
embedded in health, housing and
homelessness, uh, and so we
have, uh, recently developed,
introduced.
Getting ready to open several
gateway programs, and at this
intercepts Gateway West, which
is a shelter program. We have
men and women's navigational
housing navigation, uh, support,
we're rolling out what I
mentioned earlier, the micro
village of 50 pallet homes, uh,
the meds sobering and medical
respite as well to name. So at
each of these potential
intercepts or along that
continuum from Gateway West.
through treatment to maybe the
micro village, housing will be
super important while somebody's
navigating their recovery,
right? So, uh, we started a
program when I was with the
state to support intensive
outpatient programs with
supportive housing. So intensive
outpatient is a great name.
It means, you know, intensive
outpatient. It's 12 hours a
week. It leaves a lot of free
time for an individual that's
not in a residential treatment
program to go home and perhaps
navigate drugs in the home,
violence in the home, so
supportive housing will go hand
in hand with anybody trying to
get into recovery or
establishing a solid recovery uh
program for themselves. Thank
you. I see. Thank you. and
Shawna looking forward to
keeping in touch with you on
this. Thanks a lot everybody.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Mr. Chair, and this is extremely
interesting presentation.
Um
Curious, um,
Have you seen a relationship.
In uh prescribed opiates leading
up to heavier drugs like
fentanyl, and is there a
difference in the urban.
Uh, areas.
In the rural areas. Thank you
for the question, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, there has been
for decades now, the pathway of
an injury, uh, or surgery where
opioids were prescribed and then
as uh Shana pointed out, the uh
medication monitoring system,
stopping somebody from
prescribing. There's been
changes to uh lengths of time
for prescriptions of opioids and
so forth. And as I mentioned,
mentioned earlier, there's a
trending down on morbidity and
mortality on on prescription
opioids, but for decades that
has been a pathway to uh
substance use with heroin and
other illicit opioids, right?
The uh bootleg OxyContin or the
fentanyl that we're experiencing
now. Uh, we are limiting
prescribing by practitioners,
uh, for opioids and so forth,
but uh
You know, there's also family
members that introduced family
members to substances, and then
based on their propensity, they
could establish a substance use
problem just from street use, so
it's a, it's a deep problem
between urban and rural.
Oh, different, uh, urban and
rural, uh, you have a higher
density population, obviously in
the urban areas, uh, so
medication or substances, uh,
can be relatively easy to get.
Uh, I would, I'm unfamiliar with
the traffic patterns, but the
DEA does, uh, surveys in rural
areas and so forth and does
report out on that if you'd be
interested in seeing some of
those intercepts of uh
Where the distribution lines are
for uh rural areas.
Thank you.
Thank you for that. I, I'd like
to
Quickly ask a question on the,
on, on your allocation per
county. Is that recurring
funding or is that one time
funding?
It's recurring funding, and it's
identified as recurring funding
for 18 years.
But it's um going back to what
Wayne was talking about that
there's some different legal
issues that are coming up with
the opiate settlement dollars,
so there might be a change in
that, but it's slated to be 6.3
million for the next 18 years.
Great, and I have 22 quick
questions I'm gonna ask them
both.
Uh, before I get
was dealt
Um, on your community listening
requests.
Have you had requests from from
tribal governments to do this or
to collaborate with you.
And on the next page you're uh
idea of drug programs.
Have you talked to
administrative office of the
courts on.
So
I just finished my strategic
plan, and we did a deep analysis
of all of the tribal um pueblo,
um,
And that in nation lands in in
my county, so I have Pueblos and
Acama Laguna, Zuni, Rama.
Chapter of Navajo Tribe in
Cibola County in Socorro, I have
the Alamo, Navajo Indian
Reservation.
Um, in Valencia County, I have
the Pueblo of Laguna Resources
in Cibola County and in Katrin I
have the pueblo of Zuni land
holdings resources in Sabula
County. So we've just done an
assessment of.
This
This need to be it's almost own
separate project and for myself
to be able to probably um have
some consultation, um, support.
With um moving forward in this
way, we are setting up uh the
same.
Resources, for instance, like
our digital boards that we're
setting up in the high schools,
they're gonna go into this whole
area, but we are, we are
recognizing that we probably
need to do something very
distinct, um, for this whole
part of the project.
Um, when it comes to uh drug
court.
We are, I've, I've tried to team
up with the juvenile detention
center, um, CYFD, you know, the
police department in in all of
those kind of emergency service
systems. Um, I haven't been
successful in doing that. That's
one thing that's really
challenging around this project
is that it's a lot of counties
and you calling people all the
time and you're trying to
connect with people, um, and
those windows sometimes are
pretty small, but we do
recognize that.
That is a whole system that we
need to tap into. Now in Hidalgo
County, I'm working with
recovery management, which has
all of the contracts for the
drug courts in that community.
And so I think that process as
far as helping them stand up,
improved inpatient and
outpatient services is gonna be
my landscape to do that in other
counties. That's, that's time.
I'm going to use the church
prerogative to jump here with my
questions because I'll have to
leave with the vice chair in a
few minutes. Uh, my first
question is for you, Shawna,
the, the
The Department of Health, I
think, is now offering, I think
it's gone that way. There's now
offering a medication assisted
treatment through all the county
health offices. Is that making a
difference and when you say
there's no provider there, are
you not including them? Um, I
have, uh, reached out to the
Department of Health, Mr. Chair,
and we're actually looking at
DOH assisting with our detainees
who are being discharged for
follow-up services, um, they
don't have the resources to be
a.
provider there 5 days a week.
Um, to support some of the
systems in those areas, but I
have been working with the
Department of Health and we are
identifying what they can do.
The challenge, I think, is that
it's not a system that runs 5
days a week.
OK, yeah.
Does it need more money? I
wonder if maybe that would be
something we should be asking
the Department of Health to
You need more money, Department
of Health. Yeah, I guess they
always could use it. Uh, all
right, Stanford, uh, my, the
second question is for you. Is
there any, I, I just have to
ask, when we talked to turquoise
lodge, uh, they said they're
underutilizing.
They don't have as many people
in their turquoise lodge
facility in the Gateway Center
as their license for because the
space isn't ample. It doesn't
provide enough room for the
other meetings. Are they
negotiating with you for more
space. You've got more room in
your gateway, don't you?
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for that question. I am not
familiar with that yet, but uh I
appreciate you bringing that up.
I will certainly work with that.
It drives us crazy that, that
the state of New Mexic the only
Drug and alcohol treatment in
patients that they have as
turquoise lodge right now.
They're certified in Roswell,
but they don't have anybody
there, and they haven't started
certifying the state hospital
for drug and alcohol treatment
yet, although they will be using
that new facility in Las Vegas
right across the street. But
gosh, this would be low hanging
fruit just to get a little more
space and to expand to their
fully licensed capacity would
help a lot more people through
the course of the year. So if
you could kind of look into
that.
Then my last question is for, is
for uh Doctor Lindstrom. I love
the idea of the endowment fund
that you're gonna be pressured
to spend all the money coming in
as soon as it comes in though.
So I wanted to, to hook you up
with two other thoughts that are
going on currently at the
legislature, one is, um,
Uh, Representative Ferrari is
going to reintroduce her bill
for increasing the alcohol tax.
And I have a bill to uh it's
brought up initially by Dan
Weeks, we keep tweaking it and
keep trying it and eventually
it'll get through.
To reallocate the money the
state gets from the liquor
excise tax. We use about half of
it now for
DWI. The other half goes right
into the general fund where it's
lost and we don't really need
it, we're running huge surpluses
now in the general front.
Why don't we commit that money?
To local resources, and then
attached to that is the idea
that failed many times, but I
kept trying it, uh.
that keeps beating his head
against the wall. The local
excise liquor excise, local
option liquor excise tax that
McKinley County has, that if you
had, you'd have an immediate
source of revenue ongoing, not
independent of the opioid
settlement money. Uh, so I just
throw those out as some ideas. I
like the idea of the endowment.
But you need to find a source of
money for it.
Those are two, Representative
Ferrari is going to generate
millions with hers if she could
ever get it passed.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I applaud both
initiatives. Thank you. I'm now
turning the chair over to
Representative Ferrari as the
vice chair and I leave for our
LFC presentation, and we'll go
to Representative Garcia Nix,
and then we'll just come there.
Thank you, uh, but you won't
have a time
chairman, um.
You know, um,
The local governments don't have
capacity.
To kind of uh implement a real
creative
Program that is occurring in 7
countries.
Um
Except the United States.
And that is an injectable
treatment program.
Uh, that this concept has been
embedded thoroughly in this
committee since 2016.
When we brought a team from
Vancouver, Canada, to share with
this committee the benefits of
an injectable opioid treatment
program.
I've tried to pass legislation,
um, using settlement monies for
such programs.
And um,
And I did bear up a presentation
before the community input
meetings that city, county, city
of Albuquerque, Bernalio had,
uh, with the consultant to, to
come up with your strategic
proposal on how to spend the
The uh the uh opioid settlement
funds.
The thing is that uh Madam Chair
is uh you, the local
governments, need to hold.
The UNM Health Sciences Center,
accountable.
In terms of helping you all
initiate.
These injectable opioid
treatment programs in your
communities. Why?
I don't ear because the UNM
House Sciences Center has a
nationally recognized opioid
treatment team.
One of the best in the country.
And they're the only ones that
can help implement.
These programs at the local
level.
So I'm challenging you all.
To, uh, to use some of these
monies that you're not spending.
Burleyo County seeurerque.
To take me up on the offer to
approach UNM Health Sciences
Center.
I don't feelid treatment team.
And start implementing these
programs at the local level
because they've been proven to
be very effective and efficient.
And really turning around, the
only epidemic in the seven
countries.
The other thing, Madam Chair, is
that opioids, uh, opioid, uh,
the opioid settlement funds is
not taxpayer money.
This is money coming from the Oo
manufacturers.
This is not subject to
anti-donation.
So what's the local governments
not to keep.
You all
From establishing
Uh, J J tip programs in their
communities. What's a JT
program? We have one in the
state.
It's a job training incentive
program.
Where the state pays wages to
the trainee.
For a certain period of time.
Until that training is over,
then the employer starts paying.
The wages. Why is it so
important?
Because of the stigma applied,
Madam Chair, to substance users
who wants to hire a substance
user on a, on a, that's in a
program.
Very few businesses want to do
that.
So I'm, I'm challenging the
local governments to undertake
these types of initiatives.
To where we're, we're looking at
These types of, of programs that
help
Stabilize the livelihoods of
these substance users that are
in a clinical setting program.
Please finish your thought.
I'm out of time.
Thank you, um, we'll go to um
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and my
first question goes to Mr.
Lindstrom. Mr. Lindstrom, you've
mentioned that there was um
It doesn't look like there's
been a warm handoff when people
are leaving the Burleyo County
Detention Center because I think
you indicated that sometimes
they don't follow up on their
prescriptions if they have been
addicted to drugs and utilizing
a program in that facility. So
under this new uh program that
you're putting together that
you're working on with vital
strategies. Is that gonna be a
stronger connection now between
Burleyo County Detention Center
and some group that maybe you're
putting together so that the
These individuals will always
have a connection once they
leave their facility.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, um, perhaps.
I wasn't clear my communication,
um, earlier in that um I think
we have some very
Robust
Re-entry service system relative
to the Metropolitan Detention
Center, so you may recall, uh,
the background 2017, the county
implemented the resource reentry
center.
Um, because it used to be that
when people were released.
Uh, from MDC, uh, and releases
occur, have occurred, you know,
basically 24/7, 365, uh shuttle
would bring them to downtown
Albuquerque and drop them off on
a corner at 2 in the morning,
for example.
Um, now the shuttle brings all
releases directly to the
resource of reentry center.
And reentry doesn't begin just
with the drop off at the reentry
center, we also have care
management teams and
transitional planning teams
housed within MDC itself.
Um, and we also have um care
managers who follow individuals
who have been released, uh, from
MDC and we hooked them up with
treatment resources, etc.
Um
Many of these individuals have
complex health and behavioral
health.
Um, conditions.
Um, many of them are homeless.
Um, so once they get in the
community, if they don't have
transitional housing, uh, some,
uh, stable housing, uh,
available, it means having to
use what the city and the county
both have, uh, our outreach
teams in in homeless encampments
and street outreach and street
medicine program, um, etc. Um,
so what it is there is a program
that will connect them when
they come out. We do. I'm just
saying that there's still are
failures, and this is one of the
examples of a failure with only
20 to 25% of people actually
getting their prescriptions
filled, and that's why we're
looking for other alternatives
like a longer term injectable,
so that they would have up to 30
days upon release to be able to
get hooked up with a provider.
that could continue them on
injectables. Uh, the problem is
we don't have enough providers
with pharmacies with the
capability to do that. So we
still have some building to do
to turn that particular failure
around. So thank you, and with
respect to the 7 of you, the 7,
the 9 counties that are together
and working in in a group. Just
to follow up on the question
raised by Representative Jones.
So how are you all coordinating
with the other counties in
In terms of the work that's been
done with these opioid
settlement funds. We need to
have a coordinated campaign
throughout the entire state. So
no matter where a person is,
they're gonna get this
coordinated help. How are you
all working with other counties?
I mean, are, is there another
group of 79 counties uh that is
doing something similar and we
all 33 counties be getting
together to talk about how your
behavioral health programs are
working.
That is open to anyone. I'm not.
Miss Ben Coma, maybe you can
tell me.
Thank you so much for the
question, Madam Chair and
committee members. So right now
our effort is certainly limited
uh to the city of Las Cruces and
Dona Anna County. However, I do
know that Jamie Michael has been
advocating for at the state
level, regular um uh committee
meetings or just sharing of
information from these groups so
that we can leverage the
information and and the studies
that we've done and the
potential solutions with other
counties.
You may not yet be participating
in a collaborative, and I do
believe that there was one
meeting in September, um, that
was organized by the governor's
office, uh with entities across
the state, but we would
certainly advocate for more of
that. We don't want to duplicate
efforts with the state, we want
to learn from our partners and
other communities, certainly,
and having the form to do that
would be beneficial to all.
OK, um, just one final question
I think I can ask is with
respect to the, the students,
the seven county focus group
priorities and you look at that,
you looked at prevention and
education program in the
schools, and I think that this
was mentioned by Miss uh
Uh, Masana, uh, Hartley, and
that one of the things that has
been happening in the rural
areas, particularly is the
yellow ribbon of prevention
program and opioids can also
lead to suicide. I just want to
know, is this one of the
programs that is also being
collaborated with with the work
that you're doing.
So Madam Chair and committee
members, we are actually
utilizing the Stanford Reach
lab, uh, safety first
curriculum, which is vetted by
both opioid prevention and
abstinence-based programs.
So what we've done is it's a 13
week curriculum. What's nice
about it is it touches on.
Encouraging youth not to use
drugs or alcohol, um.
Opiates included, but it also is
a harm reduction approach,
because that is, that's, that's
true for us is that there's some
kids that are not going to stop
using and so the nice thing
about that curriculum is it
covers both. It's a 13 week
curriculum, um, Bryce Pittener,
who's one of my colleagues in my
project has actually got it down
to 8 because we wanted the
school to actually stand it up
and the shorter the curriculum,
the more likely it's gonna
happen. Um, we have
actually facilitated ourselves
at Infinity High School in
Berlin.
We did it with the staff so that
when we're providing technical
assistance and we're guiding
them on how to do so that we've
actually done ourselves. So
we've been leaning into the
Stanford Reach lab.
curriculum.
Thank you, we're going next to
representative could add just a
little bit about the yellow riot
quickly
quickly, yes, um, so there are
is a goal through communities
and schools to train 50 schools
in yellow ribbon suicide and
community members, staff, and
the children, uh, there's also
been an expansion effort for the
pack's good behavior games.
We try to expand that, not just
to schools but to community, uh,
partners, boys and girls clubs,
etc. Thank you.
Thank you. Next Representative
Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much. I have, I
think, a very quick question,
and, and that is what I'm
wondering is with this
settlement, is it, um,
contemplated to be ongoing or is
it one time or is it limited and
I'm when I'm kind of wondering
is if there's any provision that
we've put or need to put into
law to create a permanent
funding stream.
I,
I can start off with that, um,
yes, Madam Chair and committee
members. So the settlement
funds, as we noted, are
currently scheduled to go for 17
years up through 2038, and
The settlements with each
entity, whether it's a retailer
manufacturer, distributor, very,
so some are one-time payments,
some are multiple payments, uh,
some are a balloon payments at
the end. Some are uh front end
loaded. They just all really
vary and as as Wayne said
earlier, as we move through um
current litigation or or new
litigation, there may be a
different structure for
settlements. I think um we are
currently also contemplating
whether we
could potentially set up a trust
with a portion of our funds,
some of what's been discussed
here earlier has certainly come
to light, which is addressing
this as a crisis, uh, versus a
longer term need for the funds.
One thing that we're considering
is that if we were to set up a
trust for many years, the use of
the funds may always be governed
by the settlement terms, so it
may not be flexible in the outer
years when there may be other
issues to address.
OK, um, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
this, my questions and comments
are for Miss Hartley. I
represent Valencia County as
part of my district. So, um,
first of all, I was interested
to see that there's 21 FQHCs in
the seven counties. That to me
is very high, but in relation to
that,
I'm interested in the number of
pharmacies, and then my last
part of the question is, uh, do
you coordinate with the DWI and
the juvenile Justice councils
and all of those counties, and
that's all my questions.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
There are, I, I
I have this data, but I want to
say that.
There's approximately 25
pharmacies in my 7 counties.
OK. And
When it comes to
Working with the the
organizations with DWI. I have
the individuals who actually
made these posters were from the
um.
Justice after school program,
and so I haven't connected with.
That particular person in
Valencia County yet, but I am
working very closely with the
detention center with the
warden, um, Randy, um, and
trying to bridge some of the
work that we're doing in Socorro
because I'm trying to actually
create a community learning, um,
opportunity for all the
detention centers, and my goal
is to actually do that for all 7
counties. So if I work with the
DWI team in Valencia, I want to
be able to create a learning
community for all 7 counties to
come together.
So, um, Madam Chair and Miss
Hartley, the reason I bring that
up is because
The DWI um planning council
there, I realized that that the
emphasis of your money is much
broader, but they also have a
very broad, uh, scope and goal,
then they involve um.
personnel from the schools, they
involve the courts. Actually,
one of the judges actually
chairs and in some of my other
counties, um, the juvenile
justice DWI have already
combined, and so if we're doing
opioid, um,
Outreach, it would be great if
they would be aware of your
presence that you could be
prodding them about opioids,
etc. So thank you very much,
Madam Chair, and thank you all
for your presentation.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation too. I
think things have changed and
shifted from even our discussion
last year and really getting
these collaborative efforts
moving. I want to commend you on
that, um, even if it, you know,
the, the city's working with the
counties, but on the broader
scale with all the counties that
your uh collaborating with. I
think it's really important that
we're doing that with this
funding, uh, my, my perspective
on all this is that we need.
We need a a bigger
infrastructure and more
collaboration with, with, with,
with each other and my
perspective is to really
establish that from the from the
top down, really, um.
And then create it in a in a
circular type of system, but top
down meaning that the state
needs to really address our
collaborative, our behavioral
health collaborative, and what
that means, um, as we're moving
into addressing our opioid
crisis which we're in and I'm
here. I got to attend along with
our with the with the chairman,
uh, last month, the opioid
convention in Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County.
So commend you on that, then
what you did there, a lot of the
questions that were um in the
public uh participation was
incredible. Um, and the
questions that I was able to
feel just being there, you know,
for a short amount of time are
emphasized in some of the what
you're doing here, so I don't
know that that was a big enough,
uh, place for information to be
dispersed, but it was a start,
and I want to say, um, I have
some questions for Bernardo
County when you're looking at
your, your list of proposed
strategies.
I would like to know more. I
don't, we don't have enough
time, but some of these um these
uh strategies that you're
looking at or I'm looking at
legislatively, quite honestly,
and one of those would be in the
harm under the harm reduction
section overdose prevention
center and the recovery porting
the recovery housing.
Um
The first with the overdose
overdose prevention center in
I think you have here leveraging
the sobering center, but
Quite frankly, we need, we need
this uh prevention, overdose
prevention center in place. How
are you doing that? What is that
strategy. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative Luan, uh,
I don't know if you were present
when we were talking about all
of these recommendations are
being vetted by the local
government coordinating
commission.
And um one of the potential
routes that the LGCC is
considering, um, because we did
have legal counsel present who
thought that
There would need to be enabling
legislation in New Mexico to be
able to stand up and overdose
prevention center, and so they
uh were
Advocating and if this is um
endorsed by the county
commission and city council, uh,
they were considering a
recommendation that the state
conduct a feasibility study, uh,
relative to standing up,
overdose prevention centers in
New Mexico that potentially
would lead to enabling
legislation. Thank you. I would
just like to move madam chair. I
am already working on that
legislation, so I'd like to work
a little closely, uh, more
closely with you and looking to
reintroduce that legis
as he did, uh, two years ago and
just really quickly, just more
of a comment we'll talk
afterwards. The community and
schools that you brought
forward, this is, this is an
advantage, uh, place for, uh,
the intersection for them to get
the funding for us to get the
model of the communities in
schools. I was happy to hear
that you said there's 50
identified. We need to do more
because right now in our our
funding structure or the state
with our communities and
communities in school is not set
um through our SEG funding
mechanism, so they need
Then they need the funding and
so I'd like and challenge you
don't know comment, but I just
like to challenge and have a
conversation how we can do more
of that with these efforts with
these opioid funding. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. We'll go to Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you for this presentation
and thank you for all the work
that you're doing, um, I really
like the fact that you're really
trying to go out to our
communities, our rural areas,
marginalized communities. Um,
can you talk a little bit about
uh what we're doing to reach
some of our uh veterans in our
state, um, and I say that just
because some of the nonprofits
um are doing some of this work,
um, and working on strategies to
reach out to veterans, but also
understanding that with the VA.
The federal government, there's
ways that we can kind of
leverage some of those resources
for support. And so I'm
wondering if there's any work
being done there, um, uh, in the
space to just really help some
of our, our veterans in our
communities.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
representative Pope, uh.
To date, I'm not aware of a
specific.
A program coming out of these
monies relative to serving vets,
um, first of all, I can say to
you, I am a veteran myself.
And, um, the biggest initiative
that we've been involved with
for vets is the veterans
integration Center. I don't know
if you've had a chance to visit,
um, etc. and there's another um
phase of that project to
expansion, um, so.
Just off the cuff, I would say
there's certainly opportunities
relative to the work that the
Veterans integration Centers,
um, is doing relative to um uh
the purposes of, of these funds
in particular, we're just still
in the um review of the
strategic plan and coming up
with a, an implementation plan,
and exactly how these strategies
are going to be operationalized,
so.
I really can't offer you more
detail than that at present.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'm very familiar with the Vic
and Brock Wolf. I'm actually
going to there, uh, dinner gala
on Saturday night as well, so
they're doing great work and and
with that understanding, like I
said, I understand that this is
just a strategy and and
prevention and support, and
veterans are part of that. I
just wanna remind folks that I
think um we need to kind of
leverage the additional support
we can get from the VA and the
federal government, like what
the VI does.
Um, just like with folks who are
on house, right? A person who's
on the street that's that is a
vet. There's actually more uh
services, more resources
available to help them, and so,
um, it might not be the case for
this, but I think it's something
we need to investigate and look
at. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
uh, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so
I wanted to um sort of expand
just a little bit on what
Representative Garcia mentioned
in terms of employment
opportunities for folks who um
Or are using, um, and I think
that one of the one of the
pieces that I wanted to raise
was really around training,
right? Training programs so that
that people can be gainfully
employed, and for rural areas
that might mean that they've got
to go to the bigger city, um, to
take advantage of some of those,
especially some of the
apprenticeship programs that the
unions have, they're very good,
um, they pay while you're, um,
learning, um, and so I think
that those opportunities also
need to be explored, because if
you're gainfully employed, then
you're able to do all the other
things to maintain uh a home,
um, you know, if you have a
family, maintain your family,
all of those kinds of things,
and I think that that really
helps someone's um
View of themselves, right? Uh,
their ability to survive.
Um, and the other question that
I have is I didn't see any data
in here in terms of um substance
abuse, substance misuse, um, in
terms of, you know, broken down
demographically, age.
Uh, race ethnicity, those kinds
of things. And the other piece
that I'm also particularly
interested in is, you know, how
many of those folks are
unhoused. Um, how many of them
are you reaching? How many do
you plan to reach? So do you
have any of that information?
Madame Chair and committee
members, um, yes, as part of our
community needs assessment. We
did a deep dive into data
regarding the substance, the
folks who have substance use
disorders in our community, the
demographics in incidents of
overdoses, what segments of the
population were more affected,
um, for example, uh in Dona Anna
County, we males and uh people
of color, uh, in, in the older.
Age groups uh stood out as one
of the groups most impacted by
the opioid crisis. So we do have
all that data in our uh needs
assessment, and we can certainly
provide that to the committee.
Madame Chair and committee
members, I have the same
information in my strategic
plan, so I could share that with
you. The only demographic I
didn't, I would, I had a very
hard time identifying was
unhoused because in rural areas,
that issue is not that it's not
present, but it's not as um.
pulled out
So a lot of people who um
unhoused in rural areas look
like people transporting people
to a rural area and leaving them
there.
And individuals not knowing that
they're not unhoused until their
kids oftentimes aren't going to
school, so that information is
not always readily available.
A madam chair, a representative
Chavez, um, relative to your
first question, by the way, we
do have data in our strategic
plan as well. So we certainly
can get that, um, to members of
the committee.
Uh, relative to your first
question on employment, uh, at
Berlia County, we've been
piloting a program that we call
the Flame program, um, and these
are folks with um uh lived
experience and uh uh who are
challenged relative, uh, to
employment and it's particularly
gets challenging if you've got a
felony background, um, in
particular, um, so this pilot is
Um, a number of components to it
that's overseen by our HR
department with the goal of
getting the participants to a
place where they can be
employable with the county, the
county as as the employer. Um,
so we don't have the assessment
yet of this pilot, um, but it's
our hope that we can scale this,
um, because in my experience,
uh, folks who are recovery, um,
potentially
It can be some of the most
committed and passionate
individuals, uh, particularly
when you've invested um in them,
um, of, of any potential hire
that you could make. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. Start.
My timer, um, so I think it's
been given that, you know,
fentanyl addicted people started
with opioids and um.
That has been a high percentage
of people um were prescribed
opioids, so my question is, have
you considered uh prevention
programs directed at medical
providers, uh, reducing their,
um,
You know, uh, prescriptions.
Madam
Madam Chair, there's been
federal changes to prescribing
practices, one that comes to
mind is limiting 5 day
prescription in conjunction with
a prescription for the naloxone.
Um,
The
The idea of uh prescription
opioids continuing to be the
problem, uh, there are
Uh, but
Trainings by um UNM that took me
with doctors and so forth for
safe prescribing practices, um,
Other, other colleges, other
professionals do that. I know
there's a couple of doctors at
Christis that, uh, meet with
other doctors to make sure that
they're doing safe prescribing
practices
Project Echo. Thank you, John
Blank. Sorry about that. I was
just going to ask you that was
through Project Echo, but is
there a campaign to reach other
people who aren't going through
these trainings, you know, like
a reaching out to hospitals or,
you know, other doctors to make
sure that
um
I know there's some people who
are in pain and need it, but
then also they risk becoming
addicted.
Uh, there's been a variety of
strategies since the Federal
opioid, um, uh, money, uh
started to flow relative to
responding to the opioid crisis.
Um, I was with the BHSD I think
that money started to flow in
2017, um, so yes, the current
healthcare authority, the
Department of Health, um, our
respective jurisdictions, etc.
have been very much engaged.
In the very things that you're
talking about, um, and in
addition, uh, there's been an
ongoing, uh, campaign, uh,
called the dose of reality, um,
that
Still is a public awareness
program that's statewide, and
we're looking at potentially
further building on the work the
state's done around messaging
around these um
Issues, um,
Uh, in, in Berlio County itself.
About the other counties in Las
Cruces.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. Yes, as we
are still, um, identifying our
core strategies and the actions
associated with that. One of the
things that we are looking at is
for each of the potential
actions we're taking, what is
the setting, the most
appropriate setting for those
actions, whether it's a
hospital, uh, whether they're
providers' offices, whether it's
a school, or whether it's an
outreach center, etc. and so we
are definitely, hospitals are
definitely on our our radar and
our partners in
Um, with medical providers, etc.
So we anticipate being able to
uh discuss that in
recommendations to our council
and commission. Thank you.
Thank you.
So Madame Chair and committee,
um, behind me actually is my
addiction, uh, medicine
physician, Doctor Patricia Pate,
who's a part of my project. Um,
we've actually put together a
training modules for hospitals
for outpatient providers for
clinical staff for physicians
that include general education,
treatment.
Management of medical
comorbidity comorbidities, harm
reduction and substance use
intervention, so we have a part
of our team equipped to be able
to have those types of
discussions with all the
providers we interface with.
Thank you very much and um thank
you panel for your efforts and
um, you know,
Wish you um much success cause
our state really needs it. So
thank you. And we'll, we didn't
get to hear from some of the
other communities, but um we
hope that they're following in
the same, you know, uh.
type of prevention and inclusion
or um everyone in our all those
stakeholders in your
communities. So thank you.
Committee, um, it's lunch will
be here in about 10 minutes. If
you want to take a.
Oh, the lunch is here, so you'll
take
probably enjoy doing that, did
you enjoy doing that. Right. So
if a committee, if you'll go
ahead and get lunch, uh, and
then come back, we'll have our,
uh, working lunch presentation
start as soon as we can get back
here it'll be here in like 10
minutes, so we might as well
start the presentation. Um.
OK, we'll go ahead. When lunch
gets here, we'll take, uh, we'll
go back out and get our lunch.
The presenters are here for our
working lunch, and it's the
center on law and poverty, um,
on housing
she was supposed to, oh there
she is. OK. So we will continue
so that we can stay on schedule.
If you need to take a break.
Do it quickly. How's that?
OK, if everyone could take their
conversations out of the room.
We are going to continue. Thank
you.
Goodbye.
Thank you, could the last panel
please leave?
OK, it looks like we have quiet
now, um.
This is Maria Griego and you're
with the Center in law and
poverty, and if you'd like to go
ahead and start presenting our
committee will be back.
There we go. OK.
Thank you. Again, my name is
Maria Grego. I am with the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. I'm the director of
economic equity at the center.
Um, and I'm here today on behalf
of the New Mexico Housing
Alliance. We are a group of
housing advocates, uh, comprised
of civil legal service
providers, including New Mexico
Legal Aid, senior Citizens Law
Office.
Um, United South Broadway, New
Mexico, uh, the bar program, the
legal resources for the elderly
program, as well as um advocacy
organizations like New Mexico
Coalition to End Homelessness
and invoices for Children,
Albuquerque Healthcare for the
Homeless, and then um other uh
members including Soul Housing
New New Mexico infection
prevention and diversion
program.
And we appreciate the
opportunity to be here today to
talk.
To the legislative Health and
Human Services Act.
Committee about
Affordable housing in New Mexico
specifically.
Housing and manufactured home
communities and we're especially
grateful to be here in front of
this committee because uh
housing is uh is a health issue.
Um, it's, it's directly tied to
uh to health.
Um
It probably goes without saying
that an affordable safe and
permanent home is essential to
good health.
Um, housing instability and
homelessness can negatively
impact one's physical and mental
health.
And all communities,
particularly vulnerable
communities like children and
seniors need safe and stable
housing to be able to to thrive
and reach their full potential.
Manufactured home communities in
particular, uh, provide built-in
support and community and our
key factor in overall good
health, um, as many of you are
aware, seniors um often heavily
rely on homes in manufactured
home communities, um, as sort of
a, you know, a way to spend
their their final years. It
allows them to preserve their
assets will also being in a in a
community with other individuals
who can provide support, um,
Help with medical appointments,
um, and then there's, you know,
just less maintenance for um for
them than being at a private
residence. Um, so they, they are
often very attractive options
for seniors.
So I'll tell you a little bit
about the New Mexico mobile Home
Park Act because I feel like it
is a part of the law that not
many folks are aware of. I think
most folks know that there is
the New Mexico uniform owner
resident relations Act that
deals with landlord tenant law.
But the New Mexico Mobile Home
Park Act is designed to be a
supplement to that act and um
was designed to provide
additional protections to
residents of mobile Home Park
communities.
The act itself was enacted in
1983, um, and the purpose was to
recognize the unique
vulnerabilities of residents who
own their home, but rent the
land.
Again, it's to provide a greater
protections than those under the
uniform owner resident relations
Act, so it requires things like
uh greater uh notice prior to a
move out, it requires.
Um, that if the park owner wants
to change community rules that
they give advanced notice to
park residents, um, and allow
them opportunity to comment, uh,
there should be no evictions for
mobile home parks except for
causes, unlike in a uh in an
apartment, for example, where
you can just simply decide once
the lease is over that you no
longer wish to rent to that
individual, um, in the in a
mobile home park community,
there has to be uh a good reason
like not uh paying.
or a substantial violation that
puts other residents in um in
danger.
And again, these additional
statutory protections were
premised on the inherent v
vulnerability of a person who
owns their home, but rents the
land underneath their home.
Um, and in the last few years at
the center, we've really
received a a lot of calls, um,
from mobile home park residents.
Who have concerns about uh
skyrocketing rents.
Decreased services.
For conditions, um, inability to
speak with their landlord, not
even knowing who the landlord
is.
Um
illegal enforcement of lease
agreements one park in
particular called us um several
years ago complaining that they
were being fined um for, for
violations of uh of the lease
agreement. So rather than doing
what's required under the law
and giving a 7 day notice and an
opportunity to cure the landlord
was issuing a monetary fines and
uh when the
When the resident couldn't pay
the fine, um, along with their
rent, uh, the landlord would
refuse to accept the rent.
Then charge on a late fee
because the rent wasn't paid
timely, and then serve an
eviction notice.
So there are 3.
3 buckets of challenges that are
the priorities that we are
looking to address um in the
upcoming legislative session.
Um, the first is the
vulnerability to predatory
practices, um, mostly by
corporate landlords.
Second is no public enforcement
of the Mobile Home Park Act.
Or at least know a clear path to
enforcement or meaningful
enforcement of the act.
And then 3rd, the affordability
crisis.
So the first uh category being
vulnerability to predatory
practices, um, over the past 20
years, there's been a real shift
in ownership in mobile home
parks, so traditionally mobile
home parks were owned by mom and
pop, uh, owners, uh, they often
lived in the communities, uh,
were friends and neighbors, uh,
you know, friends to their
neighbors.
And we've seen a real shift over
the past 20 years, uh, where
private equity firms, hedge
funds, um, multi-state
corporations are coming in
buying up the parks, um, and
really seeking to capitalize on
the vulnerabilities of the
manufactured, um, homeowners.
The private equity business
model is buy a park, increase
the rent to increase cash flow,
um, thus increasing the parks
overall value and then selling
the park within a few years for
a major profit.
It's something that happens over
and over and over again.
Um, in my PowerPoint
presentation, which you will
eventually get, there is a uh
Picture, uh, an advertisement
for a program called Mobile Home
University.
It's uh
A program that emerged around
around 18 years ago, uh, led by
someone named Frank Ralph, who
teaches courses usually like
3-day courses, where he teaches
investors how to identify
struggling.
Mobile home parks, um,
Talks about how to invest in the
parks, buy them up, and then
increase the rents, decrease
services, etc. with the goal of
making a profit.
Um, Mr. Ralph is most famous for
a quote he gave uh during one of
his courses where he said he
compared owning a mobile home
park to owning a waffle house
only the person is chained to
the bench, to the, to the booth.
Meaning they have no choice but
to stay there and keep paying,
um, because it's very difficult
to move your home once you're in
the park.
One attendee of Mr. Ralph's
mobile home Park University, uh,
described her uh.
Her experience there by saying
uh they, the advice they offer
to participants is look for a
park that's got high occupancy
and it doesn't need a lot of
investment.
Take out any possible amenity
you'd ever need to invest in,
such as a playground or a pool.
Things that are going to need
insurance. Make sure it's got a
nice sign and pawn off any
maintenance costs you can onto
your tenants.
That's the business model that
is being taught in in these
programs.
Um
Again, in the, the, the
PowerPoint you'll see a uh a
news article, a snippet of a
news article from Source New
Mexico reporting about uh a
family who was evicted or or
received an eviction notice
rather, um, after 45 years of of
being in their park. This was a
park here in Santa Fe, um, on
the outskirts, um,
With it very near the the state
prison.
OK, here we go.
If you want to get to slide 6,
you'll see a picture, yes. So
this is Dale Mobile Village. You
can see the the New Mexico State
Penitentiary in the background,
Dale Mobile Village was owned by
a really nice family, the Dale
family for several decades, um,
they started the park, they
lived in the park. They.
treated the, the other residents
as their friends and neighbors,
worked with them when they were
uh struggling to pay rent,
always, always we're offering a
payment plan.
And then Mr. Dale in, in 2022
could no longer.
Uh, continue on managing and
owning this park, you um was up
in age and decided to sell the
park.
Um, again, most of his residents
had been there for decades.
Um, some, as long as is 45
years.
And when Mr. Dale sold the park,
a new owner came in, um,
took a very aggressive approach
with the residents.
Handed them a new lease, gave
them a deadline to sign it that
was just a few days. The lease
was
Putting it nicely, very badly
written, contained many illegal
provisions, explicitly illegal
provisions under the mobile home
park like demanding exorbitant
deposits, um, and contained
references to Utah law. It, it
made no sense. And so residents
were confused, they were scared,
they were all told their rent
would be increased, and so they
called our office and asked if
there was anything they could
do.
Um, luckily we were able to help
them negotiate a lease.
But a new lease, but there was
one elderly couple in
particular, again, they've lived
there for 45 years. The owner
issued them a notice saying,
clean up your property within, I
I think it was 3 days, or you'll
be evicted.
They are 76 and 78 at the time.
Um, in very poor health.
And they simply just had piles
of wood around their house, that
Mr. Dale had allowed them to
keep those piles there, um, the
entire time they lived there,
but the new owner didn't like
it, and he gave him just a few
days to get it cleaned up or
move out, um, which was
impossible for them. They
couldn't afford to hire somebody
and their health was too poor to
to do it on their own.
And they require in the the
owner is required to give at
least a 7 days' notice. Um, so
the notice itself was illegal.
Um, so anyway, they were able to
uh
You know, we, we spoke to the
the new owner and told him that
the time period was illegal. He
had to give them more time and
asked for even additional time
so that this family could could
work things out, um.
Eventually, they were able to to
hire help to get the the
property up to the new owners um
standards, but then the landlord
um raised rents, and for this
elderly couple, their rent was
was raised with either 96 or
97%. I'm not remembering.
But they had been there for so
long, Mr. Dale had, you know,
kept their rent at an affordable
rate for them, um, because
they've been good residents and
with the 96 or 97% increase in
rent, they could no longer live
there.
And they were hopeless. They,
they told me we will have to
just abandon our home. We'll
have to just leave it there and
move into an RV, and that's what
they planned on doing.
Um, eventually,
Uh, the new owner agreed to, to
lessen the rent, but it was not
a long term agreement and
The elderly couple was still
thinking that eventually they
would have to to move into an RV
and abandon their home.
And at 76 and 78, the, the wife
at 76 was working part-time
already and would have to go
back working full time, just to
be able to keep up with the
rent.
So the, the story of of Dale
Mobile village is not unique.
It's happening all over, all
over the state, where new um
owners are coming and especially
out of state owners.
up the parks, reducing services
and increasing rents to a point
where folks can no longer afford
it.
So moving on to the second
category of priorities is uh
Or challenges rather, is the
lack of public enforcement in
New Mexico for the New Mexico
Mobile Home Park Act.
There's virtually, virtually no
public enforcement right now.
Um,
No accountability for landlords
to violate the law, um, leaving
residents with a, with rights
under the Mobile Home Park Act
that they can't.
Meaningfully enforce.
So you'll see a picture here.
This is from a KOB4 investigates
um story that aired, I believe
in October. This is a group of
residents who live in
Alamogordo. They live in in 22
separate parks owned by the same
owner, uh, Amber Skies and
desert palms.
I've been talking to them for
several years now, at least 2
years.
Over the last year, um, they
went 5 months without gas in one
of the parks. These are both
senior communities, so everyone
there is 55 plus, I'd say most
of the residents are probably in
their 70s, if I had to guess.
They went 5 months without gas
in one park, um, meaning that
they had to shower in cold
water.
They had no um hot water for
cooking. They were for those
that had gas fireplaces, they
had to cook on little electric
skillets you can see one
resident here has a little
electric skillet plugged in on
top of her stove so that she can
cook, cook for herself.
The parks are both routinely
flooded, um, in one of the
parks, one of the residents,
the, the top, um, top right
picture.
It's pictures of her, uh,
The, the foundation level of her
mobile home sinking into the
ground because, again, the
properties are routinely flooded
and
The park when she moved into it
didn't properly have the ground
ready, didn't have it, uh,
graded and, and evened out
properly for her home, um, and
so her home is sinking and uh
she said she routinely hears
cracking sounds and it's from
the um.
The trusses or the pillars that
are holding up the home because
they are falling and and
cracking. There's no, no
adequate support.
One of the residents, several of
the residents actually contacted
um the New Mexico regulation and
licensing division complaining
about
What was happening at Amber
Skies and Desert Palms.
In the manufactured home
division responded and said that
they found after an
investigation they found several
violations, um.
Of of multiple codes, but you
can see in, in one of the little
snippets up there, they
ultimately decided that they had
no jurisdiction to enforce these
code violations, and so they
ultimately closed the case
saying there was nothing they
could do.
So even though there was a
finding that there were multiple
violations.
The Parks had had acted
illegally, had not kept up their
end of the bargain. There was
nothing that could be done.
These residents turned to uh
calling the Attorney General's
office.
And we've heard multiple,
multiple park residents who've
talked to the Attorney General's
office and have been met with
the same response. We don't have
the authority to enforce the
mobile Home Park Act.
Now,
There is the, the attorney
General's general authority to
uh protect the the health and
welfare of New Mexico residents.
There's also the authority under
the unfair Practices Act, um,
but unless the uh activities,
the illegal activities fall
squarely within one of those um
Areas of authority, it's very
difficult for residents to get,
um, anyone from the Attorney
general's office to look into
the issues they're reporting and
um and enforce the uh violation.
All right, moving on to uh the
affordability crisis.
New Mexico generally uh laps
around 40,000 units of
affordable housing.
And manufactured homes provide
the largest source of
unsubsidized affordable housing
in the United States.
And in New Mexico, uh, we rely
even more on on manufactured um
homes.
Here manufactured homes make up
a much larger portion of the,
the affordable housing stock,
15% in New Mexico versus the 5%
um.
national average.
And in New Mexico there are 11
counties where more than 30% of
the housing stock is made up of
manufactured homes.
At one point, and I believe this
is still true, but at one point,
San Juan County had the largest
uh.
portion of manufactured homes
per capita of any other county
in the country.
So we really do rely on
manufactured homes for
affordable housing in New
Mexico.
Um, unfortunately, as I
mentioned earlier, with the, uh,
dawn of this, this new.
trend of private equity firms,
hedge funds coming in and buying
out of buying parks, um, from
mom and pop owners, uh, we are
seeing skyrocketing runs, as I
mentioned with the family at
Dale Mobile Village, their rents
went up to 96 or 97%, but we
routinely hear about rent
increases of 25% or more.
And they happen, uh, quite
frequently. Some of them more
than, more than once a year.
Which makes it very difficult,
especially for seniors on fixed
income, they're relying on
Social Security alone. Um, they,
they simply cannot afford these
exorbitant rent increases.
I've heard of uh multiple
stories of elderly residents who
have to go back to work, um,
late in their years, so a
resident recently in Silver
City, an 80 year old resident
had to go back to work cleaning
homes at the age of 80, so that
she could afford rent after a
rent increase from an out of
state owner at a park in
Albuquerque, um, a senior park,
one resident recently reported
that she had to make the
difficult decision to put her.
dog down because she could no
longer afford the medication the
dog needed because of rent
increases.
So
Elderly residents are faced with
really, really difficult, um.
Decisions to make uh when when
they are charged these or when
their rents are increased.
The other impacts uh that you
see with, with rent increases
are erosion of equity, so
studies have shown that for
every $100 increase in rent, a
manufactured home can lose
$10,000 in value.
rising rents make it difficult
for homeowners to sell their
homes at a fair price. So if you
are considering moving out of
the park, um, and you want to
put your home up for sale. It's
very difficult to uh convince
someone to buy your home when
you when they ask how often the
rent is raised and you can point
to 3 different rent increases in
the last year and a half.
with each of them being, you
know, 25%, 10%. There's no
predictability.
So this leaves residents with 3
difficult options, the first
being pay the higher rent and,
you know, take a, take a job,
um, make the decision to put
your pet down because you can't
afford their medication.
Stop taking your own medication
in some instances.
spend thousands of dollars to
relocate, um, which is often not
possible, which we'll talk about
in in a second.
Or abandoned their home and
unfortunately this is part of
the business model with a lot of
the out of state, uh, corporate
investors is they.
hope that with the rising rents
that folks actually will abandon
their homes because then they
can uh swoop in and say, we know
you can't move the home. We will
offer you
Some amount that's pennies on
the dollar, what the home is
worth.
Uh, the, the resident will have.
feel they have no other choice,
sell the home and then the um
owner turns around and sells it
for a profit or decides to rent
it out um to a resident and, and
in any event, they, they make
quite a big profit off of that
abandoned home.
Although we talk about uh
manufactured homes as mobile
homes and our act is even called
the Mobile Home Park Act. The
reality is that many of these
homes are are not mobile.
Um, they're largely immobile as
a practical matter.
Moving costs, uh, the national
average to relocate uh a
manufactured home is $9000 but
we find that that's actually
quite on the low end at a client
last year who was looking into
moving her home from the North
Valley of Albuquerque to Berlin,
and the quote she got was
$15,000.
And it only goes up the more,
uh, you know, rural that you you
if you're moving your home to a
more rural location if there are
unpaved dirt roads that you have
to go over, um, if it's a long
distance, which, you know, is
common in New Mexico because
we're such a large spread out
state, um, that only increases
the price.
Um, the more insurance, uh, the
company has to have for going
over, you know, dangerous roads,
unpaved roads, the, the higher
the cost that's going to be
passed on to, to the homeowner.
Um, even if you can't afford to
move the home uh that and you
want to go into another mobile
home park, many parks often have
age restrictions for incoming
homes, so although they're
prohibited from
Requiring someone to move out of
the park due to uh the age of
their home. They can place
limits on um incoming homes, new
homes coming into the park.
And so often a lot of these
homes are, are, they don't meet
the the age restriction and they
can't go into a park, so that
leaves folks with having to find
a a plot of land that they can
buy and move the part uh move
the home on to.
And then there's the high
potential uh for the home to be
damaged during the move, uh,
many of the older homes,
especially, uh, cannot, uh,
structurally withstand a move
and so when the home is is moved
and delivered, often folks find
uh.
Pretty severe structural damage.
So our group, the New Mexico
Housing Alliance has been
really, uh, looking at ways that
we can improve.
Improved conditions for mobile
home park residents, we've uh.
Been looking at this for a
couple years and in the last
year, we, we put together a
subgroup uh dedicated to looking
at legislative fixes.
And so we have 3.
3 legislative fixes that we will
be proposing in the upcoming
session.
The first is adopt an
opportunity to purchase Act, and
I'll tell you more about that,
um, in just a bit.
The second is grant the attorney
general explicit authority to
investigate and enforce the
Mobile Home Park Act.
And then 3, limit the number and
amount of um annual rent
increases, and you can do this
in a couple of ways, um.
Aside from the obvious of just
limiting rent increases to no
more than a certain percentage,
5% is what we're proposing. You
can also require that all these
terms be no shorter than one
year or even or even longer, but
um at least with uh
With one year, folks can plan
out for a year. They know that
their rent will not be increased
within that time.
So opportunity to purchase.
Um, I want to be clear at the
beginning, this is not right of
first refusal.
This is something different.
This is a trend that's happening
nationally.
Um, and many states have adopted
legislation amended there, um.
The analog to the their mobile
home park acts to require that
when a park owner is interested
in selling the park, looking to
sell the park.
But they give advanced notice to
residents.
Um, and that's so that if
residents want to form a
cooperative um entity and
purchase the park, they can,
they have advanced notice to do
that.
There's also a decision waiting
period, so it allows the
residents, um,
A reasonable time to consider
purchasing the park to form the
the the entity needed if if
required, and then to make the
offer.
And then the 3 major component
is it requires good faith
negotiation, so it requires the
seller to um disclose what they
are, um, you know, if they are,
for example, working with uh
another potential buyer, um,
disclose what they are
considering what's on the table,
so if the other buyer is
offering, you know, 2 million
plus, um, a plot of land, then
they must disclose what that
plot of land is, is worth the
monetary value, so that
Uh, that the residents can try
and match that offer if
possible, and they know what
they're working with, so that
they can be competitive. Um,
there is a, a group. It's a a
nonprofit Rock USA. ROC stands
for resident owned communities
that has been very active again
across the country in helping uh
residents of mobile home parks,
manufactured home parks to uh
proactively set up these
residents um entities, these uh.
Cooperative entities.
So that they can uh purchase the
park, they help them secure
financing, um, they help them
negotiate with with the owner on
a fair purchase price.
And they've been very
successful, uh, Rock USA has
helped.
Thousands of residents across
the country, purchase their
parks, um, and it really helps
the residents to maintain the
community control, um, they can
limit, uh, you know, they, they
are able to set their own
community rules to set their
rents, um, and maintain the
community in a way that works
for them.
So the, the Rock USA model, um,
is, uh, well, let me, let me
take a step back and say that um
Rock USA is uh
Very interested in working more
in New Mexico. They just started
um speaking to a couple parks
earlier this year, uh, but we've
been in in talks with them,
especially now that we are
looking to introduce this
legislation and we got some
exciting news last month. They
said they want to make New
Mexico their next biggest
priority. Um, and, and that's
great news. Um.
So what Rock does is they they
provide um the initial
consultation and assessment
help.
Residents, uh, figure out, you
know, how they need to set up
their their governance model,
you know, what type of
cooperative entity they need to
set up.
Um, they provide financial and
technical support, so they help
them get in touch with uh
financing entities.
Um
They provide and and get the
financing needed to purchase the
park, uh, they provide support
during the the purchase process,
providing them guidance, helping
them with negotiations that
again, you know, valuing, um,
If there are non-monetary offers
coming from, from other
potential buyers like land or
stock options helping them uh
determine the value for those,
um, so that they can negotiate
competitively.
And then post purchase support,
so helping residents understand
what it means to uh operate a
mobile home park, would it, you
know, how to set up governing
rules, um, how to, um, create
lease agreements, etc.
Um, so,
We're very excited that that
Rock is interested in New Mexico
and
Even without so without uh
legislation that requires
advanced notice, so, uh, you
know, even if
Without an opportunity to
purchase provision in the law.
Rock USA or similar entities can
come in and work with residents
to purchase their park. The
problem is, is without that um
advanced notice from, from park
owners, um.
There it it really limits the
pool of parks that they can
help, right? Because then
they're only limited to parks
that they sort of identify um
proactively as parks that they
might uh want to want to help,
um,
provide a pro or give a
proactive offer to to a an
owner, excuse me.
But if we had a an opportunity
to purchase provision in the
law, and there are many more
parks who could take advantage
of these services because with
that advance notice, they could
get in contact with with Rock
USA and and get that process
going once they know that the
park is for sale.
Um
As I mentioned, uh,
Rock USA has been very
successful across the country,
um.
New Hampshire was was really the
first state where they started,
uh, where they sort of test
drove this model.
It was New Hampshire was the
pioneer.
Um, and the state ultimately
passed laws to support this
process, so similar to what we
are proposing now, having an
opportunity to purchase that,
and the impact is that since
adopting an opportunity to
purchase um provision.
9,099 homes in New Hampshire
were preserved as stable and
affordable housing.
Um, there were 150 communities
that were removed from the
speculative real estate market
and are now um owned and
operated by the residents who
live there.
Um, similarly in Colorado in
2020, Colorado passed a bill,
um, which would require
residents, uh, require that
owners provide advanced notice
to residents of their intent to
sell a park.
Giving uh residents the chance
to uh preserve their housing,
make an offer.
And in Colorado in just since
2020, 454 homes have been
preserved as affordable housing
in 9 communities were removed
from the spec speculative real
estate market.
There are other states that are
doing the same thing. These are
just a few that I've
highlighted, um, but it is
something that we are hoping the
legislature will recognize as an
important step towards
addressing our housing crisis in
the upcoming session.
Thank you, and with, with that,
I'm happy to answer any
questions the committee might
have.
I'm sorry?
Mhm. Oh.
I
Yes, um, representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your, uh,
presentation uh this morning. So
I, one of the things I want you
to think about you and your
group is a bigger picture of how
the statue may even need to be
completely rewritten. And let me
just tell you what I'm thinking
about as we have been looking at
the housing shortage in the, in
the state of New Mexico itself
in the vast amount of land we
have, the manufactured housing,
uh, industry in this state is
very robust.
And we could actually create
manufactured housing, uh,
communities don't call them
mobile parks, and in the part of
that whole presentation that
could be coffee shops, there
could be bookstores, and there
could even be um medical
facilities that could be mobile
because um it will take people
and make them wear, take those
mobile units where people are.
So I'm just asking you, uh, all
of these items that you
mentioned are seem to be quite
onerous.
And I don't know that one or two
amendments to the statute is
going to do, and I hope you all
are thinking about maybe it's a
rewrite, but then how do we also
solve the bigger homelessness
crisis in our state, which could
be done. I mean, Jane Fonda owns
a million dollar manufactured
home in Taos, so we could
actually do something a little
bit better. So I hope that you
will, uh, we will look at that
and, and when they come in and
um
That would be an incredible
investment in the state of New
Mexico in general. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Herndon, I, I
appreciate, uh, those comments
and
Yes, ideally we would love uh an
entire rewrite of the statute,
and I think they're um are a
number of ways that we could
make the New Mexico mobile Home
Park Act as it stands much
better. Um, what we are trying
to do now is simply address some
of the, the biggest concerns
that we've heard about, um, we
know that a an entire rewrite is
a is a huge lift, and, and
You know, quite frankly,
something that might take, might
take a while to happen, um, but
we think these are simple fixes.
What we are proposing are simple
fixes that can have a large
impact. Um, and so we are, we
are certainly um considering uh.
You know, future changes and,
and I appreciate, you know, the,
the recognition that there's a
lot that can be done by amending
the Mobile Home Park Act um
manufactured homes, we need, we
need to preserve them as best we
can.
So I will just share with you
and then um uh Mr. Chair, and
Madam Speaker, that rewriting a
statute may not be as hard as
you think. I rewrote the private
investigators and security guard
statue, and it didn't take
forever, but what you do need to
have is the support. So I just
give that to you in the broader
picture of what could happen in
this entire state, uh, the
little fixes, um, they're not
gonna be little, they're gonna
be big, but the bigger picture
of how these manufact
of Homes could play a part in
the um.
In the overall housing authority
problems that we're having, but
you're right, small steps at a
time do make a difference, and
thank you for the great work
that you all are doing. Thank
you.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you so much. um, Miss
Raby. I really appreciate it.
Um,
there's one thing I missed when
you, you were talking about
trying the, the homeowners who
had them huge increase you said
someone had no jurisdiction, and
I'm not sure who you said had no
jurisdiction.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Chasey, um, in
that particular instance, I was
talking about uh the residents
of um.
The two parks in Alamo Gordo
who'd written to New Mexico
regulation and licensing
division.
um and the uh manufactured home
division.
Wrote back and said we, we agree
there are a multitude of code
violations here, but we have no
jurisdiction to enforce. Got it.
Thank you. So that would be
something to fix in, in the law.
I mean, not necessarily give
them the enforcement figure out
somebody who does have
jurisdiction. And I just wanna
um, I don't think there's anyone
here who would remember this,
but Senator Bill O'Neill, when
he was in the house, was working
on this. He had several um
mobile home.
Parkinson is house district,
kind of a long I-25 in the that
North.
North part of Albuquerque.
And um
One of the things he said that
everybody thought was funny at
the time is mobile homes aren't
really mobile. And um but it's,
it's absolutely true, and I just
think what these people are
experiencing is unbelievable and
conscionable, and I, I wish you
luck. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, you
know, I,
I agree with a lot of the
comments I've just heard, um.
You know, we just
Have to fix this.
We see what we're dealing with
the housing in general. Um, and
this is an area of housing.
Um, that folks are living in
right now, and it seems like
they're just really being
exploited and manipulated in
ways that are unimaginable, so,
um.
I just want to be supportive and
see what we can do and, and to
get this done because it's been
going on for too long.
So.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so did
you say that you had spoken to
the AG?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Chavez, um, yes,
we have been in touch with the
AG's office. So,
When uh the current AG was um
running for office, he came and
met with folks in our office, we
talked to him about uh
priorities and we listed uh.
Protection in the mobile Home
Park Act as you know, our one of
our biggest priorities and, and
he agreed that he, you know, he
said he was interested in
working with with mobile home
parks, um.
Once he was in office, uh, my
understanding is they felt that
they were running into uh an
issue of authority. Um, and so
again, kind of getting back to
the question that Representative
Chasey asked earlier, um, they
were reading the act, you know,
they, they, there is no explicit
authority in the act. So they
were looking for authority, um,
elsewhere, and uh, felt that the
um
You know, there, there are a
number of issues that have been
brought to their attention, but
that these the issues didn't
fall squarely within either
their general um authority for
that, you know, uh, enforcing
laws for the health, safety and
welfare of New Mexicans or
authority that comes under the
the unfair Practices Act that
they didn't, um, you know, that
the majority of the issues that
they were hearing didn't fall
squarely within one of those
areas of jurisdiction.
Um, and so, uh,
I've been in talks with them
about their um.
Willingness to have um explicit
authority under the Mobile Home
Park Act. I can't, you know,
say, uh,
Definitively, but I can say that
they are at least very much
interested in enforcing the act
and and whether that comes with
explicit authority in the act or
an expansion of their powers
more generally, I think that
they are interested in that. Um,
I've, I've heard that the AG
might just be uh wanting a bill
that just expands their powers
more generally.
Um
I will say that with the and I
should have brought this up
earlier with the two parks in in
Alamogordo, Amber skies and
desert palms, um, you know,
those residents were very
persistent and calling the AG's
office and um luckily, I mean, I
don't want to say luckily
because the issues that they
were facing were pretty dire as
you saw the flooding and the
lack of gas, um.
So there are terrible issues for
the residents, but lucky luckily
they were severe enough that the
AG felt he could enforce um.
Enforce the violations through
um his powers under the um
unfair Practices Act and so
He, uh, issued
Uh, or he entered into an
agreement with the out of state
owner, he's in California, um,
it's in uh assurance of
discontinuance, so, um, you
know, if you're not familiar
with it, I wasn't familiar prior
to this, um, the assurance of
discontinuance is essentially
An agreement where the owner
admits no liability, but the AG
says we think if we took this to
court, we could establish that
you've violated the act and so
we would ask you to stop doing
what you're doing and or do
something that needs to, that
you need to do to fix the issues
and, and so the um California
owners signed on, so they are
under this agreement now, this
um AOD assurance of
discontinuance, um, but, you
know, I, my, um,
Impression is that unless the
issues of a manufactured home
community is facing are so
severe and so dire, like 5
months of no gas, um, that, you
know, the AG's office is going
to say that the issues don't
rise to the level of something
that they can enforce under the
Unfair Practices Act or or
otherwise.
Thank you for that. Um, so the
other question that I have is
around the issue of private
equity, right? And I think that
we know that private equity has
moved into healthcare.
They're now moving into housing.
Um, and so is, have you guys
given any thought in terms of
oversight over private equity
buying, housing.
Um, in terms of, you know, laws
or
Legislation, anything like that.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and and
Representative Chavez for that
question. Um, private equity is
a huge problem. I think though I
read that private equity New
Mexico,
a higher highest percentage of
private equity owned healthcare,
uh, yeah, OK, you're all
nodding, you all know this, um.
And I, and I think we're on that
path with housing if we don't do
something. So
under our uh
Goals and plan for the 2025
legislative session. That's not
something we've um explicitly
thought about. It's certainly
something I'm willing to look
into more, um, but we think that
with the opportunity to
purchase, that's one of the best
uh ways to to combat um private
equities just taking over
manufactured home parks
throughout the state, um,
because it really gives a
residents that opportunity to,
um again form a, form an entity.
Make an offer on the park and
then um run the park in a way
that that suits them and that
only increases their equity. And
I think that that private equity
isn't only buying up mobile home
parks, I think that they're
buying up.
Family homes as well. So I think
looking at, looking at it in a
global perspective in terms of
protecting affordable housing in
New Mexico, that might be the
way to look at it.
Unless I have more time.
No one's timing.
Um, thank you for this, um, yes,
concerns about um private
equity, you know, doing
childcare and a lot of other
things, um, in mobile home
parks, um, I lived in that
mobile home park in the early
70s, um that representative
Casey mentioned, I don't want to
say their name because I don't
want someone to come in
and sweep them up because it's
still there and
bring and stay there in our RV
now, um, but it's still a mobile
home park and it's really nice,
um.
To this day.
I hate to see this happening to
so many seniors in the stories
are so tragic, and I'm sure it
in Las Cruces we have a mobile
home park where um
It was in my district, it is,
yeah, still is in my district.
And um
The owners, I think it's sold
several times and it has been uh
over 50 seniors, uh, community,
and then they opened it up, one
of the new owners came in and
said, oh, well, we'll just let
families come in too.
Which
I'm glad it can provide for
other families, but the seniors
that are there for a long time,
um, you know, our impacted their
lifestyle and everything, um, so
I think that's something that
probably is
You know, if you go into a
mobile home park with that
understanding and then it
changes. We maybe should make it
so that they can't change, um,
and I really appreciate all the
work that you're doing, and I
was wondering, is Rock USA a
501c3 or 4 or
It's an organized group, yes, I
believe there are 501c3, but I
will have to get back to you and
I'm happy to to do that. OK,
just, you know, so that, you
know, uh, we know that they're
legitimate group that's going to
help uh and especially to get um
the modeling from New Hampshire
and California, um, has a lot of
mobile homes as well as Florida
because retirees.
I'm not sure we can still go to
California cause it's so
expensive, but um, my cousin
lived in a mobile home park, and
there
Does California have legislation
to protect their um
The homeowners. I am, I am not
sure, and I'm, I'm sure that the
advocates that are watching this
over at Zoom are texting me
furiously saying, yes, we do or
don't, but um there are several
states that have, um, adopted
the um opportunity to purchase
model, um, and I, I again, I'm
happy to get you a list of, of
all of those. I should know
them, but I don't off the top of
my head. Oh, sure. Well, your
presentation was so good and
thorough, really appreciate it
and um you know, we need to
support.
Um, whatever we can because as
people find this is something
that's more affordable way to
live, um.
And we need to make sure that
it's protected. So thank you so
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Representative Thompson, then
we'll go over here. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I don't have
questions because I wasn't here
for the presentation, um, but I
want to thank you for this. I,
I've been hearing from folks
that are having major issues.
Well, I guess my only question
is you talked about giving the
AG more power. Is that, do you
have a bill in the works? Do you
have a sponsor? Could you just
very briefly, and I'm gonna
remind the committee since I was
out, you, you obviously wasted
your time. I'm kidding. Just
kidding. I'm just kidding, but
we're, we're behind schedule, so
we're almost 15 minutes behind
schedule, so I'm gonna ask
people to, to please be brief
and, but so what, what is the
legislation look like and who is
your?
sponsor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair. Um, so yes, we do
have uh legislation in the
works, so we just opened the
file, I believe, last week, uh,
there will be two bills, both,
uh, sponsored by Representative
Padahon.
Um, so there will be 2, the
first bow will be solely the
opportunity to purchase
provision um because there is no
provision um currently in the
law.
Um, and so that'll be its own
standalone bill, and that's just
been uh what has been most
effective in other states. The
experts who have worked on this
have found that to be um the
most effective. And then
separately,
We will have the bill that makes
the uh the amendments to the
Mobile Home Park Act as it
stands, so that would be
including explicit enforcement
authority for the Attorney
General, um, limiting those rent
increases. We also just want to
change the title, uh, to call it
the manufactured um home
community act because uh it
really just better reflects what
the the communities are, um, and
then there will be some other,
you know,
Clean up, clean up changes, um.
But yes, so those, there will be
two bills, both sponsored by
Representative Padaho.
Thank you, and I just want to
stay for anyone who thinks the
chair and I deserted the
committee for your presentation.
We were in LFC presenting our
budget requests, so I apologize.
Uh, Representative Cates, did
you have any questions?
Yeah
Uh, senators said the Lucas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I haven't
researched this issue. In fact,
I was trying to Google it right
or not Google it up, look it up
right now, the, the issue of the
Attorney general authority. My
concern is, is if we start
having to put in every single
bill where the attorney general
can enforce the law or
Department of Justice or
whatever, where they can enforce
the law, the implication will be
they can't enforce the law.
If there's not a specific
authority, so that worries me a
little bit, because my
understanding is that the
Attorney General has authority
to enforce the law. Um, so I, I
kind of want to think about that
a little bit. Um, I think it's
very important that the Attorney
General enforce the law. Um, we
had several issues like this in
the clinical law program. You
remember if you're involved in
some of those cases, um,
that, um, it's really
disturbing, um, and, and the,
the big issue that's happening
now is, is this private equity
business model, which is also
happening not just in our
manufactured housing, um,
communities, but it's also
happening with apartment
complexes and we see it in
Albuquerque over and over again.
I've, I've been seeing that, um,
and I like the idea that it's
limiting the rent increases, um,
to 5% cause
Um, I, I think, and I hope that
there's transparency, that
there's some justification for
the I haven't seen the bill, but
I hope that there's that they
have to provide some
justification for the race, not
just automatically do it every 5
years, but that they should show
to the residents the increase in
cost. Um, you know, to try to
balance, um, transparency and
also the need, the need. I love
your presentation. I think
you've really laid it out.
about what the problem is that
we need to fix. Um
I guess I'd like your thoughts
on the authority issue. Do, do
you agree with their
interpretation or?
Thank you. It'll help me uh
analyze it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and uh Senator Sidilia
Lopez, um, yes, I, I have heard
of this argument. Um, so, you
know, I, I will say we, we
believe that the AG has
authority.
Currently.
Um
Under again, under the general
um general authority powers and
under the, the unfair Practices
Act.
What I've heard is that there
There's no, um, one of the
missing pieces is that there's
no explicit investigatory
powers. So
Yeah, so the there there.
Wanting some sort of authority
to investigate um and before,
you know, is a like preliminary
step to enforcement because
sometimes, you know, they might
do an investigation and conclude
there's nothing to enforce, no
violations, etc. So that's one
issue, and again, I can't
necessarily, you know, speak for
the AG's office. We just had um
a few conversations with them.
So we believe and and we've done
a legal analysis, wrote a memo
saying we believe they already
have the authority. Um.
I think different
administrations have taken
different um interpretations of
that.
So one reason why we want to to
codify it is because we want it
there so that if the next
administration or two
administrations down the road,
take a different interpretation.
Well, you know, it's our, it's
been codified, it's clear you
have the authority to um and I'm
seeing a different
interpretation of their general
authorities. It's clear that you
have the authority under the
I do understand your concern
about um if we have some um acts
where there's clear authority
and not others, and there might
be an implication that the
legislature didn't give you
authority to act under this act
because if they wanted you to,
then they would have put it in
the act. Um.
I, my guess is that is why the
uh AG's office is looking at um
a bill that would just expand
their authority more generally.
And if that ends up being a bill
that's introduced, we will
certainly support it. Um, I, I
think that's probably the the
best way to go, but absent that
bill, we, we want to be clear
that um there isn't an entity
and and it should be the AG's
office where our residents can
report these issues, um, that
somebody's tracking these
issues, um, because without
this, without public
enforcement, the act is, you
know, the additional protections
are meaningless.
So yeah, so that's, uh, I, I
understand those concerns and we
are thinking about the best way,
um, to handle that. I, I wanted
to also address your comment
about rent increases because,
um, what, what we intend to
write into the bill, um, is that
it be the increases are limited
to 5% annually, except as
justified by an increase of um
an increase in operating
expenses, property taxes, or
cost.
Directly associated or directly
related to major capital
improvements.
Um, so there, there will be
that, um, that language in
there. So if, if the park owner
feels like they need to adjust
more than 5% and, and there will
also be a provision that, that
requires, uh, if, if the owner
wants to go above 5% that they
have to take it to arbitration.
That that's common in other
states.
Um, and so if the park owner has
reasons to justify why more than
5% um is needed, then they can,
they can make those arguments
show that they have
Expenses increased property
taxes, etc. And you know, this
is, it's not a
The the goal is not to
necessarily, you know, wipe out
profits for these owners, and
we, we understand that it's a
business they want to, they need
and want to make a profit. Um,
what we're trying to prevent is,
is rent gouging, and, and we
have to recognize that yes,
there are property rights of
owners that we must protect, but
there's also property rights of
the the homeowners, right? They,
they own their home. These are
homeowners. They simply just
rent a lot, rent a lot, um,
where their home is.
heart
Um, and so we have to, we have
to make sure that they're um
investments are protected.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. I,
I do want to, uh, can I just
make one little point?
OK.
The rules of professional
responsibility require an
investigation prior to the
filing of a complaint. So that's
implicit in their authority, his
attorneys, so I'm really
troubled by that interpretation,
but thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lucas.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you so much for your
presentation. Um, it's an issue
that exists in every corner of
our state.
And
I know that the people's housing
Coalition. I hope you've been
working with them also, um,
because in addition to mobile
homes, there's also the
apartments and all the other
entities, um, and Mr. Chair, I
just find it interesting as we
talk about private equity, um.
These firms are, uh, of course,
with healthcare, housing, and of
course with the new company
that's purchasing the gas, our
our gas company in New Mexico,
BCP is also an an equity firm.
So, it just continues to uh
Interest me, should I say. So I
look forward to supporting um
this legislation and um it it's
necessary. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lopez. I'll, I'll just quickly
say that we, um, you know, the
people's housing project has
been a, uh, they are a part of
our New Mexico housing Alliance,
um, I think they are mostly
focused on apartment living, um,
but yes, they are, you know,
they hear the issues about the,
the rent gouging.
You're a great um resource and
partner in our work.
Yes, and I'll still be
introduced that same bill again.
Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Pinto. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for your presentation.
It sounds like we're behind the
curve as far as just putting
legislation to prevent private
equity firms coming into New
Mexico doing harm.
Um, not in this, just this
particular industry, but across
the board. Um, and it's, it's
interesting that we don't take
measures here to really um
Make a broad protection for our
constituents.
Like I'd really like to see that
uh legislation that really um
Instead of just trying to do
these little piecemeal, um, uh,
fixes.
Because
It's
What this discussion too with
some of my tribe stations in
Pueblos is that the state seems
like that's what they're going
to try and do with some of the
services.
Which impedes on the sovereignty
of the nation's tribes and
pueblos. If these firms come in
and do these contracts from the
state coming on down instead of
really coming from the bottom up
through our transformation to
Pueblos so not leaning towards
it, but even with the
manufactured homes.
Some of our, uh,
Some of the
Solutions with our teachers'
housing is with the manufactured
homes, um, having those built
in. I don't know if we're gonna
be good stewards, um, because my
experience not in this state,
but in another state was it was
not a very good um
The public's the, the schools
were not very good stewards in
that manner, in upkeeping or
trying to, uh, and it sounds
like actually in some areas
we're we're still not.
We're having our teachers live
in those kind of same
conditions.
So very adamant about what can
we do to prevent this even
further further damage and it
can keep going on. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and
Representative Martinez, any
questions?
Representative Case, you wanted
to make a comment. I thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
for your indulgence and thank
you for your presentation. I
know I was in and out a lot, but
I am very familiar with this
issue. I just want to bring it
to your attention because I've
said, I've, I've sat through
many of these discussions, and I
haven't still yet seen in your
presentation, like on your uh
slide 11. Here are the
The issues of moving your
manufactured home and you don't
have it once you move your
manufactured home, you become
ineligible for a loan.
So you buy $120,000 manufactured
home, and you put it on your
concrete foundation, you can
sell it to anybody who can get a
mortgage, but once you move
that, you can only sell it to
whoever has cash. That is a huge
devaluing of your home.
As part of real estate law.
And I'd like to see it in this
presentation. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Kates, I, I, I
appreciate that comment and I
will be sure to address that
going forward. It's a very.
Well, Ms. Griego, thank you so
much for the presentation and,
and for working so hard on this
issue and
We look forward to seeing
Representative Parejon's
legislation. Thank you. Thank
you all. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here.
So
Members we now move to um
We now move to item 8, the New
Mexico Medical Board and Doctor
Karen Carson.
The chair of the board, and
Monique Parks, the interim
executive director are here to
bring us up to date.
On what's happening with the
medical board.
Thank you.
I
Greece.
OK.
So whenever you're ready, just
go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Here we
go. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for having us here today.
I'm just gonna start with a um
overview of our medical board
members, and we have had 3 new
members appointed to the medical
board recently. Um, Ms. Janine
Daniels, who's a public member,
and then Doctors Roth and Doctor
Richards. All are from um
Albuquerque, and so we're lucky
to have those new members.
On our uh page 3.
I always like to review the
mission of the medical board and
the New Mexico Medical Board was
established by the state
legislature in the interest of
the public health, safety and
welfare, and to protect the
public from the improper,
unprofessional, incompetent, and
unlawful practice of medicine.
And the relevant statutes that
we uh work off of our below.
And so we are a state agency
were responsible for regulation
and licensing of medical
doctors, physician assistants,
podiatrists, anesthesiologist
assistants, genetic counselors,
polysemnographic technologists,
naturopaths, and naturopaths.
And as you go through here,
there's some more information
about our mission, but one thing
to remember is that the right to
practice medicine is a privilege
granted by the state, and each
state has laws that govern the
practice of medicine and specify
the responsibilities of the
medical board in regulating that
practice. And these regulations
are laid out in state statute,
and that's usually called a
medical practice act.
And state medical boards
established the standards for
the profession through their
interpretation and enforcement
of this act.
So the duty of the medical board
goes beyond licensing and
reregistration of physicians and
other healthcare professionals.
We also are charged with
responsibility of evaluating
whether a licensees professional
conduct or ability to practice
medicine warrants, modification,
suspension, or even revocation
of a license to practice, and
we're not a vanity board, we're
a very hardworking board. Um, we
spend a great deal of time and
attention.
to overseeing the practice of
licensees, we review complaints
from patients. We review
malpractice data, information
from hospitals, healthcare
institutions and reports from
government agencies.
The New Mexico Medical Board
members are appointed.
By the governor, we are, we
consist of 11 members and uh
that includes two public
members, one physician
assistant, and 8 physicians, 2
of those physicians are required
to be osteopathic physicians or
DOs and 2 are required to be
medical physicians or MDs, and
the governor appoints the
members from a list of names
submitted to the governor from
the authorized governing bodies
or councils.
s
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, there's just some
licensing, um, statistics right
in front of you as of 11-18,
2024.
We have 12,900 active
physicians.
1,321 physician assistants, 163
podiatrists, 345 genetic
counselors.
38 doctors of nephropathy.
27 naturopathic doctors.
Um
113 sleep texts and 70
anesthesiologist's assistants.
As you can see for FY 24, we
have 2000.
Into um new.
Licenses that we issued.
We also had 4,567 physicians
renew their license, as you can
see, there has been an increase
yearly.
For that.
Our application processing time
as soon as we receive a
completed application, we are
looking at issuing a license
within 5 days or less.
After we implemented our new
online database, we now have
automatic renewals, so if
there's no red flags or
anything, it actually gets
automatically renewed.
With no wait time.
Just to touch a little bit on
the complaint and investigation
process.
You can see what the the process
is there right now we have about
250 open investigations.
applications requiring further
investigation, we do have an
executive committee that we
would send these applications to
who.
Take a look at these and make a.
Oh, sure, sorry.
Um, we do have an executive
committee that reviews these
applications that tend to have
red flags or maybe have clinical
issues or um anything that may
require further investigation.
Um, and once it goes to
investigations, then of course
that that starts that process
and once they continue that and
complete that process, it would
go to a full board for.
Decision.
An example, um, that was recent,
um, just now in November, that
was approved by the board was a
surgeon that was, had not
practiced for 3 years, but we
did the executive committee for
for the board did take a look at
this application and decided
that he was board certified. He
kept up with his training. He
was still active in the medical
community and so they decided
that he did still meet the
qualifications for licensure and
we did not have to send him for
any clinical.
Um
And uh
For any CPAP evaluation for
clinical assessments.
Um, so that was something that
we actually the executive
committee was able to review and
decided that.
They did still meet the
qualifications and we were able
to issue a license relatively
quickly.
Example of applications denied
by the board would be an
applicant that has a recent
criminal, um, felony charges,
uh, medical insurance fraud, um,
an applicant that has been out
of clinical practice for 15
years.
Um, possibly an applicant with
severe impairment, alcohol,
substance abuse, or any
competency issues that may
arise.
So the New Mexico, we're on page
14 on your handout, the New
Mexico Medical Board relies on
the New Mexico health
professionals wellness program
to provide services to our
licensees, and this program
provides confidential services
statewide for health
professionals with substance
abuse, mental health, physical
health impairment, and workplace
issues.
And their services include
assessments, treatment
referrals, treatment planning,
monitoring and reporting.
The impaired healthcare provider
Act created this system where
both the licensing agency, so
the medical board and or the
individual health professional
can obtain assistance for
potentially impairing conditions
while simultaneously protecting
the public, and these services
can be accessed either
voluntarily, so these are
self-refered, and the board may
not know about the uh services
being obtained or through
referral by a license.
Board or employers.
The um health professionals
wellness program always lets the
board know if there is a concern
regarding a competency to
practice or a danger to the
public.
We work with them very closely.
On page 15 of your handout.
I put some uh information about
the efforts that we've done over
the last few years to expand
access to care and expedite
licensure.
In 2018, we worked with the New
Mexico Academy of Physician
Assistants and amended the
practice, the medical Practice
Act to allow appropriately
experienced physician assistants
to provide primary care without
physician supervision.
In 2020, we added naturopaths as
licensed healthcare providers
under the New Mexico Medical
Board.
In 2021, we worked with the
pharmacy board to allow
pharmacists to prescribe
dangerous drugs in conjunction
with point of care testing, and
we reviewed protocols for
safety.
And
Made sure that pharmacists were
able to prescribe and, well, to
test and then prescribe in a
safe manager in a safe manner
for um these
Certain, uh,
Certain diseases, and this would
include HIV post exposure
prophylaxis therapy, statin
therapy, COVID, prophylaxis, and
treatment, Group A strep
therapy, and
Influenza therapy and
prophylaxis in 2022, we
incorporated licensing and
regulation of the doctors of
osteopathic medicine and merge
the osteopathic examiner's Board
with the New Mexico Medical
Board.
We also promulgated a new rule
allowing for for residency
training by foreign medical
graduates who have been vetted
and approved for a board
approved postgraduate training
program and hold an educational
commission for foreign medical
graduate certification and this
broadened the candidate pool for
our residents and simplified
their requirements. We also
partnered with the New Mexico
Hospital Services Corporation to
process our incoming licensure
applications and
we upgraded our licensing
system, and this provided
real-time application status on
our website and allowed our
licensees and applicants to
easily communicate with the
we've.
Promulgated rules for expedited
licensure and we have uh also
passed um rules regarding uh the
podiatry, the podiatrist coming
under our board and uh
promulgated those rules in
August of this year. And
finally, in these last uh at our
last November meeting, we
reviewed and approved agency
policy and position statements
for artificial intelligence, IV
therapy.
medical spa treatments and
procedures, and we reviewed and
approved another protocol for
pharmacists prescribing of
dangerous drugs or uncomplicated
urinary tract infections. We
also endorsed and voted to join
the interstate medical licensure
compact.
And that's your next page, say,
I think everyone has seen this
map, we show this at at the last
presentation on page 18, the
IMLC map that shows where there
are member states that are
serving as a
Uh, states of primary licensure
and accepting licensure um and
states that um where a licensure
is implemented or has passed.
And I'm just gonna do a quick
review of the interstate medical
licensure compact, and so this
is an agreement among
participating US states to
streamline the licensing process
for physicians. This is only for
physicians. The licensing is all
state based, so physicians don't
receive a compact license. It's
not a nationally recognized
license. It's not a portable
license. So there has to be
state participation in the
compact.
And the licenses are still
issued by the individual states.
On page 20, there's some
qualifications that a physician
has to have.
To be a licensed through the
IMLC that includes holding a
full unrestricted medical
license, not having a history of
disciplinary actions. They have
had to have a current specialty
certification, have completed
accredited graduate medical
education.
And again we did uh vote to
endorse that New Mexico joined
the IMLC.
And there have been some
questions raised regarding
potential for actions.
Uh
If we join the IMLC specifically
against reproductive healthcare
providers, given that certain
states have criminalized some
reproductive health services.
And so there are concerns that
providers in those states may be
subject to licensure act actions
that will affect compact
licensing.
And the IMLC rule states that if
licensure action occurs, these
actions result in an automatic
90 day suspension of the
physician's other licenses
obtained through the IMLC. So if
you're licensed in Texas, and
you're a part of the compact and
your license is suspended, then
Elsewhere, the the IMLC would
notify the other states and
there would be an automatic 90
day suspension.
However, there is a rule that
allows for immediate
termination, reversal, or
recession of the automatic
suspension.
And so this uh rule was added to
address scope of practice
concerns which could arise if a
state finds that such adverse
action was taken as a result of
actions that have been, would
have been lawful in the state
where the patient was located
when the treatment was on page
22, there is a link to the
actual rule.
And
On the uh 6.5 disciplinary
actions, the administrative
reciprocal action of the
disciplinary board is deemed
conclusive as to matters of law
and fact, and a member board may
impose action that is lesser,
the same, or more severe or may
take no action.
I'm gonna move on to artificial
intelligence, and this is just a
paragraph that is part of our
policy statement that was
approved on November 8, 2024. We
know artificial intelligence is
already in use in medicine and
our statement to licensees is
that we will continue to hold
licenses responsible for the
care they provide to patients,
and we expect licenses to use
technology, including artificial
intelligence responsibly and
ethically.
And we will govern the use of AI
in medical practice through
established ethical principles,
including respect for patient
autonomy, non-malefience,
beneficence, and justice, these
have served as the foundation of
professional expectations and
have demonstrated applicability
in a variety of situations,
regardless of treatment
modalities or technology
involved.
On page 24, we talked about
additional pathways to
licensure, and I'm just gonna go
over to um acronyms that are
used and I think these are very
important to split up, and IMG
is an international medical
graduate. This is somebody who's
graduated from a medical school
but has not practiced. So
they're a doctor, they have a
degree, but they have not
practiced. And for these kinds
of graduates.
At this time, it's recommended
that they follow the traditional
pathway to enter the US
accredited graduate medical
education program. So they need
to enter a residency into the
United States.
But a different birds is the
foreign trained physician, and
this is somebody who's graduated
and then has trained in another
country and they've practiced,
they hold a license in another
country.
And so the question has been
asked of us if a medical doctor
from a foreign country can
practice medicine in New Mexico.
And one of the statistics that I
think is interesting is that 20%
of physicians practicing in the
US were trained overseas and
have American licenses, and many
train and practice in New
Mexico, and there aren't any
barriers to these physicians
obtaining New Mexico licenses.
However, overseas training is
not always equivalent to US or
Canadian training, and so for
the protection of the public,
there are standards for
evaluating the training of these
physicians.
When, uh
When a when a student graduates
from medical school here in the
United States, we are not ready
to practice medicine. We are not
equipped and so we move on to an
apprenticeship or a residency,
and those can be 3 to 6 or even
9 years, depending on the
specialty.
And um many internationally
practicing physicians.
Generally will immigrate to the
US, find non-physician positions
in the medical field and then
pursue residncies so that they
can confirm competency. But
nationally, there are efforts to
Try and explore how we can
confirm competency and safely
license these physicians, so
establish a program that
confirms competence to meet the
standards that will protect the
public, will also make sure that
the standards of privileging my
hospitals and health systems
coverage by health insurance and
malpractice companies is
present.
There's lots of moving parts
regarding foreign trained
physicians or practitioners, we
have to make sure we expand
access correctly. We don't want
all of the foreign trained
physicians in uh 11 area, we
don't want them, uh, we want,
especially here in the need in
our state. We want them
practicing rurally and and
serving in areas of need.
We need to make sure that um
these physicians are culturally
competent. You can be trained in
a different country and there is
a very different bedside manner
that is trained in the United
States. Patients are used to
having somewhat of a say in
their healthcare and that's not
the same in other countries. And
so, um, addressing that
competence is very important. We
have to figure out how we're
going to train the foreign
trained physicians and also.
of their mentors and preceptors,
who is going to be um
How, how are we going to
establish how they are competent
and who is going to be training
them.
We also have to remember that
training in an urban environment
where many of these physicians
come from is not the same as a
rural medicine in New Mexico, so
it can be very different and
there's a lot of social
isolation in these rural
communities, which can be very
hard for these practitioners.
It's very important that we
remember we have to protect the
practitioners. We need healthy
practitioners who were safe to
train, so that then we can
protect our patients.
So in June of 2024, the New
Mexico Medical Board leadership
attended a conference in
Washington DC where the
Federation of State Medical
Boards met to specifically
review these additional license
from models, and they have
released draft guidelines that
are currently open for comment,
um, and
In the guidelines, the FSMB
found that the areas of
concordance among most, if not
all state laws that are
advancing additional licensure
pathways include that the
foreign trained physician have
an offer of employment prior to
approval of an application for
an additional pathway that they
have educational commission for
foreign medical graduate
certification and graduation
from a recognized medical
school, but they've had to
complete it.
postgraduate training outside of
the United States, and they have
to possess a license or
authorization to practice
medicine in another country
along with medical practice
practice experience. There's
also a consideration that there
needs to be a time limit on time
out of practice before they can
become eligible to apply for an
additional pathway.
And there also needs to be a
requirement for a period of, of
the temporary provisional
license your prior to
eligibility to apply for a full
and unrestricted license to
practice medicine.
Several states have passed laws
granting provisional licenses to
foreign trained physicians, but
all of these states currently
require 2 or more years of work
under supervision, and many of
these large states such as
Tennessee and Florida have
multiple medical schools. They
have large training hospitals
and smaller states with less
educational resources may have
difficulty creating these
dedicated training programs for
these physics.
My last topic is going to be
telehealth, and this is on page
28, but I'm going to move to
page 29, which is a, uh, just
gives you a link to the Center
for Connected Health Policy, and
this is a good resource for
telemedicine licensing
requirements by state that uh is
really easy to search and we'll
give you um just some good
guideline
about what the states require.
On page 30 is a diagram of the
state specific interstate
telemedicine licensure. This was
last updated by the Federation
of State Medical Boards in
September of 2024. And so as you
can see on page 29 that all
state medical boards require
that physicians engaging in
telemedicine are licensed in the
state in which the the patient
is located or are registered in
the state if they have a
register.
So all states require a
licensure.
10 states issue a special
purpose license or a
telemedicine license or a permit
to practice telemedicine across
state lines.
9 states require physicians to
register or receive a waiver if
they wish to practice across
state lines, 3 states plus the
District of Columbia allow
regional or proximal reciprocity
for interstate practice.
And 39 states plus the District
of Columbia and the Virgin
Islands have licensed her
exceptions and or consultations
exceptions for services rendered
across state lines.
In New Mexico, and New Mexico
license is required to provide
care, examination, diagnosis,
and treatment. That's what
constitutes care to a patient
who is physically in New Mexico.
But there are exemptions from
licensure requirements, those
are defined in 616-17, and MSA
of the Medical Practice Act.
And this includes that a
physician licensed to practice
under the laws of another state
who acts as a consultant to a
New Mexico licensed physician on
an irregular or infrequent
basis, not to exceed 10 patients
per year is exempt from
licensure.
And below that are the specific
exceptions to the act, that this
would be a physician who is
licensed to practice under the
laws of another state who's
acting as a consultant or a
physician who is engaging in the
informal practice of medicine
across state lines without
compensation or expectation of
compensation. This is generally
what we would call like a
curbside console where I would
call a specialist in another
state, asking them a question
about uh specific
patient that I need some
guidance on.
So on page 32, this is just a
synopsis that the physician to
physician consultation exception
permits a consulting physician
licensed in another state in
which they are located to use
telemedicine or other means to
consult with a licensed
practitioner who remains
responsible for diagnosing and
treating the patient in the
state where the patient is
located. So there has to be
physician to physician
consultation and the, the
physician who is
in the state is still
responsible for a diagnosis and
treatment of the patient.
However, physicians who were
providing specialty assessments
or consultations such as at
Centers for Excellence are not
required to obtain a license in
the state where the patient is
located in order to screen a
patient for acceptance of a
referral. The out of state
physician may then provide care
via telemedicine, but only by
utilizing the physician to
physician consultation exception
above.
If the out of state physician
agrees to diagnose, counsel, or
treat the patient directly, the
patient must travel to the state
where the physician is licensed
or the physician must obtain a
license to practice medicine in
the state where the patient is
located.
And I'm finally I'm just gonna
close with the Federation of
State Medical Board statement on
telemedicine that notes that it
is important that his
telemedicine continues to be
utilized regulatory agency
balance expanding regulatory
opportunities for the adoption
of telemedicine technologies
with ensuring public health and
safety, and that physicians to
provide medical care
electronically or otherwise
maintain the highest degree of
professionalism.
Thank you very much and would
love to entertain any questions
you may have.
I, I, I'm gonna start by asking
you a question about page 30,
the map.
It seems to show that New Mexico
has a special telemedicine
license. Is that the case?
It's not a regular license.
So somebody who has one of those
who then moves to the state.
If we haven't passed the
compact.
would still have to apply for
another license if they moved to
the state, is that the case, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
yes, so this was for a
telemedicine license and so we
have a specific telemedicine
license that that um somebody
would apply for that is quite
easy to obtain and um Monique
can discuss that a little bit
more. This is not the same as a
compact license, so two
different types of things, but
we do allow
we have a speci a specific
telemedicine license.
And, and regarding the compact,
this is the first time the board
is sought.
uh
Legislation that would permit a
compact.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, we have endorsed this
for, I believe 2 years now, but
we did decide that we wanted to
formally vote to endorse it, but
we have um presented this in the
past that we think it's a good
idea to join the compact.
OK.
All right, so let's go to the
committee and we'll start over
here this time, uh,
representative, uh, Jones, you
want to start?
3 minutes, we're already at
time, essentially, so I, I'm
gonna give up my time.
Yeah, I guess
a few
Senator Sevilla Lopez.
Thank you. um.
I'm actually, um,
uh.
I'm interested in so much, but
with the, the reason that um
telemedicine's license that you,
you passed in in 2003, um, it,
it's, as I understand it, it's
the um
Uh, the, uh, what is it called
the
Um.
No, it's not the compact, but
whatever, it's a, it's an
expedited license or an
excellent expedited thing this
little telemedu, how long does
it take, guess bottom line to
get a telemedicine license.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee,
Senator Sadia Lopez. It can take
anywhere from a week to 30 days,
just depending cause we do
require a criminal background
check and uh required
documentation, but it is a more
streamlined process compared to
a requesting a school on
restricted license. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, and I know you
know that I'm interested in
making it easier for New Mexico
residents to get a second
opinion from an out of state
provider.
And that seems to be a big hang
up here in New Mexico. We
actually listed on several
websites of centers and centers
of excellence, like UCLA has,
has, um, somebody who will not
permit them to give a second
opinion. And the reason I
understand is because you
require them to collaborate with
the New Mexico doctor.
And of course, the whole reason
that somebody is seeking a
second opinion is they're
concerned about what the first
doctor did, and I don't
understand the reason for that,
for and, and, and I'm interested
in, I, as soon as it's finished,
um, it's still in progress, um,
I, I'll share with you the
telemedicine exception for a
second opinion that I'm seeking
to, to implement. Mr. Chair and
the Senator
Olym Lopez, members of the
committee. Thank you very much.
Yes, I actually was in contact
with UCLA regarding that concern
and uh the document that I was
given that uh um states that uh
New Mexico was not um part of
the or allowed to be a part of a
second opinion. Um, I was
told was actually were quite
surprised that we had that
document, and they said that was
an internal document.
Um, was not a patient pamphlet,
um, that and, and um they
weren't able to give me a lot of
information about that, but it
seemed that that may have been
more regarding a billing concern
and not a telemedicine or
licensure concern. Um, they and
I can give you.
Robert Robin Roberts, um,
information, but she told me
that every
Yeah, that's really good to
hear, but because of my interest
in in the board. I also got some
complaints and concerns about
the board in another regard, and
I wanted to raise this with you.
Um, has the board ever similar
summarily suspended a doctor's
license without first having a
suspension hearing?
If you'll indulge me, this is
really important, Mr. Chair and
members of the community center
Sidiio Lopez. I do not know the
answer to that. I don't recall
ever, ever doing anything. It's,
I believe, I, I don't mind if
you research and give it to me
and then when, if the doctor's
license is suspended or
summarily suspended, is the
doctor then prohibited from
contacting patients during the
time they're suspended.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Saia
Lopez and members of the
committee, I believe that the
physician would that if somebody
is suspended, they cannot
practice medicine, um, and so I
would say that they are not
allowed to use their license to
practice medicine. Um, I don't
know about contacting patients.
I don't think that we, uh, go
into those kind of details, but
again, I would, I would have to
look into that.
What protocol?
This is, this is where this
resulted in in the death of us
have things that we consider are
really important.
All right, thank you. But
possibly afterwards you can talk
afterwards.
Uh thank you, chair, um, I just
step that you on the compact
issue, you will have my support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, so,
Let's see, um,
Do you have a compact bill, or
are you looking to be part of a
bigger compact bill, and if you
do have a bill, do you have a
sponsor.
Mr. Chair, um, vice chair and
members of the committee, we do
not have a bill. We are um not
writing any bills or we just
wanna make sure that uh that the
legislators are aware that we
are in, uh, that we do indoors
joining the combat.
So, do, have you, do you know if
someone is carrying the compact.
I mean, it, you can endorse
something, but if we don't have
a bill, it doesn't really do a
lot of good, so I'm, I'm just
cautioning you to make sure that
there is a bill that, that can
help you out. And then, and I,
I, for years I've been in
contact with an unmatched
medical student, and it's a big
concern to me that we invest,
you know, 8 years into their
education and then for one
reason or another.
they don't match, and then we've
just lost all of that training,
so there I know some states are
doing other things. Is there
anything being looked at here
to, to do something with
unmatched medical students so
that we need everybody needs
physicians, so do you have any
answer?
Mr. Chair, um, Vice Chair
Thompson, members of the
committee, we are only um doing
licensing for.
physicians who have uh have
completed residencies or or
within those guidelines, at
least 2 years of a residency
program, and so, um, what we
found is that when you do
graduate directly from medical
school, you are not ready to
practice medicine, and that is a
real difficulty. I know that
some states have um attempted to
have um what are called
physician assistants, kind of
programs where medical students
who have not matched.
are working into training. I
believe the Missouri had that
for a little bit, but they have
actually stopped that program.
Thank you so much for that. My
final question, Mr. Chair, is,
uh, I'm, I'm, um, opening up the
telehealth Act for social
workers. And so rather than just
doing that, I'm asking all the
professions I can think of, so
anybody who's listening, if you
are part of a group that would
like to have your part of
telehealth amended, please
contact me and the same goes to
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
thank you for your presentation.
My questions are mostly about um
the board and there used to be 3
vacancies. I saw 1 more was um.
Uh
pointed, but there's still 2
left, and there's no one
representing southern New
Mexico.
So, um, are those the governor's
prerogative. OK, so, um, I have
a Doctor Flores and he is a
psychiatrist in Las Cruces, and
do you have psychiatrists, you
know, as representative of the,
I'm trying to find the slide
that shows
everyone.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, it's on, I believe, page.
To
then on page 6 that is the
actual appointment
qualifications and terms and so,
um, currently we don't have a
psychiatrist that serves on the
board. We certainly would love
to have one. That would be
great, um, but uh that is not
within our purview. Um, those
are again list of names from
governing councils such as the
Medical Society or the
physicians assistant counsel are
given to the governor and then
the
Governor appoints those
positions. So, um, Mr. Chair, we
can go to you for um how to.
Navigate that
Uh, Mr. Chair and representative
Ferrari, members of the
committee, know, you would need
to go to the governor.
OK. OK. I just was wondering if
you had a process. OK, real
quick, um, also, I want to know,
uh, with this board and you
spoke about the executive
committee and then
interchangeably said executive
and investigative, um, I, do
you?
Have an investigative board
committee that would look into,
you know, um, complaints or, you
know, if even the doctor is
targeted again in and the board
decides, well, we don't want to
kick him out, um, what kind of
recourse do they have?
Mr. Chair Representative,
members of the committee, we
have an executive committee,
which includes the chair of the
vice chair, and the secretary,
and those are elected positions
within the board.
We have uh investigations staff,
and then through our statutes,
we have what are called
complaint committees, and so,
uh, any complaints that are
given to the board staff are
sent to the complaint
committees, and these are
generally 1 to 2 members of the
board that are uh the need to
review the complaint and have
access to.
all of the information, the, the
files, the patient records.
Then during the uh regular board
meetings, the complaint
committees report the findings
to the entire board, but the uh
all of the um information is
blinded, so there are no names
or any kind of information, so
we don't know who the who the
complaint is about, except the
two members of the committee.
Those two members are recused
from our vote when we decide on
action for a license.
see. OK, I'm sorry, but that
wasn't my question. My question
was what the recourse is for
someone who is um
Uh, expelled or not his license
revoked. Uh, Mr. Chair,
representative Ferrari, members
of the committee, the there are
um.
Avenues where the licensee is
able to request a hearing, and
those are all set up in statute
and depending on what the action
is, um, for example, some, some
summarily suspended license must
receive a hearing, uh, is it,
uh, 14 days, I believe it's 14
days, it's either 10 to 14. I
don't remember exactly. And so
we would have to act very
quickly if it's a summarily
suspended license.
Most of those hearings can uh
take place.
36 9 months later, um, and the
When the when the investigation
process is in place, the
licensee is always given the
opportunity to present their
side to the complaint committee
and to the board staff.
That's thank you Mr. Chair,
yeah.
Wanted to yield your time to
Senator Silvio Lopez to finish
her questions. Go ahead. Thank
you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chair.
So going back, I thought you
said you, there were no summary
suspensions that you couldn't
recall any summary suspensions,
and you just said, outlined the
process for some suspensions.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Sidillo Lopez, members of the
committee. There is a process in
our statutes for summary
suspensions, so we have to
follow that. But again, I don't
recall any recently that where I
think your question was whether
there was a suspension where we
didn't act within a certain
period of time, and I don't
recall that.
Well, if um I'd be interested in
your summary suspensions and
how, how they were treated. Um,
the reason is I, the last
question I asked was a protocol,
whether the pro you have a
protocol for contacting the
patients um who the suspended
doctor and
is prohibited from communicating
with. And I'm just using the
language that I was told because
you said, well, they can't
practice medicine. I don't know
whether they can communicate,
but he was this individual was
told he could not communicate
with patients.
So what do you do with the
patients when there's a summary
suspension.
Mr. Chair and Senator Sidilia
Lopez, members of the committee,
generally when there is a
summary suspension that is
because it is felt that the um
public is it imminent danger if
that physician continues to
practice. Well, OK, my question
is, what do you do for those
patients? And, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Sidia Lopez and members
of the committee, if it seems
that those patients are going to
be in danger from the loss of
that physician, we do try and
cover for
that physician and find um
somebody who can cover. I do
recall when we had a physician
in Las Cruces who was providing
cancer therapies, um, that were
not approved. We did uh speak
with UNM and try to get those
patients covered through UNM
Cancer Center.
Um, my understanding is that
there were patients who were
never contacted or it didn't
even understand what happened
and died. I don't know if it's
this doctor you're talking
about, but it sounded really um
If, do you have a protocol for
how you handle summary
suspensions, because this seems
like a very dangerous time.
You're concerned that these
patients are getting some
standard care, and then if they
get no care, that's even worse.
Mr. Chair and Senator Sidil
Lopez, members of the committee,
we follow the regulations that
are in our rules and regulations
for summary suspensions and so
our, we have a prosecutor who
follows those um my question is,
what do you do for the patients?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Sidil
Lopez, and members of the
committee. I, I don't know that
process as far as patients. I
believe that um,
If there is a concern that those
patients are in danger.
As I stated what we have done in
the past is try and find
somebody.
cover those patients.
I have some more questions, uh,
and I understand that you're
dealing with a particular case,
and that's why I had suggested
that you talk to her afterwards.
It's not something that the rest
of us on the protocols that they
use, you're asking about a
specific case that I'm asking
whether they have any protocols
for when a there is a Senator,
uh, Senator Pope, you're next.
No questions, Mr. Chair.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Doctor Carson, uh, I've been
approached by several people who
are concerned that when they are
receiving medical treatment that
they know exactly what the um
educational background is of the
person who is providing it. So I
am, I would like to know if you
know how is there a requirement
that every single person who's
treating a patient will talk
about or
Tell what their background is,
and I want to give you a
specific example. If I am a uh
physician's assistants, but I
have a doctorate in sociology.
They might call me, you know,
Doctor Herndon, but then that
could be misleading. So what is
the requirement under those
situations and how can we help
out our constituents.
Mr. Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Herndon and
members of the committee, I, I'm
sorry, I don't know the answer
to that. I do know that their
license has to be displayed, um,
if they are licensed by us. It
is a requirement. I believe
that's a requirement for our all
of ourLD is that a license is
displayed, but I am not sure of
a requirement that, that you
must call yourself um.
a that that you cannot call
yourself a doctor, um, versus a
physician or other language that
could be misleading.
All right, thank you. And then
with respect to the medical
compact that you all are now
supporting. You are only
supporting it with respect to
the relevant statutes that you
are responsible for, is that
correct? Or have you spoken to
others in the medical field in
general and everyone is in
support of a medical compact.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Herndon, members of the
committee, we have spoken with
the Medical Society and they are
also additionally in favor of
the compact, um, and so the
compact only will uh address
physicians for licensing, not
other members that are under our
board, such as physician
assistants or um sleep
technologists.
All right, thank you for that
clarification. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Representative Garcia.
Thank you, uh, the chairman, um.
Does the board deal with
optometry?
Eye doctors?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Garcia, members of the
committee, we do not, uh,
Do have uh optometrists under
our board. We have
ophthalmologists under our
board.
You have a, a medical doctor
degree or a DO degree. Um.
Because I'm basically alluding
to an issue that
Came up
Uh, some months back.
It has to deal with uh an
individual that went in for an
eye checkup.
And, uh, there really wasn't a
live body.
That treated the person.
But, uh, an eye doctor from
India.
Doing it to kind of tell like
medicine.
So do you have kind of oversight
of that.
Process
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
members of the committee, we
don't have oversight over
optometrists, yeah.
Thank you for answering that.
Um,
Lastly, um,
We passed the malpractice redo.
Last session, I think it was.
Um
So can you kind of share with
us.
Um
If there's been more lawsuits or
less lawsuits.
Since that passage.
And if there's been more doctors
or less doctors.
Signing up
To practice in the state.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia
and members of the committee,
uh, for your first question, I
would ask the medical society
because we don't deal with
malpractice numbers or um
however, I can say that um Miss
Parks was just letting me know
that for licensing renewals that
we do, um, sometimes get calls
from physicians that tell us
that they will, will not be
renewing their license and quite
a few calls are because of the
malpractice.
um issues in the state.
OK, thank you for that. Lastly,
Um, Las Vegas.
San Miguel County in 2002 at 26
positions.
Um, for internal medicine, 8 or
family practice. One was a
surgeon or or OBGYNs.
In 2002, the hospital changed
from a community-based board.
Community-based hospital to a
for-profit.
The first thing that the
for-profit corporation did is
they cut positions, specialty
positions.
What role does the board play
In terms of
And they cut the board was they
cut some of these positions
based on the profit margin.
Because they cut the positions
that were not producing as much
profit as these other.
Sectors.
So how does the board look at
some
At a contradiction like that.
In terms of actually diminishing
services to the public based on
a restructuring of a hospital
based on for-profit a for-profit
margin. Mr. Chair Representative
Garcia, members of the
committee, again, we are a
regulatory licensing board, so
we do, we, we don't look at, um,
whether uh corporations are
changing status of the number of
physicians in the hospitals, um,
we act on patient complaints or.
um
Incompetence with practice. OK,
thank you for that. There's only
2.
positions in Las Vegas today out
of 26 in 2002.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative uh.
I had a quick question on page
8.
Your data seems to indicate that
the number of total licenses
issue is going up.
In the state does that include
uh there were 22 aspects of that
one. You in 2022, you started
licensing, you combined with the
osteopaths. Is that factored
into this?
Is that why they're going up,
because all of a sudden now you
have more, you have the
osteopaths and the MDs, or was
that also the case before?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee that that does take
into consideration, um, the
doctors of osteopathy, but I
still think the medical doctors
are still um has increased
within that, within that number.
We don't have a lot of doctors
of osteopathy. Um, in New
Mexico, so medical doctors.
Is still increasing.
And then the other aspect of
that is, does that include the
tele telehealth doctors.
Those licenses.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, it does.
I just wanted to alert you about
compacts, what we've run into in
the past. I, I've, I've been
down that road and been bloodied
in battle over that issue for
some time, and the committee
that kills those bills.
And is killed
The repeatedly is the Senate
Finance Senate Judiciary
Committee. They always raise two
issues that you'll need to make
sure you deal with.
One is if there's a complaint
against the board, against the
compact itself against the
compact.
Where is the hearing going to be
held?
And if it's not held in New
Mexico, they say we're losing
state sovereignty over this, and
we can't approve this.
Now, I can't imagine why anybody
sues the compact.
They would sue the doctor.
But not the compact.
So that seems to me uh but
however, keen legal keen minds,
keen legal minds far keener than
mine, as struggled with that
issue and, and cannot see that
issue. So that's something you,
you probably ought to deal with
right up front, maybe ahead of
the session, talk to them, pave
the way.
The other issue is
If we
Except the compact, it has to
be.
Word for word with the compact
said, and if not, then they,
they won't consider us to have
approved the compact. And the,
the committee made up of keen
legal minds for the most part.
There's some.
Keen minds that aren't legal.
um.
Frequently says in every case
has said, well, we want to amend
this, we want to make this
change, we want to make this
edition and we always do that
with legislation. We don't, we
don't rubber stamp legislation.
And so if you make any little
change, then the compact says it
doesn't go into effect. So you
need to deal with those two
issues. I wish you well. I hope
you succeed.
The nurses did it because they
were up against the the uh
Total deadline, and I think on
January 31st, all the traveling
nurses would be without
licenses, so they had to. But
other than that, they've been
unyielding. However, if you get
a good strong sponsor of your
legislation, you might be able
to get it through. I didn't
volunteer. I just asked. It
would be good to have a few keen
legal minds on your side too
though that would not hurt. And
with that, unless there's other
questions to say Linda Trujillo
and I opened up um a
bill to for this particular
compact, and I'm really happy to
hear that there is that little
procedure to reinstate doctors
who might go run afoul of
reproductive, um, practice in
other areas that I think that
will help a lot. So Senator
Trujillo, Linda Trujillo is
good,
good. So you have a couple of
keen legal minds on this issue.
You may succeed. Thank you for
the presentation. Thanks for the
work you're doing.
So now we go to the path
forward.
Um
Data informed.
Recommendations for improving
behavioral health outcomes in
New Mexico, and we have the
folks from falling colors with
us. So we'll have them come on
up. That's Joy Coaster Hale.
The CEO Kyle Klesinger, the
public health data analyst.
And Sam Wolf, the chief
operating officer and general
counsel.
Oh
And somebody else.
Just helping us get the tech set
up right. Thank you.
The vast majority of the
presentation is exactly as what
you see on the handout. We're
hoping to do a live demo of the
data for you, so I know some IT
folk are gonna come and see if
they can get us connected, but
we'll get started in the
meanwhile.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you all very much for having us
today. We're with falling
colors, the administrative
services organization for the
Behavioral Health Collaborative
and the lead agencies in New
Mexico offering behavioral
health services. We spoke to you
last at the end of July in
Portalis, where we gave a
detailed walk through of our
technical approach and processes
to handling public funds
specifically in the non-medicaid
space. You all asked us to come
back to extend those to broader
recommendations.
for administering behavioral
health across New Mexico. We
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you and share our
recommendations and discuss
detailed next steps with you at
the end of the presentation. My
name is Joy Coster Hale. I'm the
CEO of Falling Colors with me is
Sam Wolf, our CEOO and general
counsel, and Kyle Kleisinger,
our head of data analytics.
Thank you all very much.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for inviting us here today.
First of all, I want to address
a little bit of background on
what is it that falling colors
can bring to the table today.
Why is it that we have a
perspective that we hope is
worth sharing with this
committee and with other folks
who are interested in behavioral
healthcare in New Mexico. So
we've been involved as the ASO
of uh behavioral health agencies
in New Mexico since 2017, and in
that time, we've helped to
process hundreds of millions of
dollars relating to hundreds of
programs. We've built up a
network of close to 800
behavioral healthcare provides.
writers around the state, and
we've served many, many agencies
and many, many special projects
around the state. In that
process, we've gotten to sit in
a very interesting spot because
while we have successfully
implemented this infrastructure,
we've helped to grow this
network. Um, we've worked
directly with lawmakers and with
agency leadership to develop
this infrastructure and these
tools that help them to
administer behavioral healthcare
programs. Along the way, we've
gotten to see a lot of change.
We were
The ASO when we had Mr.
Lindstrom, who was here earlier
this morning. We were the ASO
when we had Bryce Pittener
leading the collaborative, who
was referenced this morning. We
were the ASO and we had Stanford
camp. We've got to participate
through administrations and
across a lot of changes with all
of these different agencies
along the way. And while we've
been doing that in building data
collection and financial
processing systems to enable all
of those different stakeholders
to see what's happening, to help
understand where the data is
going, where the money is going.
And what kind of commonalities
there are in looking at that
data, we've gotten to see a lot
of what does work and what
doesn't work. So we've seen, for
example, as the, you know, as
we've had all this leadership
transition at the collaborative,
we've seen ebbs and flows and
what is more engaged and less
engaged, we've seen some of the
things that work regardless of
those circumstances.
So, uh, brief notes on why we
think the ASO model works really
well, and that these are things
that we have learned along the
way that we think supports some
of the recommendations that
we'll be making that are more
specific, so some of the things
that we don't do as the ASO. We
don't depend on the existence or
the structure of the
collaborative. We work directly
with different agencies
themselves. So having some kind
of centralization can't be
helpful, but we work directly
with the agencies on what it is
that they're looking for what
they need.
Um, we don't make policy
decisions about which programs
should be implemented or
continued, we provide data. We
help the program managers and
state leadership to understand
those programs to see where the
money is going to understand
what's happening. We don't tell
them what should be done. We
think that's a decision best
left in state hands. We don't
make decisions regarding whether
or not individuals should
qualify for care. State agencies
give us rules on who is
qualified for a particular
program. We make sure those
rules get.
Forced. We make sure that a
provider doesn't get paid if
they have gone outside of those
rules, but we don't say, no, we
don't think those folks should
be entitled to that care. We
don't say it's medically
necessary or not, because we
don't think that's a decision
that should be in the hands of a
party like us. Dollar decisions
as to what should be funded
should be made by the state
agencies. Medical decisions
should be made by medical
providers. We are here to
develop tools that facilitate
those processes, make sure
everybody understands what's
happening, develop the data.
And make the process go
smoothly. We also don't retain
any funds that are not expended
on programs, so if there is a
program that is funded and that,
you know, an entity says, well,
we didn't spend all the money,
we don't keep that balance, that
goes back to the state. Some of
the things that we do do, as I
mentioned, we work directly with
each of the agencies around
their specific programs if they
have a new program that they
need specific data collected
about, they have specific
services that they want to
understand. We helped them
develop.
that independently of whether or
not there's the collaborative or
something like that. We worked
with the agencies directly. We
build and deliver tools to make
it so that the agencies, the
staff at each of those agencies
state leadership can see what's
happening, they can see what
they're doing.
And they can see where the money
is going and where it's not
going, where there might be
funds that haven't been
allocated or expended yet. Um,
and we deliver data so that
everybody who is looking at it
can see and understand what's
happening with the funds that
are being spent. We also help to
make sure that the rule about
funds of last resort, non-M
Medicaid funds, get, uh,
returns. So if there are pro uh
services that might be paid for
that should have been Medicaid
eligible. We aid the agencies in
recovering that money from the
providers. This is to
Uh, you know, nothing wrong is
happening except that there are
gaps in delays in how Medicaid
is processed, and so something
that's already been paid for,
they might determine later
should have been paid to
Medicare, we recover that money.
We've brought in, brought
millions of dollars back into
the agencies to be spent on
other programs, so that those
services could be properly
billed to Medicare. With those
uh backgrounds on where we bring
our, you know, what we bring to
the table, what we've seen that
works and doesn't work, I'm
going to turn it over to my
colleagues to talk about.
Specific recommendations across
the board that we believe will
help with outcomes of behavioral
health in New Mexico. Thank you.
So if you all look at slide 7,
the very first of our
recommendations is going to be
Is that better? Much better. All
right. Uh, we're on slide 7.
Um, so to start, each of the
recommendations we're about to
make for you, addresses what
we've identified as core
barriers to providing effective
behavioral healthcare in New
Mexico.
Our first recommendation is
going to examine the ongoing
challenge of a system that is
continuously in flux. We believe
that it is critical that the
state establish and expand
systems that are flex flexible
enough to handle the changing
landscape and behavioral health
rather than try to contain it
with brittle or one size fits
all solutions.
If you look at slide 8, we all
know that the behavioral health
landscape has changed profoundly
in the last decade. The quote
unquote new normal is that there
really is no normal. As everyone
in this room knows, but that the
personal and system level, the
last years have brought
unprecedented change, a
pandemic, economic instability,
a changing workforce, new
technological landscapes and
shifts in the behavioral health
needs of the community itself.
This means that not only are the
players and processes
continually changing, but the
information needs and goals of
behavioral health system are
shifting as well.
Moreover, even in the calmest of
times, we know that behavioral
healthcare requires the capacity
to pivot and expand at the drop
of a hat, as anyone who's tried
to stand up a new program nose
inevitably it will require
changes in process, data
collection, and even core goals.
Finally, processes and programs
are made more vulnerable to
these ongoing changes by the
high rates of turnover at both
the state and the provider
level. What would normally be
small inefficiencies in process
can become severely disruptive
from everything from provider
payments to service delivery
when key players leave without
documenting their knowledge.
To give an example of what that
looks like, we can look to the
observations we've seen as the
administrative services
organization. Moving to slide 9,
since assuming the role of the
ASO in 2017, we've seen
substantial changes in the
behavioral Health Network.
We've seen an over 700% increase
in custom service data
collection and over 300%
increase in provider network
expansion and over 270% increase
in custom project expansion.
Not to mention all the changes
we've seen in leadership,
program management, and provider
staffing.
Critically, the vast majority of
these growing services are
unique to New Mexico, rather
than standardized Medicaid
programs of the services we
manage and collected data on 75%
have no Medicaid equivalents,
meaning that their data
collection requirements are
often unique and specific to New
Mexico.
As the ASO, our charges to
ensure timely provider payments,
meaningful data collection, and
rules enforcement in the face of
this change in growth. Our
approach has been threefold.
First, to ensure that our
services are available for a
variety of programs without
requiring a standard or
centralized entry point. Second,
to build clear reusable
processes that have enough
flexibility to allow for program
requirements, uh, that very
uniquely from provider to
provider, and 3.
To enforce data collection
practices that both capture the
data needed to run individual
programs on the ground and the
data needed to build the larger
picture of non-medicaid
behavioral health across New
Mexico.
Our approach has allowed us to
maintain across all of this
change since 2017, an average
time to payment of less than 6
days for our providers, an
average claim rejection rate of
7%, which is less than half of
the national average, uh, done
by the managed care
organizations were able to
launch a new program in less
than a month from signing a
contract for that program and
we're able to deliver custom
data requests with an average
turnaround time of less than 2
days. It's the flexibility
that we've built into our
approach that has allowed us to
maintain this level of standard
in the face of ongoing flux and
change in the behavioral health
system.
If you look at the next slide,
slide 10.
We believe that the lessons
we've learned in managing the
growth and flux of the
non-medicaid network can be
expanded to New Mexico
behavioral health more broadly.
Specifically, we recommend that
New Mexico Behavioral Health
systems have resilient and
flexible data and financial
management systems that can
effectively adapt to and scale
with the changes states changing
information needs.
What does this mean? First, we
believe the tools needed for
successful behavioral health
administration, including access
to funds, effective payment
processes and transparent data
collection should not be tied to
a single entity or project.
Specific initiatives will come
and go. Bodies designed to
support cross-agency
collaboration will strengthen
and weaken tools for centralized
data collection and
visualization will be stood up
and eventually become outdated.
In fact, we observed that often
these quote unquote solutions
both.
Technical and process in their
efforts to be precise and
comprehensive and up codifying
brittle or impractical
solutions, and when they fail,
the entire system suffers.
Instead, the state needs to
ensure that the solutions they
design can flex with change
while maintaining the core goals
of behavioral health care.
Second, as we've done with
non-medicaid data collection,
the state should have a flexible
system that can accommodate
specific and global data needs,
allowing for effective on the
ground project administration
and bigger picture analysis and
goal setting simultaneously.
Finally, the state should make
sure processes are resilient to
personnel turnover. This means
first, making sure processes are
explicit, logical, and
accessible, so that a new person
can onboard relatively easily.
Second, making sure these
processes are similar across
projects and agencies so that a
single gap in knowledge could be
easily filled in with the
collective web of information.
And third, documenting processes
so that when someone leaves
their knowledge isn't lost. In
some, focusing on building
simple flexible solutions rather
than putting into place overly
complex and rigid processes and
requirements is critical for the
continuity of behavioral health
care in the face of ongoing
large scale change.
Thank you,
just one quick question.
If you could explain on that
page.
Uh, what do you mean when you
say
The funding administrative
support and data tools not be
tied to a single initiative
entity or initiative. What would
be an example of tying it to one
entity or initiative. Is that
like Medicaid or something like
that? Would that be one and so
you should have systems that
aren't.
So specific to Medicaid that
they can't be used by others. Is
that what you're getting at?
What, what are you getting at
there? I think actually I think
Medicaid is an interesting
counter example almost which is
if you look at a place where I
think, uh, the state has
successfully done this is the
layering of different fund
sources, so if you look at
Medicaid, there's a number of
different funds coming in for
qualified individuals and then
below that is the safety net of
the non-medicaid dollars. So
that's a case where even if
there are subtle changes in
those systems, say how someone
qualifies, how much money is
available in one.
System or the other because of
the flexibility to be able to
fund a single behavioral health
program through either of those
channels or multiple channels,
we're able to continue that
continuity. So rather we're
looking at things more like very
specific initiatives, you know,
one of the things that has come
up recently, two examples uh
would be the Behavioral Health
collaborative and the new data
centralization system HHS 2020.
These are both excellent
initiatives. We've seen
successes and fails on all
fronts, and we want to ensure
that the services that are
delivered through, for example,
either of these projects are
able to continue even in the
face of those projects getting
slowed down, stalled, for
example, not having a CEO for
the collaborative, it's critical
that agencies are able to access
those services even without that
centralization. So really kind
of building in those safety nets
and second layers to say, oh,
even if one person isn't sitting
right here, we have another way
in. We have another way to
access it. Does that make sense?
Excuse me, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
thank you. That helps a great
deal.
Thank you, Joy.
Our second recommendation on
slide 11 relates to making data
and powering and turning to
slide 12. I'll explain what we
mean by this. We think that the
state leadership needs to be
empowered when it comes to
making decisions about financing
public health or clinical care
interventions.
What we mean by this is that
This body, the legislature
authorizes state agencies to
spend enormous amounts of public
money, and that is a huge
responsibility. There's
naturally an inclination to want
to delegate some of that out,
and so we have MCOs, we have all
sorts of ways that some of that
money is gotten out, and the
decision on what exactly to fund
and how to make those decisions
is delegated out. Our view is
that a better approach here is
to make sure that the decision
regarding how to spend that
money stays with the state where
this
has made the has authorized that
decision to be made and deliver
tools, data tools,
administrative tools, technical
tools that allow those state
agencies, leadership and state
staff. We're working hard and
trying to make the right
decisions to make those
decisions effectively. So,
health care reimbursement and
funding decisions should be made
by those bodies, but they should
have the tools to do that
effectively. So making sure that
they have
All the information at their
fingertips transparent data,
where is the money going? Where
is the money held up, which
fund, which providers are
getting that money, which
services are being funded, where
their geographical gaps, where
might there be a temporal gaps
where there's something in
process, but it hasn't happened
yet. And being able to see
transparency about exactly
what's happening at any given
moment, um, a recommendation to
here, transparent real-time
data. So if the state funders
were charged with this
incredible responsibility.
of making all of these funding
decisions are getting data that
might be, you know, 3 months, 6
months, a year old, looking at
what happened last year and
trying to make good decisions,
that's going to make them, that
puts them in a position that
they can't ever really be
successful because they don't
have the tools to see where is
the data, where is the money
today, what's happening today.
And so by bringing tools and
that actually show, as of this
morning, how much money had gone
out to these programs. As of
yesterday, where were we at?
If we are 3 quarter of the way
through the year and looking at
what, where we might have a
surplus or a reversion or where
we're running short because we
have a program that had to ramp
up during the year. For example,
we know that there are all these
crisis situations. We can't
project a year out exactly
what's going to be happening on
the ground, that flexibility and
those tools to make those
decisions. And finally, we
recommend that the impact needs
to be collected, and so by tying
the data to the finances. So if
this body says,
this fund, you know, this much
money is going to these
programs, there should be
requirements on what impact is
that causing. So not only should
the state leadership and state
staff be able to say, we know
that as of this morning, this
much of this money had gone out
to these particular programs,
they should be able to say, and
it is accomplishing XYZ. You
know, we are seeing that there
has been a reduction in the harm
that we are trying to reduce,
we've seen that this fund over
here, this money doesn't
actually seem to be making a
difference.
Maybe we should reevaluate,
rather than waiting for the end
of the year and then waiting for
it to be collected, and then
looking at it and saying, well,
last year we spent a bunch of
money on this thing. It's been a
year and a half, and it doesn't
seem like it worked. Should we
refund it? So, bringing this
real-time transparent data to
what is happening is a key
recommendation and, uh, my
colleague, Mr. Cleesinger will
go through some very specific
ways that we can show on slide
13 of where some of this can
actually happen.
Thanks, Sam. Uh, if I can direct
everyone's attention to slide
13. This is a summary analysis
that you're looking at of an
interrupted time series analysis
of a pilot project that we
launched last year, uh, that had
this specific goal of getting
behavioral health dollars
unstuck, uh, and what we mean by
that is in our time as the ASO
what we've observed is that
sometimes behavioral health
funds get allocated or budgeted
for specific projects or
initiatives, and then they sit
there, they don't end up
getting.
Uh, utilized by the end of the
fiscal year, and then sometimes
end up getting reverted. So our
goal was to figure out when and
where these dollars were getting
stuck.
And then through that analysis
to targeted outreach to program
managers and providers to get
that information in front of key
stakeholders at the right time
to hopefully get those dollars
unstock and hopefully even
rebalance or lead to a better
optimization of the utilization
of resources across the
behavioral health system as a
whole.
Uh, as I said, we started this
in March of last year, and what
we observed was that prior to
this intervention, there was
about 74 to 79% utilization that
we were expecting by the end of
the fiscal year.
After this intervention, by the
end of the fiscal year, the
state had, uh, spent 86% of the
budget that was run through our
system. That increase accounts
for about 15.9 million to $27.6
million that instead of being
reverted, instead of just
sitting there, was actually in
the hands of providers,
providing services to patients
and communities in New Mexico.
Uh, so this is what we would
consider to be an example of how
getting
this data in front of state
decision makers and empowering
them with this information leads
to the very outcomes that you
all are looking for.
Moving on to recommendation 3.
The best way to summarize our
recommendation here is that we
need to address the elephant in
the room, and we need to do so
with some empathy and really
thoughtfully. And when I'm
talking about is there is broad
consensus at the state that
there needs to be more
comprehensive and transparent
data sharing.
In that same vein, there are
also concerns about how to go
about doing that. And
specifically, once the data is
shared, how do you explain it in
a way that everybody who sees it
can interpret it in the way it
was intended. Um, we see this.
This tension or what what we
would call this conflict between
these two competing ideas. Uh,
we call it data anxiety, uh,
because what it ends up doing is
it leads to a lot of sense of
urgency. It leads to confusion.
It leads to some defensiveness
and unnecessarily adversarial
conversations around data, where
there really is an opportunity
for collaboration and for
talking about data in terms of
growth and opportunities. Uh.
There's no one space where this
comes from, but what we have
identified is that there are
some common unhelpful beliefs or
cognitive biases that tend to
creep into these conversations
around data. Uh, we have a
couple of them listed here, but
one example is loss aversion or
risk aversion, and it's, uh, in
terms of what we're talking
about here, what that means is
if the data can be negatively
interpreted or misunderstood,
the default is to not want to
share it or to not want to talk
about it. Not
Because something bad is
happening. I want to be very
clear about that. It's not that
there was a problem or that the
data is showing something bad.
It's that there's a lack of
confidence in the ability to
actually explain that data in a
way that somebody can't take it
out of context and turn it into
some kind of weapon. Uh, so what
we have begun doing or what
we've been doing in our work is
what we would call partic
participatory data design or
participatory data education.
Um, and we think that this is a
critical
will not just for addressing the
current data needs of the state,
but also preparing the state to
look at the data tools and the
technologies of the future.
AI is an incredibly powerful
tool if it's done right.
If it's not done right, it can
be extremely devastating. And we
don't necessarily talk about the
environmental, legal, or social
implications of a poorly run
data model, uh, or artificial
intelligence, and that is
something that the state needs
to be prepared to to evaluate.
Because going into a
conversation with a tech company
who is not having those
conversations explicitly about
what the risks are.
can lead to some really negative
outcomes, and there's some high
profile cases around that right
now.
Um, on the next slide, we go
into our approach to
participatory data design. Uh,
it's a 5-step process for us, if
that makes it sound very simple,
but it's a little more
complicated than that. Um,
What we like to do is we like to
start with exploring information
needs.
This is, uh, I can't understate
this. Oftentimes people want to
jump into the data directly.
They say this is the data that I
need. And, you know, give it to
me. Um,
What we have found in our role
is that oftentimes when you
start with the data, people end
up being disappointed because
the data is not necessarily
going to give them the
information that they're looking
for. So what we like to do is
we'd like to start by asking the
question, what is it that you
want to know? What, what are
your goals? What's the research
questions that you're trying to
figure out. And then from there,
let's talk about what data is
available and what are the
analytic opportunities that are
associated with that data. And
in that conversation, we can
also
Talked about what are the
misconceptions? What are the
risks? What are the limitations
associated with this data, and
we can talk through some of
those anxieties with all the key
stakeholders so that they feel
more comfortable actually
putting that that information
out and defending it when it
comes into question during some
kind of meeting.
Uh, by designing data tools
together and implementing it
together, and then continuously
learning, evaluating and
iterating over those data
products, we've been able to do
some really cool things. Um, we
were not able to get to the live
demonstration, uh, up and
running on this system, but we
do have some printouts or some,
uh, screenshots of the
legislative finance Committee
dashboard that we have put
together in collaboration with
the lead agencies, the
Legislative Finance Committee,
and RD the team.
Uh
On the first page what you can
see is the home screen, and what
this home screen allows you to
do is uh filter by lead agency
or by fiscal year, it goes all
the way back to 2019. It is
updated daily at 4:30 in the
morning. So what you're seeing
in this is what it looked like
yesterday. It looks different
today. Um, hm.
When you go to the expenditures
tab.
You can see the, uh, current
expenditures for every program
that is run through the ASL. You
can see the expenditure by
program, you can see it by
month. Uh, you can look at
fundsource, if you click on the
fundsource, you can even drill
down into the specific program
and see how much was spent on
each service in that program.
Um,
What I, what you're not able to
see in, in, in the screenshot is
that this is all interactive, so
you can actually look
Specifically at how much did
BHSD spend on the claims program
in September of 2025. Uh, and it
will tell you the total budget,
the total expenditure, total
remaining, and expend uh
expending amount at that time
point. Um, and budget
utilization, it's a lot of
similar information, but what we
like about this page is it gives
the state a benchmark in the
Legislative Finance Committee, a
benchmark for seeing how much
progress they have made in terms
of expending their budget. So
right now we're
27.2% as of yesterday across the
board is what the state has
spent a year to date. Um.
That will increase throughout
the, uh, throughout the year.
And uh you can, on this page,
look at it by state or federal
funding, the specific fund
source or the lead agency.
On the client demographics page,
um, this is a very data dense
page.
Technically, there are over, I
believe, 1000 different
interactions that you can do on
this page to ask different
questions relating to
demographics as it pertains to,
uh, expenditures, different
demographic groups, and
diagnoses. This is all
information that comes into our
system and that we can compile
onto a page like this, and the
legislative Finance Committee is
capable of logging in and asking
very specific questions about
how much is being spent on
average for specific
populations.
specific diagnoses, how many
clients are being served in
specific populations and a lot
of specific details there.
And then finally, on the
provider's page, this is a high
level overview of our provider
network. Uh, all the providers
that work with us and are
actively billing. Uh, it can be
broken down by the type of
service, so there's client-based
services, community-based
services, vendor-based services.
You can look at how much is
spent by a specific provider or
how many services they've
provided, um, and you can also
look at this detail at the lead
agency level. So, this is just
a, uh, an example of some of
the, the
types of data products that we
put together were particularly
proud of this one because we
were able to, um, have this
conversation using this
participatory data design with
lead agencies and with HCA and
uh the legislative Finance
Committee specifically, and
There's this live access to
data.
Thanks, Kyle.
Um, if any of you guys do want
to see the live version, come
find us afterward. We have it on
our laptops and we'd be happy to
click through a little bit, um,
just to emphasize, we're really
proud of having been able to get
this level of collaboration.
It's this kind of data sharing
that often is encountered with
questions of like, wait, what
are you gonna show? Are you sure
they know what they're looking
at? Can we get everything on a
single page and so the fact that
we were able to get all of these
different agencies as well as
the LFC to look at this and
understand what the
impact of this data is and have
a common agreement on what was
being shared and why is an
important step forward in the
data transparency that we know
you all are looking for.
So,
to step back a little bit, we
offered 3 broad scale
recommendations and demonstrated
their efficacy in the
non-medicaid space.
First, we, we recommend ensuring
that the state approach to
financial processing, data
collection, and collaboration is
resilient enough to accommodate
the continually shifting
political and health landscape.
We demonstrated that our
approach of designing
streamlined sensible processes
that keep everything moving in
the same direction with enough
flex on the edge to accommodate
the unique needs of different
agencies and providers has
allowed us to continue to
deliver quality healthcare
administration.
In the face of massive changes
since 2017.
Second, we recommend ensuring
that state leadership at all
levels, legislative, agency and
programmatic are empowered with
the information and processes
needed to make decisions for
effective behavioral health
care. We demonstrated, for
example, that our approach of
breaking down the known problem
of underutilization into
actionable buckets and sharing
that information with key
stakeholders was able to
meaningfully move the needle on
reversion and underspend.
Finally
We recommend breaking down the
culture of fear and data
hoarding that is leading to
friction and lack of
transparency. We demonstrated
that our approach to
participatory data design
resulted in a collaborative data
sharing projects between all of
our participating agencies and
the legislative Finance
Committee, a project that has
been a stated goal of those
groups for years. We believe
that the approach that falling
colors has built with the state
of New Mexico to managing
non-medicaid dollars and
Its many of these
recommendations. Here, we offer
some concrete steps for
expanding the success of this
model into broader domains.
If everyone takes a look at
slide 23, which is where I am.
Uh, we offer here some low cost
next steps to see if taking some
of the lessons learned from the
ASO model can be expanded more
broadly to Mexico behavioral
health.
Our first recommendation is to
identify a pilot Medicaid
project to be run through the
ASO model rather than an MCO
model. In particular, we believe
that establishing a program and
testing delivery with this
alternative method, which is
focused on state empowerment,
state direction of dollars spent
and data transparency would
allow the state to directly
compare the pros and cons of the
two models and makes an informed
decisions of how they want to
manage.
public and federal funds.
Second, we recommend piloting a
comprehensive behavioral health
report and dashboard. You just
got a very small sample of what
we're able to do with
non-medicaid data. We would like
to do the same for behavioral
health across all of New Mexico.
Our approach would be to take a
sample of the Medicaid data, for
example, the last fiscal year,
2023 or 2024 and build at no
cost and example dashboard that
show you the same level of
detail for non-medicaid data for
all of the data regardless of
fund source, agency, or specific
provider. Finally, we recommend
adding outcome and impact
analysis using tools that are
already at your fingertips. One
of the things that often comes
up is the need to have impact
and outcome data, not just
spending data, but that's hard.
It's often hard to figure out
what is effective and how to
spin up those tools. Falling
colors offers
those tools, they are in fact
already in our contract at no
cost. They're standardized data
collection tools such as the
GIPRA and Catans as well as
custom outcome data collection
forms both for providers and
individuals. We know there's
concerns around collecting this
kind of data. It can be costly
to providers. It can be not
useful to the program goals. And
so we recommend selecting a few
pilot programs to turn on this
kind of outcome data collection
and again, the state can
evaluate are the costs worth the
ability to see the efficacy of
the program, hopefully
empowering state leadership to
make decisions around behavioral
health, not only based on
dollars but also based on
program efficacy.
In sum, we hope that these
recommendations can help address
the ongoing challenges we've
observed that New Mexico is
experiencing in its behavioral
health system while providing
concrete and small-scale next
steps.
We of course open to further
discussion of any of these
ideas, both at the broader level
and our proposed pilots, and we
thank the committee very much
for their time and interest. Any
questions you all have, we'd be
very happy to talk.
Is your current contract with
the Behavioral Health Services
division or, or with whom is
your contract?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
it's actually held with the 3
signing agencies of the
Behavioral Health collaborative,
so the signatories are the HCA
CYFD and DOH and through that
contract any participating
member member of the Behavioral
Health collaborative can use our
services without needing another
direct contract.
Medicaid could contract for our
current contract specifically
states that we can manage
Medicaid funds at the state's
direction. And so have you
approached them
with these last 3.
Low hanging pieces of fruit.
We've had a couple of
discussions with folks at the
HCA, um, we met with them
actually last month partially in
preparation for this meeting,
um, and we'd love to continue
the conversation, possibly
collectively, if it would make
sense for this group and for
them.
OK. Well, let's go to the
committee then. Uh, we'll start
with you, Representative Garcia,
and we'll move our way around,
reverse order from last time. 3
minutes
and we uh
what if we stick with 3 minutes,
we'll just be a few minutes
behind. So I'm gonna be extra
mean.
But
We don't think of it as being
mean, we think of it as being
control you don't, you don't
look, you don't see the faces.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
question to you is with respect
to the collaboration that you
talked about. So we had a group
that presented to us just
earlier this afternoon. It was
a 9 counties. And so are they
included in any way in this work
that you've done and have put
together.
Mr. Chair at a vice chair,
Representative Hedon. No, um, so
the counties operate separate
from states. Uh, right now we
work at only the state fund
level, so the collaborations
between the agencies who work in
behavioral health, HCA, DOH,
CYFD, etc. Um, that said, we're
actually talking with Burnleyo
County about bringing this model
to help the counties for
exactly, you know, the reasons
that there's lots of parallels
in the needs for the state and
at the county level.
OK. So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Madam Presenter. So you're
talking with a man by the name
of Wayne Lindstrom on how to
have the, for example, Berna Leo
County and, and 7 other counties
that are working, uh, the other
counties that are working
together to talk to this
program. OK. And do you know
that he's here today? All right.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Senator
Pope, do you have any questions?
Chavis, do you have any
questions?
Um, maybe one or two. so, um, I
don't remember which one of you
made a comment or a statement in
your presentation about
nonmedicaid behavioral health.
Can you explain what you mean by
that?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
Representative Chavez. Um, so as
the administrative services
organization are main charge is
managing the non-medicaid
behavioral health dollars and
what that means is public
dollars that are not coming from
federal Medicaid, um, and so
that's a mix of state general
fund, federal funds, and special
appropriations.
So, so those are, but those are
programs that are specific to
the state you're not managing
any kinds of funds that are say,
like a FQHC or anything like
that.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Chavez, um, we're
actually we're very flexible on
that, so it's really if the
state needs um a third party pay
for their funds were flexible,
um, the vast majority of the
funds are in New Mexico, though.
And then the other question that
I have is in terms of the, your,
your um the dashboards, the
examples that you gave of like
real time, um.
The ability to view expenditures
and and sort of get a view of
what's going on in in real time.
So my question is,
Does that rely on
Someone at the state be able to
send the information to you and
then you upload it or it's going
or you're proposing that it go
directly to you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
Representative Chavez, that's an
excellent question. No, this is
all data we directly collect,
um, so we also, we host a
software environment where
providers bill for their
services and enter data on who's
receiving services, so we have a
whole environment where
providers are logging in for
payment for invoicing, for data
collection, and from that we're
able to pull all of these
detailed data points. OK, so
then the picture, so using
behavioral health as an example
in the picture really is.
Only for the services that you
were sort of responsible for,
but not necessarily behavioral
health that's taking place in
the entire state. Mr. Chair, and
Madam Vice Chair, Representative
Chavez, exactly, um, and that's
actually one of our proposed
pilots is we, we know that's a
gap, um, nobody wants to see
just a subset of the funds if
they're trying to understand how
behavioral healthcare is
actually being run in New Mexico
and right now there's not really
a way to look at all of that
data in one environment.
And so we have the capacity and
would love to work with you all
in the state on being able to
pull that data together to turn
these visualizations into
something that's comprehensive
across all fund sources. OK, so,
but that would still only be
limited to to state funds, not
necessarily someone who is
receiving
Behavioral health in another.
It's another entity like uh of
of uh sort of at a at like um a
real healthcare center at an
FQHC they're receiving um
behavioral health services there
that wouldn't be reflected in
this data, right?
Representative Chavez, um, if
the state knows the dollars are
going to that provider, it would
be included. So I think that the
biggest gap is when providers
get direct grants, um, I know
that was talked about in an
earlier presentation yesterday.
That is genuinely pretty hard to
track unless the providers are
reporting on it, but anything
that is in any way centralized
through government, we would be
able to capture.
OK, thank you.
So, just to follow up on that,
one of the things they're
suggesting as a pilot.
be
For for the state to pick one of
the Medicaid programs.
And
Pull that out in the MCO's turn
it over to them. Let them.
Be the administrative arm for
that for the year, and then we
would be able to see, did we
save money? Do we know more
about outcomes? Do we have
better day to day budget
following everything, you know,
in other words, it's a way of
testing out two different
approaches. The MCOs who are at
supposedly at risk, and their
fiscal
Goal is to, is to make money on
that contract, so we hope that
that makes them be efficient,
and we've seen how that's gone
for 25 years, or an
administrative services
organization which does it.
And, and returns the money to us
at the end of the year if
they've saved money.
And I guess the other question
too is, um, you know, um,
efficiency in terms of folks
getting paid. I know that's an
issue, but I guess the bigger
picture that I was really asking
about was behavioral health
that's that's provided outside
of all of those entities.
If that makes sense. Well, it
would be if it was Medicaid
money in addition to the
non-medicaid that they already
have, but flowing from the
state, it wouldn't take into
account the local government
money or tribal money or
whatever. Yeah, so that would
sort of be the, OK, thank you.
Mhm
Representative Ferrari thank you
Mr. Chair. Um, I'm concerned
about how you provide how you
measure outcomes.
Like
You know, with behavioral
health, it's so difficult to
know, you know, has the person
gotten enough care, um.
For long term or you know, if
they recidivate things like
that.
And thank you, uh,
Representative, um Ferrari, the
it depends on what kind of
program you're wanting to
collect outcomes on our approach
to collecting outcomes would
depend on, so like, as we said,
about 75% of the data that we're
collecting is associated with
services that have no Medicaid.
Parallel, um, so there would be
some very specific data
collection or custom data
collection around that, for
example, let's say you were
looking at a sexual assault
prevention program. One way that
you could go about collecting
outcomes for that, tracking it
alongside funds would be, let's
say you're doing an educational
program like Green Dots or uh
some other violence prevention
program that involves going to
high schools where you're doing
an educational program that way
of uh
Evaluating that kind of outcome
would be you could do a pre-test
post test using a surveying tool
in our system, they would be
able to send surveys out to
students, uh, who would do a
pre-test post-test, and then you
could look and try and see
whether or not the intervention
itself actually changed, say,
rape myth acceptance scores,
which is something that we've
used in, uh, other, um,
Programs around the country, so.
Time is, um, also, if we're
looking to expand what we are
hoping uh to expand by hundreds
of millions of dollars to
behavioral health and prevention
programs.
How much would that cost for you
all to be.
You know, giving us back the
evaluation and implement, you
know, on the success or
implementation of these
programs. Uh, our administrative
fee for administering public
funds is 6.6% for every dollar
that gets paid out to providers,
uh, so as, uh, the chair noted
any dollars that are not
expended, whether because they
were not sent to providers. They
were recouped, etc. gets
returned to the state and we
don't charge a fee on it.
OK, thank you very much.
Representative Thompson, you
want to go next?
Sure, Mister Chair, so, um
thinking about data like real
time, it's like Alice in
Wonderland. We've never had
that. I mean it's like, so we,
we continue to fund programs
that are not effective because
we have data from 2 years ago
and we have to, so I'm very
excited about this, but um it,
it, will it be possible to work
with you and or LFC to ask.
Or other data to be provided on
these dashboards, things that
this committee in particular may
have an interest in.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
absolutely, um, we'd actually
love to invite you guys to take
part in that participatory data
design we were talking about,
which would be us sitting down
with you to understand what you
need us going back to the lead
agencies to talk about what
information they have that might
address the questions you have
and then all of us kind of
designing a dashboard version
that would answer the questions
you have. Thank you so much for
that. And then just looking at
like pages 18 and 19, we see the
amount expended by agency, but I
think for this
Committee, seeing the amount
expended by the different
programs, you know, whether it
be, uh, you know, uh.
The youth tobacco cessation or
whatever to, so that we know who
we need to kind of give a little
nudge to to get busy before they
lose their money, um, let's see.
I have, I can't understand what
I meant.
Um, it says outcome data, so, so
you, you talked about the data
like a like a um.
The
Violence decreasing, but are you
looking at data for outcome for
individual.
Patience. I mean, uh, you know,
our, we're spending money and
our people getting better, are
they not?
Recidivizing or whatever that
word is, um, and not, not
showing up again. Uh, is it that
granular? We absolutely can
collect that data. It depends on
what, what the program wants us
to collect. So every time we
work with a new program, we have
the conversation about what data
is important to them and what
they want to enter into our
system. So for example, the
forensics program that runs
through us, we are able to track
whether or not uh what the
competency evaluation it was.
And what the outcome of that,
um, that evaluation was and
whether or not they ended up
incarcerated or not. OK, thank
you, and then just um we've been
pounding on the all payer claims
data um for
Our lifetimes, it feels like. So
would that be helpful for you
and then also are you doing any
work with synchronous, who is
our uh uh electronic medical
record, state provider. Thank
you. Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, thank you, uh, in reverse
order, um, yes, we've been,
we've reached out to
synchronous. Uh, we went to a
conference, uh, that they hosted
and started talking with them
about some potential data
exchange. I think there's
definitely potential there. Um,
in terms of.
Oh no, what was your last
question? Your second to last
word. Yes, um, we would love to
be able to sit down and see what
the specifications for that are.
I think that actually might be a
great tool for merging the data,
um, and then one final note on
what Kyle was talking about in
terms of outcome data, um, we
would support the state in
adding more outcome data
collection to their existing
programs, that's actually the
3rd pilot we proposed cause I
think there's not enough of that
right now. It's mostly still
funding focused, um, and so we
could pick a couple of programs
to do exactly what you're
talking.
about look at, you know,
reincarceration rates, look at
relapse rate, look at, you know,
stable housing rates based on
interventions, I think it could
be extremely powerful for
helping making program
decisions.
May I add just a brief note to
that, uh, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Vice Chair, we, one of the
things that is kind of rolled up
in all of our recommendations
relates to the fact that what we
are collecting right now is what
the agencies tell us they want
to collect. They say we have
this program. Here's how much
we're going to spend. Here's
what we want to know, which is
fantastic, and we've shown you a
little bit of what we can do
with that. What you all can do,
um, and what we hope you will do
is make some rules around what
kinds of data the agencies
should always
collect, because that's what
will help us bridge these, you
know, different leadership,
different administrations who
have different focuses, so for 4
years, you might get fantastic
data on this thing over here,
and then later when you're
trying to compare it and there's
a new set of priorities, it's
hard to know what's going on.
What this body can do is
establish some kind of ground
rules, and that's what we mean
by these flexible but sturdy
structures where you can say, we
always collect the following
things because that way, 10
years, 12 years, 15 years later,
We can look back. And sure,
we're going to see more, more
information about a particular
thing. We're going to see
different initiatives, but
you're going to be able to see
those long term trends,
regardless of who's in charge in
a particular administration and
what their priorities are. Thank
you. I, I'd be interested in
working on that with you.
Oh representative Kates, we're
going to you now.
returned to ask questions if you
have any.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thought
we were going the other way. Um,
thank you once again for your
presentation. Um, I wanna let
you know that, uh,
Kudos were being uh spoke about
you uh a couple days earlier in
this meeting and so, um, uh,
yes, I would just say yes, of
course we want to see that
dashboard. What do we have to
do? I want that would be my
quick answer, um, that you're
offering and your
recommendation. Uh, I just to
throw it out there, I appreciate
our vice chair asking for
different data points. One of
the things I've asked LFC for
for some and and I I think it
would be very helpful.
is I would like to have to for
for a data manager to look at
the copy of the RSP for our
NCOs.
And say
This is what we, how we selected
our NCOs, so why aren't we
looking at the data from what
we've asked for. The LFC data
does not marry to the data we
asked in the RFP, so I want the
data. I want those data points
created from the RFP so that the
legislature can see how that is
tracking so that we know when
we're when they are being
selected by this.
criteria, how are they meeting
that criteria. And so as that
would be extraordinarily helpful
and let me know what I need to
do to see if you could do that.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Kates, um,
absolutely, we would be very
interested in talking with you
about possible approaches for
that. Uh, one thing that we
noted, um, you know, that Eric
presented yesterday on gaps in
behavioral health, and one of
the things that we saw is that
the vast majority of data he was
able to pull is from the share
system, which fundamentally is
an accounting system, um, even
just to give you a gap of what
that data shows is in that
system, the only line item for
falling colors is all of the
pass through dollars that we
manage, making it look.
Like we're $200 million service
provider when in fact all of
that goes to the behavioral
health network, and that's
totally masked in the way that
that accounting system is set
up. And so I think one of the
things that absolutely we've
been working with the LFC on and
would love to work with you all
on is thinking about what are
the tools to pull in that data
so it actually you see the end
point of it, um, because often
the share system really is how
the state transfers it to the
first in the line of behavioral
health and so it's the same
problem with the MCOs is there's
a single transfer to the.
MCO and then it's really a black
box for where that money gets
distributed. So I think thinking
about, you know, we would
absolutely be, you know, able to
use our model to show you how we
track the dollars that we are
entrusted with to pay out to
give some guidelines on what an
MCO should be able to deliver
and how that compares to the
expectations from the contract.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and thank you. Um, how would I
confirm your uh assertion in
your point that you have an
average pay time of 6 days.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Cates, uh, we'd
be happy to send you the data,
um, so we have raw payment data
which shows for every
transaction when it was entered
in our system when it was
approved by the state, when it
was approved by our finance team
and when that check hit the
provider's bank account.
Senator Silvia Lopez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, the, the idea
that we would have this kind of
uh data is really exciting. Um,
but I had a bad experience one
time with, um with this kind of
service, and that was um
couldn't get the data back.
So do you does is the data
remain the state property and
and there's no kind of, like I
said, it was, it was a difficult
issue that we had once with the.
A service like this.
center city ofopas, um, yes, we
actually provide the data back
to the state whenever they ask
for it, uh, BHSD and CYFD both
have access, direct access to
our data warehouse to look
specifically at the data that
goes into our system for their,
um,
And, and when your services
terminate, they could still
cause that's what happened is
they it it became inaccessible
because the data was in this
kind of propriety program,
unless, unless we paid, we
couldn't see it again. It was
really an awful experience.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Vice Chair, Senator Sio
Lopez, our contract is very
clear that the data belongs to
the state. Um, and so there's no
issue there, and, you know, one
of our obligations, of course,
there would be a conversation
about how do we deliver that,
you know, we can make the
database accessible, what format
do you want it in? So that's the
concern, I understand, but
that's not, that's not a problem
here. One of the other neat
things about it, because we have
this, um, and of course, we've
been doing this for a while. So
as I said at the beginning.
We have been through this
process with a number of
different leaders of the
collaborative and different
agencies and that sort of thing.
We still have all of that.
And so we're able to not only
deliver it if asked, but we can
still go back through some of
the historical data, answer
questions that maybe weren't
asked then. And of course
there's some gets complicated
because different layers have
been added on over time. Um, but
in short, all the data is yours
if you want it, we talk about
how to make sure that you get
it, um, in a way that somebody
else can look at it. And another
data point that I would like to
see is how much money do we
spend on alcohol prevention
treatments and uh recovery.
Um, is that something we could
get?
Thank you, Senator. Um, again,
in terms of the specifics of
what's actually in our system, I
don't know off the top of my
head, but the bottom line is
that the, we collect what the
agencies tell us to collect
about the dollars that are
funneled through us and so that
is, that's why we're
recommending that we add some of
the Medicaid data because we
know that's there, right? We
know that the information is
there and we could do so much
more right now what we have is
going to be limited to what the
agencies we work with spend on
those particular funds and
whatever's there. Yeah,
Can tell you all about that. But
there are other funds that may
not be funneled through us, that
we wouldn't be able to answer
the same questions about and I
assume it's more cost effective
to use your service and to use
staff.
Chair, Madam vice chair, uh,
Senator Cynthia Lopez. We hope
so, um, really, of course,
that's for you all to evaluate,
but we've worked extremely hard
to be an effective arm for the
behavioral health collaboratives
at a low cost. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all for your presentation. I'm
gonna back way up because I, I
wanna get a, a perspective of
how this all started. Was it the
behavioral health? Was it
behavioral health who asked you
to do this data collection.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Jones, uh, so
we're contracted as the
administrative services
organization, um, that most
recently went out through an RFP
process, uh, which we got a year
and a half ago starting in
fiscal year 2024. Uh, we served
as the ASO before that for 6
years on a previous contract.
So, um, in fact, as was
mentioned, our predecessor for
this role was Optum Health. Um,
so this has been a standing
service that New Mexico has
requested for quite some time.
Um, like I said, the fundamental
proof.
is to be the third party payer
and administrative services
organization primarily for
non-medicaid funds as an
alternative to the MCO model,
um, a lot of what you see,
however, in terms of the data,
um, is not specified in our
contract. It is our initiative
to say it's key that there's
this kind of transparent data
sharing for the funds that we
run, um, so a lot of this is the
following colors initiative, but
it's, you know, in service of
the contract we have with the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you for that. I'm just
curious what other entities do
you work with?
Uh, question. I know, yeah,
um, chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Jones. Um, so in
terms of the agency side or the
state side, um, we can work with
any agency that participates in
the behavioral health
collaborative, which means that
they offer behavioral health
services, um, examples of that
that we work with at this, this
year would be uh HCA CYFD DOH,
early childhood, um, uh,
developmental disabilities, etc.
So most groups that run some
behavioral health fund.
we work with on the state side
and then on the provider side
because really what we do is we
manage the funds on behalf of
those agencies. So they say I
have 10 million earmarked for
these particular programs for
these particular providers for
these particular kinds of
services. They'll give us the
dollars to manage and all of the
rules, and then we go out and
build the provider network so we
hold the contract contracts with
around 800 providers across New
Mexico right now, and we're the
ones that hold their contract in
the specific scope.
of work and then they'll log
into our system, which we were
talking about a bit before where
they'll log for those specific
services that they have a scope
of work for, we'll review it for
quality. We'll make sure the
state reviews it for quality,
you know, doesn't meet the
requirements of the, you know,
contract, and then if everyone
says yes, we pay the provider on
behalf of the state.
I see that that's very helpful.
So you specifically work in New
Mexico.
OK.
Very good. If I could add a
brief note there, um, so we
contract with those providers,
this jury said. The contract
that we use is established by
our contract with the state, and
so that contract is specifically
includes a lot of protections
for the state around, you know,
all of the things that go into a
standard state contract. So just
to be clear that we don't get to
decide how we feel like
contracting with these
providers. Occasionally one will
say, can we change something? We
have to call state attorneys to
say, is this changing?
acceptable. So the state is
heavily protected there. As far
as the scopes of work, we don't
set those either, so a state
program will tell us we would
like to, you know, we have this
provider who's already in the
network. We have a contract with
them. We'd like to give them the
scope of work. We handle the
administrative aspects of
getting that two of them, making
sure it gets signed, making sure
it's in our system, and then
enforcing the rules in that
scope of work. We don't decide
the content that is left in the
hands of the state staff, agency
leaders, um, and that was one of
our recommendations. We think
that
that's appropriate. This is
money that state agencies are
spending, according to the
legislative intent of the funds
that they were given. We think
they should be making those
decisions about what the rules
are, what the scope of work is.
We do everything we can to make
that process seamless and easy,
so that the state agencies can
spend their time making
important decisions and
watching, you know, is this
being effective? Um, so we
handle that's, you know, our
software platform makes all that
very easy. We process the funds,
we deal with the scope of work
and the contracting, that kind
of thing, but the
state is in control of what
decisions are made, what scopes
of work, who the providers are
and all that sort of thing. I
hope that helps to clarify as
well very helpful, yes, thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thanks, Representative and
Representative Martinez.
Mr. Chair.
I try to be brief. Um,
Uh how long have you been on
contract with the state?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
uh, House minority Whip
Martinez, uh, since in this
capacity since 2017 as the
administrative services
organization, um, our contract
was renewed via public RFP at
the end of 2023, um, before that
we were actually a provider in
the network, so we've been
working in behavioral health in
New Mexico in some form for
about 20 years.
OK, so, uh, um, uh,
I kind of thought I knew how
this worked until
You, you, you had a discussion
with Representative Jones.
So you have one overarching
contract and then you
subcontract with different
agencies, is that how that
works?
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
House Minority Whip Martinez.
kind of, so we're contracted as
we, we have a direct contract
with the state of New Mexico to
manage public funds, um, and so
we have a very specific contract
for the purview of what that
means. And then in that capacity
we hold a variety of
standardized contracts with
individual service providers, so
therapists, crisis centers,
things like that, um, and so
it's not really a subcontracting
relationship exactly. It's that
on behalf of the state we are
the legal entity.
holding those contracts with the
providers.
OK, so I misunderstood what you
said, I thought you said that
you had one contract with the
state, and then you had other
contracts with
Different agents, state
agencies.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
House Minority Whip Martinez,
um, so the way, the way it works
is we do have a, we have a
single contract with the state
of New Mexico, which has 3
signing agencies, which is
HCACYFD and DOH and through that
contract we work directly with
all of the participatory
agencies as they'd like.
So you work with the agencies,
you don't have a separate
contract with those agencies,
OK, um, and earlier you said,
um, Mr. Chair, um,
You said that people think that
$200 million goes to you, you
don't get any of that. How?
How do you get paid?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
House Minority Whip Martinez,
thank you for asking. Um, so as
I mentioned, we have a 6.6
administrative fee, so, uh, we
will bill separately for that.
It will be a separate line item
in the state budgets, um, so for
that 200 million, the way it
works is, um, you know, we are
contracted to manage the 200
million, for example, as we pay
out those dollars to providers,
so say we only pay 100 million
by the end of the year, as we're
paying it out to providers, we
are then billing the state for.
6.6% of the dollars that we've
paid out. So in the end our fee
is gonna be 6.6% of the dollars
that actually go to the
community.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Representative
Garcia.
Thank you a small chairman.
I just have one question, uh,
if, if it's a question at all.
But um
You guys came on board in 2017.
And 2017, governor Susana
Martinez was in her 7th year.
Of her eight-year term.
So you provided services under
the Martinez administration.
For 2 years.
And um
And you came on board when
The behavioral health industry
was decapitated.
So it's like,
You came on board in terms of
what we see now in Gaza.
You know, and uh,
So you came on board when
providers were just
Bailing out
You know, uh, safety nets were
being torn apart.
You know, are
Mainly disabled and our
substance use disorder networks
were in disarray.
So how are you? How were you
able to be true.
To the values.
Principles of your program.
During that period of time.
And how were you able to be
consistent.
With those values and principles
coming into a new administration
with Michelle Grisham in 2019.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Garcia. Thank you
for that question. Um, so first,
I'd say we actually came on
board really as a result of the
catastrophe you were talking
about. Uh, we were actually a
provider under Optum Health
during that period, um, and we
saw that there was a need for a
new model for managing this
particular contract, um, we are
local to New Mexico, Sam and I
both grew up here and we
participated in behavioral
health here during all of these
changes, um, and we saw the
impact.
that it had on the community and
the providers, folks didn't get
paid. People didn't get
services. Uh, so that's actually
really why we chose to step into
this role as we thought we could
offer a different approach. Um,
so really for the very beginning
of our contract, it was us
working to fix that system. Um,
there's a variety of things we
did. We went out to every
provider that was potentially in
the network, um, behind me, in
fact, is our colleague Reba
Serafin, who is our provider and
stakeholder relations. She's
been with us since the start,
and she went down and sat down
with
Literally every provider to
understand the impact of what
had happened to them and what
they needed from an ASO. Um,
there was a lot of really hard
conversations. People were
really angry. There were people
who felt they couldn't trust the
states, people who felt they
couldn't trust us. And so we
said, here's how we're going to
do it. We will always make sure
you get paid on time, right?
We've been able to keep that 6
days to payment in part because
we know that for many people it
means making payroll. It means
keeping their doors open. And so
our approach as being local
New Mexico, having seen the
impact of the network disruption
means that we prioritize
ensuring that services that are
delivered are always paid
fairly, that they're paid on
time and that we're able to
bring information to the
providers and the states to make
sure there's no disruption in
those services regardless of the
changing political landscape.
Can I add a brief moment to
that, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Vice Chair,
Representative Garcia, another
piece of what we've done, as you
noted, the behavioral healthcare
network had been decapitated,
there was very little left, um,
in fact, there were just over
100 providers statewide when we
took over this role, um, and one
of the things that we have done
that we're very proud of is we
have brought that back up to
close to 800 providers, and that
has been frankly, a lot of work
that has been, uh, as I said, we
have a contract that the state
establishes. These are the
terms of the contract, we are
allowed to sign with those
providers and as legal as
counsel for falling colors, that
means that I have spent dozens
or hundreds of hours on the
phone with providers who are
anxious about that contract,
saying, what does this cover?
What does this mean? What does
that mean? That has meant
sitting on the phone with them,
literally one after another
after another, trying to
reassure them about how we were
going to do things and promising
them. And so far I haven't, we
have not had a this promise has
been kept that we are going to
take good care of them, and we
have never had any kind of a
dispute with any of those
providers, it has gone very
well. Um, and so that's how
we've done it. We have rebuilt
it literally from the ground up,
piece by piece, provider by
provider over the course of all
of these years.
And that's time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Folks and the feather in your
hat.
You know, you weathered the
storm, I think credit is due to
those that really put up to
fight.
Thank you.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you, Representative, um,
I, I had a question on page 9 of
your report. I, I didn't get a
chance to ask mine yet,
although.
chimed in a few times. Um.
I, I'm, I'm not certain I
understand what custom services
are or custom projects. Uh, is
that just another word for
non-medicaid or is there some
other meaning to that custom
services, custom projects.
Uh
Thank you, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
the, when we're talking about
custom projects and custom
services, what we're
specifically talking about our
custom data collection tools for
different projects that are
brought to us by the state. So
for example, the way that you
would go about collecting uh
claims data is largely a mirror
of Medicaid for these
non-medicaid or, or these uh
projects that don't have any
services that
Have a Medicaid parallel where
there's no structure. We put in
the work of working with the
program managers to understand
what the service or activity is
that's being provided. What is
the data that is needed to
support reimbursement and what
other data might be needed to
support the information needs
associated with the program. So
that can look a lot of different
ways, um, but it is a custom
project for each program that
comes on with us. And, and
you've had a 703% increase.
Since you took over in 2017, in
those services that you had to
basically define and measure.
That is correct, and that's also
a low number, that's a
conservative number, um, as we
said, there's a lot of iteration
that goes into program
development. So, uh, one of our
recommendations is that need for
flexibility and that need to
adapt midstream when a project
is already up and running. Um,
it's not uncommon for a program
manager to come to us and say,
You know, I need to get dollars
out. We, you know, we need to
get this up and running, and
they don't have all their
information needs figured out.
And so what we end up doing is
we end up building what they
need to get started, and then
maybe 6 months to a year down
the line, they realize they
actually need this additional
data, and so we'll work with
them to build out more, um, data
collection tools or edit the
data collection tools that they
have, uh, and all of these
different iterations are not
necessarily reflected in that
statistic that I gave you.
So it's probably 3 times, uh,
that in terms of the number of
data collection tools that we've
developed.
Yesterday we um we had a
discussion here of Ozempic and
and those drugs that have now
become
So, such a big factor in the
increase in in pharmaceutical
costs. Uh, for weight loss, and
the, the discussion was
Around
Just measuring the increased
cost of Ozempic.
Doesn't really tell you its
impact unless you know.
But it's saving you at the other
end, surgeries or other
hospitalizations or other
disease, uh, treatments that
might have been caused by
obesity, the Theozempic reduced.
Is there a way to capture that?
Does your data system, would it
lend itself to, not necessarily
for Ozempic, but to the an
innovation.
The cause something, but it
saves something on the other
end.
The simple answer is yes. Uh,
the more complicated answer is
every single project, every
single initiative that you wanna
measure, it's gonna require its
own specific data strategy. Um,
we're very comfortable having
those conversations. We're very
comfortable thinking about how
do you evaluate a public health
or behavioral health program and
do that alongside, uh, real-time
financial data collection.
It, it's a conversation, um, we
would probably the way that we
would approach that is with our
participatory data design, we'd
bring in the key stakeholders
for that program, uh, talk to
them about what are the
information needs, talk to you
all about what your information
needs are and say, OK, how do we
go about measuring that? Um,
measuring public health
initiatives, prevention in
particular, is a skill in and of
itself, um,
People have entire doctorate
degrees around how to do that.
We have specialized in this
area. So we can have those
conversations, uh, it's a
strategy.
So
Well, thank you, thank you all,
and, and I, I would hope that
next year's interim committee
might want to have early on.
A discussion with the falling
colors about designing some kind
of legislation that would
involve this committee getting
Data that they could make use of
in in formulating legislation,
um, that's simply a suggestion
from an outgoing legislator, but
I want to thank you all for the
work you've done, Mr.
Sander, take note.
Can I ask one follow up question
just
Take 15 seconds, yes.
How long is the contract term?
Uh, House Minority whip, um, it
is a 3 years with 31-year
extensions.
So, and I'd be happy to chat
with you after, I kind of go
through the details of how we do
the payment, how the contract is
structured, um, if you're
interested, we'll be in the
back. That's true. Ma'am, thank
you very much. I, I am very
interested. Let's chat. Thank
you. Thank you.
And how minority whip, we, we
were wondering how you're able
to get the new sign done so
fast.
Just like that.
This is, this is the indication
of how that house minority is
going to be operating. Yeah,
that's very impressive. I have a
printer at my house.
That's great.
All right. Uh, also, you may
have noticed some of us buzzing
around looking at our, at our
devices. You probably got some
of the same messages, and you
all are amazed at the
information we just got.
That uh
There's gonna be a new head of
CMS Doctor Oz has been named as
head of CMS
and when I mentioned that to
Xander, he said, yes, and Judge
Judy is going to be named to the
Supreme Court. So the, the, the,
the momentum is building here,
but also we all been looking at
our devices about Secretary
Allen resigning or leaving as
secretary of the Health
Department and Gina De Basi, uh,
De Blasi, being named head of um
The department.
Interim secretary. So big
changes afoot, both on the
national and the local level.
State level, and he's leaving as
of today.
And I was not joking about
Doctor Oz either. I was about
that Judge Judy
All right, so we move ahead.
Thank you and we'll move ahead
to the next item on the agenda.
Thank you all for your time.
Thank you
Which is um the medical society,
their legislative priorities and
we have with us
Uh, Doctor Angelina Villa Adams,
and Kerry Robin Brunner.
Welcome.
Thank you.
OK,
green means they're wrong.
Uh, thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman, for inviting the
Medical Society to talk about
what we're up to in the 2025
legislative session, um, with me
is our brand new president, um,
Doctor Vus Adams. We changed the
guard every year in October, so
Doctor BS Adams had a quick
turnaround for her first time in
front of the legislative
committee. She's gonna start our
presentation, um, just kind of
set some context about who we
are and why we advocate for what
we.
advocate, um, and then I'll go
ahead and get into some of the
gritty about the policy
proposals we're going to put on
the table. So thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Hello, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. I want to thank
you for having us share our
story today, um, as Carrie
mentioned, I'm Angelina Vius
Adams. I'm a native New Mexican.
I was born, raised, and educated
here. I'm passionate about
maintaining a healthy healthcare
system and delivering
high-quality healthcare to the
citizens of New Mexico. I am a
private practice
gastroenterologist.
At Southwest Gastroenterology
Associates in Albuquerque. I
have the honor as mentioned of
being the current president of
the medical society, which was
established in 1886. Our medical
society has been dedicated to
the advancement of medical
science in order to serve our
state's healthcare needs for
almost 140 years. Through the
elevation of the standards of
medical education, the enactment
and enforcement of just medical
laws and the promotion of
medical.
ethics as set forth by the
American Medical Association, we
seek to keep physicians and
other members of the medical
profession at the forefront of
medical practice.
We work to improve our medical
community with physicians who
provide patient care and
ancillary services. A few ways
that we do this is uh continuous
medical education through our
annual medical conference,
weekly Zoom presentations.
Physician and patient advocacy
here with the New Mexico
legislature, as well as with the
US Congress. We have adopted
along with the American Medical
Association that the message of
your care is at our core.
Nothing could be more true.
We continue to work tirelessly
to educate and advocate about
public health issues that affect
our state and our patients.
We are a not for profit
association representing close
to 2400 physicians, physicians
in training and medical students
at the University of New Mexico
School of Medicine and Burrell
College of Osteopathic Medicine.
We represent all specialties,
all practice types, both
independent physicians and
employed and all stages of
career from student to retired.
You and I know how great New
Mexico is.
We need others to know and see
that.
Our goal is to create practice
environment that invites
physicians to stay and move to
New Mexico. Our other focuses
are advocacy, education, and
problem solving.
From, we need to bring here
people here from other places
and retain those that are grown
here. We want to stabilize the
current medical infrastructure,
support clinicians and expand
services and build a pipeline
for the future.
We are proud to say that the
medical society
In the last few years has
focused on renewed emphasis with
success on relationship building
with residents and students.
This is a way to connect
students and physicians in
training with independent
attending physicians to educate
about the parallel community
outside of the academic center.
These two distinct communities
of physicians in New Mexico have
different challenges and work in
collaboration.
for the collective healthcare of
our patients.
We continue to collaborate and
build relationships with
national and state healthcare
associations, the American
Medical Association, the Medical
Board, the New Mexico Hospital
Association and more.
I need to impress upon you.
The disproportionate and growing
shortage of physicians in New
Mexico. I can tell you that we
community physicians feel it.
Our wait times are increasing
and have increased sixfold since
I started in 2011. You could get
an appointment with me in one
month in 2011, and now it's over
6 months to see me in clinic.
I have no open appointments. We
are scheduling into May, but
that month isn't open yet, so we
have a wait list. And as soon as
that month is opened, those
schedules are filled within
days.
My time for procedures because
we do endoscopic procedures is
4.5 months. We are scheduling
into April. We are unable to
keep with the demand.
Unfortunately, and with my
resistance, we are considering
as a practice to close to new
patients.
This is because we have to
provide the care to those
established patients that are
with us.
While physicians are critical to
the viability of our system. We
are not able to fill the
vacancies and staffing that
includes nurses, CRNAs,
non-physician providers and
medical assistance as we try to
grow, they are equally and
integrally important to our
healthcare team.
According to the 202022 report
released by the Association of
American Medical Colleges, the
US has a projected shortage of
between 37,800,124,000
physicians by 2034. They project
this represents a shortage of
17,800 to 48,000 primary care
physicians and 21 to 77,000
non-primary care.
physicians.
New Mexico is competing against
every other state in the union
to attract and retain
physicians. Our mountain is more
difficult to climb with our
unique social structure
struggles that we are working to
overcome and the extremely rural
nature of our state. New
Mexico's shortage is severe.
Workforce solutions report that
as of April of 2024, we are 2200
posted openings for physicians.
s
physician advocacy Institute is
a not for profit national
advocacy organization
established in 2006 to promote
fair and transparent payment,
policy and contractual practices
to sustain the profession of
medicine for the benefit of
patients. They studied physician
employment trends in New Mexico
and throughout the country and
with their data, we learned that
New Mexico was the only state in
the country to experience.
experienced a trend in years
2018 to 2020, where more
physicians were transitioning to
independent private practice,
which is great. However, the
trend reversed at the end of 21
with New Mexico now close to the
national average for present of
physicians employed by hospital,
health system, or corporate
entity. As of January 24, only
25% of New Mexico physicians
are.
Independent private practice.
Our challenges are simple yet
complicated. In broad strokes
are reimbursement is fixed, our
overhead continues to rise from
raises that we give our
excellent and loyalty members as
they deserve to the cost of
malpractice rising, the cost of
supplies, the increased
logistical burden like prior
authorizations, we are
definitely filling the squeeze
in the middle.
Every data point shows that New
Mexico has lost practicing,
which is very important
physicians in the last 5 years.
We fill this data is accurate as
it was collected from billing
information, not just licensure
or other ways to, to mark
physicians, but from billing
information to show who is
actively billing, meaning seeing
patients in New Mexico.
Even more striking, New Mexico
was the only state in the
country that experienced a loss
of physicians from 2019 to 2024.
The number of physicians
practicing in the United States
has collectively grown by 44,272
in that five year span. New
Mexico in that same period, lost
248 physicians. We know there's
a problem nationwide, but we are
feeling it in a
disproportionate.
Um, burden.
If you wanna hear more about um
this data and, and asks
questions specifically, there
will be a webinar from
physicians advocacy Institute
planned in December, um, that
we'd all love for you all to
attend. Healthcare issues all
impact each other.
It takes a special kind of
person to want to practice here.
Our communities are rural, are
population has more social
determinants that work against
their overall health and by the
time patients get to see us,
they're sicker.
It's not one answer to our
challenge, our issues are
multifaceted and our solutions
must be at will as well. We
can't fix them in silos.
My practice has proudly been
independent for over 40 years.
We have not seriously considered
partnering with private equity
until we were at risk of closing
our doors, because we could not
secure malpractice insurance. We
very much appreciate the efforts
the legislature made to help us
avert that crisis. As a result,
we were able to secure
malpractice insurance for our
endoscopy center.
But at an increased premium of
1,200%.
The history of Medicare
reimbursement helps us to tell
some of the story. Physicians
have experienced no notable
increase in Medicare in 20
years.
The current ruling for 2025 is a
cut in physician reimbursement
by 2.8%. This follows the cut
sustained in 2024 by 3.4% for
physician service reimbursement.
New Mexico Medicare
reimbursement rates are lower
than surrounding states due to
the geographic practice cost
index.
Federal action on Medicare has a
much larger impact in New Mexico
and on our physicians than other
states due to our reliance on
Medicare systems for direct
patient care and reimbursement
rates for other services. The
medication, the medical
inflation rate for 2024 is
estimated to be 7%.
We can tell you that at
Southwest Gastroenterology, we
experienced an 8% increase in
expenses with salary and supply
costs.
In addition, an interestingly,
the growth of health care
administrators has outpaced
growth of physicians by several
1,000% over the last 20 years.
This goes along with the
corporatization of medicine.
Models out of Tennessee.
Medical practices are unique
businesses. Medicine is the only
industry in which the business
cannot control the price of
services we provide. In New
Mexico, approximately more than
70% of patients are covered by
government insurance. You all
know that Medicaid and Medicare.
Any changes in these
reimbursement rates as I just
outlined, has an outsized
impact. For races and services
of commercial plans, they often
fall back on.
Aid and Medicare rates, which we
show our lower than practice
costs through a lopsided
negotiation process with managed
care organizations. There, these
rates are often set more than a
year in advance of the services
provided through the fee
schedule to add the challenge,
some contrasts have evergreen
causes, and it makes it makes it
difficult to renegotiate those
rates for years as the uh
environment and the economy and
the growing costs change.
So then, the only way to
increase revenue is to see more
patients. That's not the best
for quality of care, seeing more
patients leads to physician
burnout, and then those
physicians leave the community
of medicine and clinical
practice entirely.
In more drastic measures,
fishing, well, maybe it's the
same drastic. I don't know.
Physicians may only accept
private pay patients where they
set their own prices. As you can
imagine, most two Mexicans could
never afford to receive care in
that setting. In addition, these
panels are capped, and that
limits access.
If there is no margin, there can
be no mission. Even with the
best of intentions to provide
excellent health care to those
in need without the ability to
adequately pay practitioners and
support staff, the mission will
fail. Again, we are competing
with the rest of the country. We
have to be able to offer
competitive salaries in line
with the rest of the country.
New Mexico is beautiful and has
so much to offer, but without
competitive salaries, we can't
even get a seat at the
negotiation table.
Other professionals are paid for
their expertise in medicine,
much of the payment is linked to
the quality of the result.
For many of these outcomes, we
as practitioners have only mild
to moderate control. Patients
assigned to our panels may
choose not to participate in
quality recommendations, and
they also have a multitude of
barriers to follow through with
those recommendations. These
activities may include refusal
of vaccines.
Miss Specialty specialty care
appointments. No show for lab
follow-ups, refusal, refusal for
nutrition consults, delayed or
missed preventive medicine and
utilization of the ER for mild
illness when they could call us
first and we could protect the
ER to some capacity.
Insurance companies may cut
codes or deny payments, or they
may bundle fees.
Practitioners are paid and not
reimbursed. Payment may not be
granted even after a service is
performed.
Independent practices are major
employers of the community.
At Southwest Gastro, we have 11
full-time employees for every
physician. We contract with
other entities which contributes
to the economy as well.
So just um talking about some
major costs to independent
practice, that's not recognized
in the payment structure. I'll
give you an example. In our
ambulatory surgical center where
we do endoscopies and
colonoscopies. We don't get
reimbursed nor are we able to
charge for each item used for
each patient, for each
procedure, for example, if a
patient comes along and they
have a large polyp that we
removed during a colonoscopy.
And we decide that we want to
take the extra measure of
placing a clip, um, to mitigate
the well known but very small
risk of a post polylectomy bleed
because that's a higher risk
with a large polypectomy, um, we
cannot charge for that very
expensive clip. Those clips cost
us $200 each.
And you can imagine in a center
where we do
About 15,000 procedures a year,
that can be quite expensive.
In contrast, if that same
procedure is performed in a
hospital, they are allowed to
pass on all of those charges to
the insurance companies and if
not the patient.
Some of our, so if you, this is
for Southwest Gastro
specifically. This is our costs
required, um, to serve the
patients of, of, of our
practice. We perform 32,500
clinic visits a year and like I
mean between 14,515,000
endoscopic procedures per year.
So what does that cost us? Well,
our malpractice premium is
$557,000 per year. That is
$412,000 in 2024 for our clinic
side and 145,000 for our
endoscopy center. The clinic
side includes all the
physicians, all the CRNAs, all
the nurse practitioners and
physician's assistants, um, and
the cost for the endoscopy
center is just.
For the facility.
Our electronic health record
costs us $900,000 a year.
We aren't paid when we do phone
and night triage.
For prior authorizations, which
I know is a topic of ours in my
practice, we do about 105 prior
authorizations a day. Um, we
outsource, which is about
260,500 per year. We don't work
on the weekends and things, um,
and we outsource a portion of
this, but collectively this
costs are practiced 10, uh,
full-time employees.
We continually have to monitor
insurance payments. We spend
time emailing and phone
requesting for proper payment.
We have a, an entire billing
staff to take care of this so
that we can see patients and not
spend time doing this, and
unfortunately, we still do do
some of this. We have to do
appeals or peer to peers that
requires me to set up a time
that's convenient for the other
person on the phone
conversation, which is often not
my peer.
Sometimes it's a nurse,
sometimes it's
A trained professional that goes
through a bullet point of
questions, but has real no
medical training. Um, and these
can often happen many days later
and if I need a CT scan for a
patient cause I'm worried they
have a diverticular abscess. I
need that now. So, what do I do?
I send them to the ER, which is
so inefficient when I can just
take care of it and keep the
ER's a little unburdened.
Payments are then withheld for
months for review purposes and
Thankfully, we, our staff is so
efficient, but my colleagues at
the university have told me
about threats that they have to
make to OSI to report that they,
one of my friends who's a
critical care physician and a
pulmonologist because she can't
get the proper inhaler.
Um, for her patients and, and
sometimes we, and we're, we do
this at Southwest, we have to um
threat, termination of
contracts. Uh,
We also have to do managed care
organization negotiations and if
they can't negotiate in good
faith, then we can't continue to
provide care.
Physician services delivered
within a healthcare system costs
between 12 to 26% more compared
with independent practice.
System-based hospital services
cost 31% more on average
compared with delivered by
those.
By independent physicians. We
take much pride in providing
high quality lower cost care.
Our focus is to create an
environment where most
physicians and medical
professionals through
physician-led care can thrive
and provide quality care sooner
in a patient disease process,
which will result in better
outcomes and a better community.
Thank you.
So Mr. Chairman, we're gonna be
on slide 15. What we're really
trying to bring to the
legislature this year is a
comprehensive look at how can we
make more proactive decisions to
support independent practice in
the state. So I know that um if
you go with me to slide 16,
when, when the physician
advocacy Institute approached us
and said, you know, we're doing
these studies all across the
country. Would you like us to
look at New Mexico data. We
said.
Yes, because most of the data
that we've looked at in the past
when it comes to workforce
shortages when it comes to
physicians who are currently
practicing is really based on
licensure data and licensure
data is a really important data
point, but holding a license in
New Mexico doesn't mean you're
actually seeing patients in New
Mexico. It doesn't mean you're
working full time in New Mexico.
It maybe doesn't even mean
you're living here. You could
have a telehealth license, you
could have a license in New
Mexico.
but really see patients in
Colorado. So we said it would be
really interesting to see what's
happening in New Mexico in terms
of where our physicians are
employed compared to the
national averages and really
what's happening with them,
billing and seeing patients
compared to other places in the
country, so, uh, like Doctor Vus
Adams said, we, uh, asked the
physician advocacy Institute if
they would host a webinar
themselves because this data was
kind of, it was, it made our
head.
turn. We weren't quite expecting
it, right? Um, so that you all
can ask them direct questions
your staff can ask them direct
questions so that we can see the
nuanced difference between just
the licensure data and the
actual billing data, so that
will be on December 9th and
10th. You'll get an invitation,
um on Friday and like we said,
staff, uh, we know that you guys
now have your LA's, um, anyone's
welcome so that you can ask
those direct questions to the
physician advocacy Institute,
um, the slide.
on 16, which is kind of this
chart that shows the dip. New
Mexico was in a really good
place as Doctor Vus Adams said
where we were, according to the
physician advocacy Institute,
one of the only states in the
country that had more people
coming out of employment and
going into independent practice.
We think that that's really
great because uh you get to
control more of your own destiny
and care for the overall system
is more affordable and
independent practice than it is
in hospital-based practice. Um.
But we had a sharp change after
COVID. We think there's probably
a lot of reasons that
contributed to those physicians
who were coming out of
employment, going back into
employment. This uh trend has
been recognized by a lot of our
partners, um, even Blue Cross
Blue Shield, uh, Blue Cross Blue
Shield entered into an agreement
with the medical society just
last month, I believe or this
month. They've gifted our
foundation $500,000 to create a
grant program.
For the recruitment of
physicians to New Mexico
independent owned and controlled
practices. These grants could be
used for a a signing bonus for
removing costs um for different
things that these independent
practices are needing to provide
physicians from out of state to
be a little extra goody to move
here, and we think that that was
a really, really important and
great partnership and and thank
you to Blue Cross Blue Shield
for for recognizing this need
for we need to do as much as we
pro
actively can to try to get more
and more independent
practitioners while still
protecting all of our clinicians
that are working in an employed
um setting. So you'll see on
slide 17, this is the data that
I know is like really head
turning for all of us to see
that we actually lost positions
between 2018 or 2019 and 2024.
Um, again, this is built based
on billing information, so it's
how many physicians were billing
in New Mexico in 2018 and then
in 2019.
2020, 21, 23 and 24 with their
unique billing code, um, and the
trend of those physicians no
longer billing the system, so
physician advocacy Institute has
told us that when they've looked
at all of these other states
that they've done studies in.
There were lots of states where
they were flat. Um, they didn't
have a huge growth of
physicians, but we're the only
one that actually saw a decline
in the number of physicians who
were billing in the system. So
again, we really hope that
you'll join.
um, or actually join them, um,
to ask some more questions about
this data because we think it's
just kind of reinforcing a lot
of what we hear from the lived
experience of our members that
it's hard for them to bring on
new partners, patient wait times
are higher because there's fewer
physicians in the system. So I'm
going to transfer us or or
transition us a little bit on
slide 18 to talking about
Medicaid kind of broad strokes.
I do not have to make a sailing
selling uh pitch to this
committee, you guys know that
Medicaid is very, very
important.
It's important for New Mexicans
who are Medicaid clients. It's
honestly probably some of the
best insurance that you can get
at this point in New Mexico
because of the benefits package
that you all as a legislature
have really helped build with
the health, um, health care
authority, um, but we know that
the best way to raise all of our
boats in the clinician
community, not just physicians,
nurse practitioners, a
behavioral health specialist,
the whole clinician, um, broad
strokes is to continue to invest
in Medicaid for the
long term. So on slide 19,
again, thank you for everything
you did in the FY 25 budget to
increase our Medicaid
reimbursement rates to be 150%
of Medicare for child and
maternal health, primary care,
and behavioral health, all of
the other codes are going up to
100% of Medicare on January 1 of
2024. I'm sorry, 2025, that has
been a game changer, um, but we
also know that we don't
fall victim to the ebbs and flow
of the budget, um, in 2017,
there were cuts to the Medicaid
budget. Um, I, or 2019, um, I
never want to have to be the
person who gets the word from
you all that the budget's gone
bust and we have to go now cut
Medicaid because I think it will
be really catastrophic for the
people who are providing
services throughout our system,
whether they are physicians,
nurse practitioners, physical
therapists, um, if you
billing Medicaid, it's a really
important revenue source in your
practice because almost half of
New Mexicans are Medicaid
clients. So we, uh, are very
supportive of the $40 million
appropriation that the
healthcare authority has
requested to do a full year of
the 150% reimbursement rates for
those targeted codes and
bringing everyone else up to
100. We're very supportive of
the conversation about making
sure those rates keep up with a
little bit of inflation.
Because as Doctor Vus Adams said
on the side of being a
practitioner, you get squeezed
more and more as the cost of
providing the service goes up,
but your reimbursement rates,
um, don't keep up. We also think
that in a future year,
In a future year, we need to
have some conversation about
specialists for their actual
procedures. So I'm an orthopedic
surgeon. My ENM codes are now
going to be um going up because
those ENM codes are like primary
care, you're, you're, you know,
when you're getting checked out
before they actually say you
need surgery after your surgery
is over, you're going back into
the clinic to making sure
everything went well, but the
actual knee replacement surgery
for a Medicaid client hasn't
gone up.
So we need to think about those
procedure codes in the future to
make sure that we're keeping up
with what we need to be doing.
And as you'll see on slide 20 we
are very supportive of the
creation of a permanent trust
fund for Medicaid. But I think
that the state has done a really
great job creating permanent
funds in our times of wealth to
make sure that in future years,
we have a way to supplement
general fund spending if revenue
isn't there. So we've done that
for
early childhood. We've done that
for conservation efforts through
the like of the um land of
enchantment legacy fund. I think
it's time that we do that for
Medicaid. Medicaid, I think I
heard earlier this week is now
the 2nd biggest general fund
expense that we have in our
budget. It's the first in
general fund, right? Number 2 in
general fund, number 1 overall,
right for budgeted dollars. Um,
I, I think that it is smart
fiscally for us to plan for the
future, set some
money aside, let that money grow
and then use that money in
Medicaid programs to leverage
future match for future
generations. So that is
something that we will be
working very hard on, um, we
think it's, it makes a lot of
sense.
We also are going to bring a
prior authorization bill to the
session. You also heard a lot in
the last couple of years about
prior authorization, um, I have
an 11 month old daughter. Uh,
she has colon problem. We've had
to go through tons of prior
authorizations in the last 3
months. Um, it impacts everybody
in the system, right? It's a lot
of time for the physicians. It's
very frustrating for the
patients. Um, we're having to
sign financial consent orders
that say if my prior auth
doesn't come through, but you're
doing this procedure anyway.
I guess maybe I'm gonna have to
pay for it. Um, it just isn't
working very well. So what we're
looking at is actually using the
state of Texas as a model. Um,
we have gold cards in New
Mexico, so Doctor Vus Adams, if
she prescribes a medication, um,
a lot, and she's got a really
high approval rating on her
prior authorization. She gets a
gold card for that one medicine,
but she has to get a gold card
for every single individual
medicine that she's prescribing,
um.
we don't think that's a very
efficient use of everybody's
time. So at the state of Texas
has done is is they've said
Doctor Vus Adams, let's look at
your last 12 months and what was
your approval rating for all of
the prior authorizations you put
in the system. Was it above 90%?
You're a good actor. You're not
overprescribing, you're not
asking for a medically
unnecessary procedures. You are
a good clinician. We will give
you Doctor Vus Adams, a gold
card, and now you
don't have to do prior
authorization for any of your
things for the next set of
years. Yes, there's a look back
clause where if she, you know,
goes wild and crazy and starts
prescribing things that are
completely unnecessary. Um,
there could be an auditing
function to make sure that we're
keeping people in check. Um,
there will be a study component
on the end of that bill to see
did we really increase costs in
the overall system. Um, we think
that 90% threshold is good
because it's not just for
physicians, it's for any
clinician that's doing.
prior authorization, so if
you've been a good actor, you
get rewarded, you wouldn't have
to do prior authorization
anymore moving forward.
Um
The next thing that we're
talking about in our legislative
agenda is what you'll see on
slide, the slide called economic
credentialing. Um, we have
experience in pockets of our
state that there are now
hospital systems that are
denying privileges to community
clinicians because they are not
part of their healthcare system.
So this is not happening in
Presbyterian, but I'll just use
them as an example, right? I am
an independent general surgeon.
in New Mexico or in Albuquerque,
um, I have had privileges to the
ORs and Presbyterian in the past
because I meet all of their
bylaws. Now there are some
systems that are saying, well,
because you're not a part of the
press medical group and your
competitor in the market, we're
gonna deny you privileges. You
can't see your patients and you
can't use our ORs. Uh, we wanna
get ahead of that. There are 16
states in the District of
Columbia that have said if you
are a clinician that needs.
all the hospitals bylaws. The
hospitals need to control the
bylaws for safety reasons, for
covering on call shifts for
making sure that the hospital is
running seamlessly. We agree
with that. But as long as you
are meeting the requirements in
the hospital's bylaws. The
hospital should not be able to
deny you access to your patients
simply because of an economic
reason like you're a competitor
in the market, um, so that is a
bill that we will be bringing,
um.
The intent is to make sure that
we can continue to support a
robust network of independent
clinicians and they can still
have access to their patients if
their patients need hospital
care, while also making sure
hospitals get to make sure that
they are covering what they need
for safety and for any kind of
on-call shifts. Um, the next
thing we're looking at is on
slide 23, really thinking about
healthcare more in an economic
development lens, uh, when Lida
was created, Healthcare was
excluded from
Being able to access LIDA
dollars, local economic
Development Act dollars because
at that time, healthcare was not
viewed as economic development.
Um, we think that particularly
when it comes to the local Lita
money, a local community should
be able to make the decision
that they want to invest in an
independent healthcare practice
to help them get capital, a
facility and things off the
ground. Um, so that's a bill
that we're actually working on
with um NMFIB, uh, to
see if we can have independently
owned and controlled, get access
to local Lita dollars so that
those local communities can try
to help out local providers, um,
in the way that makes sense to
them. There's a lot of stuff
that happens in healthcare in
the session, other things that
we're watching um on slide 24.
We are very supportive of the
healthcare professional loan
repayment Act. We have talked to
you all a lot about this. Um, we
think that the appropriations
need to meet the demand so that
we can continue to bring all
kinds of health.
healthcare clinicians, um, under
the loan repayment aura and they
can start getting more loan
repayment possible. Um, we also,
uh, have had some conversations
with the residents at UNM and we
think it is important that their
salaries be increased again so
that we're keeping up with the
region, um, and making sure that
we have the ability to attract
the best and brightest residents
into our state while also
knowing it's not just about
money on the front end for
residents. It's also about
creating an environment that
they want to stay in when
they're resident
is over, um, but that's an
appropriation that we're very
supportive of, um, we will have
some cost containment measures
for medical malpractice, but
particularly the superintendent
insurance asked for a premium
support appropriation. It's $16
million. You all gave premium
support back in the 2023
session. It gave a little bit of
a reprieve for independent
clinicians from normal practice
premiums, and we think that that
appropriation is one that we're
gonna be watching very closely.
Uh, we know there will be a big
bill.
about mergers and acquisitions,
we agree that private equity in
healthcare can be scary. Um, but
we also know that a lot of the
horror stories that we've heard
as we've participated in the
stakeholder process when it
comes to mergers and
acquisitions is really based on
decisions that large healthcare
systems are making to interfere
with clinical practice, um, to
interfere with healthcare
decisions that are being made by
physicians, by health care
clinicians. So, and those
decisions can be made outside of
a transaction, right? Those
decisions can be made outside of
an acquisition, so we wanna
start thinking about ways that
we can protect clinician
autonomy in making clinical
decisions some other states have
looked at this, uh, basically
saying, you know, you couldn't
have a corporate guideline that
says you have to refer to a
certain physician. You couldn't
have a corporate guideline that
says you can't order a specific
test, um, so allowing those
individual uh providers to make
those decisions. Uh, we also
think
The legislature in the world of
private equity, um, if private
equity is a problem and it's the
only time we think a lot of
independent clinicians are
looking to private equity to
help them is when they are in a
jam, right, when they need
capital to buy a new MRI machine
when maybe revenue didn't go the
way that they were expected. Um,
we think that providing more
public opportunities for public
dollars to go into practices in
hospital provides a
Different place for those
clinicians to look other than
private equity. So things like
the healthcare rural delivery
funEA um loans to the New Mexico
Finance Authority, right? Like
let's provide opportunities that
aren't private equity for our
clinicians to turn to when they
need some sort of money in order
to continue to serve patients.
Um
The health information exchange
is an issue that comes up a lot
with our members, um, this is
the system that's supposed to
say I was in the emergency room
two days ago. Now I'm seeing my
primary care physician, my
primary care physician wants
access to my labs and wants
access to the report that came
out of the ER. That information
should exist in the health
information exchange, but it
costs money for clinicians to
hook up to the health
information exchange. So if we
want a really robust health
information exchange, maybe.
consider some state grants to
help those practices hook up to
the system so that we can really
be sharing the kind of data that
we need to share. Gross
receipts, taxes, I hear about
all the time, uh, but I started
to hear about them a little more
specifically. Number one is
professional services contracts.
I'm a physician that's not
employed by a hospital, um, but
I am working on contract for a
hospital if I'm in Las Cruces, I
can be an emergency room doctor
on a professional services
contract, um, and
I have to pay GRT in Las Cruces.
If I'm in El Paso, I don't have
to do that. So what could we
think about like we did with
accountants around a GRT relief
on a professional services
contract for a health care
clinician. Um, and then Medicaid
payments, I think we could
actually do some really good
work through House Bill 2, GRT
is included in the Medicaid per
member per month fees that are
paid to the NCOs, but they're
not line items for clinicians
when they're.
their reimbursement in their
contracts. Uh, I think that was
some great direction from the
legislature or from the
healthcare authority to the
NCOs, we could clear that issue
up pretty easily because we
understand why GRT is levied on
Medicaid payments, we use it for
a federal match. We just want to
make sure that the GRT is
actually making it to us for us
to then repay to the state. So I
think that that's something that
we can actually solve pretty
easily.
Um, and then the final thing is,
you know, as Representative
Herndon has talked about, I
think for the last 2 years,
growing our own is really
important in a world of
shortages. Uh, we couldn't agree
more. We really think that we
need to integrate medical
trainees in our communities and
in our independent practices,
um, by providing tax incentives
for healthcare conditions who
are taking on residents School
of Medicine students, um, even
high school students who want to
do an internship in medicine,
and I think that there are other
seats that have been a really
good
model when it comes to a
Medicaid differential for when
you do take on medical trainees,
but at UNM there is time built
into an attending schedule to do
the academic part of training a
resident.
They don't see patients 100% of
the day.
That system is what allows that
attending to spend the
appropriate time with a resident
to get really good training,
right? There is no similar
mechanism that exists in
community practice. If you
weren't seeing patients and
billing, you aren't bringing in
revenue. So what Oklahoma has
done is they have said we want
to recognize the time that it
takes for you to train someone
and so we will give you a bump
in your Medicaid reimbursements.
So that rather than having to
see patients all day long. You
could carve out 2 hours to have
this kind of educational
experience with a medical
trainee and you, you don't lose
money on the deal, right? We're
making up from a business point
of view that revenue that you
would have lost if you didn't
see patients. Um, there was
money last year in House Bill 2
to do some rural preceptorship
on Medicaid differentials. That
was a really great start. I
think that we can build on that
and we can really
be thinking about if we care
about independent practice if we
care about even, you know,
outside of the academic center
setting, really great training
programs so that our doctors and
all of our other clinicians are
the best of the best, and we can
have the best uh care possible.
Let's recognize the need for
that kind of training in some of
our payment structures. So
that's some of what you will
hear from us in the upcoming
session. Um, we appreciate the
time and I think with that, Mr.
Chairman, we're ready.
Well, thank you very much. Let
me just one get one
clarification.
Before we turn to the committee
for questions. When you say
Um
Um
Independent physicians.
Do the doctors that work at the
FQHCs around the state, do they
meet that definition? Are they
part of that 24%?
Yes, uh, yes, our understanding
is the 75% that are not
independent or individuals who
are working for a hospital, a
hospital affiliated medical
group.
Or a corporate entity such as
Optum, um, because Optum is
affiliated with
UnitedHealthcare. The other 25%
is everybody that is not in
that, the hospital, hospital
affiliated system or corporate
employer. OK. Good.
All right, let's start with uh
Representative Martinez.
3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the time. Uh, 2
questions, um, on page 17.
Uh, New Mexico was the only
state in the country that
experienced a loss of physicians
from 2019 to 2024. Do you have
any idea why?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Martinez, the
physician advocacy Institute
does not answer the why
question. They only bring
forward the data of what it is
that they see happening in
billing. They have some national
surveys that they've done that
are not New Mexico specific
about practice environment,
burnout, um, so I think that
there are a lot of contributing
factors. Uh, I think that
Independent physicians in New
Mexico and even employed
physicians in New Mexico have
had a rough go at it for the
last couple of years. And I
think that we can talk about
that more if you want to join
this webinar in December, but
again, physician advocacy
Institute didn't answer the why.
I think that's something that we
collectively have to answer
together.
I appreciate the link to that to
that webinar. Um, I've talked to
some uh independent physicians
who
Just like every small business
in the state find it very
difficult to survive.
Um, and we need to, we need to
come up with an answer to that
question, why?
Um, if we want to keep those
independent physicians. I've
heard a lot of talk about.
corporate takeover and how
everybody's afraid of it and
everybody's against it. Well,
then we need to
Make sure those independent
physicians survive.
Next question, page 20.
So, um
Permanent trust fund for
Medicaid.
Any idea of what the figure
would be.
Uh, the initial investment on
that fund. Um, if I were queen
for a day.
Which I'm not, but if I was, um,
the early childhood trust fund
was started with a $300 million
initial investment of
non-recurring appropriations
from the legislature. It was
then invested by the State
Investment council. I do think
it's important to think about a
way to have some recurring money
go into that, at least for a
couple of years so that we can
grow it to the point where the
interest that's spun off is
actually, you know, a sizable
amount to do a Medicaid match.
Um, but I think that, you know,
past experience
the land of enchantment Legacy
Fund was more than 300 million,
um, but the early childhood
trust fund was 300.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. um.
Very much carry, I, I.
I, I, I'm, I'm, I'm not a big
fan of all the funds, not.
Not a fan at all, but.
Um
This one is a little
interesting.
Um, because
We need to look at
How we're going to take care of
this.
If we want to keep those and,
and I'm focused on the
independent.
Practitioners
Appreciate the time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much
for the presentation.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you both
very good presentation, lots of
good information and good ideas.
I'm curious about the, the other
number with these physicians
that left or that.
We had a decline in billing
physicians from 2019 to 2024.
How many were not billing. Do we
have that number?
Just curious how that compares.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Jones, we feel
like
The overwhelming majority, 90+%
of physicians are billing
somewhere because it's the only
way, there's not enough private
pay, uh, patients in New Mexico
for a physician to not be
billing somewhere. So this
looked at billing across the
board, um, to make sure that
they were capturing any kind of
physician who was billing, uh,
so I don't think this number is
there were 3,039 billing
physicians in 2019.
And there were 2,0791 billing
physicians in 2024. Is there
maybe a handful that don't bill
maybe, but it's not.
I guess I was wondering if there
are just some that decided not
to practice anymore. Oh, sure,
uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Jones, that that
would, if they're not practicing
anymore, they're not billing,
right? So, so that 248 number we
think is reflective of
physicians who have either
retired and stopped billing,
moved out of the state and not
and don't bill anymore, um,
that's probably the biggest too
because you don't have very many
physicians who are like, well,
I'm a physician and I'm just
not, I'm 35 and I'm just not
gonna do it.
anymore, right? So they probably
either moved or they were
retired.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Jones, there are, there are many
physicians that are um licensed
in multiple states too, so they
may maintain their New Mexico
license, but live in Colorado,
and they just to keep doors
open, they'll maintain that
licensure and and pay for that
because it's easier to do that
than to relicense or recertify,
uh, so that could also account
for some of that decline.
I see. OK, thank you. I'm
looking forward to the webinar
as well. Thank you, ladies.
Senator Silvio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. These are,
this is a very comprehensive and
good presentation with a lot of
creative ideas. I had never
heard of this economic
credentialing.
Which just seems weird to me.
Why would a hospital care?
I, I, could you explain a little
bit more? You went through it
fast and I was like trying to,
yeah, absolutely. So, um,
economic credentialing is
basically a term that's been
adopted across the country,
which is.
You, so, let me back up. As a
physician, if I want to see my
patients or rent an OR time in a
hospital. There are bylaws at
the hospital establishes around
safety on call that I have to
do, um, good things, right?
Making sure I know who the
nurses are, all, all of those
issues, um, in the past, so long
as you met the bylaws of a
hospital, you were allowed to go
check on your patients if they
land in the hospital or rent OR
time. Um, there is a
trend that has happened around
the country and if we, we have
experienced it in pockets of New
Mexico where a hospital has said
you meet all the criteria of the
bylaw, but you're not a part of
my medical group. You're not
affiliated with my hospital.
You're an independent
practitioner. So I'm gonna deny
you privileges, which basically
means that independent provider
can't practice in that community
anymore because they can't do
surgeries in the OR and they
can't see their patients if
their patient.
land in the hospital. So we
wanna get ahead of that and we
want to say you hospitals need
to continue to control your
bylaws, and we need to continue
to meet all of the requirements
of your bylaws, but if we do
that, then we should be able to
have access and privileges to
the hospital. I get it, so it's
for the economics of the
hospital. Yes. OK, cuz I was
like, well, OK, um, I think
that's a really good idea and
I'm, I'm glad to understand it a
little bit better, and I, I
think it makes sense that
Independence should uh comply
could should uh be qualified for
LED funds. I hadn't realized.
That they worked, so you know,
so you really have brought a lot
of attention to, to issues, um,
and, and I know we're already
dealing on the mergers and
acquisition issue, um, so I just
really want to commend you for
A, the independence of your
practice, I think that that's
really important to keep that
alive and well and be for the
thoroughness of your
presentation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thanks, Senator, uh,
Representative Kate. Uh, thank
you, chair, and, and thank you,
Carrie. You've done a great job
uh laying things out, and I'm, I
appreciate you going through the
150%. Um, I do agree uh with
most of these, um,
The suggestions, I will say the
leader funds are by federal law.
I know that we have state leader
of funds, but NMFA is definitely
already has funding and we are
asking for more funding for
bricks and mortar for medical,
uh, I am a supporter of
independent medical groups, um,
I will say the, the, the these
statistics are vastly different
from when UNim has presented
this, and I understand that one
is licensure I do, but I also
understand that.
Like 248 medical people have
left the state or stopped your
license. You didn't bother to
tell how many new ones were.
So that's, that's a glaring
absence of data, um, and that
one that would tell more the
full story of that, uh, and so
I, I would like to know more
about New Mexico, Mexico uh I'm
sorry, um, yeah, New Mexico
Medical Society. It is, is it a
nonprofit or advocacy group for
Southwest Gastro, cause all the
data that you, that, that the
presenter provided was only from
Southwest Gastro.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Kates, uh, I would say first on
the 248 number, physicians
advocacy Institute did take into
consideration new builders. So
that 248 is a net number. It's a
net. It's a net number, um, and
like I said, I, I know there's
lots of questions about that,
which is why we're like you guys
have got to present this
information directly, right? So
that it's not just us as the
messenger, um, on, on your
second point, uh, we do case
studies of our independent
practices and
any presentation we give to the
legislature, so just last month
we were down in Las Cruces and
uh BCA pediatrics gave similar
information, um, and that was
the day that was included in
that presentation, uh, because
Doctor Bus Adams practices at
Southwest Gastroenterology, we
used their practices data today,
but we're happy to provide you
with information from a litany
of different independent
practices. OK, so the members
that I'm looking up at the
website for New Mexican society,
they come from different.
an independent practices,
they're not all from Southwest
Castro. Uh yes, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Kates, we have
over 2400 members and they come
from all corners of the I'm so
sorry she's gonna cut me off.
OK, so, uh, residents per, I
will say that I would support a
residence program that is set up
much like our apprenticeship
program, which would require
practices to have X amount of
residents and as uh per hour
that they're providing.
That that they're working, it's
not just their supervision,
they're working for labor hour
of the resident that there will
be some sort of reimbursement
rate for that, that would help
offset the cost of the
supervision. Um, I do understand
that for other uh uh other
professions as well. Um, are any
SQHCs, a member of the New
Mexico Medical Society, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Kates, I don't believe we have
an entire FQH.
see that his member, but
individual physicians pay their
membership and we do have
physicians that work at FQHCs
that are members, and you said I
have one quick question, super
quick. Um, you said you pay, uh,
Southwest Gastro paid 557,000
for medical malpractice
insurance in one year. How many
medical providers did that
cover?
Mr. Chair Representative Cates,
we have 10 physicians. We have
6, non-physician providers, they
do not all work full time.
And we have
4.5, um, certified, uh,
registered nurse anesthetist.
All that falls under the medical
malpractice. Correct. For, for
the gastro portion, the
southwest endo portion is just
for the facility. Thank you.
Uh, let's go to Representative
Garcia, and then we'll finish up
here with the vice chairman.
chairman, um, excellent.
Presentation both of you are
dying like, um, you know, um,
I had uh presented some
information.
To a prior presenter uh with the
um
Medical Board.
And it had to do with an example
that I gave of uh the hospital
in Las Vegas that basically
serves a big region up there,
almost that whole northwest,
northeast portion of the state,
kind of congregates in that,
that one hospital. In 2002, it
went through a change.
Of community ownership to a
nonprofit and uh at that time
there was 26 positions in Las
Vegas.
Now there's 2
And um at that time, um, when
the worst 26 positions, there
was 4 that were doing internal
medicine, 8 that were doing
family practice, one that was a
surgeon.
Uh, for OBGYNs.
And um
11 of the first things that the
hospital administration and not
the for profit did was it cut
some of these
position positions that were not
generating.
Ultimate profit for the for the
hospital. And uh so that, that
to me seemed kind of really
unprofessional. I'm principled,
um, mainly because they cut out
those services to the community,
and you address some of these
concepts in some of your
Elements that you're looking for
reform on, uh, which I'm glad to
see, to hear.
Now,
There's consequences when
doctors go by the wayside. 6
years ago, we were in Las Vegas,
this committee.
It was brought to our attention
that the only OBGYN.
Um
Bailed
Be chip, no longer there,
providing services.
3 months later,
A 20 some year old Chicana.
I going to Santa Fe to deliver
her baby.
Died
In a car crash.
Halfway between Las Vegas Santa
Fe.
Two persons died in that.
The unborn child and the mother.
You know, and I think these are
consequences that we really have
to take to heart when we're
looking at beefing up.
Um
Medical practitioners.
But this company has done is
darnness to the increase.
You know, I was a member of this
committee in 2005, when we did
the BA to MD program.
And uh that was a good
Plus, in terms of increasing
numbers, and it's been a pretty
effective to my understanding. I
haven't heard a presentation in
quite some time, but maybe I've
been absent when those
presentations were done, this
committee, but Doctor Ross,
Who entered the initial
foundation of that program get
to his work.
In terms of making that program
reflect the face of New Mexico.
That the cohorts, the students
going into the program will
reflect the face of New Mexico.
50% Hispanic.
10% Native American, 65% rural.
And I hope that that's still the
breakdown in terms of what we're
producing over that program.
So again, I thank you for your
initiatives, your presentation,
and your proposals. They're
right on.
Representative Herndon, your
turn.
Thank you, Mr. T, and Carrie,
you talked about uh making sure
that billing code sort and
increase in
In some of the services, there
are 3 services I want to make
sure that we are all on, on
board with in terms of
increasing number one, making
sure that doulas are paid, 2,
making sure that birthing
centers are reimbursed at the
same rate as hospitals. And then
the third one is with vagus
nerve stimulation therapy.
That's for those who are
suffering from epilepsy and uh
how are we going to help them.
That's one, right now, Medicaid
does not reimburse it fully for
the use of
that therapy. So how do we make
sure that we're all on the same
page on some of these items that
we're asking for an increase on.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Herndon, you will
get no argument from the medical
society on any of those three
things.
Well, thank you very much. And
then uh the second thing is with
respect to the uh the big
picture that you were talking
that you and then presented to
us on yesterday. Are you all in
alignment with them in terms of
how we're going to continue to
grow this legal. I'm sorry,
medical profession, Mr. Chairman
and Representative Herndon, I
was really inspired yesterday um
by Doctor Richard's
presentation, I think, uh, their
goals to double the number of
graduates and trainees.
is phenomenal. We want to be a
partner walking alongside UNM so
that we can provide
opportunities as the liaison,
maybe between UNM and academic
setting and practicing in an
independent, maybe more rural
setting, uh, so that we can make
sure that all of those trainees
that are coming out of UNM know,
they have options, right? They
can work in a hospital. They can
work at New Mexico orthoped.
ic s they can work at BCA
pediatrics. They can work at
Norley and Hobbs. We've got lots
of jobs, um, and we want to make
sure that those residents as
they're coming out of their
training, are looking to New
Mexico first, so we are really
excited to be a partner with
them.
And just one final question,
this is for Doctor Vas Adams.
Now you talked about uh the cost
of being going up for medical
services and too many people use
an emergency rooms, but they
should come to you. But then at
the same time you're saying it
takes 6 weeks to 1 year to see
you. So how do we balance that?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, so we have established
for our practice, one of our
nurse practitioners who all she,
well, 50% of what she does are
those urgent, um, messages,
phone calls, or portal messages
of patients who are acutely
symptomatic, but to be honest,
in addition to that, I know my
patients and I have this morning
I have a, a young woman with
ulcerative colitis. She's
active.
I know her like the back of my
hand. She writes in a portal
message. She's gonna get a
response from me within 4 hours
as long as I'm in the office,
and she did this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, madam.
Senator Pope.
Representative Chavis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so we
talked about the cost of medical
malpractice insurance, you gave
us some numbers in terms of, you
know, who that covers, but I
have a couple of questions. One
of them is um what is the high
and the low salaries for those
individuals by so the 10 docks,
the 6, non-physician providers
in the 4.5.
Um, nurse and anesthetist. I
can't say that word.
Um, so what are their wages,
high and low, and then, um,
what's your, um, what's your
what's the gross income of
Southwest. That's true.
I would have to ask my, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez. I would have to ask my
practice manager who's not here,
what our total revenue was for,
you know, it's very, it's a very
difficult question to answer.
Uh, we have high costs cause we
run a surgical center. We have
nurses that are very costly. We
have IV fluids, which uh you may
know is in a national shortage
because of the hurricane
problems. Um, um, cost of
medication. So, it's a little
bit different to run a
that has a surgical center, um,
than it is to run uh direct care
pediatric clinic, for example,
um, as far as wages, um, our
nurse practitioners and
physician's assistants, on
average, probably make around
130,000. Um, are, um, uh, CRNAs,
it's all very variable because a
lot of them are time-based and
we try to
to retain people as long as
possible. So several of our
CRNAs work 3 or 4 days a week.
Um, every other week, there's a
lot of different creative ways
we work with our team members to
keep them working. Um, I would
say on average, CRNAs make
between, I don't know, 2000 and
$300,000 a year. They're,
they're very costly. Um, but
they provide essential services.
in keeping our sedated patients,
um, uh, safe, um, as far as
physicians, there's a broad
range. I was in discussion with
a gentleman I had posted, we're
trying to hire physicians. We
have not been successful. We
sent um posts to every
fellowship program in the
country and got no bites. Um, I,
so I used social media and put
out a post saying, hey, is our
anybody want to talk to us. This
gentleman, this is just today
and yesterday, he responded
that, um, well, he wanted to
compare numbers and that he had
an offer in Texas for a million
dollars a year. He had an offer
in Wisconsin for $2 million a
year. We make nothing close to
that. Um, we do make good wages,
uh, but we, I, I told them I'm
sorry. I, there's, you know,
maybe we're not the practice for
you because we don't make those
wages in New Mexico.
OK. Did you answer my question
about the uh physicians
salaries. I don't remember.
Well, that, I'm sorry, that was
in context to physician
salaries. Um, again, it's
variable. We have some
physicians that work more, some
physicians that work less. Um, I
would say on average
gastroenterologists here
probably make between or in our
practice between 400 and
$700,000.
Wow
Um, OK. So if you can get us
your um your revenue, that would
be great. You're asking for
public money. I think the public
has a right to know what um what
you're bringing in in terms of
your um income.
Thank you. Mr. Chair represented
Chavez, this data that I'm
presenting is for Southwest
Gastro, but I am a physician at
Southwest Gastro, but, and so
this is the data I know well,
but we are here as the medical
society to to represent all
physicians. So that's, that's a
little bit different.
Well, it's not really different
because as Southwest Gastro
you're also asking for
assistance, for example, with
medical maalpractice, right? Um,
that's public money. And so
that's the point that I was
trying to make, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so you
talked about the rising
malpractice costs, but in Silver
City two months ago, we got a
report from Doctor Allegra
Hernandez, who's sitting right
back here, who said that they've
been stable over the last 5
years. So this isn't a question,
this is just a clarification
that where we get our data says
something totally different than
what, what has been, um,
has been stated here. Um, and
when you look at doctors, uh,
physicians, providers going out
of um private practice, private
equity obviously has a big part
of that. We can't because it
they happened along the same
time correlation is not
causation. So to say that, that,
oh, it's malpractice that drove
up the cost. That's not
necessarily true, and according
to the people that we trust for
our, our data, um, that they're
not holding that out. Um, and
then on page
16.
Oh, and let me just take you to,
uh, before we go to page 16,
page 8 on the um medical board.
They, they show data that shows
that we um have increased our
physicians and on this slide on
page, I think it's 17, says
every data point shows New
Mexico has lost physicians, so
every data point has not, and,
and I find that disingenuous and
I, in to, to be kind of like,
oh, it's all this.
That this came from one study,
and I'm very upset that we can't
get the data without going to a
webinar that may or may not be
propaganda. I mean, I looked at
the people who are on this and
Physicians advocacy Institute,
and they're all medical society
people there, so, so I, I don't
think it's acceptable to say you
can get the data if you go to
this commercial, and whether it
is or not, that's, that's the,
the sense that I get. Um.
And then, um, gosh.
Let's see, um,
So I, I believe that you cherry
picked data, um, cause you
could, I mean, what's the lies,
damn lies and statistics. You
can make them say whatever you
want them to say. And so the
fact that this is out of line
with both the LFC and the uh
medical board makes me a little
bit uh nervous. Um.
So, as I said before, provide us
the data, don't tell us to go to
a webinar that that's, that's,
first off, we may not be
available, we may not have time
and we may not have any interest
and that doesn't go far with me
in terms of, of reliable data
that we gotta go listen and then
I do believe NMFA has some um
dollars for medical purposes.
Um, it's, they're pretty narrow,
narrow, but there I, I sit on
NMFA and there, there are some
moneys that are available,
particularly for capital for um
medical providers. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and I just, I wanted to get into
the issue of gold cards. I, I
didn't realize we had those
already. And do we need to do
that with a law, or is that up
to each of the individual MCOs
to decide, uh, we'll just let
this doctor, um,
Make prescriptions without
having to be, or undertake
procedures without having to
have prior authorization.
Chairman, the gold cards are
currently in OSI regulation. We
do, they're an OSI regulations
for those regulations, right, so
we do need to amend the prior
authorization Act to direct the
insurers to create the gold card
programs for the clinicians,
specifically. We're working with
Senator Hickey, um, on this
legislation, uh.
So I think it'll be in the prior
auth act, um, we've been in
there a couple times in the last
couple of years, but it, it
would be an expansion in the
prior auth act.
OK, good. I, I just checked in.
It won't be one of the bills
we'll have ready and for
endorsement but keep an eye on
that one as it comes up in the
session. And I think everybody
else is covered.
One last question from the vice
chair.
Actually, it's not a question,
it's a statement that I've made
in the past that if
organizations, boards, whatever,
and this started with the
hospital association. If you
don't want to provide the state
all the data that we asked for,
then I think we're not being
responsible if we give you money
with you withholding data. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you. Thanks for the
presentation. We'll look
forward.
No, I won't.
I will be from a distance I'll
be following. I'll be
closely following from a
distance what goes under
incision. Good luck. Wonderful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Members are final item today is
a report.
That we contracted with Sam
Haworth to do for us. Uh, Sam
did this report back in June and
uh um we wanted the members to
have a chance to discuss it with
him. Do we have copies of the
report or?
I don't
I don't know. Do we just have,
you're just gonna make a verbal
uh uh report
bring the hard copies? No, I
didn't
I just
Well, will they, will they show
up here if we have an electronic
version.
Oh
Well.
Mm
we don't have any time tomorrow,
the documents tomorrow, but you
can go over it, yeah. OK, we'll
have to do it that way.
OK.
Turn your mic on you, your, your
mic has to go on, yeah. Sorry.
um, Mr. Chair, I can try to keep
this brief at like 30,000 ft,
and I'm happy to return if
there's specific questions that
I can't answer from either the
PowerPoint or the report itself.
Would that be helpful? And that
way we can probably finish on
time.
I think that works fine, Sam.
Let's, let's see what, let's see
how it goes. What, what we had
asked them to do is to take a
look at all the work that had
been done on global budgeting
for hospitals and to synthesize
it, analyze it, and give us some
recommendations for how we might
proceed.
Well said, uh, Mr. Chair. So, as
a backdrop for this, as the
chairman mentioned, there were a
number of reports that have been
commissioned either by the
legislature or the executive
branch in the last handful of
years that include these. I'll
read them quickly. Hospital
Global Budgets a primary
consideration for New Mexico,
New Mexico Hospital Global
Budgets report analyses related
to healthcare cost drivers in
New Mexico and now this one
feasibility of implementing a
global budgeting system.
An analysis of methods to reduce
administrative costs in the
healthcare system in New Mexico
and leveraging hospital
financial analyses to inform
state policy. Very quickly, a
ton of information and not
simple information, very complex
things to be considered in terms
of decisions the state wants to
make in regard to what's written
in these reports. So legislative
council services said as the
chair mentioned. Sam, will you
read all these and tell us.
How we can, my language, build
something that could
appropriately think about all of
these recommendations and make
informed.
Decisions. So I read all these
reports and um thought about
based on my experience with the
state models I've seen, etc.
What, what we might do. So I may
be following 4 recommendations.
The first one is to provide
stopgap funding to New Mexico's
neediest rural hospitals with
the greatest financial
challenges for up to 3 years. So
recommendation one is shore up
the ones that are struggling
while we look at the following
recommendation.
The second one is to develop a
healthcare planning
collaborative, similar to the
behavioral Health collaborative
when it was functioning, um, to
be housed at the healthcare
authority to determine how best
to ensure ongoing sustained
support to rural hospitals in
New Mexico.
3, develop a health
collaborative work team at the
Healthcare Authority to
operationalize the decisions
made by the collaborative before
the stopgap funding expires, and
for, ensure that the healthcare
authority receives adequate
funding and positions to
implement recommendations 1
through 33 was to develop a
collaborative work team. So if
you imagine an entity and I'll,
I'll touch on the mem what I
suggest could be the membership
of that entity.
But the right players.
Convening, considering health
options for the state. If we
decide we're gonna do blah blah
blah blah in respect to
workforce, uh, training,
recruitment, um,
And retention, you need people
to actually do what you've
decided you want them to do.
Does that make sense?
So, providing stopgap funding to
New Mexico's neediest rural
hospitals with the greatest
financial challenges for up to 3
years. Using mathematica data
from the NASHP hospital cost
tool from FY11 through FY 22, I
examined the physical health of
all 30 of New Mexico's rural
hospitals. These data include
net income, net profit margin,
fund balance, operating profit,
operating profit margin,
operating profit or los.
operating profit margin or loss.
Um, I refer to some, the
analysis was much of the report
pages 4 through 12, which you
don't have. But
I've got it here. Let, let me
forward it to you. Uh, if I can
figure out how to forward
something.
I'm, I'm not gonna go into
Great detail on the methodology,
unless you have questions,
because even though I find the
methodology defensible,
absolutely. You could make other
decisions when I get to the
decision that I put forward as a
recommendation.
So, I examined the
24 non-IHS rural hospitals and
determined that the following
12, and Mr. Chair, that's a
correction from the report that
I sent you originally, which
said 13. I did bad math.
So it actually costs a little
bit less. And those are Alta
Vista Regional Hospital in Las
Vegas. Sila General Hospital in
Grant, Dan Crig Memorial
Hospital in Tucum Carry, Hia
Regional Medical Center in
Silver City, Guadalupe County
Hospital in Santa Rosa. Myrs
Colfax Hospital in Redone,
Rehoboth McKinley Christian
Hospital in Gallup, Roosevelt
General Hospital in Portalis,
Sierra Vista Hospital, in truth
or consequences, Secora General
Hospital in
and Union County General
Hospital in Clayton.
The list of all rural hospitals
is on page 4 of the report.
So, I'm recommending that the
New Mexico legislature seeking
appropriation of $115 million
during the 2025 legislative
session to provide up to $3
million a year to each of the 12
hospitals that I just decided
through a competitive
meats-based scran process. 12
hospitals times 3 million equals
36 million times 3 years equals
108 million. The remaining 7
million would be provided to
healthcare authority to
administer.
these recommendations. Um.
This recommendation and
recommendations 2 and 3, and
that's 2, 2.3 million a year for
three years. And I would put a
sunset on this or I'm
recommending that a sunset would
be put on it, that any unspent
money from the appropriation
with sunset after the 3 years.
So, we developed a healthcare
planning collaborative to be
housed at the Healthcare
Authority to determine how best
to ensure ongoing sustained
support to rural hospitals in
New Mexico.
I uh forward you a
recommendation that the
following.
Agencies, um,
be members of that body. One
would be the healthcare
authority as chair, Department
of Health, aging long-term
Services Department, Indian
Affairs Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance
Department of Finance
Administration, representatives
from at least some of the rural
hospitals, the New Mexico
Hospital Association, Indian
Health Services, the Medical
Society, one of the state's
nursing associations, the House
and Health and Human Services
Committee member, uh, the Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee.
Then content experts as needed.
So, the authors of those reports
are both content experts and nod
towards other content experts.
So whatever this collaborative
was discussing, debating,
thinking about, you might want
to include, and that would be
money that would be given to the
healthcare authority, money to
contract with other people from
other states, potentially or in
states who have done this sort
of work and are very smart about
what it is that you're
considering.
Recommendation 2 to develop the
planning collaborative to be
housed at the Healthcare
Authority to determine how best
to ensure ongoing sustained
support to rural hospitals. From
the reports, these are just some
of the things that were raised.
So one is global hospital
budgeting. Another one is prior
authorization standardization.
Standardization of building
forms and claim submissions,
administrative simplification,
standardization of MCO
contracts. Um, health
professional workforce.
Rural healthcare delivery fund
expansion of tax credits to
additional providers, medical
malpractice reform, we heard
about that a minute ago. Other
areas of health care reform. So
this body would be charged with,
OK, what do we want to take up
first? How do we think smartly
about that, and then hand it off
to be realized.
Recommendation 3, develop a
health collaborative work team
at the healthcare Authority to
operationalize the decisions
made by the collaborative before
the stopgap funding expires.
These individuals would be, have
to be knowledgeable of, um,
about the following,
understanding of these issues
and the, and the time to
dedicate themselves to the
attainment of each of the
decisions made by the
collaborative, writing the RFP
for rural hospital funding,
making awards to hospitals and
overseeing grant funding and
evaluation over the course of
the 3 years, and I'll pause
there because what I write up in
the report is the healthcare
authority would issue an RFP.
Each of the eligible.
hospitals would respond.
They kept request up to 9
million for 3 years, 3 million a
year, but it gets reviewed each
year to make sure that they're
actually using the money on the
things that they said they would
use it for in the report, and
things are actually changing.
Um, they'd be knowledgeable
about CMS waivers, about
facilitating complex change,
navigating complex systems with
a multitude of players and often
competing priorities, um, the
healthcare authority will also
need to convene and facilitate
the collaborative and contract
with experts as needed.
Recommendation 4 is just to
ensure that the healthcare
authority receives adequate
funding to implement these
recommendations. Um, I, I wrote
that into my recommendation.
Um, for the an appropriation,
but I would strongly encourage a
conversation with Secretary
Armijo to see if that's
adequate, if that will hire the
FTE that she's gonna need, just
issuing the RFPs that overseeing
them is a, is a task, let alone
operationalizing anything that
this authority would recommend.
Oh, there we go.
And then on the last slide, this
provides a timeline, so the
appropriation July 1st 2025, the
HCA convenes the collaborative
monthly, develops the RFP, makes
grants to rural hospitals. Years
2 and 3 and ongoing, the HEA
hires the team members that will
do the work that the
collaborative is tasked them
with. The collaborative
continues to convene, perhaps
bimonthly and forwards
recommendations to the team.
and the team implements those
recommendations and then year 3,
the collaborative continues to
convene, perhaps quarterly and
forwards recommendations to the
team and the team implements
those recommendations.
So, really what I've done is
suggest an architecture that
would allow for deliberation of
very complex ideas. I mean, just
sitting here for part of today,
quite a few, not global
budgeting, but quite a few of
these were raised, and I
understand why the request of me
was made to do this because when
I read through those reports,
even having been at the
Department of Health, run the
policy commission, Bennett
Robert Johnson, uh, Center for
Health Policy.
done health policy work for much
of my career. It's overwhelming.
They're very complex decisions,
and you're gonna need help for
lack of a better word, to be
smart and deliberative about
them.
And with that, I will
Stanford questions.
Um, Sam, thank you. Thanks for
the work you've done. You really
created a platform that we can
build off of, I think, um, the
questions for Sam,
Representative Chavez.
I don't, I don't necessarily
have any questions. Thank you
for the report, but I just
wanted to make some comments
about it, um, you know, first of
all, you, you, um, you know,
talked about global budgeting,
which I think is really very
important and just want to say
that we're going to have a
presentation on that, a
conversation on that tomorrow
with some of the contact experts
that you recommended or that you
talk about in your report, um,
Langinson and Guzmano who are
going to be making the
presentation and the other piece
too is that, you know, I think.
It, it does give us sort of
something to build off on
because again in tomorrow's
presentation, we're going to
have conversations about the
issues that you that you're
raising, right? Global
budgeting, simplifying hospital
payment and accountability
systems, um, and, and the other
piece that's important too is
collecting the data that we
need, um, and looking at a
health expenditure database so
that we know what we're spending
our money on. But I think that,
you know, this has been, um, I,
I read your report, um, and, um,
and uh yeah, thank you for it
and, and I think that these are
some.
really very important issues
that we need to begin to address
as a state.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, chair,
art, and I'm so sorry. I'm gonna
need time uh to read and digest
the report as well and thank you
for putting your contact
information in there so we can
do follow-up questions. Um, the,
the subsidies, the funding, uh,
that you feel it should be
eligible for funds are any of
those independently owned and
operated clinics or medical
groups or all of them hospitals.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Cates, all of them are hospitals
in terms of their ownership, I
can't speak to that by, from
memory, that information does
exist though, and I think
Allegra's report earlier talked
about that too, didn't you?
yeah
And, and Mr. Chair
Representative Kate, I neglected
to mention this. I did not
include the 6 IHS hospitals
because they actually have
global budgeting, and they
submit their global budgets to
the federal government, and we,
the state, are not involved in
uh their fiscal well-being. Um,
so I didn't include those. OK.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And yes, I
would like to have that list.
Thank you very much. I, I will
just say that this committee is
um uh very clear.
On its intent to helping medical
groups that uh are keeping their
money here in the state of New
Mexico, and so we will be
looking at the ownership of
those hospitals. Uh, is there a
reason why you didn't expand it
to since New Mexico is the state
of small medical providers,
right? clinics and and
federally, you know, federal
clinics, uh, is there a reason
why you did not include them is
are they too small for global
budgeting? Um,
Mr. Chair Representative Cates,
I wasn't asked to. It was
strictly to look at rural
hospitals. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and thank you very
much for your work. Thank you.
And just to follow up on that
representative, the reason we,
we limited it that because
that's what the earlier studies
had all been about and not to
expand it to another group of
organizations that might need
it.
We,
we need to decide if that $3
million appropriation, which is
one of the recommendations for
the stopgap funding, uh, will,
will be something that we would
pursue for somebody in this
group would pursue, uh, to make
sure that, that, that we don't
get behind, you know, otherwise
we'll fall a year behind.
Mr. Chair, didn't we already do
that though earlier this year we
passed the, um, some legislation
that was setting up money for
the hospitals that were
I don't remember what the term
was, but um,
And then we actually have a um
uh
Some documentation in terms of
how much each hospital would be
able to get. Yeah, that was,
that was some of the study that
Allegra had done and it doesn't
kick in until, when does that
start, Allegra?
Could I check on those funds had
not yet.
No, no, that was one of the
studies that not one of the
potential resources that you had
looked at, that, that, that
fund. So you're saying over and
above that, a stopgap funding
for because even Allegra's
information showed that several
of those are gonna be in, in
trouble even with that money
coming up.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I can tell you
how I arrived at the 3 million
and that might help. So, um, I
looked at the average dollar
amounts for each year in which
these hospitals' net income was
a loss from fiscal year 11 to
fiscal year 22.
The years um, that number was
-2.6 million.
The average operating profit or
loss across these hospitals for
the same time frame was, uh, a
negative 4.5 million. So I found
a round number in the middle. It
was
That simple, and I would.
Also urged the committee, given
Representative Kate's comment.
Those are things that are
legitimate to consider. This
just provides again the
architecture for making those
decisions. The, the
collaborative could say we're
not gonna fund um out of state.
Run hospitals. We're just not
gonna do that. But we will fund
local hospitals. Those are
decisions that you all can make.
This just provides the
blueprint, right?
Senator Silvio Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Please
indulge me. Are you related to
John Howard?
Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez, uh,
he's my father. Oh, OK. He was
my father, I should say. I am so
sorry for your loss. He ran the
honors program when I was at UNM
and I just kept listening to you
and and looking at you and
saying he's got to be related.
So thank you, um, and thank you
for the, the presentation and
the report. I, I'm, I hope that
it fits into everything that I
think it does fit into.
Everything that we want to do.
And um and I I also think that
the ownership of the hospital is
getting to be pretty important
because just adds more and more
administrative costs and more
and more profits, um, that
doesn't go into patient care. So
I really appreciate this. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
video.
Seeing then, I, I hope we can
get copies tomorrow of the
Hard copies of the report and of
the and you send a PowerPoint
also, you said, yes, and of a
PowerPoint, I, I'm not sure I
have that, but
Somebody, somebody I'm sure on
the staff does, if we can get
that printed off to the
committee, that would be great.
Sam, thank you for the work you
put in on this and um I don't
know exactly what you're gonna
be doing. You just got back from
a, a great uh uh bit of
traveling and, and so on, but if
you're around, we might be
looking to you for some other
help in the future. Mr. Chair,
I'd be happy to, um, I am back
for the foreseeable future, um,
just had my first grandchild, so
we're not, we're not going
anywhere for a while.
Congratulations. Thanks.
OK, we'll now move to public
comment and we have Nat Dean
with us for the, if I might not
Mr. Chair, if you don't, don't
have any of these documents,
Xander knows how to.
We reach out to me and I'll send
them. Thank you thank you.
No comment today, Matt.
Oh, can't, can't speak. OK.
OK, then if there's anybody
online who wants to make public
comment.
Um, you go to the zoom link,
there's a Zoom link
and then under reactions hit
raise my hand.
And we'll recognize you and you
can speak for up to 3 minutes on
any topic regarding health or
human services.
Or Doctor Oz as the nominee for
CMS
Next is gonna be Doctor No in
charge of
I don't know. I guess let's give
him like a minute, no one raises
their hand and call it.
Oh
We have somebody.
use that language for.
And
I think we've, we've born the
whole populace down to a nub
right now with a, um, tomorrow
we start at uh 8:45 again.
So get some good rest tonight.
Anything else that we've, we've
omitted that you wanted to make
sure we covered?
So we, we outlasted the LFC
today, Representative Mohan.
All right, good, we're.
And Thanksgiving dinner as part
of their workday, so they had
Thanksgiving dinner, the food
here is better with the chair
and I were invited, but we said
we have work to do.
So thank you everybody. Thank
you, Nat for coming, following.
Thank you, doctor, for coming
and, and being with us. It's
always great to see you.
And with that, we'll stand in
recess until 8:45 in the
morning.
