If you turn the page to 12 here,
you can see Wall Street Journal
surveys of economists and their
expectations for recession risks
at the top, uh, maybe a year
ago, we were in a much worse
place than we are now, but we
are very dependent on federal
policy, um, uh, I, I, going
forward through this, this
revenue forecast one, because of
uh Federal Reserve interest rate
policies. On page 11 and on the
secretary's presentation, we saw
what we're currently expecting.
To be the path for the federal
funds rate, but any significant
deviations or reversals in this
path would have severe
implications for our revenue
estimate, including in the state
treasurer's office distributions
to the general fund.
Um, I also want to point out
that
Tax cuts, uh, as New Mexico
piggybacks on the federal tax
for personal income taxes. Tax
cuts could have trickle down
effects for New Mexico, um, our
current expectations built into
this forecast are for the
continuation of the tax cut and
Jobs Act that were set to expire
at the uh at the end of this
coming tax year, um, but also
any changes in federal policy
related to spending could have
significant impacts on New
Mexico considering New Mexico is
the top state for receiving
federal funds, so pullbacks and
in federal spending could be uh
a significant sticking point for
the state budget, but also the
path of inflation, especially
any impact that tariffs could
have on inflation would also
have significant impacts on our
revenues, both in the upside.
Higher inflation tends to mean
higher collections, but it could
also be in the downside if
higher inflation destroys
consumer demand, if prices get
so high that consumers stop
spending, that would be a
downside risk.
Revenue volatility, as I pointed
out, the state treasurer's
office, also corporate income
tax is highly volatile because
it's association with the oil
and gas industry. Both of those
revenues together make up about
7 or 8% of the total revenue
forecast. We know that both of
them can go negative quite
quickly. So we can see how
quickly 7% might uh disappear
from the general fund forecast,
so that's another large risk
that we expect here.
Turning to the stress test.
Um, I want to highlight a little
bit of a different
representation here in the LFC
brief. The chart at the middle
of the page extends spending,
assuming flat budget growth into
the out years. So, assuming no
new additional spending uh on
top of what was spent last year.
How much would a recession or an
oil price crash cut into the
budget.
And if you turn the page one
more,
To
Age 14, the chart at the top
represents the worst case
scenario, which is an oil price
crash. How far it cuts into
non-recurring appropriations and
as Secretary Props pointed out,
it doesn't in any of these
scenarios cut into recurring
appropriations, which is
certainly good news, but if you
didn't want to have to pull back
non-recurring appropriations,
how much cash would you need on
hand to be able to cover those.
And we expect an FY 25 north of
600 million in FY 26 north of
1.4 billion. So for
A total of 2.1 billion if
there's no additional spending
growth.
Of course, if the $892 million
in new money is added to the
budget, that would represent
another $892 million that you
would need on top of the 2.1
billion.
Now, reserves are north of that,
that's about 30% reserves
reserves are currently north of
that amount, and it's important
to remember that in addition to
reserves, there are also other
buckets like the, in the worst
case scenario, the, the growth
fund, which is set to come out
of reserves in 206, that's still
a liquid asset available to you
all, but maybe longer term, if
the recession or the oil price
persists on a longer term basis,
you might be able to reach other
funds that are invested, like
the Higher Education Trust Fund
or the uh early childhood Trust
fund. Those are
Certainly though, uh, not as
liquid and would need more time
to to be uh deployed.
Uh, moving on to the trend
analysis on page, at the bottom
of page 14, uh, similar to the
point secretary props made. We
are seeing revenues return to
their trend, which highlights
the, the, uh, maybe more
reliability of these estimates,
when they're much higher above
the trend, we tend to worry
about their return to trend and
as they're returning to trend
we're a little less worried
about their volatility in this
estimate than previous, but if
you turn to page 15, we can see
that a lot of that returned to
trend is because of
legislative changes that you all
have made. The economic uh
underlying variables here are
certainly still above trend,
wages and salaries are above
trend. Economic spending is
above trend growth is above
trend. Severance collections are
above trend, but because of
those insulating, insulating
measures that you all put into
place, severance tax revenues
are returning to trend, and
those reductions in the gross
receipts tax rate is meaning
grocer seats, tax revenues
returning to trend, the same
story playing out with the
personal income tax. So, uh,
Maybe a lot of these
Strength, a lot of the strength
in these revenues is, is not
because of a return to trend in
the underlying economic
indicator, but rather because of
legislative changes.
The chart at the bottom here
also shows how reserves have
been coming back down from their
watermark years and those high
growth years in FY 22 and FY 23.
And again, we, I would expect
that 38% ends up lower when all
is said and done.
And I don't think you need to
click to the end, but on the
last page of the estimate uh for
those in the audience and
watching online, uh, we have all
of this.
General fund data, downloadable
and interactive for you at our
website, which is
nmledge.gov/econ.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
think.
We're ready for you all.
Thank you guys. You know, if
you're probably just wrap this
up and put it in a Christmas
present, right? And you think
about it, right?
What better gift can you give in
New Mexico than than what we
just talked about, right? The
stability, the long term growth,
everything that we've done,
you're gonna survive off of
investment returns, right?
And you sit here and think and
say, if I'm a Fortune 500
company and I'm looking at what
happened in the last 10 years of
my company, and, and you turn it
around and you start looking at
this. I mean,
This is the story. I mean, this,
this is, this is.
Senate Bill 26.
Everything has changed in the
last two years and how New
Mexico's finances are gonna be
for the next 50 years.
You wanna say something easy or
you're agreeing with me.
Well, the market's gonna be the
market, but I mean the
volatility, we've taken the
volatility out.
I mean, if we did nothing.
And absolutely 0, and, and just
not spent non-reoccurring and
spent non spent non-recurring
and touched nothing.
Everybody's budget would be the
same for the next.
3 to 5 years.
That's
Pretty damn remarkable, and I, I
sit here and think about it
every time it's like.
You know, uh, this has changed
the picture from when
I came in, and we've had the
opportunity because of oil and
gas and the revenues that came
in. We took the opportunity in
this committee.
This committing, this
legislature.
Use that opportunity to, to
close the book on one portion in
Mexico and start a new book on
the next portion, right? It's
not changing the pager, you open
a new book of opportunity to
everything that you could
accomplish, and you want to
accomplish an estate without
having to
Worry about recessionary
pressures, and so.
With that, we'll start us off
representing Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. Um,
Couple of questions. Um,
I forget exactly what page and
which presentation, um, shows
the employment growth rate.
Um, but my question is, uh, Mr.
Chair and presenters, where are
peers, uh, peer surrounding
states in terms of employment
growth, um, and are they higher
than New Mexico or sort of where
it is, where do we fall
regionally with that.
Mr. Cha and Representative
Dixon, uh, page 3 of the LFC
brief.
Has a historical
chart to that point, and you can
see recently our peers have been
Maybe
percent or under 1%.
Higher employment growth than we
have. Um, that's following.
Over a year of New Mexico
leading the pack of higher
growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Izzy. And is there, do we have a
sense of why?
They are now higher.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, I can think of a lot of
reasons. One could be that, um,
maybe we're hitting, hitting our
employment, um, capacity sooner,
that's a possibility. And I, I
think that's a large um factor.
Um, I, I, and actually to a
strength in New Mexico, we're
seeing New Mexico's
manufacturing employment grow
much more quickly than our
peers. Um, it could be
It, it, it, it will, we'll see
as, as we progress, especially
with the federal spending
policy, um, we've benefited a
lot from
Dollars made available for
infrastructure spending and for
uh green.
Manufacturing. So those are both
benefiting New Mexico to a to a
significant degree, um, whether
that persists remains to be
seen.
Thank you. Um, thank you,
Chairman. Um, that leads sort of
to my next question, which
relates to page 18, um, I think
of the uh executive
presentation.
Just make sure. Um,
Oh, yes. Tax base by industry.
Um, and, um, Izzy obviously
mentioned mentioned
manufacturing that Mr. Chair and
um perhaps secretary, I'm
interested in um the most
dynamic sectors.
And um,
Are there some examples.
Could you talk us through
What those dynamic sectors are
here in New Mexico and why?
They might be especially dynamic
here in this state.
Mr. Charon, Representative
Dixon, I'd be happy to uh add to
that and, and if anybody else on
the panel wants to add
afterwards.
That would be great. Um, about
our construction sector, I think
something to note is our grocery
receipts tax is different than a
sales tax, and it includes
services for the most part. So
we're benefiting from growth in
construction-related services,
um, that a lot of state sales
tax bases do not, so that's a
positive for us. Um, to the
previous question and, and a
little bit to this current
question too, um, missedo, our
chief economist, also reminded
me that the labs uh in the media
post-COVID period we're hiring a
lot, so that might also be a
factor in why New Mexico
employment growth right after
the pandemic was growing faster
than the national, the national
average and our peers, and now
it's tapered off somewhat. Um,
that and mining, um, you know,
New Mexico has been, as you
know, experiencing this
incredible multi-year boom, and
we know that's flattening. So I
think the mining, um,
growth and employment as well as
growth and everything else that
affects, uh, also was going
strong right after the pandemic,
uh, and so that was part of what
contributed to us uh returning
to our pre-COVID employment
levels quicker than most of the
states.
Mr. Chair, if I could add, uh,
our economist Brendan just made
a really great point, and I want
to draw your attention to page
28.
Of the LFC brief, where we have
some of these employment sectors
and their growth rate plotted
out. And so as Secretary Chardon
Clark pointed out, GRT obviously
is not necessarily the same as
employment. We are seeing, I
think it was right there, there
it is.
sort of the bottom half, um,
manufacturing
manufacturing is leading growth.
Uh, the job openings rate in New
Mexico. So the amount, amount of
jobs open looking for people to
fill them is the 5th highest
nationally. That's even higher
than our peers. So, the ability
to fill those open positions is
maybe holding us back compared
to our peers, and it could also
be the case that or New Mexico,
the manufacturing jobs.
are some of the easiest for us
to fill. The job openings that
are contributing to us having
such a high job openings rate,
uh,
Might be in maybe more
esoterically skilled sectors
that aren't um as easily filled
with our current.
Employment pool.
Thank you. Um,
I guess what I was particularly
interested in um is the fact
that the science professional
scientific and technical
services.
Um, it seems like they are
continuing to show positive and
substantial growth. Is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, absolutely, I
would make the distinction again
though, between gross receipts
tax and employment. Employment
is still good, uh, but much
lower at about 1% compared to
some of the other sectors.
Thank you, Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Um, what are the um main
contributors to a higher um
personal income tax.
Revenue for the state.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, off the top of my head.
Wage inflation, you know, when
you increase the amount of wages
paid, you increase the wages
subject to tax. The number of
employees increases at the more,
so those two things are uh
impacted, but then there's tax
policy considerations like what
are the brackets and where do
they take effect and what
credits do we have in place? So
you've got the underlying wage
and salary and number of jobs
growing or contracting, and then
you've got tax policy on top of
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a few
more questions. Um,
The, um,
Izzy, um,
Expected net revenue from the
film industry for New Mexico. I
know I've asked in the past, but
do we have an updated sense
there is a nice little chart,
uh, that shows CIT um and film
tax credits. Um, do we have sort
of a sense of what the expected
net revenue from the film
industry, uh, would be for last
year or this year.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
we do have some estimates for
that, that we would be happy to
provide to you. Um, gross
spending, I think maybe to your
point, um, the net revenue to
the state is, is a, a fraction
of the dollar spent on those
credits. So the net revenue is
negative, but the overall
spending by the film sector, um,
we can get you those estimates.
Thank you. Um, and then,
I think my last, uh,
Question, Mr. Chair, is um we've
talked a lot about the
Benefit, you know, and and it's
a wonderful benefit, uh, that
the increase in investment
income.
Uh, is gonna be for budget
stability moving forward. Um,
however,
My question is,
Does investment income.
Create jobs.
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Dickson, this is
kind of not my bailiwick. It's
not one of our tax programs that
we administer, but uh I think
the answer is sort of it
depends. Um, it depends on where
that money is invested and I
think there's a natural tension
that people can disagree about,
you know, when, when if we're
investing, should we be just
very strictly following the
prudent person rule and
maximizing return or should we
be exercising some sort of
social value structure and where
we
invest in and what we invest,
so.
I think your question, the
answer really just depends.
Um, you know, if I, if, if I can
add to that too, um, you know,
the two distributions to the
general fund from the permanent
funds, land grant and severance
tax permanent fund. Um, we know
that investment sector is also
volatile, but there's built in
this wonderful 5 year averaging
of the market value, so the
stock market will come and go
and it'll it'll rise and fall,
but the five-year average is, is
gonna be pretty stable, but um
again this is outside of the tax
programs we administer, but I'm
thinking about stow earnings.
And, and still earnings are such
a major source of volatility
right now for a couple of
reasons. Interest rates are high
and the portfolio balance is
high, you know, there have been
times where the portfolio
balance was kind of minimal and
we're earning 1% and so the
volatility didn't matter that
much, but I guess I'd like to
look with um.
busy or, or with DFA in the
coming months at why, and if we
are really are required to be
distributing to the general fund
based on unrealized gains and
losses, cause I think that's
what's causing the volatility.
So, of course, when interest
rates rise and fall, that has an
impact on the value of the
portfolio you already hold. And
so we have these unrealized
gains and losses that are
causing, I think, most of that
volatility and maybe that's
something we can just change in
state law and say, don't do that
and don't distribute like that.
anymore. Just a thought and then
those unrealized gains and
losses would just stay in the
stow portfolio. So I, I would
like to look into that to see if
we can stem off one more area of
volatility.
Mr. Chair Representative, just
quickly to Secretary Chardon
Clark's point, we do currently
have um investments specific to
New Mexico from our investment
pools, which do have some job
creation data, um, that we'd be
happy to provide to you. Um, but
I, I also wanted to make the
point that
The, uh, initial investment, if
not creating a job, the
distribution from that
investment is then
Put through state programs which
can create jobs. So, uh, even if
the initial investment doesn't
make a job, the state spending
from that can result in drops.
Thank you. Um, and I think
that's my point, right? That,
um,
While it is wonderful that we
are gonna be able to replace in
some ways the amount of revenue
that we currently get from oil
and gas from the earnings from
our investments.
Um, it doesn't necessarily.
Uh, result in a growth in jobs,
personal income tax, I mean, we
have to make sure that it does.
Um, so it's not
It's not necessarily apples to
apples, in terms of its impact
to the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks for the presentation,
very thorough, very
knowledgeable. You know, my, my
concern is, you know, I came
into office in 2016.
And the gentleman in the middle,
the secretary said that uh some
communities are looking under
the
Cheek cushions for nickels and
dimes, and if I remember in
2016, that's exactly what we
were doing.
And my concern is
You know, it's even more the
state makes, the more we spend.
And we need to really take a
look at that, Mr. Chairman, and,
and think about what we're
doing, cause the money is good
right now. Everything looks
perfect, but these are
predictable, you're predicting
these things are gonna happen.
What if they don't happen?
And we're spending and spending,
you know, the, uh, our, uh,
permanent funding well away
really quick and everybody in
this room knows if you take
money out of your savings
account.
You'll never put it back.
It's gone. And that's what we
need to look at, you know, we
need to open our eyeballs up and
say, hey, you know, the money is
good, you know, the, the
reserves are good.
But what if they go back 2 years
from now, 3 years from now, we
can't afford all these things
we're doing now. These, let's
just my concern, Mr. Speaker,
uh, Mr. Chairman, because this,
this is reality, you know, I, I,
you know, I don't know who was
here in 2016, the event it was
here in 2016 and the state was
completely broke.
We're taking money funding from
schools and everything we could
just to survive. And you know,
I don't want to see that happen
again in, in another 5, 10
years, and it's very possible,
like you said earlier, you know,
the market can go down.
Everything, everything in oil
production and go away, and we,
you know, oil production is our
biggest funder of the city of
New Mexico. What if they go
away? What do we do then? And we
know we're not looking at the
big picture. It's good to spend
and it's good to fund everybody.
It's, everybody wants that
money, but at the end of the
day, we really need to look at
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In here.
Wow
Let me see if I can wake
everybody up, Mr. Cha, just by
banging things.
So, um, first of all, having too
much money is always a curse.
So we're cursed now, but I do
have a question about the, the
change from personal income tax
to corporate income tax.
Why
Why just why did we make the
change, not sure, um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Sheer from
an accounting perspective, there
wasn't kind of one obvious place
to put uh the tax revenue
collected on pass-through
entities. And uh for, for
tracking purposes and data
analysis purposes, we just kind
of had to make a decision
whether it belonged with Pitt
and Sid and and it's more
closely aligned with corporate
income tax, and so it's been
moved there, so you see this
$190 million.
reduction in pit and the same
addition to sit. If, if, uh, the
chief economists want to add to
that. I just wanna add that
hopefully it also could benefit
taxpayers. I think we did have
some um filing some revenues in
both categories. Um, and so it
this way, they're all in 11
revenue, uh, filing, and it's
very clear, hopefully now, more
clear than it was before, so
that I think that also. Thank
you, uh, Izzy.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, you
reminded me too there was
confusion amongst taxpayers on
the the form to use and so
moving in it to sit lets them
have a more streamlined filing
process using one form. Thank
you.
OK, Mr. Chair.
Maybe.
So
So I know you had LLCs and
you've got S corporations and
all that. And so now you're
saying all of those are now
corporate income tax. Um, no,
Mr. Chair and Senator Scherer,
really the pastor entity tax is
an election that a taxpayer can
make, um, if it benefits them
from a tax planning standpoint
and it kind of traces back to
the federal uh tax cuts and Jobs
Act that I think was passed in
2017. Of course, the federal tax
reform, um, greatly reduced, uh,
it increased the standard
deduction.
and decrease a lot of
deductions, causing fewer
taxpayers to itemize. Anyway,
long, long story short, there's
a cap on the state and local tax
deduction that can be taken in
New Mexico and just about every
state that has a personal income
tax, responded to that by
creating a pass-through entity
taxation that allows states to
sort of reduce their federal
liability that that went up
because of the salt cap at the
federal level without decreasing
their state liability. So,
Very, it's very technical, but
we created um a mechanism for
states to respond to that change
in federal law through the
state.
tax code.
OK. So, Mr. Chair,
Is anybody's tax going to be
increased?
Or decreased either way, or is
it just an accounting?
Mr. Chair and Senator chair,
there's no change in tax
liability, taxpayers now can use
the sit form, which is more
streamlined for them if they're
electing the pastority tax
method.
And the amount of tax paid stays
the same.
All right, maybe I understand.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I know that
There's been talk about tax
reform, only for like 10 years.
Um
And, and I've always believed
that the main economic, the, the
main problem with attracting new
economic-based businesses is
that our tax code is confusing.
I don't think that we're
overtaxed or undertaxed, I
think, uh, when new businesses
look at New Mexico, they look at
our tax code and they go, what
the heck? And then the economic
development people come in and
say, oh, but we'll give you all
of this stuff, and
It's just not worth it to them
to even sort through it.
Um
And of course, uh, uh, a few
people in this room have heard
about the 2% gross receipts tax
and the elimination of 354.
Deductions, credits, and
exemptions.
Um
And all of that's designed to
just make it so that other
people will even look at New
Mexico.
I also know that there's been
Uh, it's been proposed, somebody
said, oh no, it's, you know,
it's a 2% down from 5%, and oh,
it's just a terrible loss,
except that the 354 the
elimination of 354 credit
exemptions and deductions was
not considered.
Because I believe that it's, if
it's not revenue neutral, it's
pretty darn close.
Is that something that
That we could look at again from
an FIR perspective, if I go and
introduce that bill again this
year, are we going to get an FIR
that says
that, that, that takes into
account all of the pieces, both
the incoming in the in the
expense part of it.
Mr. Chair and Senator Scherer,
uh, you know, of course, every
tax bill that is introduced,
we'll do an FIR on, we'll
continue to do an FIR on on that
proposal if it's introduced and
as in the past, we welcome any
feedback on the methodology. Uh,
I know we've uh spoken with
Doctor Clifford before and
others from um from the analysis
staff and we're open to feedback
if there's something in
particular you think isn't being
reflected correctly, but it's
very complicated legislation. We
certainly do our best on it, but
I.
And I know that uh you thought
the physical impacts weren't
correct, but then we didn't get
feedback about why they weren't
correct or what changes we could
make where we would love to talk
to anybody about that. Always
looking to do the best job we
can.
So, Mr. Chair.
Um, it was because the
elimination of the credits,
deductions and exemptions wasn't
put in there.
But
Uh
I also believe, you know, in,
in, so people say we got to get
off of oil and gas, OK. Uh, I
don't think we can. It's
physically not possible to
eliminate oil and gas without
living in caves.
Re to death in the dark.
Um, but it doesn't have to be
our main primary, our, our main
driver of our economy.
And so when I look at tax
reform, I'm looking at, OK, how
do we bring somebody else in
because we've been talking about
this, oh, I don't know, probably
for 100 years.
And yet we've not done it.
And so I do think it's important
that we have other economic base
industries here, and they're not
coming as long as our tax and
regulatory system, uh,
is confusing, whether it's good
or bad system.
Uh, uh, or right amounts of
stuff.
It's almost irrelevant to the
confusion of the system.
So I think that's important.
And then finally, on page 8 of
yours, um.
Izzy, uh, talked about
investment growth.
And the dollars and so forth. Is
this because we've just got
brilliant investors, or is it
because we've put more money
into
The permanent funds, therefore
they can grow faster, or is it
just because
The gods of investment have
smiled upon Senator,
uh, certainly the lion's share
of this is due to increased
distributions from
Some in the case of the land
grant permanent fund from oil
and gas directly in the case of
the severance tax permanent fund
from less bonding and also a new
distributions from oil and gas
revenues in Senate Bill 26.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you uh.
Secretaries, props, and char and
Clark and um Mr. Torres, thank
you for the presentation. Um, I
just wanna uh call our attention
to page 23 of the
Of the, of the slide deck, um.
Brought by TRD and DFA, uh, and,
and, you know, I agree with you,
Mr. Chairman, I think that this
is really a
A very welcome Christmas gift
for the people of New Mexico and
and I I want to call our
attention to uh the 92% or so of
Um
Personal income tax adjustments
and, and a vast majority of
that.
It's gonna go to support working
people with kids at home, and
these are plumbers, these are
electricians, mechanics, these
are first responders. Uh, these
are very welcome tax cuts.
For those hardworking New
Mexicans, which quite frankly
make up the majority of us,
right? We don't have a ton of
millionaires. Uh, most of us are
going to be within those.
Uh, those brackets, uh, that
also includes seniors, seniors
for whom we've um uh cut or
eliminated in, in most cases,
taxes on their Social Security
benefits. Uh, these are, these
are big deals, Mr. Chair, uh,
because New Mexico continues to
be committed to helping and and
lifting up working people.
Um
In fact, in one of these, uh,
Uh, you know, silly interviews
around, uh, you know, the new
president and what different
states will do to so-called
Trump prove
uh, you know, what I responded
was, hey,
President Trump made
Big promises to help working
people.
And if he wants a blueprint for
how to do that.
We have it here.
And I hope the federal
government come January 20th can
come and get our blueprint for
supporting working men and women
and families, uh, because we are
doing it in real time. Um, and
we are doing it in ways that
Or not sacrificing the future of
the state. I think this
committee, uh, it's, its
leadership on the House and
Senate, um,
has been very judicious, um, and
with the support of the
incredible staff in building out
um a forward thinking, uh,
Budget process that takes care
of people today, takes care of
those who need it the most
today, while also planning for
the future. So I, I want to
extend my congratulations to
this committee, to the staff,
uh, to, to the governor, to, to
her team for for uh putting us
in this position, uh, that I
think um will certainly
Um
Pay dividends, um, in, in the
years to come. Um, at the same
time, I want to highlight a few
things that we're also doing,
uh, that this legislature and
and and this administration has
been focused on, Mr. Chair. Uh,
while providing tax relief for
all of these people.
We're also investing in the
human capital, moving forward.
Uh, we are one of the, one of
very few states with low to no
cost childcare.
That is thanks to the work of,
of, of many here in this room.
Uh, we are offering uh
opportunities, uh, for higher
education. And, and, you know,
we're not just talking 4-year
degrees, we're talking
certifications and
apprenticeship programs, so that
uh our high schoolers can go
into community colleges and,
and, and other spaces and secure
uh certifications to become
plumbers, to become
electricians, to become
construction workers. Uh, that
is an investment, um, I think
that will also be
dividends. Uh, and then, of
course, the, uh, investments
that we've made year after year,
not only in infrastructure, uh,
but also in public safety. And I
think, uh, you know, I just
spoke at the law enforcement
conference this past week.
Um, and I, I heard many times
that the uh retention, uh,
recruitment fund that, uh, said
Dixon and others spearheaded,
um, all those years ago, has
been tapped by these agencies,
many of them in rural New
Mexico. And so their ask was,
please continue that because we
still need it, right? Uh, so
these investments have been
made, uh, in our human capital,
in our communities, while at the
same time, cutting taxes for
those who need it the most, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
opportunity and, and thank you
to this committee and to the
incredible team behind the
scenes for putting us in this
position.
Senator Steinbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, a few questions. Is he for
you on your presentation on page
6, and this is a question also.
Um, secret Sherton Clark, you
mentioned it as well. When we
talked about the areas of our
economy that are growing or the
part of our budget that is
growing.
Um
The gross receipts.
Am I basically understanding
that chart on the bottom of page
6 is he to say that out of the
growth of our gross receipts,
only 4.6% is attributed to oil
and gas.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
almost the, the growth, the 4.6%
represents the growth in that
sector year over year. So
mining, oil and gas grew 4.6%,
but the total contribution
Of the growth from that sector
is 517 million of the growth of
6 billion.
So
My quick math would be, uh, you
know,
no, it should be a little more
than that.
I shouldn't do it off the top of
my head, but
That that's how you would do
that math. It would be more than
4%. OK.
On this chair, yeah, the reason
I was asking is initially when
we were doing this, I know
sometimes when we see these
numbers.
We see gross receipts, but in
fact, there have been times when
a lot of that was attributable
to the industry, creating more
gross receipts. So it might come
across as like, wow, we have a
diversification of our economy.
We've got, but in fact, the
story is a little simpler than
that. And so initially when this
presentation started, that's
what I was wondering, like how
much of this growth is
attributable to this, but now
with Izzy's chart, we're hearing
that in fact, we are seeing
growth in other sectors,
accounting for more
than 90% of the growth of gross
receipts is that first
statement?
Absolutely, Mr. Chair.
So that's good news. Um,
Secretary Sergeant Clark, thank
you. On your presentation on
page 8.
Um, I was really interested by
the chart about job growth.
And how a few years from now,
that line kind of gets real
steady and it's slight increase.
It's not flat. It's slight
increase. What I was wondering
is, is, is that
Average job growth, or is that a
little bit slower job growth
projected in a few years.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn.
First, let me say that the
flattening job growth in New
Mexico does kind of mirror the
flattening job growth that's
expected in the US economy,
although New Mexico is expected
to be a little flatter, um, than
the national economy. So if you
kind of compare slides 7 and 8,
you can see the slope of the
line is a little flatter for New
Mexico.
Um, that is the average across
all non-farm sectors, I think to
answer your second question. So
there were within that there
will be rising and falling, you
know, between different sectors.
And thank you. And a follow-up
question, Mr. Secretary, would
you say job growth in New
Mexico.
I saw, you know, you talked
about unemployment, how our
unemployment rate fits against
the federal government, which I
guess is slightly higher. But
would you say our job growth is
on par with national trends, or
where do we fit as far as job
growth.
I would, Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn, I think that uh we
talked a little bit just earlier
about how, for example, New
Mexico's growth was above the
national trend just after COVID,
maybe be strengthened by lab
hiring by mining, by a couple
other factors, and that right
now it's a little lower than
national, but, but for the long
term forecast of the
unemployment rate, they're very
similar, the national and the
New Mexico. And, and that's
actually great. I mean, of
course, we would like to be
lower than the national average,
but for much of the last, you
know, decades.
Um, following the Great
Recession, for example, we
lagged behind national recovery
and national growth pretty
significantly for that entire
period, and now we don't.
Thank you. Uh, next question,
Mr. Chair, panel.
Would you just very briefly,
like in a sentence or two.
Describe the
Interest income that's flowing
back into the general fund
that's supporting our state
budget. You had mentioned
Secretary that
You know, the decrease in oil
and gas.
price per barrel.
is being offset by our
investment strategies. Well, I
know that in some of these
funds, they're, they're lock
boxes or constitutionally
protected in some cases. So I, I
guess just educationally, would
you just describe again in a
sentence or two.
The mechanism by which
The investment income is flowing
back into the general fund.
From our investments.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn, um, specifically,
this would include the land
grant permanent fund, the
severance tax permanent fund,
and this also includes a small
amount from the state
treasurer's office, but that is
Oil and gas-related revenues
that go into these funds managed
by the State Investment council,
who earns a return on them and
distributes a share of a
five-year average balance back
to the general fund for you all
to appropriate.
Right on. And so that's
So it's kind of statutorily set
such that as that fund grows,
are inflows will grow without
any change in statute or
otherwise. Is that correct?
Sure. That's right, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. Finally, I just want to
close this. I think this is a
brilliant invention, you know,
and I, and I, I think we have a
paradigm about our permanent
funds that we, you know, they're
called rainy day funds, and it's
raining, where are we investing?
And I explained to people this
is a financial strategy, the
state has adopted to help what
is expected.
Decrease in revenue, where we
know we're going to have a
shortfall where we would
otherwise.
And um
Just trying to just help educate
them on the wisdom of what's
being done here, but I, I always
love to give credit where
credit's due, and I'm just
curious. I'm sure the genesis of
this was some staff person, not
probably a politician who said,
you know, we could do this a
better way. And I would just
love to know who that person is,
or so that we give credit where
credit's due, because I think
politicians always end up taking
credit, but, uh, that you, is
he?
Are you the genius?
It is, it is. Izzy was the
genius behind 20 Senate Bill 26,
but we should give you a round
of applauseisy. He's the man.
All right.
And uh yeah and kudos to the
politicians for listening,
because I've been here when we
wanted to spend every dime and
we had governors wanting to
spend every dime and people were
cautioned against it. We could
have done that, but instead we
didn't and so kudos to L LFC and
others that embrace that so.
Great presentation, that's all I
have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Steinborn would be
buying this all lunch for that
Senator Woods.
Uh, real quickly, uh, Mr. Chair.
Is he on page 8?
Uh, monthly.
State treasurer's Office
general.
funds distributions. I know you
explained that.
But I didn't get it, so explain
it one more time to me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Woods for giving me
another chance to explain it,
hopefully a little more clearly.
Um, the, the state treasurer's
office.
As several investment pools.
The one we're talking about here
is the state General Fund
Investment pool, and the chart
at the bottom of that page 8
actually represents what we are
estimating to be the major
components in that pool.
You see, mostly in and out
revenues a third, about 1/3 is
revenues coming in and out, uh,
maybe a quarter there coming
from agency budgets as they
been throughout the year, they
have some cash piling up, and
then 43% is what we're calling
bond proceeds, but that's really
a lot of unspent capital outlay,
though significant, as you all
know, portion being invested
there. So as Secretary Chardon
Clark mentioned, the total pool
has grown.
Tremendously over the last 5
years.
I believe we're at about $10
billion in that pool now.
And
The state treasurer invests
that.
Through fixed income assets as
short as overnight, all the way,
I believe as long as 33 years.
And these are treasuries. And
so,
The, they'll purchase these
fixed income assets with
The, the funds that I just
described.
And, um, earn some sort of
interest rate on that as
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned, that's the stable
part.
The really volatile part is that
the asset value when once they
purchase that bond, can
fluctuate dramatically depending
on market expectations for where
the Federal Reserve is heading,
where current demand is for the
bond market, all, all of those
factors. So, uh, if we're
holding current bonds and
there's an expectation that
interest rates will rise in the
future. The value of those
bonds, which are fixed at a
lower rate, declines, and that's
how you can end up with a
negative, unrealized game. So
that's what we're really seeing
here in this.
chart is market expectations and
the value of the holdings
fluctuate month to month, quite
dramatically and, and that
actually directly impacts the
general fund. When there's a
loss that comes out of the
general fund when there's a
gain, it goes into the general
fund. And, and in some ways it's
an accounting exercise because
the value, the, the actual face
value of that.
Bond holding never changed. I
think Secretary Shadon Clark's
point is, is there a way we can
Adjust the accounting to make
sure that
We, we, we are only counting the
real earnings, but they're, they
are caveats and issues with that
as well that we've, that this
committee has actually dealt
with, I think 10 years ago when
we made the change to unrealized
games, but hopefully that helps.
So what, what we're talking
about is unrealized gains and
losses.
That's right. Nothing to do with
actual value in the market. I
mean, at maturity, at maturity,
that's exactly right.
Got it. The only other thing
I've got in my chair, make a
suggestion.
We talk about all we wanna do
for everybody.
I suggest we just take the
corporate income tax and donate
it to the road funds every year.
Um, I think they already got
their hands on the corporate
income tax. That's the film tax
credit. That's where that money
goes, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Representative small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all very much for the
presentation. Um, you know, New
Mexicans know that money matters
and this really drives that
home. Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Secretary Chardon Clark. This
is, as you pointed out in the
tax changes and kudos to you.
You've been from day one with
this administration in your
role, we've overseen and the
speaker, uh, in his previous
role as tax chair and other
capacities, really fundamentally
shifts. This is some of the
biggest tax changes that have
gone to New Mexico families.
Would you agree with that?
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative, absolutely.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chan and
Madam Secretary, and I think
that contrast, I think
potentially with some previous
approaches that sort of mixed
like really big, uh, reductions
in responsibility for larger
corporations and maybe we're
more thin when it comes, when it
came to families, sort of, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, it's
very fair to say that we focused
a lot more on New Mexico's kids
and
really corporations continue to
pay their fair share and
streamline that do make it more
efficient to work with the
private sector, but the focus
was much more on kids and
corporations.
Yes, Mr. Chairman and vice
chair, I would agree with all of
that as well. Great. And Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, I think,
um, a core question as we go
into the final two years of this
administration, sort of what's
next? Do we uh see additional
need in some of these areas. How
do we continue what's been
really 6 years, I think of, uh,
as we're pointing out here and
it's being discussed, very
responsible approach coinciding
with a really remarkable time in
the.
state's history. Um, I don't
know if you have any thoughts on
that, but want to pose that to
you if you, if you have any
thoughts on it. Sure. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and Vice Chair Small.
I agree. We've, we've uh really
moved a mountain together as the
executive and legislative
branches in the last 6 years,
um, and it's hard to to
sometimes know whether the
policies we've put in place have
moved the needle, but in the
amount of work we've done in the
tax code in the last 6 years,
you really can't see there's
objective data out there showing
that we've moved the needle for
just those populations that
you're talking about working
families, families with
children, especially families
with children that might be.
vulnerable to hunger and
poverty, um, and when I say
we've moved the needle, I don't
just feel it. Uh, we've got now
census poverty measures that
show New Mex a couple things
that are really important. Uh,
the census, uh, supplemental
poverty measure is much more
accurate because it includes to
your points, vice chair and Mr.
Speaker's points. It includes
not just family income, but all
the benefits, all of the
supports the state puts in place
to support those populations,
and no other state in
the union makes nearly as big of
a dent as New Mexico does in, in
its supplemental poverty
measure. We go from being the
highest poverty state in the
nation and the official measure
that doesn't take into account
any of those measures, the,
those supports we have in place
to being below average, and we
still, even in the supplemental
measure, we still have about 9%
of New Mexico children in
poverty again, we've really
moved the needle on that.
Another um great data source on
that is the new who pays study
from
I tap.
We moved up from basically the
middle of the pack to one of the
10 most progressive state tax
codes in the nation in the, in
the latest who pays study. So
are the uh measurements
subjectively of who pays New
Mexico's taxes have improved
dramatically, and yet we should
still do more. We've still got
9% of New Mexico children in
poverty, we should still do
more.
And if we are doing more tax
reform, I, I would agree that we
need to be careful about
targeting that towards the folks
that need it most and also
targeting it towards sectors and
economic development initiatives
that can help us diversify the
economy, create the jobs that
will lift people out of poverty
longer term in a different way.
So, um, I think it remains to
see how much to be seen how much
capacity we have for more tax
reform in the coming session,
but I, you know, I definitely
think we'll all be there
together in the tax committees.
together looking at more
recurring cuts and, and it'll be
as always difficult to choose
where to put that capacity, but
um some of probably the most
successful um existing vehicles
in the tax code, I would say are
the working families tax credit,
the child tax credit, and
liquor. So those are really
efficient, effective existing
vehicles that we could always,
we can always be revisiting, but
then, of course, there will also
be appetite for some um more
specialized tax relief to try to
get certain sectors off.
The ground. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. um, really appreciate
that insight and Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, as we think
about the upcoming session, it
really seems to continue to be
responsible. We really have to
think about potential tax
changes that have direct
offsets, you know, we've gone
through this period of really
explosive revenue growth. We've
moderated that has been pointed
out with Senate Bill 26, Senator
Gonzalez.
Um,
we can't count on that explosive
we have taken that explosive
revenue growth out of our
general fund. And it's a tribute
to the work and the continued
efforts, um,
But any tax cuts, we need to
think about those offsets, uh,
moving forward, I think in order
to be responsible. Mr. Chair,
uh, going on to Secretary
Probes, uh, thank you for the
article. It seems like we're in
a position to uh see our bond.
We've been uh rated as a
positive positive for the bond
rating. That will reduce uh
long-term borrowing costs. Mr.
Chair, Mr. Secretary, it seems
like we have a ready-made
vehicle.
with another LFC innovation,
that being the uh growth fund,
making that part of our reserves
as is appropriate and it is very
sufficiently funded is, seems
like a, you know, that's, that
worked very well last year that
in your mind that seems to,
would that work, uh, as we look
forward into the next year.
Chairman, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee and uh
small, yes. Great. uh, Mr. Chair
and, uh, Mr. Secretary, I want
to credit uh chair uh L Lenthe,
you know, House Bill 253, 1 of
the areas where we're still
incredibly exposed is in our
severance tax bonding, and for
our capital program, uh,
Before last year in the
chairman's bill that I was proud
to, to uh be a co-sponsor of um
We were entirely exposed to oil
and gas when it came to paying
for roads, big things around
buildings, and then all of the
other senior centers, uh, water
infrastructure, things that have
traditionally been carried
through the capital outlay
program.
We're moving away, we're, we're
sort of starting to diversify
that revenue. Would you agree,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Secretary, Mr.
Chairman and Chairman Small,
yes, I agree, I agree with that
as well. But Mr. Chair, there
seems like there's, uh, there is
still significantly more work to
do in that area. Would you
agree?
I would, Mr. Chairman. Yeah, I
agree as well, and Mr. Chair,
finally moving, uh, Mr. Torres,
um,
The, and this is actually a
slide that the secretary Sharon
Clark also discussed.
New Mexico's job growth are you
said our job openings, number 5
for the entire country. Is that
right? OK, yeah, that was right,
Mr. Torres. That so job openings
were number 5 in the country,
and that's sort of at a pro
rata, right? For the number of
people in our state, the number
of job openings were in the top
5 in the entire country for for.
The amount of jobs available,
Mr. Cha, yeah, I believe that's
a ratio between job openings and
unemployment.
Employment. Got it. OK, thank
you. And so really the, the key
challenge there is that we have
to continue to grow our
workforce.
That that we have sort of more
jobs open right now currently
than folks who are looking for
those jobs.
Mr. Chair or a skill mismatch
potentially between those
looking for the jobs and the
jobs that are available. OK, and
Mr. Chair, Mr. uh Torres, so
that seems to suggest that a lot
of the work last session, the
big investments and
apprenticeships, stipends for
folks who want to get those
right skills, maybe begin a
career in a pre-apprenticeship
and internship that we really
need to continue that work when
it comes to uh expanding our
workforce and making sure our
workforce is
You know, New Mexicans, they
have the right tools to have
that job that's gonna help their
communities, support their
families, uh, give them, you
know, a sense of fulfillment and
purpose about the work that they
do.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, and, and
if I could plug, um, especially
in distressed areas, the more um
that
Skill upping and retraining that
can happen in areas with the
highest forms of unemployment is
the biggest bang for your buck.
Got it. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And so sort of taking it
all, there is a great deal to be
proud of here, but this isn't
mission accomplished.
Right, where there is still a
great deal of work to do. We
have job openings. We've got to
make sure that folks are in the
right position, have the right
tools, the right supports to get
into those, to do those jobs. We
have a capital program where we
have more money than ever to
build, but we, there's a lot of
sort of in that middle space of
being able to get to that point
of actually spending those
construction dollars.
Um, and then around the tax
code, uh, we potentially have
further work to do, or at least
sort of an implementation side.
Uh, OK, that, that's great. And
Mr. Chair, that, I think that as
we go into this week of budget
hearings, um, finding where the
right investment to support New
Mexicans is, is going to be our
North Star.
It's not about just growing a
recurring budget because an
agency says they want to. It may
be about, it may be that, but it
also may be a special
appropriation and maybe moving a
special appropriation that has
been stranded in an agency now
going on 4 or 5 years. Um, it
may be something else, right?
So.
It may be tackling the
increasingly dire challenge of
insurance for our state where
we're starting to pick up
wildfire insurance where we're
starting to see school districts
that are unable to, um, for
whatever reason and our own um
CYFD with
Massively growing um liabilities
and they're unable to, to get on
top of that. Those are real
risks to this, and most
importantly, they harm the
Mexicans, so there's a great
deal of work. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for getting
us to this place where we can
tackle it together.
Representedente.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, presenters for your
presentation this morning. I
want to echo the sentiments of
both Speaker Martinez and
Chairman Small in regards to the
type of work that this committee
has done. I have sat here for
the past 2 years now and they've
been in awe in regards to how
this committee listens to those
of you that are professionals in
these fields. I mean, I look at
you Izzy and, and the applause,
you didn't like it, but it's
well deserved, man. It really is
because when I listen to you and
I talk to you, you break it down
in a way where it's thoughtful.
You're thinking outside the box
and I can appreciate that.
As well as I'm sure many of us
around this table do. Uh, one
thing that I will continue to to
talk about in regards to
appreciating how we've reformed,
uh, tax, the tax code in regards
to the tax progressivity in this
state in regards to how we're
helping working families and
little middle wage earners in
this state, uh, how we get away
so much more from when we want
to create tax differences or
text changes in the state, how
it's not always just a dream.
on the general fund, right? I
mean, oftentimes when we talk
about one of these things again
this year. What do we do? How
can we do things? How can we be
creative and oftentimes, oh man,
it's gonna cost a lot of money.
And it often does. But how do we
get away from it being a taxi
drain on the general or a drain
on the general fund to an
investment and be seen as an
investment in that way. And, and
how do we begin to create data
around that so we can say these
types of investments will fetch
us these results in 25, 10 years
versus.
It's gonna cost us X amount of
millions of dollars for the next
345 years. And so I'm hoping to
get to that point, uh, soon, so
that we can begin to uh continue
this work that we've done on
the, on tax reform in this state
because I think it's fetching a
lot of really positive results
to your point, secretary, in
regards to how it's helping
today working families. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you guys, you know.
At the end of the day, if the
executive and the legislative
were not working together.
Uh, in sync to do some of this
stuff, it won't happen, right?
I mean, give credit to the
legislature cause we're the
legislature, right?
And it's a lot of our thought
process that kind of set this
up, but with Wayne at DFA and,
and everybody working together,
it all works, right?
I, I've said this before, you
know, New Mexico, we're not a
poor state anymore.
In in New Mexico needs to change
that mon like, we got things
that we can win on.
free education, childcare,
right? Low taxes for working
families, for children.
And that's all because we've
done a lot of the work to set
this up for the future.
And if we go decide to spend on
something big that doesn't move
the needle.
It it will be a waste of money,
rebates were pretty much erased
the money.
We could have created another $3
billion worth of funds and, and
had 150 million more reoccurring
money.
And, but that's a lesson
learned. But if you don't try
something, you're never gonna
know.
And without risk
There's no reward, right? And
so,
We did this and
It's changed.
And we need about 2 more years
of this change in, and we'll
have, we'll be in really good
shape.
Um, but it's opportunity and
opportunity is what everyone in
New Mexico now has, right?
Whether you want to go in early
childhood, whether you want um K
through 12, college, right?
Workforce training. There are so
many opportunities in New Mexico
right now that, that money is
available to do things.
And we just need to succeed and,
and that will come in time, uh,
and, and it'll come with the
population growth and, and
that's gonna be our real problem
in New Mexico. The next
presenter for these members.
I think he's, he's gonna
probably give you the most
important thing on the workforce
and in market migration and
market migration and why people
aren't in the workforce this
afternoon.
And, and that'll end, that'll
answer a lot of questions, but
if it's not for the people, uh,
were elected to represent the
governor, the legislature,
right?
I, I don't know how to make this
anymore since, I mean, for me,
it's like you've changed
something.
When that was probably the
hardest change to make.
His fiscal change.
And it changed, and nobody's
really realized it yet, but this
fiscal change that has happened
is just, it's incredible to me,
so.
And Secretary Wayne, thank you
for everything. Thank you guys
for all your hard work.
Appreciate that.
And like you still stay there
and you need to.
Need a break for a quick second.
Mhm
All right, we'll go ahead and
get going
or keep going for Madam
Secretary.
out.
We're ready. Go ahead, please.
Thank you. OK, good morning
again, uh, members of the
committee. This is a real mental
shifting of gears from something
very big picture to something
very narrow, um, tax and Rev as
one agency budget within the
whole general fund. And so, um,
before I get started, I just
want to introduce the, the
wonderful team that I have that
makes, hopefully makes it look
easy, but it's not. Um, sitting
with me today is our ASD
director Denise Ian, who's been
many of these
folks have been with us since
the beginning. Denise joined in
2019, also with us is our deputy
secretary of administration,
Aisha Mora, who has been a
19-year veteran with the
department and became the deputy
secretary fairly recently. Also,
we have our chief in information
officer or IT Director Mike
Baca, also a long history with
tax and Rev. We have our deputy
ASD director Annette Reynolds,
and then if I turn this way, we
have MVD's finance director,
Ali.
Rodriguez. We also have from MVD
um Sean Bullion, who's one of
the MBD's project directors and
MVDs to deputy directors,
Juliette Casale and Monte Lopez,
Juliet is over MVD central
operations, Monty is over all
the field operations. And I
think that's everybody, right?
OK, that's everybody who's here
today, so hopefully between all
of us, we can answer any um
detailed questions you might
have.
So, um, I will take us to the
slide deck.
Um, so really on slide 2, we
just wanted to highlight for
you, big picture, what are the
priorities in our budget
request, and it's pretty simple
and it's pretty similar to years
past. Our budget request is
usually not adding any new
programs or initiatives. We're
always just trying to modestly
keep chipping away at our
unfunded vacancy rate. Tax and
Rev has had roughly the same
number of FTE for a long time,
but we've uh been coming down
from a funded unfunded vacancy
rate in the mid-twenties to try
to.
that down little by little each
year. Um, we're also requesting
a little funding to address pay
alignment and make sure that we
address any issues of
compression or um any, anything
that's causing pain to not be
equal across positions. Um, and
then, of course, we're always
working hard to make sure we
have the funding and systems in
place to safeguard our data. If
you think about the data that we
have in GenTax and MVD's
tapestry system. Nobody wants
that to be at any risk. And so
we work very hard to make sure
we safeguard it.
And speaking of gente and
tapestry, the contractual costs
that our agency expends to
maintain and sometimes um
enhance those systems is pretty
significant, um, and the model
for how we are charged for those
contractual costs is changing
somewhat, the way we pay for
maintenance, so the budget
request addresses that.
Um, and then onto some more
specialized things in our
request. We're requesting 1.4
million in other state funds,
that's from the motor vehicle
fund, um, to address a driver's
license redesign that is
necessary every decade or so,
security features change, um,
best practices change around
driver's license design and we
need to tackle that. Um, we're
requesting 1 million towards
mobile driver's license
implementation and just, um,
everything that goes along with
everything MVD does, photos,
printing, fingerprinting, facial
recognition, all that kind of
stuff that goes on behind the
scenes to make sure that MVD can
operate securely and
efficiently.
Uh, we've built in about 473,000
anticipating increased costs in
our building leases. Um, and
then I know today is not focused
on non-recurring requests, but
we have our, uh, typical request
for 5 million for legislative
bill implementation that's
non-recurring and basically we
uh the story is always we don't
know what the tax package will
include for us to implement
until pretty long after the
budget is done. So, um, that
allows for us to make sure we
have funding regardless of what
is in the tax.
package. And then a $1 million
non-recurring requests for those
increased costs in tapestry and
um gen tax to make sure we can
keep pace with growth there. And
then we have 3 C2 requests. I
won't go over in detail, but
happy to answer questions about
those when the time is right.
Um, so to put our budget request
in a little bit of historical
context on slide 3.
Um, we've shown on the, the
chart on the left-hand side, you
can see the growth in general
fund and other state funds that
we have had over the past years.
Um, it's, it's been moderate,
and we really do try to be
cognizant of not placing too
much strain in our request on
the general fund. We know that's
very tight. Um, MVD and the
property tax division are funded
in whole or in part, um, out of
other state funds, so that helps
somewhat. Um, and I, I wanted to
basically
They present data on the right
on our reversions. We also try
to be very cognizant of
reversions from our operating
budget. I think um I'm, I, I was
really glad to see in the LFC
brief this morning that agency
reversions are being looked at
separately recurring and
non-recurring appropriations
cause they really are different
animals. If we revert a balance
and a non-recurring
appropriation, that means we
finished an IT project under
budget. That's not a bad thing,
um, but we do really try to
minimize our reversions to the
operating budget.
Um, you can see they spiked in
2020, um, and that had a lot to
do with supply chain issues. Um,
at the beginning of COVID and we
had some supply chain issues in
FY 22 as well that, that caused
us to revert. But one of the
things um that I kinda wanna
draw attention to forex and Rev,
as well as a lot of other
agencies is the amount we revert
in the 200s category. Um, the
way we have to move about
filling vacancies is of course
our budget projections or, you
know.
Based on what positions are
currently filled or vacant and
so we can move forward where we
show that we have the funding
available. We know that
historically 43% of TRD
vacancies get filled by a TRD
internal promotion, creating
another vacancy the very next
day. And so, part of, I think
what, I guess I hope the
committee will think about and,
and, and it affects all
agencies, is that unless we have
any kind of wiggle room to
project.
Future vacancies into those
projections, it's gonna keep
happening and there's only so
much we can do to minimize the
200 reversions. That definitely
impacts us, but we're glad to
have our career ladder. That's a
good thing for us and our
employees, but it kind of
hampers our, our being able to
fill vacancies.
Slide 4 is, uh, you know, just,
just kind of an overview of
where we've been from this
administration, um, when we
started in 202019, tax and revs
vacancy rate was at about 29%.
We made really good progress
bringing that down until COVID
hit, and then we kind of treaded
water for a, a period, but we're
back in the, the position of
making good progress on filling
vacancies. We're at 18.8% vacant
as of uh the beginning of this
month, and that's about as far
as we can get with the.
budget we have. Um, we have, uh,
the lowest vacancies, I think
are in MVD. They're down around
like 10 or 11%, the highest or
more in audit, which uh is
difficult because that means we
could have more auditors
bringing in more revenue for the
general fund, but um they're
also that program is currently
in a deficit for the current
year. So, uh, many of our
divisions and programs have a
hiring freeze in place right
now, which is really why we're
focusing on uh chipping away at
that unfunded vacancy rate.
Almost done. Um, here's a little
context too of um the size of
our department compared to the
size of our mission, um, in the
blue bars you can see the amount
of revenue that we collect and
distribute, as you would expect,
growing pretty exponentially the
last few years. Meanwhile, our
number of positions has come
down. Uh, we lost, I, I think it
was about 40 positions off our
OL from FY 21 to 20, um, and so
our number of physicians has not
grown, but the amount of revenue
we collect and distribute has
roughly doubled. So the only way
that we make that work is
through IT automation, really,
um, our goal is always not to
have to touch tax returns, uh,
for the system to do it all for
us and things to just flow
through automatically without
error, and that's the only, like
I say, that's the only way that
we can continue to operate with
you, um, amount of employees we
have. So we ask for a lot of IT
funding. It's very important to
us, but I also wanna kind of
brag on.
our IT department and, and the
divisions, every project in this
administration, we've completed
on time and on budget, so we,
uh, we're very proud of that
track record.
And last, the budget request
itself is on the next page.
And so just to kind of
reiterate, um, we've got detail
for each program, um, for
Uh, the, the growth rate, um, is
4.7% in program support, which
includes ASD, the Office of the
Secretary, and IT were
requesting 3% growth in tax
administration, which includes
two divisions that the audit and
compliance division as well as
the revenue processing division,
8.5% growth in MVD, but that's
primarily not out of general
fund, uh, 12% growth in the
property tax division. Again,
that's a division that's
entirely enterprise funded by
its own activity.
and then 16% growth in our
smallest program, which is
compliance enforcement, also
known as tax fraud
investigations, and kind of the
tan bars below the table, you
can see detail on how our budget
request would impact the funded
vacancy rate. Um, so just, I'll
walk you through just one
example. Um, looking under tax
administration, you've got ACD,
the audit and compliance
division. The request would take
the FY 25 budgeted vacancy rate
there of 26.2.
2% down modestly to 25.8%. And
so you can see um how each of
the division vacancy rates would
be affected by the request.
And there's only a request for 2
additional FTE and those are
the, in the enterprise funded
property tax division. Um, we're
requesting expanded for an
appraiser, uh sorry, 22 FTE
appraisers, um, one in the field
and one in-house.
And with that, we would stand
for any questions.
Great. Thank you very much,
ma'am. Secretary. We're gonna go
first to Representative De la
Cruz and then see who else has
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't
have a a question per se. I just
want to make a comment. I
remember a time where
state of New Mexico was famous
for how inconvenient it was to
try to get a driver's license
or.
Change the car title, and so
we've come light years from
those, from those times. Uh, but
what I wanted to say is that
New Mexicans judged the state of
New Mexico on those things that
they generally see and feel. And
there isn't probably any more
department that they see and
feel that this particular effort
around driver's licenses and car
titles and all the things that
that they do. And so, for what
it's worth, Mr. Chairman, I just
think that it's important that
we are mindful of that and that
we do our best to make sure that
this operation is funded
adequately, so they continue to
be effective.
So that we are all judged
favorably in the eyes of
taxpayers and citizens. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative de la Cruz. OK, I
don't necessarily see any other
questions, Mr. Char turn it over
to you.
Thank you. No, just, you know
what, you've kind of changed
that whole mantra, tax and Madam
Secretary, and it's been good.
I, I still have a few complaints
sometimes when you're still
using snail mail to mail titles
back instead of giving us the
titles at DMV, uh, um.
Maybe it's an area I live in,
but I mean, it's kind of going
in a circle with him, so.
But, but setting up appointments
and times and the flow into the
system and I'm there quite a
bit.
Um, it is so easy, right?
You gotta have your ducks in a
row, which
the thing
and uh but the flow is
completely different and even
answering some other people's
tax questions that when you have
constituents, I mean, it's
changed completely, so I
appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and if I
may, it sounds like I just found
a champion for one of our C2
requests.
Uh, MPD is requesting 1.4
million. This is on slide 2.
basically to put in place
electronic titling, and so right
now we have a very cumbersome
system where um somebody comes
in, titles the vehicle, and then
you have to wait several weeks
because we, we have to centrally
print the title here in Santa Fe
and mail it out to you. It may
or may not get lost in the mail.
There might be a problem with
that. And um so, so we, uh,
basically if with a 1.4 million
dollars C2 project we could
move, uh, basically to almost
immediate e-titling, that means
your title can never be stolen
from your glove box, lost in a
fire or lost in the mail, plus
we avoid all the printing costs.
So this is definitely um
something that states are moving
towards, and we want to be on
the leading edge of that.
Can we do electronic insurance
too.
This is our deputy director for
um MVD and she has more
information on that.
Mr. Chair, so currently right
now statutorily you can show
your insurance card on your
phone.
Good. And so let me ask you this
on the driver's licenses, so
going through
An airport, right? And you had
to have a real ID now, and they
stick your ID in that machine
and it just takes a picture of
you.
And it matches it up. So how
they do that if you put that
driver's license in your Apple
wallet, maybe this is just me
learning, right? And then you go
to the airport and saying, well,
here's my picture, here's my ID.
Well, I can't get in the
machine, so have a nice day.
Mr. Chair, um,
So just to clarify, the real ID
deadline federally set is in May
of 2025, unless it's extended
for the millionth time, I don't
know how many times it's been
extended, but we're planning on
that going into effect. I think
it's May 5th, 2025. Um, and so,
yes, last week we became the
12th, I believe, state
nationally to launch a mobile
driver's license if, if you want
to install yours today, I'll
help you, um, and they are TSA
compliant. There are a few
states that launched a mobile.
ID without TSA compliance, and
we didn't think that would
benefit the state or it would
cause more confusion.
So, um, there are select
airports nationwide. They're
some of the biggest airports so
far that are the TSA has already
equipped with the scanning
equipment to accept that. Um, we
expect an announcement in the
coming weeks that those will be
accepted at the sunport in
Albuquerque as well as the
regional airport near Hobbs, and
then it'll continue to grow from
there. So they have the scanning
equipment necessary that just
like a b a mobile boarding pass.
I'll be able to present a mobile
ID at the TSA checkpoint and
it'll do facial recognition.
to use it. It's just a secure,
but I would recommend everybody
still travel, of course, with
their plastic credential and of
course you have to drive with
your plastic credential, that's
state law. We don't want law
enforcement handling your mobile
driver's license or having to
take your phone to their vehicle
or anything like that.
Yeah, I would never allow that.
Uh
Um, that's good, but
which
I may have slipped through the
presentation, so I wanna
Make sure that I know what's
going on here.
Appear where you have compliance
enforcement.
And you're wanting to do a
16%, 16.9% increase on your
budget. I
Explain, are we, we believe we
have a lot of people out of
compliance.
And how do you come up with
that?
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Woods. So the compliance
enforcement program is also
known as the Tax Fraud
Investigations Division, and
there are smallest division, I
think they have about 20 FTE
give or take 1 or 2, and they
investigate criminal tax fraud
as opposed to civil tax fraud,
which is much more common,
although the criminal aspects of
it are growing exponentially,
and so because the budget is
fairly small, uh, what we're
looking at there is just the
vacancy rate, and you can see.
in the sort of tan bar that in
the current fiscal year, they
have a 23.8% unfunded vacancy
rate, and we're aiming to bring
that down to 13.6. That's adding
about 2, it's not adding any
FTE, but it would be enough to
allow us to fill two unfunded
positions. So with that
qualification, give me the
qualifications of that. Is that
a CPA position or, or what is
that? Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, no, we have different
positions.
in TFID, um, there, some of them
are forensic auditors or
forensic accountants, certified
fraud examiners, um, we are also
looking at, um, this is sort of
a, a long term thing, but we're
looking at reclassifying one of
their vacancies to an attorney
position because they go through
a lot of work and effort to
investigate and demonstrate that
tax fraud has occurred, criminal
tax fraud. They turn over the
investigations to prosecuting
entities, and they say that
looks like a great
investigation, but we don't have
the resources to prosecute it.
So we're looking at potentially
adding an attorney so that we
could um we could process be
commissioned to prosecute some
of that ourselves, and I think
our ASD director wants to add
more detail.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. um,
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, we
also had a special agent's
salary schedule through Spo that
was implemented for increases in
salaries, and so that was
unfunded in the current fiscal
year, and so this ensures
funding for the special agents
in your, uh, for 26 and beyond.
And what, what, uh, expected
increase in salaries are we
talking about?
Literature
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, I
can give you, uh, I can send you
the actual increases in via
email if that would be
appropriate. OK. Why don't you
send it to me and send it to the
committee also and uh
When we'd start talking about
criminal fraud, and, uh, you
know, I, I have been concerned
for years about, uh, uh, and I
used to ask everybody for their
contractors list, as you
remember.
And of course,
I couldn't make heads nor tail
out of any of it when I got it,
but, uh, I've always wondered or
worried about or wondered how
you check.
To see
In your agency,
What kind of controls you have
on your contractors? What kind
of controls?
Do you say they're performing to
do the task that they're hired
to do, is that?
I'm assuming all internal.
I'm assuming that.
By division head.
And
And I assume it is.
You know, we're raiding them on
how well they do their task or
if they do their task. I know a
lot of this stuff will have to
have contractors when you start
talking about changing IT and
things like that, uh, that's,
that's a lot of contracting work
done there. Um, and I don't
assume that do it does much of
that for you.
Uh, and that's a question.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
thank you. I, I would say that
to a great extent, the way that
we monitor contract expenditures
and accepting deliverables and
things like that is pretty
standard across other with us
and other agencies, you know,
there is a particular area of
the division that oversees a
particular contract and they're
receiving the services, they're
in regular communication with
the contractor. So whether it's
deliverables based or more like
time and materials or hourly
base, that's just monitored at,
at the staff level and um
Of course, I have oversight of
entering contracts on the front
end and making sure that there's
an agency need and that our ASD
makes sure that the budget is
available, but that's all pretty
standard across agencies.
Yeah, uh, and uh do it.
Part of that
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, I'm
looking at our, at our IT
director to see if he wants to
add anything about do it's
oversight role, but again, it's
sort of on the front end on
contract approval, right? So,
you know, there's a, a different
do it template if you're, if
you're contracting for IT
services and um they have the
contract review authority along
with GST and DFA and others. And
so there's an extra do it level
of approval just to make sure
that the contract is good on the
upfront, but they don't have a
lot of involvement on the back
end.
And then, then of course,
there's the um project
certification committee, which
is an important role for do it
and, and that's a good oversight
body for non-recurring projects
of an IT nature, so we regularly
go there to give, uh, get
approval for different phases of
IT projects, and they play a
really good role in that, in my
opinion.
OK, and in, and the last
question is,
And I don't want this to be
become a political statement,
but
You know, I asked for an infant
request on a certain number of
Of
Names that were sent out from
your office.
Uh, in regards to the Secretary
of State.
Uh, kind of stuff and
If you could get back to me and,
and tell me if you're not going
to fulfill that or, or what.
Um
That would be fine. I'd just
like to know kind of where I'm
at on that. OK, Mr. Chair and
Senator Woods, I, I know the EPA
request that you're talking
about. I believe we did close it
out the week or two upon when it
was requested back in November.
So from our standpoint, we've
sent you, I believe we sent you
back something saying we had no
responsive records, um, and I
can't remember the name, but I
believe a staffer from the
Senate checked with us and we
let him know that as well. I
think it's closed out.
And see what that was. Um.
It's always funny, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Many times I asked for.
An Attorney General's.
positions and opinions and
So far I've got 100% 0 on that
too.
So
So it's amazing that
You ask for something and
sometimes you just don't get.
But that's for another day,
another story. Thank you, sir.
You and I are batting the same
at the Attorney General's
office.
But
Senator Steinburn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I actually
do not have a question. I just,
Madam Secretary, while you and
your team are here, just wanna
give you a kudos and your whole
team, you are just a pleasure to
work with on policy issues, um,
Information, education, but also
helping my constituents more
than anything, every time I have
something come up.
Man, within seconds, you're
responding, your team is
responding within 24 hours. I
think you're just a model,
secretary of model agency, and,
and I just want to thank you and
your whole team publicly for the
good work you do.
And always as a legislator, we
can support you continuing to
make the efficiencies
improvements you're trying to
make in state government, um.
You know, we, we listened to
that very carefully. So, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary.
They're all looking for tax
credits before we wrap up.
No, thank you for the
presentation. Thank you for the
time today. We were there a long
time, so we appreciate it. Thank
you guys.
We'll be back at 1:30.
