All right good morning it's
great to see everybody um
we've been talking about how
everywhere else he goes this
year so far we brought rain and
it's great to see what that here
we're going to get started i'd
like to do a couple of quick
things before we go to our
agenda first we're going to
invite of chris stag a great
friend of the committee and it
really incredible leader up here
we'd love for uh chris to say a
couple of words about the work
up at taskie valley and then
we're gonna ask center gone
solace to give us all sort of a
guide for uh later this evening
in his
his home so with that uh chris
will go over to you.
Open can we ask you to turn on
the microphone
the little person the ones yeah
little person
there we go all right
well usually i'm pretty good at
technology but this is all new
you know so anyway it's my
pleasure to be here today I just
wanted to say thank you and
welcome to the committee for
being here in our community at
house
we appreciate the legislature in
the legislative finance
committee for the support of our
community
and
and we like it when you come and
visit us so thank you very much
for that a couple of things that
are top on the list right now is
the support for our hospital you
know communities can't do much
if they don't have good health
care and like a lot of rural
hospitals tow struggles but
thanks to the support of the
legislature we're doing a little
bit better and we have a new
medical office building we're
going to start building again
thanks to a grant from the state
of new mexico
we also have air service grants
that the legislature is approved
to appreciate that look over a
george because I know he's a
pilot appreciates flying around
but our service starts for the
summer time tomorrow and so we
have four markets that we serve
out a touch
san diego LA austin and dallas
and then we have new service
going into uh denver
international with contour
airlines which means you can
interline and connect with the
world and that's really a good
thing for our community and so
we appreciate against support
for that
I also notice on the agenda that
we have today a lot on forest
health and forest projects and
so I just wanted to update your
little bit on top ski valley and
what we do with that we're one
of the earlier signatures and
big contributors to the water a
real grand water fund which is I
think you're where of itself.
Big project up your six hundred
thousand acres and the northern
part of the real grand base into
due for a stinning and forest
health and all that kind of
thing and I think jere logan and
our very capable
state forester laura will give
people a tour on that this
afternoon that's something it's
been near in dear to towski
valley's heart
and we've spent personally in
the company about five million
dollars over the last few years
during forest health and if you
take our forest permit area and
the privately under tow ske
valley and the highway when
fifty quarter it's more than
three thousand acres that we've
been able to treat thin and
mitigate for forest health and
for fire mitigation and and a
little sidelight I don't know if
you know but our ownership group
was harvesting would offer the
ranch up in southern colorado
and they needed to place to take
the wood products and so they
developed a sixty million
dollars some mill in blanca
colorado the southern part of
colorado and that also takes
wood products from northern
mexico and and meals that so
that's uh it's been one of the
problems you know in the as the
light logging industry declined
the fault saw mills close and so
now that when you do a lot of
this work you don't have any
place to take other products so
that's been one of the things
we've tried to do
to to help with that.
Yeah so anyway the other thing
we've been doing is working with
a kit carson electric to go
through our community and put a
lot of the power lines under
ground so that we don't have the
fire risk from from the the
power and we're also putting in
a microgrid uh so you know tales
kid cars and electric is a
hundred percent daytime solar
but then one of the issues
especially when you're in towsky
value at the end of the line
you have other issues and so
we're going to put in a five meg
away battery facility up there
they'll give it six hours of
back up in the case of having to
shut stuff down because the fire
because of outages for other
reasons so I think we're really
working to try and mitigate
you know our power issues in in
that remote control community
and then i'll i'll finish up
just I was talking to
representative dickson and
towsky valleys of corporation
were certified carbon neutral
but we really have worked to try
and find solutions to carbon use
in that kind of thing is hard in
a scary you got big machines and
you got all that kind of thing
we have purchased and have the
first electric snow grooming
machine in the united states
and we have a budget hybrids
we've taken all over snow
mobiles and converted those to
electric and put charging
stations around in the mountain
but one of the things that I was
talking to representative texas
about is there's this product
that I really just became
familiar with a year or so go
it's called h v o d it's hide
road treated vegetable oil it's
not biodiesel really it's a bit
it's it's it's a more
sophisticated product a simpler
oil actually uh refines this
product in down and there are
teacher uh I think the problem
is all the supply
literally their whole refinery
setup to put it on a train and
send it to california and and it
doesn't get into new mexico.
But if you use this product we
cut our comment carbon
uh pollution by sixty percent by
just taking this product to
using it instead of a
conventional disall and we don't
have to modify our engines we
don't have to do anything so it
really is one of those kinds of
things that you can make here in
new mexico if you can get it
into the new mexico market it
can make a big difference to our
carbon
emissions and and it's really
pretty easy to do once you can
kind of get the market the
supply train going so one of the
things I think that's where the
legislature could help us is is
how do we
enhance we already have the the
clean fuel standard spiel that
we passed a couple years ago
that if you talked to sinclare
there they're excited about that
that's helping them but anything
else we can do to try and get
some of this product into into
the pipeline no punitive it
really that way that would help
us do what we do because
obviously use a lot of energy in
the ski business being
snowmaking and grooming and all
those kinds of things and so
we've been trying to mitigate
all that so I won't take a more
of your time but I just want to
say thank you very much I
appreciate when the committees
here and you know look forward
to seeing all of you later and
visiting if we get a chance so
thank you thank you chris this
is really impressive thank you
for the update thank you for
being here and we're very
excited
more of what you're doing and to
be the best partners we can be
thank you much
and if you could push that
button one more time
now we're gonna go straight over
to the center go solace.
Thank you mister chairman good
morning to everyone hope you had
a very pleasant and the restful
evening and night
I hope a few things for tonight
so program and the first of all
we do have available some bands
if they'll you wish
transportation and we need a
short hands if you would want to
go on a van what they would do
it will send a sign up along
okay I was just trying to
coordinate it as early as
possible for the county because
they need to hire a driver or or
not have a great okay raise your
hand if you want to take the van
this would be their service also
houses afternoon and the plan is
to just pick your appear on the
front and then bring you back to
the same place but we can have a
sign up then maybe as long as we
can let the county know like my
ten
will come back this morning and
then you can take.
Okay oh very well their note
we're trying to start a right
around five thirty and a model
still love if you do not take
the band how ask that maybe you
might want to coronate some car
pulling as much as possible
that no as you arrive over there
too to our plays so
more than likely you're going to
probably have to park on the
road and just make sure that you
don't block any of the neighbors
of drives and that you would be
fine now if
those of you
form if you travel on five
eighteen and staff will have a
map is
right on sixty eight by by a
lunch of the towers on the
traffic light going towards
spine asking las vegas it's
exactly six miles and will have
one of the olive c signs there
and then from their eye I will
have other signs to go through
there they're not I hope that of
all of you are very hungry and
we will be waiting for that oh
so
that is our plan and
now
there is a mountain lion called
natasha delatora known as
crimson and the likes decline on
white trucks
i'm just seeing to see if you're
paying attention
so I don't think on our vice
chair was paying attention but
anyway i'll know there's no
mountain line I just wanted to
see if you're a week and if
you're already for that but okay
so very well we'll plan to
sealer tonight you know starting
at five thirty any question and
so
the analytic will leave staffer
you have my phone number and you
can call them.
Should be very simple just five
eighteen six miles and will have
some signs turned left at the
mountain line
thank you you can call it on the
touch of the authority or
crimson understand that thank
you very much and we're very
excited thank you for your
generosity okay with that we're
gonna go to our first
presentation invite up
miss hartsler and the other
presenters please come on up.
Yeah.
Great let's get started.
I think red means were on
correct correct every year
good morning members of the c my
name is tracy heartslower in
president central mexico
community college to treat to be
with you and really special to
be with you here this morning
i'm certainly with my colleagues
and would you like to introduce
ourselves and then go through
what would you like us to do
yeah if we can have quick
introductions we want to stay
untime today so will uh as much
time for member questions as
possible good morning mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is married that years and
the chance they're here at
received new mexico tasks
good morning committee james
johnson and chancer of the enemy
system and president of our
portals campus
thank you well against pleasure
to be here
at campus so what a treat uh but
we're really excited here to
talk about something that's so
important that you all have
funded which is our workforce
training programs and the the
spending of
high skills high demand funding
is part than mexico grow program
what I wanted to first is at so
I representing
the new mexico in a penalty
community colleges and all of
the work that is before you you
have two packets what I want to
do is one point to this one
first.
And the reason why you have two
packets is because we really
wanted to make sure that all of
our colleges were able to
showcase and include comments
from employers and comments from
our students and learners who
have benefited from this program
I think all of us are um as
president serve incredibly proud
of the work we do but we know
that the most effective
advocates and testimonials about
what you fund and we know that
our success is determined by the
success of our learners and our
employers who who are using this
program are using these funds in
these programs so the materials
that i'm i'm sharing with you
again not only come from CNN but
come from all of the colleges so
you'll see generally how we're
spending money to support
learners directly and helping
them enroll in programs that are
important to our local economies
also to
subsidize working based
experiences with employers so
they can expand their pipeline
as employees and help expand the
number of interested learners
who could enter their sector if
not their direct employment.
And then also some money spent
on program development again for
programs that are of need in our
local communities
it's on the first slide I just
wanted you also to recognize
that what we're talking about
this morning is part of a much
larger conversation around
economic development
so economic development goals
and work force needs so what you
find you funding direct benefits
to employers you certainly fun
institutions you certainly fund
programs that come out of work
for solutions but all of these
are really to support our
state's economic growth and just
make sure that we have a quality
trained work force and then that
training goes on throughout the
course of of an individuals
working so we really appreciate
that this is one part of a much
bigger piece that you all have
funded over time and
particularly through the new
mexico girl programs.
So and slide three.
When we talk about higher the
funding that's going to work
force programs there's been
about eighty million dollars
that have come to work force uh
programs in the last four or
five years most particularly I
have been this one uh plug a
funding twenty million dollars
largely that state funding was
replaced with federal funds
during the pandemic
refund arpeth
some of the federal funding and
then most recently the current
slug of money is sixty million
dollars twenty million per year
that is part of the mexico
growth program
important that of the funds that
have been allocated and i'll
just hear a speak for CNN
centers received or likely would
receive twenty six million of
that eighty over time so it's
really important that you
understand what I find it to be
very important to understand
understand how we are defining
success how we are sharing
information reporting the
database from our learners and
our employers so you know why
that this is is so important
because at the end of the day
CNN is a funnel of funding to
promote and grow economic
development.
On slide for
um you'll see how we did this we
are we have used the five
million dollars from what we
call each of the one so far
we've used seven million dollars
from eighty two for the grow
funds we are in we will use the
next round of about seven
million dollars in your two of
grow funds to largely do two
things to support work based
learning which we call
internships free of pretty ships
anything that's going to help a
learner and subsidise wages of
an employer i'd help that
learner enter an industry sector
and gain some skills and an
employer frankly invaluable.
Labor.
And then also direct spending to
learners
and I say learner's because they
are really individuals who would
never who would really don't
come to walk through our front
doors regularly for our college
programs these are individuals
were seeking just in time
training
to help them achieve confidence
to gain some financial stability
and there for their families and
maybe to try a new industry that
they never would have
anticipated otherwise
participating in so we have made
direct payments to our learners.
You can see here on slight board
twenty almost twenty six hundred
scholarships have gone out the
door in the last two years of a
nominal amount of money i'm in
efficiency to spend what I
really like to share is that joy
for hand who is our vice
president for work force
community success.
That's right but that modest
handeries really has made sure
that we have worked closely with
employers and across our
institution to provide quality
work training and experiences
and I want to give great credit
to her for pulling this material
together from not only see them
but all of our colleges.
Now you can see that of the
twenty six hundred learners they
bark you participated number of
programs on slight five you can
see most of those programs that
they've been rolled in have
related to technology
transportation trades certainly
health care and you can see that
we're starting to work on
quantum technology and
technicians which again is
incredibly important to central
new mexico and you've probably
seen some articles recently from
sandy labels from you and from
CNN that talks about this growth
industry so again we are trying
to make sure that individuals
are gaining learning experiences
in high demand high wage
programs.
On slight six I want to show you
so the next couple slides show
some of the data how do we know
this is working.
Um how do we and that's you
absolutely want to know that
you're investment is making a
difference.
I'll see broadly speaking it's
been hard to get
the money in our hands quick
enough to get the data in time
for you to report this
information so what I can tell
you is from the first slug of
money the first five million
dollars on page slight and paid
six that's really what the
results you're seeing here
you're seeing about eight
hundred people who have
completed their training.
You can see about a hundred and
fifteen are still in progress
because again takes time for
people to i'd say wrong the
program
complete and moving
present i'm just gonna really
quick members if you want to
turn to tab g that's where I
think our LFC um
sort of context as we go on.
So you can see on side six we've
had about eight hundred people
complete their programs you have
about a hundred and fifteen
people and still in prices from
that first
funding source that was largely
spent by december of last year I
think it's important is that you
know that we've collected about
seventy four percent of those
individuals have responded to
our surveys so we know that so
that and they're telling us that
they're employed their employed
in the industry where the
program that they took
it is aligned.
And then on slide seven you can
see what their wages are because
again we want to make sure
they're trained if their
employed or they're seeking
continuing learning and then
what are those wages we want to
keep moving the need all so that
you we can tell what their
successes.
So on page seven you can see
that our learners are porting
our leave wages
we have about a hundred and
fifty six.
So about sixty percent of the
individuals who have told us
what they're making by the way
personal waged out of is really
hard to collect.
You're gonna hear that from all
of us but people will tell us
their employed they rarely tell
us what they're earning.
So i'm just going to note that
so the best information we have
is that most of our learners
have gone through programs are
from that first
allocation of funding is really
they're making between forty and
fifty thousand dollars and
certainly we have a number who
are making much higher than that
and mostly in the industries
that we talked about.
Now the second on page eight the
second amount of money is seven
million dollars that received
last year
that we can spend up until what
this week june thirtieth
we have about six hundred and
eight people who have completed
we have a number in process.
The.
The egd allocated those funds
back in october two thousand and
twenty twenty four
so that meant we have a eight
months to spend
you know seven million dollars
that's been very ticket
challenging to do but that's
also why you see so many of our
students who are in progress
because they enrolled not only
in spring but certainly started
this summer so just so you know
we've made continuous progress
and scaled up our work as you've
been able to get those funds.
Again of the individuals of the
fifteen hundred people we see
employed or i'm sorry in our
trading programs you can see we
have about two hundred people
who have told us what they're
that their employed in what
they're earning.
On page nine similar data that's
in progress whose employed what
do they earning in and what
their salaries are I think
what's important to note is on
slide nines that you can see the
salaries of individuals have
increased but again there's more
individuals are in certain
training programs um their
ability to I frankly earn more
more money is is noticeable and
on slight ten I chose in a one
learner who was able to both
receive intensive training
receive a workbase learning
experience he is in that higher
that higher earning categorian
prior sites of his making that
seventy or more thousand dollars
based on the skill sets and the
investment that you've made.
Now I mention that we directly
fund a number of learners for
timely training.
We are also incredibly focused
on work based learning at cnn
and I think i've said this in
the past we really want one
hundred percent of our students
to achieve an experience a work
experience that is relevant to
the program a study that they're
in that's very common and
straightforward when you're
nursing when you're in teaching
somewhat when you're in the
trades
we're trying to expand that as
well and so this money the hd
grow money has been a game
changer for us and I would be
able to expand and provide paid
work experiences for a learner's
as you know most of our students
are most of our learners have
other obligations they can't
afford to have a work based on
experience that is unpaid they
simply cannot do that so for us
to be able to subsidize wages
because of what you're what
you've chosen to find we've been
able to make a difference and on
slide eleven you can see we've
had two hundred and fifty four
interns
on slide twelve you'll see that
those interns are working in a
variety of areas including local
government but certainly at
start ups at some of our more
established businesses and
albuquerque in the region so
again it's a variety of warning
learning experiences that are
students are participating in
and again on slight twelve you
can see where most of our work
most of our learners are
how they've completed their
internships so again i've about
a hundred and fifty interns that
we've seen so far about you can
see that we have about fifty
five have told us they're
employed and what their wages
are so again we are continuing
to collect the statute because
we know how important it is to
be able to show that return on
investment both for the learner
for the employer and for the
legislature who's funding this
program.
Um on number thirteen again it's
really important for other
institutions and certainly
proceed them to tell you and for
employers to validate whether
this is working and I think on
slight thirteen that tell you to
that again in the appendix and
the attached materials from a
number of our art partner call
are there colleges here you were
you repeatedly see the employer
satisfaction that's coming back
saying we couldn't have hired
these individuals we couldn't
abroad these these students into
our um into our field into our
business and our practice
without this money and without
the subsidized wage so again
really important for a job
attraction and a recruitment
tool a but also really important
to our learners as i've
mentioned
slides fourteen and fifteen tell
you who are a partners are again
private companies government
world trying to sell the work
force need and provide the best
skilled train skilled work force
into our areas
um we certainly want a highlight
that burnly county is taking
advantage of this and donated
communicologist also done an
exceptional job working with
their government a local
governments to provide interns
as well so again really
important work that we're doing
to make sure that we're meeting
a workforce need and being able
to provide quality and important
services to a community
slide sixteen we were asked
to also include the panel was
asked to include
sort of a slider description of
contract training so we have
employers who will come to cnm
or will come to
south east mexico college and
other colleges to be able to say
we want specialised training.
And here the competencies that
we need you to train to and they
will help pay for some of that
training so again it's CNN
slide sixteen you can see we've
had sixteen a sixty four of
those contracts as regular part
of what we do we served fourteen
hundred employees of companies
for up skilled and skilled and
based on what their companies
telling us to do whether it's
presentation health system where
there's intel with its local
government we certainly have a
number of employers who come to
a saying we'd like supervisor
training project management
training certainly c d l and we
use of right funds to help
support the employer and how
they pay for those funds
so what's next
we have some head june twentieth
told us all the institutions
what are allocation would be for
f twenty six.
See them we'll receive again
about seven million dollars and
were really pleased without
allocation because we're able to
frankly put it to good use
quickly and about eighteen
months or last funds are in
about eighteen months so our
goals are aggressive on slight
seventeen you can see that we're
gonna grow the number of
learners through training by
about fifteen percent.
You can also see that we're
going to focus our training and
our scholarships on advance
manufacturing and on health care
because in central new mexico
that is subsubstantial need
we're also going to expand our
internship number because we see
the value both from our
employers.
The.
I think what's most important
for us is all of us talk about
the data that we have and the
work that we're doing for
individual communities and our
individual employers what's
really important is that we have
seen early results and we are
absolutely committed not only
CNN but and I might the new
mexico independent community
colleges in seeking permanent
funding for work for stringing.
It's it's unuh it is again it's
clear that these problems are
making a difference who want to
make sure that there's permanent
funding for that so we will seek
that even though we are only
approaching the second year of
the new up and am grow and
funding
and while some opportunities and
ways that we can we'd like to
present to the legislature on
how we'd seek that funding
that's in if we can I know we
have two more
I don't want actually I think
one of the things that we want
to hear particularly given that
cn is essentially thirty five
percent of the funding that
we've allocated and but for each
institution sort of summarized
the successes please share your
top challenges whether that's
with h d and sort of timing for
money or any of the others and
uhm
so that I mean that's I think
going to be the meat for us to
really dive in on questions
if I may it seems that those two
I don't think there's any
question that it's hard to get
the data that we seek we are
committed to making sure we can
find out where is to
tell the story and to test and
refine our programs in our
trainings based on what
employers are telling us and
what learners are telling us
collecting data is hard it's
very personal staff intensive so
that's difficult I would also
say that the timing of each of
the allocating the funds has
been difficult we have had to
make institutionally i've had to
make decisions.
To fun i'll say front money
for july one for approach for
internships and training that
started in june that will end in
august but I didn't know until
june twentieth what what the
amount of money I was going to
have to be able to work
employers so we are to make a
commitment institutionally that
this is important to our
community to do this i'm pleased
at the department
again late june recognized and
made those allocations but it
really makes it for very
difficult way to manage employer
relationships and learner's
experiences
mid summer so we've got to
figure out a better way to do
that those are primarily the
biggest challenges I would say
thank you
thank you
mr chairman members of the
committee this morning what i'd
like to spend some time telling
you about is how university of
new mexico towes bills
relationships with our local
employers have spent the grow
funds and what the future looks
like for us just for a little
bit of contact we've heard some
big numbers you're going to hear
some small members we serve
thirteen hundred students we are
working with a budget of about
two hundred thousand dollars and
grow funds i'm also going to
talk about nursing enhancement
and nursing expansion which is
about a million dollars for us a
year we do not do any contract
education.
So i'll begin now on the first
slide in may have twenty twenty
three there is an article in the
santa fe reporter entitled on
this struggle bus and weather
story was about was the the poor
state of public transportation
in santa fe
like many industries are
covering from covered there were
insufficient number of employees
and so trained cdl drivers were
really barging down the public
transportation systems and new
mexico in northern new mexico we
were seeing regional transit
just having a hard time keeping
enough routes open to serve the
purpose we were seeing
challenges in public and sorry
and tourism transportation which
was really impacting for us the
ske valley
fishing operations water rafting
operations was hard for people
to if they wanted to work to get
to work if they needed public
transportation and employers
like it cars and for who mine
men have to have a c d out where
really being challenged to
maintain their work force and so
many of these employers reached
out to the university of new
mexico tasks and asked us for
help and what we did was engaged
in some creative problems
solving with them our challenges
are limited staff and limited
equipment and actually those
were the resources that these
employers had they had folks who
were expert drivers they had
trucks that they could be doing
training in and so we provided
testing we provided curriculum
we provided expert development
for instruction for experience
cdl drivers and we started to
saw the work force problem
we were able to pay that with
growth finds and really start
making a difference for our
local work force getting people
back out on the roads in jabs
and in these vehicles and
addressing the needs.
The work force.
And the next slide new and
housework force training what
you see is this is a hallmark of
the work that we do in a small
community I mean with a ceo is
monthly and have relationships
where they are able to
communicate needs really
immediately to us but our whole
goal is to meet the local work
for a sneed
provided the example of cdl you
also see this and construction
yesterday you heard a mayor
masters talk about the work that
is happening in touch to provide
housing that's affordable
housing are construction program
is is really
responsive to those needs and
terms of providing that training
for a construction we do a lot
of on site
where land is already present we
come in and we will do quick
bills we provide ocean training
for
for example for the publo that
as you heard is also
in a rapid kind of construction
situation and we provide
expertise if we receive funding
for at that house work for a
center we will be able to build
year round which will be a huge
boom in terms of doing
incubation of different
and building components our film
programs highly responsive to
the look on the needs so we have
created firms for the ban on
safety on trails we are
producing the native voices
series add film series on the
preblous of new mexico and right
now we have students who are
working with national geographic
on a shoot and based in new
mexico and what you're seeing
and all of these examples is
students learning hams on in the
employment context so they are
able to go immediately from the
learning environment to the
employment environment really
seamlessly and this is our with
the help of grow finds.
This.
The same types of things they're
helping it happening in all of
our health care programs so we
work very closely with holy
cross not only to meet their
staffing news that they
immediately have but to predict
means for the future and we see
not only are are students
learning and and doing
placements out holy cross having
holy cross be part of our
instructional team but we're
building out medical assisting
and flabatomy this fall in
response to needs that have been
brought to us from holy cross
and so as a result of this high
intense connection between you
and and house in our local work
force over the past four years
we've seen a fifty seven percent
increase in the awards i'm
meaning the certificates and
degrees that we are worried and
career technical education areas
the highest growth we've seen is
and transportation and health
care health care
are pre am science is the major
that students have when they are
going into health care fields
that is our number one major and
now we see that city is students
represent twenty percent of the
enrollments that you and m t
house we see very strong
retention and completion rates
in part because students know
why they're learning what
they're learning because they're
using that in the contacts that
they will when their employed in
that field very often they're
already working with an employer
or they see that direct
alignment into the work force on
this is made even more feasible
with the grow fines and so on
this buyer that says legislative
finding like a program impact
your cease some of our numbers
in cd we had thirty students you
are all currently employed we
spent fifty eight thousand
dollars of.
Grow money to make that happen
those students are going into
jobs that are a family
sustaining wages in this area
line men who are working for
kick cars and are earning excuse
me.
Are earning forty dollars an
hour
and excuse me
but a see the out can be
starting out at twenty eight
dollars than our walmart
recently advertised that
beginning people who just
received their cd al can be
earning eighty thousand dollars
a year working for them a
certified optic technician i'll
talk about that development and
just a minute
that we this is a nine credit
program so you're not going to
see degrees or certificates
being awarded here but this is a
one week program for a students
come and are earning for that
for learning for that full week
and are going directly into the
work force emergency emergency
medical responders again a large
number of students are coming
through our program for that
they're going into volunteer
positions because you know amr
emt in a mass are not
compensated in this state of new
mexico these are typically
volunteers working with a local
fire department but are an
important part of the health
care system in new mexico and
finally nursing representative
chat field I believe that I
remember meeting in which you
are specifically what's
happening with nursing as a
result of nursing enhancement
and nursing expansion in twenty
twenty two after received the
when we were able to receive and
the funds for enhancement and
for expansion we doubled the
number of nurses you were coming
through our program previously
we ran a cohort are entered a co
hurt every other year when those
funds came in we were able to
expand our are teaching faculty
the resources that we provide to
support students through and
expand facilities so that we
were able to completely house
that the faculty and the
students for that and doubled
their number of nurses that we
were bringing in and completing
from our program.
They go directly into the the
local work force
with a very high success rate in
our program we typically have a
hundred percent of our students
who are passing the includes on
the first attempt.
So a cross these programs you
can see that high level of
involvement with our local work
force the alignment of our
programs and it really speedy
way to the needs of their work
force and the ability for
students to enter into the work
force here locally directly and
so in their sky that says
community impact what we can see
is that branch college is across
new mexico are critical to the
success of training and local
work force that wants to learn
here and work here and because
we're responsive to that work
for us need we're able to make
sure that employers have the
folks that they need to be able
to work with our local
work force in that the first
half of the slide holy cross
hospital had an initiative
called team's house and they
stated as their goal was to hire
is many u and m nursing
graduates as possible
they know that their quality of
health care that's provided by
folks who live here who have
learned here and live here is
superior to traveling nurses and
their goal was to really break
up with traveling nurses when
possible and work with local
employees kit carson was able to
pursue a ten million dollar
department and energy grant with
confidence because they knew
that they could turn to us to
develop that work force and so
my example about the certified
fiber optic technicians.
I'm wind louise knew that he was
going to be going after that
grant he called me and he said
we're going to need a whole lot
of folks who retrained and fiber
and can you help us with that
how quickly can you be able that
we worked with christian artest
representative or test to build
out those programs to build the
um a printership model and you
can see that we had fifty eight
students who have come through
that program we'd have
incomplete data on whether they
are working right now in that
because such a short program so
they come through with us we
know that many of them were
already working out kit carson
and this is advancement for them
essentially on the job training
but we also know that we we knew
that there were people who were
coming in unemployed people who
were coming in in lower parts of
the work lower paid parts of the
work force coming in and getting
trained in fiber optic
technicians and now they are
going directly into that work
force is we're building fiber a
framed house all the way down to
espanola we need a lot of people
to do that work and this is
something where people and one
week can be entering into those
careers so
the relationship with the
employer the education and the
growth funds has made all of
that possible.
So in terms of looking forward
we've been able to do all of
this without a dedicated
facility which leads me to to
get you ready to see a request
from us to turn their former
national guard armory into a
work force facility I am you can
imagine that we've been teaching
construction without a space to
do that that's part of why we do
so much work on site but now
we'll be able to do that work
year round animal so with you
that's to devoted to that well
also for the first time have our
own facility to teach welding to
do electrical planning to really
expand the resources that we're
doing in construction
we've never had our own kitchens
to teach colonary and I hope
you've been enjoying some good
food while you've been in touch
that is a big part of the
tourism industry here
our film and digital media has a
current space we'll be able to
move them into an expanded space
to really continue the
excellence that they have
started in that program
additionally we see that
observatory hopefully a future
ask as a way to build the
relationships with the space
industry that's growing in new
mexico we already have
partnerships with reasons
activity and others who are
working in that text space
due to the the really
outstanding telescope
opportunities that we have so
the opportunity to house those
resources properly and to
provide again this really high
contacts learning that motivates
students to to enter too too
complete because they know
they're going straight into that
work force is very impactful
alright I will pass there
and if you wouldn't mind sort of
the biggest challenges
please yes.
You don't think the biggest
challenge for us when we were
working with high demand dollars
and then transitioning into
growth dollars was really the
process of receiving the funds
and my hope is that we've gotten
to a better place we we are
easily able to spend that many
when we have the run way to do
it if we have a a short period
of time we're working with
employers where working with
recruiting students into this
who do not think of themselves
this college students typically
so there's a lot of testing that
has for cdl there's a whole lot
of testing that's that's a that
says hard as the work that
they're going to do in the seat
and so I was that bringing
people in and getting them ready
to be college students take some
time i'm recruiting that student
group so the longer the the
earlier we know we have that
money they more iterated the
process to receive those fines
the more effective we're able to
spend those fines
thank you mister chairman
members of committee are since I
and eastern were the ones that
initially asked for access to
these fines I appreciate the
opportunity to present the good
work that we're doing
first a very briefly review of
the y regional comprehensive
universe season why I asked for
access to these funds
most of the students we serve
work at least part time we've
had internship opportunities on
the books for for years but not
a lot of them could take
advantage because they couldn't
leave that part time job to
participate in an internship
that was unpaid some of them are
helping mom and down on on the
farm the dairy on the ranch and
you know their housing is
provided for them they live at
home and they come to school so
for a lot of those reasons we
didn't have students taking
advantage of the opportunities
on the other side we saw a lot
of our potential employers our
potential businesses that.
Would provide internships
thinking that why don't have the
money to on a small business I
can't pay for a wage for an
internet to participate I don't
know if I can help for the time
to allow them to to learn with
us so for a lot of those reasons
this money
solves the problem and allows us
to move forward
so the briefly what we've done
with that money in the the fall
of twenty four the set the
second slide you'll see a list
and I will go through all those
numbers i'll just explain to you
a couple things that you're
seeing are one in the fall as a
chasing mention we receive the
the funds all but laid into the
fall semester but you'll see
that range of disciplines are
grow and change and you will see
that continue to change as we
are plugged more at these end to
to the university into our
process so you'll see the number
of students served the number
students finishing the program
so what that is reflecting as
the number of soon set graduated
in the same year they
participated in this this paid
internship and of those the
number that we know where we're
employed and as has already been
stated I want to know more about
those data and and we're we have
a plan for uh getting more
information on that but
we know of of again of the
numbers that that move through
the other thing i'll mention is
look at that if it'll turn to
the spring data
we're working more with our
alarms and with our potential
employers i'm very heavily
involved in economic development
and eastern new mexico at this
point out of necessity I think
for me to be successful to grow
the university for me to keep
more of our graduates employed
in new mexico I need to be
involved in the price service of
addressing our access to health
care child care education
housing so on and so and so i'm
it's all connected but the more
I can use these internships to
create an education and educated
work.
Force high blind and I work
together with the the city and
the county and the the state to
pull those businesses in the
more successful will be c o c
and those numbers again that the
range of disciplines and i'll
talk more just a second about
why that's growing in and how
we're using that again the
number of of students served the
numbers that completed their
their program of steady within
that same academic year and the
number that we know were were
employed
so really want to want to focus
on is the importance of this
phone where we're taking it and
the sustainability so if you
look at the slide the future
plans and our healthy quality
initiative a high learning
commission requires that we have
a quality initiative something
that enhances essentially a
student outcomes.
We are up for review and twenty
twenty seven that plan was
submitted actually a couple of
weeks ago and we have to gather
data on out
so
the reason that's important is
my intent in what we have built
at eastern is that this process
this will be a key piece of what
we are doing from the first day
of class to the first day of
career are everything we are
changing or modifying is to help
that student first of all
identify what they want to study
a lot of uncome to us and they
have interest they have passions
but they don't know what they
want to do with with those
interest
research tells us the sooner we
connect those students to a
course of study the sooner we
connect them with something the
more likely they are to persist
into graduate on our side that
also means minimizing the wasted
semester credit hours that they
take when they change their mind
midstream and decide that's not
what they want to do with the
rest of their life so we are
really focused on and are being
very intentional about those
first year experience courses
advising counseling to connect
them early
also the
experience you're learning
within their course of study we
are intentional and working to
enhance the opportunities for
them to have hands on learning
within their discipline whether
that's undergraduate research
with a faculty member whether
it's the leadership programs
that i'm creating we have one
through our uh that's donor
funded through athletics is the
athletic leadership academy and
it's taking those leadership
skills off the courts in the
fields and making the marketable
skills that they'll take with
them into their first job will
use that to create other
leadership opportunities on
campus for for these students
aligning our curricular to make
sure again it's intentional it
bills a skill said as they move
through their degree.
And it's focused on what they
want to do with the rest of
their lives
many of you may have heard me
talk about one eastern that's
initiative within our system
that now every program we offer
on all three campuses is
available to any student
enrolled at eastern so if it
makes sense for them to complete
a computer science degree and
portallus and the cyber
certificate and read also they
can do that and be concurrently
enrolled in that seamless we
want to tie in those marketable
job skills are those experiences
within that curriculum and will
gather data as we move through
any of the programs that were
offering
are also helping students
articulate those skills document
those whether it so portfolio
were a resume or a vita that as
they go through and they have
that first interview they can
list all of these opportunities
they've participated in an again
that those paid internships are
a critical to the process if
they have hands on learning if
they get to apply what they're
studying first hand preferably
with a business in new mexico
and that business hires them at
the conclusion of that that's
that's perfect for all of us I
continue to grow work force I
continue to develop
the economy of new mexico and
again we we retain students and
high paying jobs.
So the the
second the next slide of the the
quality initiative
consistent with our slogan
student success that's what
we're about
our primary goal again is to
have them go through an entire
education coordinated education
process the results in
experience and a high pain job
at the end I traditionally were
measured often on a metric such
as retention rates completion
rates degrees offered
those are important for us we
meet those metrics but I don't
know that student that graduates
with that degree and doesn't
have a job doesn't put that
degree to work with necessarily
agree with that measure of
success so again we are focusing
all that we do on
those those plans and and where
we are in finally I I mentioned
the data and i'll i'll conclude
with that peace the improved
tracking so we're tracking
throughout our program you'll
see a less I won't read through
all of those but at the end of
that we i've hired additional
staff that will work to
coordinate the internships and
the work that we are doing
through our clear services might
manage that and to set up in
turnships and be we're working
on a new c r m to help us track
data and gather data from our
alarms and and what they're
doing on the outside so within
our
quality in this should have
emphasised our focus on the new
mexico's focus on career
readiness
i've know we've noted in that
the three year investment from
the state on that and we want to
continue to demonstrate that
that roi I wanted you to see
that we are heavily invested we
have built
our entire quality initiative
our programs on this we're
hoping that this is a ongoing
fund we're working on additional
donor supp.
For it so we're not completely
dependent on state funding for
this but as we build this
program and it and build our
success through that it's our
hope that we see that this one
continue are beyond these three
years and I left you with a
summary data slide and and
without we're happy to stand for
questions great thing thank you
all we're going to go straight
to question starring with center
pidea then going to center good
thank you very much mister
chairman and thank you president
in a chancellor and chancellor
for some real quick questions
president hartsler on page of
thirteen of your presentation
the first actual presentation
you meant.
Just excellent work all around
you know i'm always so proud of
all the work you do in all the
work your team does you guys do
in such a phenomenal job I have
one of your branches in my
district and we just love having
you there and we want to build
you it one that's three times
the size so let's get there.
But the question I had is on
thirteen are the companies that
benefit from these are
partnerships are they
contributing to the cost of
delivering the training
yes
members of the committee and
center per dear the employers
heavy match for the employee
subsidy the wage so we subsidise
up to
fourteen dollars they pay at
least seventeen total or higher
so they are putting in at least
three dollars an hour for that
employee but certainly what
they're putting in is the time
the talent often the equipment
of their own employees to mentor
and train somebody at their shop
and if you're a small start up
which some of it and again
we have start up so if they're
taking time away from their phd
sign and scientists to train one
of the internet on the lab
safety and technician safety
that slows down their production
but what's happened as the
employer has seen a benefit to
growing their pipeline and
frankly helping to eventually
get to a higher productivity for
their employees for those
interns so there's subsidies per
the wage and their site there
mentorship in their commitment
to frankly providing the doubter
that says why this works and how
we can engage in other ways
thank you thank you chair and
i'll just move through my
questions for a quick so i'm now
also president hartsley that
seems slide so are you is does
your staff create proactive
relationships or do you wait for
a company to come to you i'm
thinking of things like the new
new mexicenter that it makes it
soul in my district there
already have seven companies
from india that are coming in
they'll be start ups there is a
eban solar maxian solar there is
going to be an awful lot of
opportunity for which you're
describing here are you
proactively approaching them or
do you wait for them to come to
you had a does that work uh
members the committee and
certainly it were pretty
impatient so no we don't want it
for them to come to us
but I would say it starts with
our relationship with our local
economic development
organizations.
Area and so an albuquerque and
for county area that is the
alcohol regional economic
alliance so we are often seeing
amazed often whether it's myself
whether it's joy four hand or
others are at the table
recruiting eban and maxion and
other companies so part of the
pitch is that we provide the
work force very similar to what
my colleagues have said so we
started the front end of
recruiting companies frank it's
reason why many of them are
coming to our area is because of
our work horse commitment and
because the companies have seen
and this is publicly stated they
see the state and the local
governments i'm investment not
only in tax incentives but in
work for us training and in
their support for higher
education whether it's the
opportunity scholarship or
lottery scholarship so they see
a number of ways that that we
work together to leverage funds
to help attract businesses but I
want to be really explicit we
don't only work with companies
coming to us we want to make
sure we're very clear about how
we're helping our local
employers get their services and
expand so it's some because you
want to grow our region and
certainly commit to careless
power or any of those other son
until certainly but the the the
ring of the supporting
businesses for an intel for a
maximum for others or those
space spin offs that are coming
off of hurtland or sandy and
national labs we're providing
technicians for all of those
businesses and many of the
skills are similar though
slightly tweaked depending on
the industry so we're very
committed to working we were
closely with our economic
development organization and
chambers and government to make
sure we're pitching we're
pitching our services together
to recruit and retain our
businesses and grow businesses
here so no we don't wait thank
you chair and think you are made
a president it's terrific you
answered my next two three or
four questions and what they
were really around are there
linkages to the economic
development groups and bodies
and and i'm sure that's why
you're so successful in doing
it.
I just want to make sure so
thank you very much for that and
mister chairman i'll be at real
quick here so chancellor johnson
I have a couple of questions for
you on the fall data and slide
and the spring data slide
on that one so the social work
individuals that are going
through this programming and all
that where are they going what
what are they doing after
they're making turn off if we
have a do you have any extra
might.
So so what are they doing when
they're done with the internship
where they going do you know
where they're going to go work
full time
mister chairman since you'll we
are connecting him with
the opportunities with the
within the state as as many as
we can but they're they are
going to everything from schools
to hospitals to behavioral help
we have some that are doing
internships and plugging into
can an air for space in the
needs of our military
one of the issues we had is a
lot of our social work students
were passing up really great
internship internship
opportunities because they
couldn't afford to leave that
part time job or move out of
their home
it's incredibly living
yeah sir so hard this young
those are the questions I want
to answer I want to know more
specifically
where they're going what they're
what they're getting paid where
the the emphasis areas are so
that we can
strengthen those and continue to
to grow in those directions well
thank you chairman and thank you
chancellor yeah I mean I would
think that see why if he would
just be beating your door down
because they have such a
shortage of workers there do you
interact are you linked with
them at all or they would think
they want to ask you if they
could set up a recruiting office
right in your building to make
sure that they capture these
folks before they run after
texas or something else mr
chairman sensibly I yes and we
graduate for our first or will
graduate first co heart of
masters master of social work we
started that program and for
those in particular the
search has been very are very
interested in in the program
hour department chair for social
work is very engaged state wide
doing a lot of great work to
connect our students to those
charms thank you chairman and in
my last it's more of a comment
you know would can I get a
commitment from you that you
will.
Set up a meeting and talk to the
c cabinet secretary and just
learn more about how to link
these people to super jobs over
at cybe because you're producing
some really great workers that
they need to very badly and so I
just ask I i'd be happy to help
facilitate that III could get
along great with that department
to help them a lot a lot of
different ways but this is oh I
don't know i'm looking at for
fifty nine potential folks for
right there that they could
really use like little it right
now so alright thank you thank
you we have six more folks on
the list we're going to go
straight to senators allison
repliment down senate goods
thank you all mister chairman
and members i'll be very brief I
don't have any questions I just
have a some commons first of all
listening to all three of you
first of all thank you for your
presentation in just the
uniqueness of our state you know
from the urban to the rule and
to the different parts of the
state but all bottom line is
some being born and raised in
towels and the many years that I
also work with a tough schools
understanding the need but also
what I have seen what you and
emtals has done for towers you
know in that it really has
become you know the the apple of
the community the gold and apple
of the community and so just in
listening to to the request that
you start from mayor or there
from question that potential if
that happens you know creating
that her to your third more in
also with more under energy is
so the potential of so many jobs
and this are individual settle
they're not going to have the
means to travel or to relocate
somewhere else for their
training or their education so
just being in our backyard you
know that is so something really
very strong to the community
providing no of.
Within the union towels and a
very brief mister chairman is
some
the national guard armory was
sold you know when it was so we
actually took us six years to
get the funding for that and in
the process it became a
transportation unit so it's a
big building because of the
transportation part and you know
I just look at it what a way of
really transitioning to where we
don't have extra tax dollars
into going to building and that
working with its building and
modifying this building to the
needs the second place is for
the members to see is that it
could have happened anymore
because so
the property the building is
adjacent to your damn cloud so
it's all within right there you
know it's a win win in you know
what I give to to the community
also too you and them talks to
enhance on this so you know I
can see some the high potential
you know of what's coming now in
reference to policy and then I
have worked also with a
department of transportation
also with a mvde
one of them for our state on the
cdl training you know itself
it's in a way it's like
you want this but in a way it
also is hard because you go
through the training and then
someone else is willing to pay
more takes that and what it
really does hurt yourself school
transportation you know school
transportation really
albuquerque everywhere you know
the training for cdl is so hard
because this individuals go and
then eventually you know the
land you know with or something
with a higher salaries.
And you can blame so on the
endorsements you know that's
something that on maybe we could
take a little closer to look
into that to her it would
inhense for school employees and
school transportation and now
that is so pretty much a state
wide need to know that that goes
now
I know on the nursing part what
an excellent to just work with
our own our own people having
here instead of we know what we
faced with our traveling nurses
of home the high expense to to
fund that and to keep that going
in the need is there so it's a
much more if we can do our own
to have everyone certified on
this but all the mischairman
members though I really want to
encourage percentages and also
the uniqueness to our state you
know from all of you thank you
thank you representative down
and center to buy us thank you
mister chair and thank you for
the presentation that my
questions for the chancellor
I get are you guys you guys do a
lot of dual enrollment and I
want to personally thank you
because a lot of the folks from
my district the students do
their their concrete enrollment
dorn romen through eastern for
agriculture and i'm looking at
your chart on the paid
internships and on agriculture
it says one
are you just a terms of a
representative
that in the spring that's that's
part of what we're building is
helping me soon to understand
that there are opportunities
for example just dfa as
coming to our door saying we
want more in that area but one
of the places were were growing
and strengthening part of our
uh
funding is building a new
agricultural production and
management facility so that's
faced one that's going now.
Our next year bound out will be
to
grow that are a new academic
building a new lab spaces so
we're growing that academic
offerings and it's rolling about
connecting our alarms and those
businesses where those
opportunities and coming from
and I will cultural background
it's been my intent to help a
lot of these generational
businesses understand how to
compete commercially or on a
global scale sold that those
general generational business
don't continue to disappear so
thank you thank you mister chair
and thank you for that
chancellor I just don't know if
you're giving yourself enough
credit cards I mean maybe you
guys are focused on one stream
of money but I know of at least
two students who are doing dual
enrollment online with eastern
who are in paid internship
programs that are being funded
by ped so there are different
pulls of money so I don't know
which of you would want to
answer that their sister was a
higher number of students that
are not on campus in this case
dual that are getting paid
internships and getting their
course work from you and my neck
of the words and but there's i'm
wondering if if any of you guys
have seen
the roll out or know what's
going to happen with the one
point two million and work force
at like kind of the new mexico's
first time they funded wio more
money beyond the federal dollars
have you been told what that's
going to look like or how to
access those dollars.
I think if you have any answers
to that
were focused here on the on the
the grow french this grow sixty
million but if it is in may have
an answer to the chair and then
down the sort of answer is not
yet
oh thank you thank you mr chair
and I do think I mean the grow
money probably isn't enough to
do everything that you want and
you want it to be permanent but
there is a lot of other money
out there that can be utilised
so
err I appreciate what you're
doing and especially when we saw
the report that of the students
who are graduate I think we were
right below fifty percent of our
students who are getting the
opportunity and lottery
scholarship were graduating and
then other those that are
graduating the majority of those
are in humanity ease or general
studies what you are doing is
critically important and you're
putting in people into work in
high demand jobs and that that's
what I think tax dollars should
be doing is meeting a need for
new mexico citizens whether it's
nursing cyfd
we all want to eat three miles a
day our average farmer is in
their late fifties early sixties
I mean I think what you guys are
doing is tremendous and I would
have the privilege of going to
the ten year anniversary of the
layman program it at donate
community college which is a
partnership between the electric
company of hassle electric
company and donate community
college and that the I think
they've had forty one laneman
that had been hired at all
possible electric company
through that program over the
last ten years that's critical
and demand under me and energy
is something every citizen
benefits from I can't really
connect a basket reading degree
back to my community as a high
demand job meeting a need for a
caregiver or are a equipment
operator or a best driver or or
see why if d worker but I can
connect what you're doing and it
makes sense to mean I think the
mexico appreciate that thank you
thank you very much have doubt
senator to buy a sin and reps
and better.
Thank you mister chair
let's see who where I want
chancer johnson you talked about
you just graduated your first
cohort of masters and social
work is that correct actual mr
twice and I miss way we will
graduate there this coming up so
we just started it are fall of
twenty four so they will we'll
see those what I
I think they were
too that graduated they went
through expired so we will
graduate the first full cohort I
think
this coming here okay thank you
and mr chair what's the expected
income like earnings for that
degree in new mexico
mr chairman since your I those
are the data that I want to to
capture and collect I I do know
that a master of social work
certainly
higher level of of practice and
higher income are earned but I
those are the kinds things that
were trying to capture through
our new caring wonderful how
many people are in that cohort
mr chairman central
projected originally last fall
of starting a court of twenty we
started with twenty four we
weren't intending to start a
spring court but we started
spring court with twenty five so
were
we what we were up to scale very
much much quicker than we had
anticipate it thank you mister
chair and chance or that's a
it's a good number and I
appreciate the effort i'm now
seeing the questions because i'd
also like to know do you have a
way of getting even now how many
of those graduates would go to
cyfi
mr chairman center I I don't
know with the moment and again
those are those who the exact
questions I want to answer to
know where we direct them and I
certainly take a similar to
video up on his offer and
connect him with a doctor moyer
and I make sure that we are
funneling connectors more
directly and if their
opportunities for more
internships that we can
facilitate.
That's exactly what I wanted to
do with funds like this
wonderful thank you and mister
chair chancellor and what is the
communicator's orders degree
exactly can you explain that a
little bit to us certainly
amazon in sensor that involves
through a service are speech
language pathology and audiology
program so we're we have a
community facing clinic are we
do on for a patient care through
that and through our local
hospital but it is a services
around rehabilitation for speech
language issues and are hearing
we just set up a research park
act entities so that we can
enhance and expand the services
that we offer through funding
from the previous session we
were able to add services that
previously patience in eastern
mexico would have had to go to
aston texas to to receive so
were very excited about
the funding we have received and
what we're able to do now in mr
chair and chancellor is artism
in in this spectrum of of
services as far as language and
audiology would that be the type
of individual that would receive
some of these services
mrperiod sharing center um
dutch not sure I could answer
that that fully I do know we
have some through other our
education or cause of education
that that do help
that with students on the
spectrum and the learning so I
think if there were a a more
specific pathology of difficulty
than certainly these programs
would what also
address those and mr chair
chancellor can you speak to the
numbers here because this is one
category on your chart for
twenty twenty four and twenty
five that has a high number of
students spent a low i'm
finishing or graduating rate now
the employment rate seems to be
equal to those that are
graduating but.
Can you speak a little bit to
that like why why are there such
low numbers i'm finishing the
program at this point certainly
I message her in sender o these
are required clinical hours of
these students will begin those
saying through their junior year
and senior year so they have
four semesters where they are
are participating in clinical
opportunities like that so it'll
we want them engaged early
in an arrange of opportunities
so you you would see that in
programs like that so they they
may participate in this three
say three times before they are
actually graduate so it's not
it's not like a street course
rate so they're not in like they
take two semesters in their done
it's they're coming back and
forth is that when i'm here
that is correct so the diet
active and clinical parts of
their curriculum would extend
over I at least the upper
division of the recourse of
study wonderful thank you in mr
chair
actually the chance of this is
not pointed just at you now so
sorry you're so that's the
but I i'm a business coach so I
work with businesses all over
the state and and every capacity
i'm every market and one thing I
can say over the last almost
twenty years and that's a bit of
big concern in one of the
biggest hurdles for those
employers as job readiness so
you are all speaking my language
i'm very passionate about this
how are you getting the word out
to small business owners around
the state that they could employ
an intern through your programs
because I can tell you that the
vast majority of companies that
myself are my husband have
worked with are not aware of
these programs
mr chairman central answer
initially
that's part of what the the new
stap position I bought it will
work directly to do it's in the
queer development center and
that individual will work to
connect.
Internship
programs are internship
opportunities from the
university to
every business weekend
we can identify in and connect
back to in chancer president can
you answer that as well because
I think it's a great
um I would say that one of their
most important communications
that we have with a smart
business community as mr chair
and senator are through our
speedc and we have one of the
highest performing spdcs and the
state and that is a um because
we're a sponsored that we are
able to connect
um many resources that are unm
tous resources to our small
business community we're also
member of the chamber and we
have many small businesses who
were represented
thank you membership chair
members of the committee center
CNN one the materials that are
presented here from our other
community colleges and
independent medical speak to how
they are reaching and working
with their local employers to
provide work based experiences
or internship so what I say
isn't distinct only to see in
them certainly but it's
certainly in the materials here
c n has a division of work force
and community success we have
organized ourselves to represent
into work with all businesses
incoming but also or existing
businesses
to provide
to really help them address
their work force needs period
we do that in a brave way is
whether it's contract training
whether it's through specific
uh design programs that are
including work experiences
but we have a video work with
our businesses
to include workforce rating it
so it's be clear we have
exceptional technical training
we are still continuing to work
and find ways to improve I would
say the durable skills for all
of our graduates.
Right durable skills
communication team work writing
reports how he's technology in a
I to better address and and
solve problems so we're all
doing that we do in different
ways but we're providing that to
all of our businesses
and through the chamber through
the great work that we've been
doing for years we built their
workbase experiences into that
again the employer testimonials
we have eighty interns up
earlier county government we
have two at a couple of start
ups and buy your sciences and in
our quantity work so it is a
range but were buried deliberate
about using this experience to
help others and early in the
aged one funding fairs and that
twenty million when we developed
our internship agreement with
employers we shared that with
the other colleges
so they could use that to to
ramp up their work base
experiences if that's what they
chose to do and so in a number
of colleges did that and of
course we've learned from their
agreements with other employers
as well so we are routinely
sharing information so that in
ways of doing business and
getting this money out to
employers and students that is
not only serving our central new
mexico region but really
throughout the state
mr chair president thank you for
that and i'm I have about three
organizations that i'd like to
invite you to speak out if if
you're interested in albuquerque
and because I think those
organi- organizations would love
to hear more about this and then
a final question for all three
of you mister chair would be are
you all keeping short in long
term data with graduating
students as far as what what
exact job did they take with
whom and how long are they stain
in it whether it's one year five
year ten year I I mean i'd love
us to make sure that we're
making sure that we don't have a
continued brain dream which has
been another hurdle for our
employers around the state and
actually a pain point for a lot
of family is quite frankly that
their children are just going to
other states for better
opportunity and and their
review.
So can you speak to that a
little bit and again is it is
there a five or ten year track
of knowing that they're staying
in new mexico and what their
employment looks like mister
charles take a sweep with this
we know that our community
colleges eighty plus per cent of
our graduate would stay in the
area so we know that just as a
baseline and these types of
programs
also see an m is very specific
and how we are working with area
or local economic development
organization we have shared
staffing we have a shared data
model that we are using
specifically to ask those
questions because we know that
that first job out of the
training start of getting cdl
will lead to additional training
or perhaps degrees which will
enhance an individuals learning
and they're earning potential
over time so we don't have that
doubt and now we we are
acquiring it as we go through
this program and we appreciate
the growth funds are helping us
to make the case and we work
very closely with department of
work for solutions and are
looking to expand our agreement
with our cnm work for solutions
agreement on data sharing to get
more so more timely sharing of
data to again enhance and really
assess these credentials of
value and how do we help how do
we help employers assess the
value how do we help a learner
or assess that growing wage
increase we believe over time
and that we can so that we can
tell you that we hope to be here
in ten years because you all
funded grow for another seven so
we can certainly continue to
tell that and show that doubt
and show that story cause right
now it's pretty difficult to do
but we're committed to do that
certainly for five years
thank you thank you mister chair
thank you very much
thank you mister chair and thank
you camel thank you for your
work thank you for your
leadership it is it is really
deeply appreciated
president in herself I had a
question on your slide.
Uh page number eighteen I I
didn't understand that she said
four hundred million for new
work force training plan could
ultimately generate over twenty
million annually state one I I
kind of didn't get that sure and
it's a not that thank you chair
members the committee and a
representative so when we look
at flight eighteen
I I work with exceptional
colleagues you may know or a
vice president of libya pidia
jackson who's a former secretary
for the department of finance
administration and others who
are working on ways to find
permanent funding for this type
of work so if you talk about
establishing a fun just as you
have done as a legislature in
the governor of signed funds
whether it's early childhood
behavioral health and others a
work force fund that permanently
generated
endowing that fun and then
drawing down on that on an
annual basis for work force
training would be really helpful
for us and by the way funding
for us means employers and
learners employers value a
program that is stable they are
taking about with us that we are
doing this for three years to
get them addicted and find that
this is of such great value that
we will need to keep bunding us
so that's really where we're
focused on data and why we're
looking for AAA more permanent
funding source so you are
checking the creation of a trust
or some version of that in there
are probably other opportunities
that we'd love to explore we can
okay my my next question is
actually for um I think all of
you and clean the chancellors
are on your bsn program what is
the passed on the national exam
for your for your students
mr chairman representative
actually our batteries b s n is
a completion degree so those
students come to us with a
social degree nursing which is
what's required to enter so they
have already passed their
includes exam
coming to us so this is a
professional top off.
A degree for those nursing
students
so all of the ones we receive
have already passed their their
licensing exam.
Um I I think there's one for the
four year degree too but I could
be right and it may have changed
over the years I used to work
closely with that program the
nursing program and they had a
national for the bs in program
to mister chairman
representative yes that so there
is a primary pathway back lord
degree of previous institution I
had
all actually all three levels
then yeah so it was the primary
pathway entry is back and they
would take the inclined set the
conclusion of the backload
degree
okay and and your pass and your
password now or
free maybe I didn't understand
four for our completion degree
all of them have already taken
it can't come before coming
and uh change the good tires
mr chair representative have
ever thank you for the question
we have a one hundred percent
password nice okay thank you
historical for the program thank
you
by monos and then represent the
hunt
thank you mister chairman you
know when we did this senate
size in our producer they
claimed to it
we have started this with with
eastern rate to list create this
program and let's do this and
then i'm starting to look
through some numbers in in asem
real questions in my mind and I
know why we put it in grow
exactly now and i'm not going to
pick on anyone individually but
but the numbers are going to
matter to us and in them to look
at send one college and you look
at the programming budget in
there the overhead cost is a
million three and you're only
putting seven hundred thousand
in the prince program
and and that's a little
troublesome to me and that's why
this needs to be reported in
growth I mean at eastern in the
way you're you're reporting your
stuff
let me ask you a question the
communications disorder I mean
you have seventy one students in
that communications disorder
that's your highest level but I
don't know what you're operating
costs and your overhead costs
are in into the growth program.
But we all talk about the work
for shortage in it's going to be
different for each and every one
you how you do it albuquerque's
completely different than talks
in the house is going to be
completely different than
eastern in in san warning and so
they're going to be hard to
to look into the numbers but if
I go back and I look at
send one which is really
interesting to me that the only
had one c d l driver
when that's the easiest access
in and then you start thinking
about all of you know we hire
mall day long every day see the
l drivers do not enter college
in inner principle program to
get a c b l license right
they want that six months and
they want to go make the eighty
thousand dollars a year or a
hundred and twenty in the oil
fields however much you want to
drive in in so
I mean we're gonna have to
cutting as we go through this
grow programming we're going to
have to think how differently
each school is going to be to do
this I mean
it answered that's at my mind
point is is I want to see this
data and I want to see it come
back to us in the want to see it
come back to us you know if they
have named nineteen heavy
equipment operators in san want
air for a total of forty eight
and only nine of them only seven
of them dropped thirteen in
progress in nine schedule for a
later day that's twenty nine out
of the other forty eight that
had pretty much put a stop on it
and I don't work that cause was
but if we're ping them into this
principle program
why is that I mean it could be a
number of things could be
families you could be a number
of things but the data is wrote
this is where the dad is really
going to matter because as an
employer
the work for shortage is where I
thought went right how do we get
people into the workforce and
for us is employers as we look
in me higher I don't I don't do
this program but if I get it
this is where I would find the
cream my crop employees that
were committed to.
To what they wanted they're
crear to be or what their life's
interest would be and so as you
manage a prediction program in
say someone wants to be a heavy
equipment operator those guys
that played a little concrete
toys in the backyard and put
dirt and made bill roads they're
going to show their passion and
that's going to come through as
an and say okay I want that guy
and I cost me a little bit of
money to figure out who my
employees are going to be
through this friendship program
but they're going to go to rate
they're going to get the cream
in the crop guys that are
connected to the industry or to
the jobs that they want to have
the only problem is you look at
the heavy criminal operator to
they don't want to go to call
right they want to go sit on an
escalator and dig a whole day
long in same with a welder rate
even though you need that
certificate so it may be
something different and then I
think we're going to have to
change and and build a a
building trades license in new
mexico in some way she
performance they thought of it
but if you're going to enter
this program in you're going to
enter even in this
communications disorder we're
gonna have to build not just a
certificate but some type of
programmer license that we can
get him because they're getting
i'll call the door credit system
they're getting ojt pain right
and they're getting their
certificates in this programming
and so if we're going to do this
then we should get a license of
programs as they move forward if
they don't continue college or
they decide they're going to go
down the different path then how
do we get them that credential
right because credentials matter
when you walk into a businesses
door may I have this training in
it could be I maybe I take
communications this order and
then I take computer science
class in the native a
a business class and then they
take a colonary arts well that's
pretty well rounded training
right
and are we limiting let me ask
this room quick are we limiting
them to one.
Thing in the training or can
they take multiple things they
can go in the culinary arts for
a while and then they can switch
in college kids are going to do
that anyway but can they do that
in switch programming to get a
well rounded work for
mr chairman and simpson if I can
take first front oh
actually what we're doing within
eastern speaks to all of those I
I would say first that one
hundred percent of the funds
that we report it here directly
to those students the staff
person that i've hired the
administration of what we've
done have been through people
that they're already there but
three one eastern user welding
is an example my my son is a
good example certified welder
work for a guy for a while a
company bought a truck when out
on his own and realized he
didn't know how to run a
business so we have a degree
program we take that welding
certificate in its entirely we
plug it into a backlord degree
with an emphasis in business
management to give him the
skills to run that business post
graduation I think the the other
that you spoke to is the last
fees have what we're doing
within the end of your system is
helping that soon answer that
question if they want to go into
coloring arts they want to run a
restaurant they want to have a
food truck whatever that is that
we can tailor the the course
work that we offer to fit their
direction and they may come back
back to his five years from now
and say I have this new
opportunity I need to add and we
want to make sure that we take
the entire that plug it in and
they just pick up where they
left off
so
check chair and send her money
out so I want their couple of
items here
I am not a similar sand one's
particular program but I will
note that
for the second round of funding
for for the first year of growth
funding we received notice in
october about what we're
eligible for so to spend up a.
And in some institutions use
some of those funds to develop a
program that didn't have we used
a lot of our money breaklated
expand programs we already had
so each institution is going to
respond a little bit differently
to their local need so I don't
speak directly to sim once out
of the way absolutely know that
a present pentagon be glad to
talk to you more about there
where they're headed so a near
one for eight months I think
this is some of the data you're
seeing we absolutely while
continue to report down as we go
further i'm your point about
cost and licenses of value we
are very mindful that what we're
the data that seem I was
reporting here is industry
recognize credentials you don't
want see them coming up with a
communication certificate that
looks like a thousand other
certificate communications
certificates you want one that
is recognized by
the the licensing organization
for all communications or
whatever it is we're very
mindful that we want to make
sure that we are not
there we are that we are putting
and supporting students and
sporting employers who need
those credentials of value so
it's a cisco license saying it's
um
for health care your quote see
number of other licenses around
particular training program cdl
clearly has a license oceal
licensing c p r if you're in
clovers so I get more
recognizing that
some other third party is
validating the certificates that
were offering because we know
that's important and you don't
want this water down so we're
very mindful that and we'd be
glad shocked you more about what
kind of license that we might
work on your point about return
on an investment and how do we
the data were working on cnm is
part of a dozen colleges across
the country working on a cost
model for these kinds of
programs because we don't have
facility up and and the program
costs for each one are very
different and established
program may have a facility
mary have employed faculty or
staff the costs are different
than for a start up program and
I think you're seeing that and
some of the data and we're
certainly going to see that as
we develop our programs.
But we're working on a cost
model that will help us better
understand facility utilization
faculty instructor utilization
job placement services that we
leverage already for a current
degree program seekers but for
these trainers treat these
training certificate really
quick in and out learners we
don't always give the same
services to them so we're
looking to have to expand that
to make sure that we can get
people and jobs quickly so when
we talk about costs at least
we're gonna be able to provide I
think a better model for that to
again to be able to show value
so you're asking really
important questions that a
number of us frankly round the
country are wrestling with to
give you the information that
you're seeking because we are
absolutely determined by by next
month next year in your three of
this that we can have a release
that you have an up information
and make a really thoughtful
decision
I mean that the workforce is as
changed at one since covered
sold so greatly right I mean an
employee will leave it for fifty
cents
an employee will leave you for a
benefit and then decide they
don't like that skills and then
try to come back when you've
already hired in so giving them
in the right place at the right
time and getting them connected
to stay is so important to uses
as employers right in in in
making insurer and item just
using I don't know what san on
college's overhead cost when I
start looking at numbers and
saying you know we want to
predictive programs and will
have one cdl driver and I know
all our cdl drivers from galip
have to go to stand one to test
and they're only kicking out one
in in a principle program makes
it very questionable
of what really works in which
area that's why I said you know
each one used like my hand my
dad's hands my fingers on my
hands each twenty is going to be
different in what you provide in
your region in your area and and
what those people connect you
but for the local work for some
used houses and example those
kids that.
Don't leave that want to stay
here and work for whatever
reason family issues take care
the parents could be anything
right that want to be a white
revenue to it or after drive the
truck to the deal that that's a
career for them while they're at
home in that has a connection of
the principle program that that
should be enforcing elming galps
kick this apprenticeship program
off I haven't heard about it yet
but it's interesting in so
I think that's why and grow it
so important to us to look at
the numbers and look the data
into k
do you know george minos months
to go to eastern new mexico but
he doesn't really want to
register for school and and get
his business class when he can
get in the prediction program
then see if you likes it or not
or the same thing with it cbl
guys are not maybe the
immigrants say not all of it a
lot of them are not interested
in getting pursuing another
degree they're their interested
in getting their cd they're
interested in going to work but
then they got a registered
through college and go through
that whole right ameral and so
maybe do a little bit of
homework on that for me in in
you like the heavy equipment
operator the welders are
completely different and so how
we figure that out because in in
tales is the same way you got it
you're going to have to figure
this out on the run in in it's
gonna be a hidden missing a lot
of different places
but I think the supreme court
problem as we look to a new work
force and the new air of how the
work forces going to react
businesses and is going to be
keen in certain areas
mister chairman appreciate that
for looking at the numbers in
the differences we move forward
and see how we move this forward
or see if it's it's worth and
that's why I grow is I think
that's why I grow up so
important to us the right now is
as we look at data and in where
putting sixty million into this
program but is the sixty million
hitting the prediction program
or is hitting overhead costs
thank you great great questions
next we have some.
Thank you mister chair thank you
all for being here
president
you're just wonderful thank you
your presentations you have been
presenting all over the state
with what's going on
I think it's it's a it's just a
point time and we're trying to
figure out our work force but I
have a couple of questions
regarding the curriculum and how
we're training out you know this
this particularly work first
because this is where rates when
we're looking at what is really
to the point of what senator who
knows is talking about our
modernized work force and we're
looking at cargo to the
emotional technological
proficiencies how are we
training or what is the critical
applied for adaptability in the
work force mister chair.
Um mister share and represent
bluehood I guess what I would so
if I understand your question
correctly if i'm looking at
let's just take the examples on
page five of the prank trading
programs we have we make sure
that embedded in the training
classes that there are a
components of again what we call
durable skills can you
communicate can you work with
others can you write a report at
the end of shift that the next
ship can understand
critical thinking problem so I
think standard freezers but
we're making sure those skills
are embedded in the programs we
have and the employers are
telling us here's how we want to
test the critical thinking test
communication test
t more and so we're betting
those in our in our program so
it's also employer driven unless
it's defined by the license or
the
curriculum were used at a third
party or license curriculum
we're using more those standards
are competencies are clearly
stated so thank you embedded
if anybody else wants to answer
to that I think that I mean it's
just really important because
the work forces fluctuating much
to senator when you point their
back and forth there you know
are they understanding their
finances what are those critical
elements and we're moving into
the the the technological
advancements of ai so is there
any do you have any
words of witson from the higher
education sector to charge
thank you mister chairman and
representative of the one thing
I would add is for the disposal
cross the professional displans
across the university we also
have advisory group steets that
represent the industries that we
are training to so does advise
through groups are critical
peace of informing the
curriculum that we so that it is
relevant it is up to the date I
think the other as we respond to
certifications and micro
credentials those
pieces so that they're not
circling back for an entire.
Degree but adding to or
responding to this specific
piece so I think
broadly as
four year institutions we have
to I respond to those
were fortunate enough for eddies
to have a system I can use the
two colleges to help
create those pathways for
college university to connect
all the pieces
thank you mister chair I just
want to make those in your to
have this conversation because
it's a ai and critical thinking
is going to be
one point in everything you read
about you know our other job
searches and as an hour person
as of the things that I know
that the skill sits that we are
really leaning on modern times
the other questions I have
mister share are related to some
of the
some of the things that are
still in play that are um
barriers if you will to this
program in the funding that we
have towards these programs that
were putting in place a couple
of them are the transportation
barriers um
the affordability in economic
trade office if you will so
where are we in addressing in
the care giving in the
responsibilities we have
children if you have elderly
parents and those sort of things
and lastly the limited broadband
a digital access how are you
addressing those through these
programs and and what's going on
with our students.
Um i'll thank you mister chair
and represent lunch i'll just
say very broadly speaking
we don't have the phrase one com
but I appreciate that we make
sure we are we are on a journey
to make insurer and trying to
expand advisement um and job
placement across all of our
learners don't care how you walk
in the door don't care if you're
taking a cdl class or your
liberal arts you have
criminality doesn't matter we
want to make sure getting a
standard level of i'd say
learner's support
in addition though or food
pantries are transportation
vouchers are child care vouchers
are open to any learner who
comes to us doesn't matter if
it's more forced training or in
in a credit degree program so we
make sure whatever we have is
available to all of them
including foundations or
scholarships that might be
needed for
costs that are outside the cost
of a tuition or a fee so we're
really trying to broaden that
it's not a hundred percent
available but we're certainly
doing the best weekend within
our resources at CNN but I do
know a number of these other
challenges are absolutely noted
in the in the materials from
clovis and from some of other
institutions are certainly a
challenge transportation I think
is always a challenge and it
doesn't matter if you're urban
or rural um but I would just say
it's seen and here's some of the
journey that we're trying to
provide services for all
learners who come to us
and mister chairman
representative but I would add
that getting a little bit of the
economic development or work
that that i'm doing now
childcare is one of those very
difficult uh problems
particularly for where we are in
are eastern new mexico so
working where that pull together
an executive council of
individuals were
the connections the resources
the experience to help me
respond to opportunities like
that when just as quick example
can therefore space there's a
lot of the airman that would
like for their children to be in
portality schools.
But we don't have a child care
or day care that will take them
from the school to a day care
toll five o'clock so when
they're off duty and they can
come in pick up their child in
same thing in the morning so
those are the areas where
working line on that side in
addition to what uh uh president
harson has already talked about
the the internal pieces that we
have in police mrperiod terry
and representative live and I
would also add that the support
that the legislature is provided
for the new mexico basic needs
work has been helpful and will
continue to be helpful
especially as we're we you know
our focus seeing primarily right
now on fifteenth and are making
the needs now but I think that
you you're raising multiple
issues that we are so no or
basic needs
thank you mister sure that they
are and and it's still those are
so the barriers that this part
of the report and part of the
things they need to be discussed
in then I would just last thing
I wanted to look at is on the
distribution of the FY twenty
four hb two funds to hire
education institutes in our
in our packet here
and as i'm looking at you know
this distribution and where the
we're allocating the majority
these funds of courses where
those programs are as as
mentioned or describing how
we're going to allocate the
funding and I would just
along with some of those
disparities i'm talking about is
we're building out a work force
and it's very there's a lot of
these majority of these are in
rural communities so this is the
now coupled with housing so
we don't have to get into that
right now but i'd like to see
you know like how these are all
linked together and how we are
meeting those challenges because
it's just not one issue and if
we're going to build out a work
force we have to look at all
these other gaps particularly
you know that the child karen
and the food poundries that
you're talking about one of the
issues that I am very concerned
about with the housing as well
we're going to create them work
for work they're going to where
they can live.
And how are we account making
this accommodations uhm
very pointingly when I looking
at this is the outside of this
scope but looking at our
physicians in recruiting our
physicians into our states we're
we're going to recruit it we're
having a heart enough time
increasing them from it for
legislative reasons and other
things but the costs of living
in the sheer in the cost for
their insurance and all the
other things that become
barriers for us to even have a a
holistic way of over recruitment
because you're gonna say well
now you're going to pay this
much this amount of money to
just buy a living in new mexico
and particularly in santa fe
because that's why i'm out but I
think towers has that issue so I
just want to really factor in
the these this is a a full scope
way we need to approach this and
I just appreciate all your work
in the programs are building now
very well developed and I am
looking forward to having more
conversations about this mister
chair thank you thank you we're
gonna conclude with
representatives and then senator
thinking mister chair I fell in
love with you and him towels
fifteen years ago when I was
pregnant with my first daughter
and done I have enrolled in the
kids campus are daycare and I
got in luckily those were the
days I think they're you are all
are completely over a subscribe
now but with state funding will
be expanding and expanding i'm
just so grateful for the start
that my children had through the
early childhood education center
kids campus and I am grateful
for all the work that you and
themed house has done to meet
community needs employers needs
with unit with each other really
and training that next
generation of uh workers and
folks who want to stay here and
raise a family and i'm sure at
eastern and it's in them you'll
do in the same thing but you
know I know about you and then
tell us and thank you channel
the.
And i'm i'm gravel for the
legislature for before my time
at funding early childhood
before my time in legislature
not my time as a person funding
the early childhood programs so
made me able to go back to work
because child care was free with
my second child and so I think
that is really important the
role of a early childhood
centers and in the economy and
bring allowing folks to get back
into the work for so thank you
and thank you mister chair thank
you senator hill
thank you mr chairman i'll be
really quick about this um I
think you guys were being here I
really appreciate this
information and uhm president
parts I just want to again
publicly thank you for your
culinary arts program III I
thought I thought it was gonna
be easy it ended up being very
hard
but I understand and I I think
what I learned from that is that
I appreciate the way that you
the program starts with the
basics food safety culinary math
I mean there those all seemed
like why do I have to take these
but I do know that many of the
students that I participated
with for nearly a year and a
half got jabs after colonary
rate and and have them gone back
and and trying I I still have
struggle to get the my last
class for the baking but
nonetheless I appreciate that
you have it in in an order and I
assume that the rest of your
programs do the same thing that
people can get employed within a
couple of semesters of
participating there's a couple
of things I just i'm wondering
what is the injurie programs
because we looked at up and it
it seems like it's all these
other things too so on this
chart here i'm looking at and
please be brief
so CNN offers.
Miss share and center a tree c n
m opera's educational learning
in a number of ways degree
programs that are very
traditional what we used to call
non credit is work force
training and those most of those
courses and programs are offered
through engineering which is our
five or one c three a research
park act entity thank you for
that mister chairman and
president two things that I hear
over and over and over from
community members and from
associations is we have a
shortage of building trades and
and i'm wondering you know if if
if each of you are working with
the home builders association
for those kind of internships to
try to get kids into it and then
with our building trades unions
because those are like them the
ones that really are driving and
we cannot have work force
housing unless we have people
who can help build it so I I
hope that that's happening I
don't need a response from you
and mister chairman i'll just
close with saying that
on the kids count data right
that's the that's the data that
makes the decision at put
continues to put us at the bar
rate were at the bottom but of
those sixteen indicators that
are in four general categories
what you guys are doing in meets
probably identified at least six
of those indicators out of the
sixteen and it has to do with
economic well being for our
children and it has to do with
access to health care for a
children not only are you
helping increase that access but
you're providing
jobs you're training people for
jobs and then in the family and
community so the work that
you're doing has much more round
vacations than just what you're
doing and I don't mean just but
the work that you're doing to
train um students and to get
them into jobs that are you know
higher pain than if they didn't
have this training.
Is really benefiting our kids in
the long run so thank you for
that work thank you thank you
very much per panel thank you
it's clear that we need a whole
lot more data it's clear that
you
need stronger partnerships and
more clarity with
uh with higher ed and I think
it's also clear that right now
it's an unclear and uncertain
whether we should continue
funding uh these programs
following the pilots and that's
going to be a lot of what this
year to particularly is going to
help inform so thank you very
much and we'll look forward to
talking
great we'll ask the health care
for the field refund to come up
as folks are coming up in a big
things to the agency for making
the trip up please bring as
brief as possible on your
presentation we're going to ask
members to be as brief as
possible and our questions so
that we can make sure everybody
has the opportunity
to raise questions and explore
these important topics
secretary grade to see you
and your team were talking each
month and if members can turn to
tab h.
We'll get started
we'll let's make sure and get
waters for our presenters.
The.
And please start up as soon as
you're ready.
Great go ahead good morning uh
mister chair members of the
committee my name is mac good
luck a program evaluator for
your committee the LFC
to my side is uh health care
authority deputy secretary alex
castio smith and calling bio
thank you alex and calling for
your partnership and
transparency as it is related to
this program evaluation
today I will present the program
evaluation report
tab each of your binder
it looks like this is the first
evaluation of twenty twenty five
so this is a report of a
legislatively required program
evaluation of laws twenty twenty
one chapter one thirty six
senate bill three seventeen sp
three seventeen past in twenty
twenty one two on the one hand
it enabled the state to study no
cost behavioral health care and
on the other hand uh made health
care more affordable for new
mexicans by creating a revenue
stream out of the health
insurance premiums or tax
mr share you and your colleagues
required as part of the law that
lfc conduct a program evaluation
to study the impacts of the
change in the surtax with
respect to the affordability
outcomes namely what is the
impact of providing health care
insurance subsidies to three
specific groups small businesses
low to moderate income new
mexicans who otherwise don't
have access to health care
and
groups that find themselves
uninsured and don't have access
to other forms of health care
in addition to the program
evaluation mr chair the law
requires the health care
authority to work with partner
organizations DFA and LFC to
develop performance measures to
submit an annual re.
For program report
which among other things tracks
insurance rates of the three
qualified groups taking these
provisions in the consideration
as well as the valuability of
the program given its length of
implementation
the data availability the left
sea program evaluation team
evaluated roughly the extent to
which demand for the program
matched appropriations
it was found
that appropriations exceeded the
man and this is likely due to
inadequate performance measures
therefore the report suggests
that the legislature explicitly
require
ht set and monitor progress
towards a five year uninsurance
rate for groups that are
qualified for their
affordability programs
mr chair the report exhorts the
hca to work with executive
agency and partner organizations
the LFC and DFA to develop
comprehensive performance
measures that show the breath in
depth of the work and then link
the share of the surtacs that's
distributed to the age call to
those performance measures and
targets ensuring the bang for
the buck
so to briefly describe to you
mister chair members of the
committee what you bought when
with this legislative action
turn with me to page six.
So here on page six figure one
it's summarizes the program
logic or causal reasoning causal
theories have changed policy
inputs lead to productive
outputs which then produce gains
in those outcomes the surtax
which provides the funding to
the age cash the health care
affordability
find
several legislative actions
followed senate bill three
seventeen including that which
created the health care
authority
the office of the superintendent
of insurance I and h c a's
division of the health care
coverage in novation developed
an implemented three subsidy
programs the small business
relief subsidy program it's
really straight forward suppose
anti nets towing service with
eight full time equivalent
employees
has a total gross insurance cost
of five thousand six hundred and
twenty five bucks
the hca then subsidizes that
about five hundred and sixty
three dollars or ten percent so
the actual subsidized premium is
five thousand and sixty two
dollars and an hca funds that
subsidy with the age caf
the program for the uninsured
residents is called the coverage
expansion program this program
is a flexible program that hca
the uh uses to develop safety
nets for folks that find
themselves in policy gaps where
they don't have coverage
the market place affordability
programs are a set of subsidies
to reduce premiums and out of
pocket costs
for qualified new mexicans
collectively the implementation
of the subsidy programs are
designed to increase affordable
options for your mexicans.
Reduced cost barriers and
increase the enrollment of
qualified applicants
if the subject programs are able
to accomplish this these things
then participating new mexicans
will experience improved
financial safety net increased
health equity and reduced on
insurance rates
this logic model can serve as a
basis for revise an expanded
performance measures one thing
you'll notice uh mister chair
there is a missing policy input
and that's the marketing or
communications outreach
framework that h c a uses to
increase the qualified
applicants
mister chair members of the
committee turn with me quickly
to page eight
so I can discuss the mechanics
of them distribution of the
surtas.
Figure to mister chairman page
eight is a breakdown of a
hundred dollars and qualified
monthly premiums on off the top
the state collect six dollars
and seventy five cents basically
for every hundred dollars three
dollars goes to the premium tax
and three dollars and seventy
five cents to the premium sure
tax when the surtax distribution
is set to fifty five percent
then two dollars and six cents
of that hundred goes to the age
caf and then the remaining
dollar sixty nine goes to the
general phone that is a policy
lever that you guys having in
your
in your two box
short for on the next page
mister chair it displays the
share of the surtacks that is
distributed to the age call
the line in in the chart here
shows the actual distribution
that has been prevailing for the
policy your own page eight.
Uh.
Between FY twenty two and five
twenty four those are actual
distributions FY twenty five
through FY twenty nine are based
on craig estimates but roughly
around two hundred and twenty
million per year
on page ten mr chair the report
shows how the new mexico premium
assistance program works this is
another piece of the product
that you purchased with this
line of revenue.
So what you see here is a
breakdown
of somebody who earns two
hundred to two hundred and fifty
percent thirty one hundred
dollars per month and they they
face a five hundred and sixty
dollar monthly premium on
subsidised
after the affordable care act
subsidies and the enhanced
subsidies from the federal
government the new mexico
premium assistant subsidy picks
up about sixty four dollars and
the individual then is
responsible for sixty two
dollars of that subsidy of that
insurance premium so that's the
way these subsidies work there's
also a risk that that enhanced
subsidy will go away so you can
see it here visually uh when we
talk about that later.
On page twelve mister chair the
first finding in the bowl text
each count revenue from the
premium sir taxes far exceeded
the health insurance subsidy
means
hca has developed implemented
and ministers a relatively
complex subsidy set of subsidies
combining to tens of thousands
of new mexican beneficiaries
however the appropriations have
far exceeded the demand
take figure three
just below that visualizes the
flow of the funds for FY twenty
four
the fund at a beginning balance
of a little over three hundred
million
of that three hundred million a
hundred and ninety two million
or sixty four percent was
carried over
even with the legislative using
each caf to fund other health
care related needs for the state
and just so you know there are
some federal changes to the
federal landscape that could
affect the house funds
table ten on page fourteen
it shows the
it shows the age catherine's
unspent reserves and all budget
categories mister chair.
Yeah.
Table eleven and on page fifteen
provides a rough accounting of
how you and your colleagues have
used the age caf for other
health related expenses finally
mister chairman on table twelve
on page fifteen
of the report it shows the
evolution of how the revenues
and expenses face by each caf
the top line shows the carry
over the second line shows the
new phones that were distributed
from the surtacs
the third line shows the balance
the next line shows the expenses
and then the percentage that was
carried over at the bottom.
On page fifteen potential
changes in federal health
insurance policies may increase
costs for the each caf the
federal government
has signal with that the
enhanced subsidies will expire
they're set to expire at the end
of of this calendar year
this should this could
potentially increase monthly per
member costs for the map than
marketplace affordability
program subsidies from on
average forty five dollars to up
to a hundred and thirty dollars
to per member per month and
federal medicaid work
requirements while it may see
the state money with medicaid
it's it has a constant potential
cost depending on if the
enhanced subsidies stay or go
between forty four and a hundred
and nine million if we don't
have those enhanced subsidies or
between twenty seven in sixty
three million if we do have this
enhanced subsidies
on page sixteen in the side bar
mister chair it presents you i'm
not going to read through it but
just a couple of policy levers
to control costs if
the federal policy should shake
things up
the the coverage expansion
program has yet to launch under
the current design
specifications each ca plans to
provide state subsidized health
insurance options for
undocumented residents the plans
are still in motion though prior
to april twenty fifth estimate
estimated annual costs between
twenty three to seventy two
million for this program table
six on page eighteen mister
chair members of the committee
it shows the annual estimates
reported by the actual real firm
that each ca used to carry out
the simulations in the first
year for sixty seven hundred and
rollies the hca expects to spend
roughly twenty three million.
If medicaid rates prevail or
thirty two million
commercial reimbursement rates
reply
the next finding mr chair is on
page nineteen
and it says h c a could refine
and expand their performance
measures.
The current aga performance
measures are insufficient for
each demonstrate the impact of
these subsidy programs
the sideboy reports lfc's
elements for good performance
measures h c a should work with
their stake holders lfc the fa
to ensure that the performance
measures are meeting these
criteria further more mister
chair the report list
considerations for eight hca
when defining their scope of
performance measures or their
framework
and that concludes my
performance i'm an atturned over
to hcade for their response
good morning mrperiod chair
members of the committee I just
my name is alex castio smith and
i'm one of the deputy
secretaries for the health care
authority I want to serve by
thinking all of you for your
service to your constituents to
new mexico and public services a
hard job and you are not thinked
enough so thank you I also want
to think the olive sea staff for
their work with us on this
report their clab region I think
matt that a really good job arm
his evaluation was really in
sightful and analytical and
thoughtful and we largely agree
with the recommendations that
are in the report
my remarks will be very brief
and you'll see there's just a
few pieces of paper that we
provided to all this morning um
and I want to think you again
for your support of the health
care authority including our
more than eight hundred and
forty eight thousand customers
which includes more than a
hundred and ten thousand new
mexicans who are served by the
health care affordability fund
programs
so if you go to
the first slide after I title
slide that's the mission vision
in goals of the health care
authority you all know july will
be the one your anniversary of
the health care authority this
new agency.
I'm very prowning sighted to be
at this department
the healthcare affordability of
fund was one of the entity is
that
co located with us the health
care authority as a map
mentioned it was previously at
the officer the superintendent
of insurance and I think in
thinking about the rough now for
doing so
it represents our first school
for the department
you know and thinking about
expanding health care access and
quality and healthcare
recoverage for new mexicans and
this move to the health care
authority really reflects the
affordability funds ability to
leverage our purchasing power in
partnerships that we already had
at the human services department
and we have an incredibly
knowledgeable staff and team and
i'm very proud to work with them
and on slide three moving ahead
I won't read to you what we have
on the left hand side for the
age on the next i'll go through
really quickly
but I want to acknowledge my
colleague calling buyer who is
sitting next to me he was at the
officers superintendent of
insurance when the affordability
fund passed and when they were
sizers implemented so he can
answer any historical questions
you want me have we also have
secretary carry army ho and some
of my other colleagues in the
audience and we're available to
answer and in questions that you
may have.
On page four
the health care affordability
fund has had many successes
making it a national leader and
coverage affordability you can
see that enrollment in the
marketplace and be well new
mexico is at a record of more
than seventy two thousand new
mexicans and we have more than
thirty six thousand new mexicans
who are getting premium
assistance and supports in our
small business program uhm more
than half of new mexicans nearly
three quarters of new mexicans
are getting some sort of premium
assistance
or it seemed out of pocket
assistance I ping
in it by receiving funding from
the affordability fund amount
touched on some of the on the
purpose of the statute that
created the affordability fund
for me I think about this
affordability funds statue you
know it charged the state of new
mexico now the health care
authority to decrease premiums
and car sharing for families
small businesses and small
business employees who get
coverage on the exchange in that
stand you are so called on the
state to facilitate resources
that provide health care
coverage for the uninsured
on page five
are you can see in that
graphic on the right hand side
just reflection of how the fund
really is a national leader for
coverage assistance and supports
compared to many states our new
mexicans who benefit from this
program or you know not having
to choose between food and
medical costs were energy cost
and medicine and they're getting
and support for these out of
pocket expenses and premiums
and so
what I also wanted to just
mention from where I sit at the
healthcare authority.
I think this affordability fund
demonstrates the legislature's
foresight to respond to an
evolving and federal health care
coverage landscape
it has evolved the slandscoop
and many ways since the statute
passed and twenty twenty one so
I also think that the health
care authority we have a
responsibility to leverage every
federal dollar we can so that we
are a good fiscal stewards of
state funding and and that to me
is the story of the
affordability funds since the
statue was created and twenty
twenty one your deese reserves
that matt has mentioned reflects
that we were in a cover
eighteenth and dumbing period
where people stayed and rule the
medicaid you we wanted to
leverage those additional
federal dollars folks there is a
decreased in anticipated demand
for marketplace enrollment that
we couldn't follow you product
when that statute passed in
twenty twenty one in that period
of
decrease marketplace enrollment
lasted for a few years and so
the resources the state
resource says pretty
affordability fund weren't
needed at that time and now that
changed it changed in the last
year or so and we're seeing a
decrease enrollment in the
medicate program and there's
record and romant in the seat
place marketplace and so you
know this current year in fy
twenty seven i'm you'll see in a
few sides that the the the needs
of the fund are in line will be
in turn to spend and what also
changed since
that stands who was passed in
twenty twenty one and mount
alluded to this as well is that
the passage of enhanced federal
subsidies.
Allowed us to not spend state
funding from the fund we were
the unable to use another source
of federal revenue now that will
go away
um I suspect by the end of this
calendar year and so i'll be
counting on the fund and these
hundred and ten thousand new
mexicans
may count on the fund more than
ever
so something else that is also
changed and i've been thinking
about since the start you passed
are the changing the changes in
you know from gaps in federal
coverage gaps when the law was
passed there were about a
hundred thousand new mexicans
who were uninsured for a variety
of reasons and you know they due
to immigration status they need
too much money to qualify for
medicaid but they had two little
income to qualify for
marketplace subsidies
those those gaps were created by
federal policy but after the fun
past the federal government
closed many of those gaps
now some of those gaps me reopen
at the federal level depending
on what congress decides to do
and so the healthcare
affordability funds statute has
that flexibility to respond to
how the federal government sort
of opens and closes some
criteria related to health care
coverage i'm turned appeared
six.
Um.
This
year of the secretary wall
mentioned this and some detail
also but the pending federal
reconciliation bill will likely
increase the uninsured rate
aiming coverage less affordable
for new mexicans if you look on
page six
but you can see on the right
hand side we anticipate in your
max account in new mexico that
folks who recurrently getting
these assistance from the
affordability fund we'll see a
nineteen hundred dollar premium
increase per person we think
about sixteen thousand mexicans
for lose coverage that they're
currently getting on the
exchange there's also other
financial impacts for the state
err we're gonna need additional
but we need to call on the fund
and to you know if we want to
sustain the level of current
premium systems I folks were
ganning on you to call on the
fund for that support
and if we design and launch a
program for the uninsured with
the brad as scope of eligibility
it could come out of costs the
medicaid program
so it's something that we want
to be thoughtful about in our
happy to discuss with you on
and on the final side just want
to think you aren't for your
support during the twenty twenty
four legislative session
to revise the funding formula
that amount alluded to
and again just wanted to show
are a preliminary twenty seven
cost projections for
affordability fund programs is
around two hundred and twenty
five million dollars the one
hundred and eighteen million
dollars that you see you for the
market place affordability
program that reflects or latest
projections of what we're seeing
on the federal level at the
reconciliation bill and certain
comparison i'm in fa twenty six
were anticipating needing only
seventy two million dollars from
the fund.
For that program but if the
budget bill and congress passes
as we think it may
were projecting one hundred and
nineteen millions you can see
that increase need
our projected revenue for the
fun in fy twenty seven is two
hundred and twenty two million
you'll see there's a small gap
but we've got a fun balance and
so that fun bounds that we have
will support that small gap
between the revenue and the
expenses
I think with that I will stop
and happy to take any questions
or comments thank you great
thank you very much we're going
to go start with representative
little
I don't see representative
little oh sorry I apologize
please go ahead
thank you mister chair um i've
got a question of regarding
in relation i'm try to formulate
my question as clearly as I can
mister chair thank you
with the anticipated changes
that might be coming into a for
medicaid for example to the
state I was wondering in you did
cover that and appreciate that
how those dollars might be used
to
prepare to maybe make sure that
these funds are available that
the the assistance is available
to people to the families of new
mexico where i'm going with this
is we if those
if the if those cuts actually do
materialise.
New mexico are families are
afflicted by a lot of
diseases like dob is oh I don't
think I have to tell you i'll go
into all of this hype pretention
and so on
but with those having been in a
and health care administration
for ambulatory services one of
the things that we saw was that
as people do not have access to
prevention to early detection of
all of these health issues
with those disparities then I
can see them rising and i'm my
question actually I hope maybe
it's a couple of them i'm
wondering how
catastraphic illnesses
catastrophic events that take
place even now how are those
factored into this rates
and worse those with the
potential laws of
health care services are access
to health care services what are
you what might be
the impact
to this fund and eventually i'm
really curious about what the
impact is to the families of new
mexico who live with these
chronic illnesses thank you mr.
Have chair and representative
little and and turn over to
column bio who can provide
answer for your question
thank you mr chair and
representative little that is a
really good question I think the
way framed it is exactly right
is that when people don't have
access to regular needed
services because their own
insured it spirals into
emergency situations that could
have been managed with regular
primary care visit specialist as
it's right and so
I think with the federal cuts on
the horizon we unfortunately
will start to see that you know
people are unable to go in and
get the care that they that they
need they might not be able to
get those regular cancer
screenings and catch a cancer
diagnosis early on so that it
can get the treatment that they
need so that is a real concern
and I think the way that the
statute is drafted now it allows
us to really be flexible and how
we respond to this we can think
about how these dollars best
invested today our focus really
is on helping people get
coverage help reduce those
barriers so that they can get
that regular access I think
we're gonna have to be very
nimble on our feet and thinking
about what it looks like when so
much federal funding is pulled
at the federal level but I think
we've got a good infrastructure
here and with the programs that
are in place today
thank you for that response it
and mr chair the i'm curious as
to and and if it's a uh
discussion we might need to have
offline i'm i'm fine with that
but am curious especially
because working with federal
funds and are trying to manage
them so that we didn't over
expend the amount of contract
health funds there is a
different terminology for them
now i've been out of that for a
quote sometime.
But we had a finance amount that
we were that was appropriate to
us in the indian house service
so when people opened week came
to the end when we
used up those dollars sometimes
it come we were on a fiscal year
bases from october one to
september thirtieth.
Depending on the situation
that are that families were
facing individuals for facing.
A couple of
catastrophic build either
illnesses or an event like a car
accident or some other
catastrophic event could
actually wipe out everything all
of the funds in that was
available that would have that
had to be managed carefully for
it every other
patient within that system
i'm wondering how
can you would you please explain
to me how those are factored in
in as I mentioned i'm happy to
talk with you afflame but I I
worry about the
it is not an un
how do I see this uh
mr chairman it is not there are
not funds that are going to be
there for a red side in endless
well.
Uh
what at what point
maybe i'll have to form my
question better but i'm curious
about health catastrophic
illnesses or events are factored
in and how they might impact
that that is a really good
question I appreciate you mister
chair and and representative and
bring in that perspective from I
think it's the purchase referred
to tear funding for for h s and
yes I think that's going to be
even more critical with some of
the loss of these other federal
funds is how do you stretch our
our dollars further and I think
one thing that we've done in
these programs that specific to
what you're talking about here
is
we're actually we have a program
that buys down the entire
premium for native americans who
qualify and so what that does is
make it so that if that
individual would otherwise be
uninsured and or would just be
relying on hs
they would be able to
actually rely on those
the state funded dollars in
their insurance to cover those
costs when there needed to be
provided outside of by hs and I
think that that's been a good
model we've seen enrollment
growth quite substantially among
that population and we know
there's still a lot more people
who might qualify so when we're
thinking about you know how
those purchases referred care
dollars could be uhm stretched
further for a tribes the idea of
purchasing health coverage for
their members and leveraging
whatever federal dollars are
available and stay there might
be a a good way to make sure
that we are covering those types
of services that you're
concerned about
thank you again mrperiod terr
it's a well the description that
you're providing does
and I was referring to work for
a need of american citizens.
In the state of new mexico
the impact what I would have
found what many of us find is
whatever happens in native
communities is happening out in
rural areas of new mexico it's
happening at crash city even
urban cities where we have
people who are at risk this is
not just a tribal nation's issue
that this issues will affect
them as a will affect everybody
in this state so I appreciate
your
responses and
would like to follow preview
later thank you so much thank
you mister chair thank you very
much for percent okay this has
been very informative we don't
have any other questions but
appreciate this deep dive and I
think the very close and natural
connection to our
logical connection to our next
presentation with secretary army
so thank you very much for your
work thank you for the excellent
evaluation and will go ahead and
ask the secretary in her team to
come up
to
is there coming up members we
can turn over to tab i.
Oh mr chairman members of the
committee my name is eric senior
on the LFC analyst for the
health care authority and
sitting next to me is.
Secretary carry out me home for
the health care authority also
again will be under tabling
books
looking at it sheet that looks
kind of like this so legislat
before I get started I just
wanted to mention it's it may
have been a while since we've
done a legislat
these are meant to be kind of on
a cadence on a regular basis.
And they're meant to be an
opportunity
for you to ask a lot of
questions and do a deeper dive
in to the work that we're doing
and if in a specific policy area
where roof we try to keep our
presentations a little bit
shorter so that the committee
has more time to ask questions
as
as is needed and so these these
presentations are meant to be a
little more focused there meant
to be a committee driven
there meant to be a deeper dive
to be actionary entered
accidental and impact for me so
a lot of times that we we do in
these presentations is there is
a summary of
how the last legislat went this
is the third legislat that we've
done on this particular policy
area and so you can see that
within the brief itself
without all go ahead and move
into the brief itself.
Uhm one of the biggest questions
coming out of the last legislat
was you know we've put a lot of
money into the system for
medicaid.
With the purpose of expanding
access to health care
for new mexicans
and one of the big questions
that came out from you guys last
time was what is this system
going to look like in five years
are we going to have improved
outcomes and five years are we
gonna have access to those key
behavioral health
services
and are we gonna have access to
maternal child health and
those services and so that's
that's kind of the the framework
of what we're kind of how we're
kind of looking at this specific
policy area
so since then last last
september when we had the last
legislat.
We've put about five hundred and
fifty five million behavioral
health services and non
recurring funding
that's just a chunk of the
bigger about seven hundred and
seventy million that went into
non recurring funding for the
health care department but
health care authority.
And over the last three years
we've increased rates for
providers including hospitals in
many other types of providers
by about two point two billion
dollars
so large numbers kind of
unprecedented and the state of
new mexico and
so
I think what we want to know in
moving forward is.
What is this going to look like
in five years what is what is
all this money that we've put
into the system how is it going
to help us how are we going to
build the system going forward
and so daving rate in
you can see under the maternal
mortality
you can see back in twenty
twenty one or under new mexico's
health rankings earn twenty
twenty one in mexico's mortality
rate maternal mortality rate was
we ranked thirty eight we
improved a little bit we got to
thirtieth.
Um for low birth weight
and twenty twenty one we are
thirty nine and
we actually got worse down to
forty three
neonatal absolute center a men
mortality rate for women has
remain pretty much flat
for new mexico behavioral health
rankings that's that second
table there on the first page
over all mental illnesses gotten
or rank went down substance use
disorder I rank
got worse
you fifth major depressive
disorder and youth substance use
disorder those are ranking and
on all of those have kind of
slipped over the last few years.
Moving on to page two that first
table at the top there that just
gives you a break out of all of
the rate increases that we've
done these are recorded these go
most of them go in the form of a
directed pay increase to the
providers
you can see that hospital rates
we've increased that by
one point three billion dollars
you can also see that we've
increased.
Uh behavioral health provider
rates by about uh ninety million
dollars over the past three
years.
Medication
i'm gonna jump down to the
utilisation table that we have
there
you can see that for physical
health practitioner visits for
one thousand members we've
actually kind of slipped on that
a little bit
we don't less utilization there
but in behavioral health there's
been a increase in utilization
but we don't have kind of better
data around that in terms of.
Who's using those services is it
just one person that's going you
know a hundred times and using
that one service or is that a
lot of people using services all
around the system or so that's
something we are need to work on
in terms of uh getting better
data.
No you kind of summarized a
little bit of what i'm moving on
to peach three of what we talked
about in in our prior legislats
during the last legislative
september twenty twenty four lfc
members asked about how the
authority will know whether it
is improving that delivery if
care given the the passage of
the health care delivery in
access at and greatly rate
increase rates to hospitals and
whether the authorities are
tracked improved services within
the next five years
prior legislaturing raise
questions about rural health
care delivery grants what
services the funding was being
used for and whether the
services are evidence based
members also want to know
whether the authority was
tracking health care work force
and access data to distribute
the grants to ensure providers
establish the right services or
expand services in the highest
new communities.
One issue on the progress there
under progress there remains
little available data to assess
whether the state's investments
are resulting in meaningful
medicaid managed care network
expansion
the authority recently revouped
the states managed care system
under new contracts and we just
don't have the data moving
through at this point to where
we can actually measure have we
improved from last year to this
year in terms of network
adequacy that network at a
question is that measure that
tells you are there certain
types of providers in your local
community
and then with that information
you can kind of figure out okay
what types of services do we
need to add to that's typically
to that community in order to
make sure that a sky the full
that people have access to the
full array of services been in
that community and so
we don't have good data in terms
of that at this point and so
that's something that we're
working on I I think the
secretary will say that she's
that she's working on it to
to kind of get a better
understanding of where we're
where we're at right now and
an understanding of whether or
not our system will be.
Better off in five years and so
that's that's that piece of it
and so with that mister chair
i'll stop talking
and I just want to mention
there's an appendix in the back
with additional data if you want
to see it there's also in the
very back the very less slide
there's a slide that kind of
gives you the
the spend and the enrollment in
medicaid over the past uh since
f eleven so with that i'll pass
it over to secretariat or meal
good morning mr chair members of
the committee it's been a few
months since they start your so
that was quite a session it's
nice to see you again thank you
for having me and thank you to
the community of towers for
hosting today it also like to
think my incredible break
intelligent hard working team
deputy secretary alice customer
smith who you i've heard from
earlier calling by we've also
got our medicare director dena
flannery and our behavioral hot
services division director
because here with us today so I
just want I think them and they
were here to support my ability
to answer your questions it also
like to think i'll see and eric
uh specifically for you know the
ongoing partnership that we have
it's really valuable to us as an
agency and we really appreciate
the dialog that we have at these
discussions
I mean is hark today briefly
about kind of where we are the
landscape in terms of access to
care that was really the focus
that I was asked to be as brief
as possible so that you all can
ask questions I was something to
try to do that and try and queue
it up for you as quickly as I
can but provide some pertinent
additional information I am
sending a go ahead and skip to
street to slide three where I
mean just kind of leaning out
the level and for you today
we're going to talk about a
provider network growth overall
but he were a health access
primary care access was hug a
little bit about mco network
oversight the health care
delivery in access to act and
then impacts.
Of potential federal changes
which will have very likely
impacts to new mexico's health
care economy and access to care
here in new mexico
I don't moving out to slight
form I just reminder that the
healthcare authority serves
eight hundred and fourteen
thousand five hundred and forty
eight medicaid members that's
thirty nine percent of new
mexicans we are the largest pair
of health care in our state you
can see our medicaid members by
county but there's been a lot of
really important research that's
come out recently showing that
medicaid actually saves lives so
as you think about medicaid in
terms of the overall impact it's
it's really wonderful and
incredible program because of
its life saving ability and it
reduces the date risk of death
by twenty one percent
moving to slide six ones for
give you a snapshot of we're
we're seeing growth in our
provider network we are actually
things are really moving in the
right direction we are starting
to see providers really enter
our network we've seen a over
four thousand net new providers
internet work over the past
eleven months that's across all
provider tapes but one of the
two of the points that it wanted
call out is that fifty seven
percent of that provider network
growth has been behavioral
health specifically at twenty
nine percent of that growth has
been in primary care mistake a
little bit about why primary
care is so important because it
is connected very closely to
behavior a health as well
side seven just a little bit of
national context for you all
right now according to latest
state by state data new mexico
rates sixteen in access to be
here or health care overall so
now that the top which is where
we all want to be but it's
showing that these interventions
are working on this state has
done a lot of work really
rebuilt the beater a half system
refund living with the news out
of issues in many ways that
weren't present a decade ago and
I think in terms of substance
used to sort out for sure and
some other issues but things.
Are really improving in terms of
access to care
i'd slide a little bit give her
a hot utilization has increased
by hundred and twenty seven
percent since the twenty sixteen
as a reminder and I think you
deeply for your investment in
the medicaid reimbursement rates
we raise those rates for
behavioral health to a hundred
and fifty percent of the
medicare rate in january that is
making a difference we are
getting ready to launch in just
a few days our new justice
involved pilot programmer were
really connecting people who
were transitioning out of
present in jail to services so
that they don't have gaps and
care done a lot of investments
in he were hot supporting
services and the locks own
distribution and they want to
call that out because we also
specifically focused on the
locks on distribution in our own
officers very recently when ever
employees saved the life of one
of our customers and what about
a lobbyist since it's very
meaningful work that we're doing
and it's having a direct impact
in new mexico we also are
serving over two thousand new
mexicans through housing
assistance and one former other
I try to help people with
transitions so about living on
and support of having.
Another break smart in terms of
network on slide nine is that
new mexico now for the first
time has a behavioral health
crisis network we didn't have
that year ago we launched at
five certified community beamer
a hoff clinics on january first
we are in recruitment for new
providers for demonstration here
too which will start january
first of twenty twenty six you
can see which counties are in
our live status at which
counties are slated for access
but this is amazing he's clinics
are providing primary care and
behavioral health care in an
integrated studying and they are
providing twenty four seven
access to crisis services and
i'm so really for the first time
new mexico actually has a
critics this network is not
everywhere that we want it to be
but it's really a strong
foundation to build from we also
are building mobile crisis teams
crisis tree our centers and
expanding medication treatment
on side ten just to read minder
that are court behavior provider
growth has increased by hundred
and nineteen percent over five
years with growth in the rural
counties of new mexico the
highest
flight eleven just really
quickly wanted to talk about the
heaper health reform and
investment act that's something
that i'm getting a lot of
questions about just wanted to
mention that that's at twenty
twenty five senate three lot of
work under way to really make
sure that we are managing a
system for getting those
investments out and
collaborating we've been working
closely with the lfc as well as
with the administrative office
of the courts we had our first
executive committee yesterday
we've completed some of the
statutory deadlines which were
just that to be able to help
service standards and evaluation
guidelines by june first those
are completed we had our
executive committee yesterday
and established our behavioral
health regions and
administrative office for the
court is leading sequential
interest that mapping across new
mexico and giving monthly status
reports.
We're in the process of a
beautiful health gap analysis
for adult services working on
that universal credentialing for
behavioral health care and we
have a website where all this
information is posted so if you
all are curious about the work
we're doing with that
you statute at please feel free
to check it out and we can
provide additional information
and they twelve
what did you just kinda give you
the context for primary care
specifically and mexico
according to the latest national
data
rates twenty ninth in access for
primary career services so again
not where we want to be kind of
more in the middle but i'm also
you are not at the worst which
is always good
primary care is really important
foundationally for all health
care services it is an entry
point for but he wrote health
just like it is for primary care
and in many of our rural
communities it is the most
likely setting where sometimes
it's going to actually receive
ability for a whole services our
primary care providers can do
things like prescribe access to
medication assisted cheap man so
they are being health providers
the many ways
on slight thirteen you can see
the growth in our primary care
provider network over the past
few years and where were at now
adding your over your growth in
provider network which is the
trend that we want to see
we are also reimbursing at a
hundred and fifty percent of the
medicare rate for primary care
as of january and not positively
impact seventy percent of all
medicaid claims so almost every
provider got a rate is a through
that after it can increase the
reimbursement rates we added a
parapractice benefits to the
service package and that's
important because the new mexico
character practice can actually
serve as primary car providers
and we've added to the lesson
like you shouldn't consult
and then we have a bunch of new
access standards and
appointments standards that were
holding our mco contractors to.
Including a non urgent behavior
of health request to appointment
times in seven calendar days and
the expectation that routine
medical or dental care be
scheduled within thirty calendar
days and you can see it
therefore list there
for teenagers a couple of notes
and we may want to talk about
this leader in the qne but
oversight of the mco network in
performance we're kind of doing
a full court press unless they
would say I really trying to
make sure that we were doing
everything we can oversight the
billions of dollars that go out
through those contracts
in april of twenty twenty five
we did assume notices of concern
to all of our mco's for a
deficiency is related to access
to care credentialing and care
coordination this is usually the
first stab in it in terms of
what might be among our review
or escalation process that could
include
crack to action plans notice a
secure and sanctions sort of
walking through that process but
we have also issued a credit
action plan into presbyterian
specific to their compliance
with the contract for children
and state custody we are doing
i'd say added this week related
to their oversight of the
network and you can show that we
really understand what data
they're using and we have our
own internal compliance
committee that's been created
really monitor this with the
great regularity starting do you
worry first we also will be
shifting with your to a new
policy initiative that I really
think is
the right direction to move for
new mexico which is to reward
the mco's with the remember
assignment but standard superior
quality so right now we kind of
assigned members in a somewhat
random way to talk about how
that works but i'm but making
sure that we favor superior
quality results in outcome at
other than starting january
first.
Slide fifteen the rural health
care delivery fund which eric
brought up and that is producted
to deliver almost one hundred
and eighty thousand new health
care encounters in fiscal year
twenty twenty five you can see
where projected it's you have
have over two hundred thousand
new health care encounters and
after twenty six
we really think this program is
working well we've heard a lot
of really good feedback about it
from the provider community but
we have another round of funding
out you all funded twenty
million for fiscal years twenty
six through twenty eight that
next round of funding is going
to be focused on primary care we
just we know we don't have
enough primary chair across the
state in our rural communities
anything we're about about to
make it announcement about those
funding applications that will
be going out in today today or
tomorrow
on the next slide you can see
where projects are stood up that
through the rural healthcare
fund and which projects switch
types of projects are funded so
as of right now the vast
majority of products has been in
the behavior a whole space
seventeen percent of projects
for primary care sixteen percent
for admin turn all child health
care and have some specialty
care dental optometry
transportations you can kind of
get a snapshot of what services
were funding through that
project now that there is sort
of a separate part if I need for
behavioral health we think it's
really important internet focus
on that a primary care shift
just a reminder on slight
seventeen that we are also using
medicaid here expand graduate
medical education by twenty
thirty the number of residencies
in new mexico will grow to two
hundred and thirty which is a
seventy percent increase over
where we are today so a lot of
doctors hopefully will stay here
new mexico
a couple of notes about the
health care delivery in the
access act on slide eighteen
this is premium designed to
provide extra support for a
rural hospitals through a
provider tax it and an enhanced
payment is loud at the.
Federal government level
through that program we have
paid out seven hundred and fifty
million dollars tiny mexico
hospital since go live that
reflects the two quarters of
those dollars have been issued a
hospital if you are curious that
how much your hospital has
received consuming I can all let
you know
seventy percent seventy five
percent of that net new funding
has to be spanned to support new
healthcare services if access to
care in new mexico we do have a
required pretty mechanism we're
working listen is part of that
work group
to oversee that and forty
percent of the revenue is tied
to polity performance at a we
have some quality metrics that
you can see there are including
some behavioral health metrics
and those that funding will be
contingent on the meeting
quality standards and with any
quality program you could have
set it up with quality metrics
for the first two years as you
should start to move the needle
on those quality outcomes you
shift to new mattress so these
mattress are not and i'll be all
for this program these are
really good starting metrics
on flight nineteen just wanted
to give you an over off **** out
how many backs the case health
system is working this is that
the latest detail from the
common month
showing that new mexico ranks
thirty first overall and it's
health system performance out of
all states
and it does show as rinking
first in the southwest region so
promising direction there
lastly before it closed and see
ad for a question I just wanted
to talk a little bit on slide
twenty one about the impact of
potential federal changes
I think it's really my dad to
make sure that we're all
breasing for what will be some
very big changes ahead
those changes are going to act
affect access to care not just
for medicaid patience but for
every new mexican and the reason
for that is that new mexico's
healthcare economy is rely on
medicaid as the largest payer.
We have the highest per capital
medicaid enrollment in a country
with about thirty nine percent
of the state's population we
receive almost ten billion and
federal funds
and under the federal
reconciliation bell new mexico
is very likely to see the last
of about two point eight billion
in medicated funding federal
medicaid funding much of that is
being used today to support
provider reimbursement i'm a
couple of things that are likely
to happen at the federal level
our cat reimbursement so I just
talked about having our
reimbursement said at a hundred
and fifty percent of medicare
for most providers
looking at reductions down to
one hundred percent of medicare
as one very likely scenario the
other is the fees out of our
hospital or hda program over the
period of multiple years so that
program likely to go away and
think uh at some point there is
a fees down approach that's
really being presented in the
reconciliation bell that's in
the senate with a fees out of
that almost ninety thousand yes
ninety thousand new mexicans
losing coverage
most likely the result of new
work requirements are for the
medicaid population forty two
thousand subject to copies that
will be new
two hundred and fifty four
thousand new mexican subject to
increased paperwork either are
more frequent eligibility
determinations as part of the
reconciliation bill or so just a
lot of administrative work to
keep people enrolled
in a letter and providers slated
to lose critical funding and a
lot of potential closure of
sixty eight rural hospitals
across new mexico so we are
bracing for impact and will be
you know watching very closely
what's going on at the federal
level and implementing those
programs with the least amount
of harm that we can to are new
mexico healthcare infrastructure
and with that I think i'll see
how things ever to mister chair
for questions great thank you
very much eric and and madame
secretary we're going to go
straight into.
Questions starting with center
for then represent out the rooms
and move on to
mr chair and thank you
secretarian eric for being here
I wondered ask about the and I
think you may have answered this
secretary but i'm paid one of
the legislation shows on that
second behave your old health
chart there that it's it's the
term is that we've kind of
slipped in that but i'm
wondering if the increase in
ranky because where identifying
more people would be paying for
all health and were providing
more services for them is that
what that's connected to
because it doesn't make sense
that we're sixteenth and the
nation for access to be here
help but then over here we're
ranking forty four in overall
mental illness does that just
mean that we've identified more
people which is not a bad thing
mister chair and senator you
know it could it could be that
it could also be that the
service is that people are
accessing or it necessarily high
quality
there's a lot of different
things under that we need to do
a deeper dive into that to
really get a better
understanding of
what's actually going on there
but
you're right it could be that it
could be other things mr chair
and senator to hear though I do
think that the data from mental
health america that is related
to prevalence and substance used
to sort out so do you think we
have a higher prevalence in the
maximum curtain familiar with
that data which sort of ranks
and you can kind of see on that
first indicator overall mental
honest prevalence so it doesn't
really talk about whether people
are receiving treatment it just
says that this is like overall
kind of a population in health
she wouldn't believe that's what
that.
Um data is about and if we do
know that we've had increase in
adults that since used to sort
out in new mexico and nationally
so you know I think we do have a
probably an exastibited problem
here
thank you mister chairman and
thank you secretary I just want
to make sure that through our
numbers we don't
we don't in city way that
identifying someone with a metal
health prices or mental health
issues is a bad thing
I would say that would probably
all at one time or another have
some mental health crash
I certainly have be the first
one to admit that
but I just want to make sure
that we're not identifying that
in the negative matter so thank
you for explaining that and then
i've
been doing a little bit of
research and discovered that I
knew that the national
association of social workers
has opposed to the national
social work exam and I think
it's been about five years that
that report has been out and the
reason that they've opposed it
and exam is put out by the
association of social work
boards and they've apposed it
because there's a hype
percentage of
individuals of color older
individuals and individuals with
other than english language who
fail that examination so in new
mexico particularly for the
bachelors of social work the US
national pass rate is only
seventy two I will just point
out that that means that we're
losing why I think that's the
math not my string but I believe
that means we're losing twenty
eight out of every hundred
students who have taken social
work in college and have passed
it and have a degree in social
work.
They can't work in that field
that's pretty significant when
you think about the need that we
have for social workers that's
the national percentage the
percentage in the mexico is
fifty seven percent.
I just like that sit for a
minute fifty seven percent the
means we're losing about half
of our students take
complete have a degree
and don't end up working in the
field and i'll I will just I
would just point out what's
happening is in the mexico we
give an individual temporary
license the minute that they
apply for it they can work for a
whole year they have three times
to try to take and pass that
exam if they don't pass that
example keep in mind or letting
them work for a whole year in
our schools in other settings if
they don't pass that exam within
the year at that license
so now they're moving into
another feel I know that there's
at least a weapon states that
i've taken away that national
exam
I met with the legislator from
new hampshire who two years ago
started the process of
eliminating that exam they have
had a hundred and sixty four
percent increase in social
workers in their state I would
just ask that we look at that as
a possibility for new mexico and
would love to see the government
or put that on the thirty day
call and that we could eliminate
that exam to increase our social
workers thank you mister
chairman thank you secretary
thank you okay we're gonna go.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
for the presentation I am
looking at page oh sixteen h
sixteen that shows the um the
role health care delivery fund
and i'm looking at the numbers
in each county where can we get
the names of the the folks who
refunded to provide services
mr cherry representative down
we're happy to send you the full
list and we can just send it to
their committee so will send the
full list of all worded
providers and the amounts which
counties there's are being and
we'll just send it through the
committee so that you all have
it that would be fantastic thank
you think it was true thank you
secretary and then on eighteen
on the health care delivery I
will say that since I I know in
the first quarter second quarter
um arab rural health clinic in
sierra county this perhaps is
what kept the door open but it
seems like it's being paid at
its it's a payment that they're
receiving monthly of maybe I
don't know a lot about it but it
doesn't seem like it's a
reimbursement only how is that
money being distributed to the
hospitals
mr chair representative down so
there is two components at the
hospital payment one is a
payment on discharges and it
sent as a what's called a
directed payment we pass it
through to through our mcos I
but we tell them exactly how
much to pay and it speeds done
prior utilization but it is
always based on actual
utilization about a key patient
so impetion and outpatient
discharges those payments go out
quarterly there is the second
component of the program which
is based on the quality and that
those payments go out once a
year so the quality peace that
forty percent is sort of in the
design at forty percent of
revenue is tied to quality
performance
so those payments are yearly I
believe we send out the first
round of quality payments
already though so we've kind of
at we started the program it so
we've kind of had a little bit
of catch up to do the first year
at the hospitals are being
reward.
Like paid on the quality metrics
for reporting the policy
mattress because we have to
establish a b sign in order to
actually move the quality along
and so there's kind of a tiered
step approach where over time
they were kind of hold
accountable to greeter shares of
the quality payments that they
are receiving both sets of
payments right now
and then I will continue to do
so but at some point is this
sort of a greater share about
quality payments going to be
tied to the actual outcomes if
that makes sense it's kind of a
complicated as it will get
shares and information on that
thank you thank you mister chair
and thank you for that I just
wanted to make sure that my
hospital or any other rural
hospital because they're so
important ended up reverting
something later
because I didn't understand it
to be reimbursement only and
also seventy five percent in
forty percent is more than a
hundred percent so I was just
wondering how they know
that they're utilizing it
correctly and don't
a reversion
so mister terror representatives
out these are their funds
they're not I don't believe
subject to rivers and they're
actually being paid out just
like they would
to any medicate provider so I
don't believe they would be
reverting and i'm sorry I don't
think I probably describe this
poor lead but seventy percent of
their seventy five percent of
their net revenue has to be
spent in new mexico
forty percent of the total of
market as being tied to quality
so it's a sixty forty split
sixty percent of the payments
are tied to discharges.
Forty percent of the bucket is
higher to quality performance
then out of that sixty four
years for it seventy five
percent of that hundred percent
has to be spent on expanding
healthcare access in new mexico
does that help i'm sorry it's
for complicated thank you think
mr and it's I mean it's not my
world so I mean it's I can touch
you more offline and i'm looking
at the quality matrix and um I
don't know how many of these
rule clinics have birthday
friendly hospitals or even have
obed lands or repeat attritions
for that matter so
can you explain that a little
bit and is isn't this a place
where there could be a tie to
see why
why isn't that part of the
matrix mr chair representative
dow so you are correct not every
hospital has birthday services
so in that case they're excluded
so they're not there's different
like tears of hospitals they are
penalized for not having that
the goal really is to kind of
try and hopefully invest in some
of these services and we want to
make sure that we advance like
hospitals being able to through
reinbursed image from all child
health so
there are different tiers of
hospitals so like larger
hospitals are kind of have a
different quality
but if they don't have earth
centers they're not sort of you
I and services they're not
penalized for not having that if
that makes sense
in terms of cafd I think that's
a great suggestion
that program wasn't designed
originally with the CYFD would
we designed these matter
excellence probably prior to
some of the discussion around
this these metrics have been
going sort of around in our work
group for awhile and so we are
building off of this I actually
think that's a great suggestion
for the future and I do think
this program will evolve to have
additional mattress kind of move
the needle on to additional
quality performance and so I
think it will above and so we
are opening system additional
suggestions he is part of our
work.
And so we can I certainly look
at smevolution there thank you
thank you and thank you madame
secretary and cause on page one
you're looking at neonatal
absolute send I mean I know
that's the new term reasoning
for babies for an exposed to
substance as particular if those
are an illegal substance or an
addictive substance that the
matter was using and the baby
was foreign exposed and in the
lot of these rural hospitals
even though they don't have
birthing centers they see
emergency birth and they're
around those rankings that
you're trying to address and so
it seems to me that mean most of
these rule hospitals if I had
the opportunity and when I asked
about carer I asked them about
baby's board exposed I asked
them about home visiting in most
of them they have such a hate
her very they can't even connect
to don't know what it is I don't
care with the chart says that
represented they don't know
about carer and they don't know
that connection with the idea
I just think it's it and it's
important indicator that we
should I thank you mister chair
thank you very much for upset up
next twelve representative lewin
that rooms have done thank you
thank you
secretary for being here with us
so
mister chairman just you know
i'm i'm not happy with it the
rankings were seen in the new
mexico paper house
I think this is so very
concerning for me when we have
invested
two point two billion dollars
over the last few years for new
services I
I know yesterday that was an
executive meeting with the ocean
and what they've been task with
I know that i've been to well
the day before on monday I was
up in the same as where they're
doing a mapping session and
discussion with us almost county
I know that there's a plan in
place of how you know we're
moving forward with with them
what we did in this last session
and I
will be on the behavior health
commission that you'll see as a
legislative legislator.
So my questions are going to be
very pointed here in the
planning and some of the things
that i'm hearing are the there
are going to be
new contracts regarding
behavioral help with a oc and
one of my question is how are
you how is it hca working with
them so that there is there are
not deplicative efforts that are
information and pieces of
already been done and how are
you working together to really
map out a timeline or a plan
mr chair representative of
living thank you for the
question I we are working
very closely with the sea right
now you are probably seeing that
we have a director of the three
initiative chrissie brooks she
came him twice from samsar
they also have a director
responsible
christie and as brands that are
working indeed daily together
and we're still there on the way
like I would say that this has
not been one of our traditional
partners that we were closely
with for learning a little bit
how they work or making sure
that we're doing what we need to
do to try and be convenience
together
but yes we are working closely
the exact committee which kind
of constitute that is the health
care authority plus some
additional bribe reason notice
has the charge really have
approving regional plans for
funding investments that don't
duplicate services and I think
that is one of the mandates of
the executive committee so
funding is not going to flow
a directly from the health care
authority without sort of going
through that there some part of
that informing the regional
plans is the sim nothing is you
had a reference to make sure
that we are really clear about
what is going on in the
community with services do they
have an overlaying that is going
to be a robust medicaid gap
analysis.
So we're really trying to look
at I think I previewed that for
you all during such an ad the
total number of people in each
county who needed for example
medication treatment where
they're traveling to to get that
treatment and how many providers
you have in that community so
those two things are going to
overlay and to make all of those
funding decisions we are looking
at sort of a fast track option
where we try to get some funding
investments out pretty quickly
because
I think the regional plans are
going to take a while to get
done and we there are some
really known access gaps and so
will be looking at that that
will be a topic and discussion
at the next executive committee
for us really think about how we
can find things that we know
counties are struggling with and
communities are struggling with
thank you mister
observations and my work in in
in this
this policy efforts that I think
we were all working on trying to
resolve and I and the dedication
of funding that we put forward
it's substantial another has
been a lot of changes in this
this area and I just want us to
get this right so in efforts i'd
like to follow up with you and
and how you have are working
with their health councils how
you're working with the
organizations and groups that
have already formed
around the avoid
funding for our local
governments and some of the
declaratives that they formed
because
we're not reinventing the wheel
here we are already finding our
health councils mr chairs we
know we gave him I believe four
million dollars in this last
session
to do to really focus on
behavioral health they are
regional they are working with
in our tribes they have a plan
and it's a very substantial plan
that I believe it's been
underfunded for the work that
they have been doing and many of
us supported that supported them
in the funding efforts that we
put forward in the last couple
of years.
And we're seeing the outcomes in
the positive way I would say
that would be one of my
recommendations so you're not
duplicating things and that we
are working together and this is
already into the house councils
are already in our constitution
and in our internal hospital
already finding them so I would
just end up of course our local
governments and how they are
being funded in and working well
together as well
so my next question mister
chairs what are the goals and
how
maybe we've gone over the goals
housing the stake want to
measure success so to speak
who is going to provide the
metrics are you going on with
that the common wealth scoring
or where do you look it out to
to get this measures mister
chuck answered her
representative who had that was
one of that sort of how do we
measure success with one of the
first three of things that I
think it was condeplated in the
statute of requiring the
healthcare authority and the
less you issue a joint set of
evaluation credit
that first criteria that was
issued on june first as we have
a set of criteria for those
investments picture that were
really measuring were not
throwing in a money out the
window we really want to make
sure that we're strategic that
we're measuring things that
things are really evidence based
as as it talks about I don't
know if you want to add anything
error about that uhm
that evaluation criteria
specifically.
Of the question is with the
additional twenty million
dollars that we've
we have for the real access and
delivery grants
is that gonna go to start of
cost or how is that going to be
allocated
mrperiod chair representative
loophone you're talking about
the rural healthcare friend
that for this round if I need we
are going to focus on primary
care because there is so much
money going out the door for
through this other senate bill
three investment for behavioral
health there was a lot of marked
over hundred million dollars we
really want it sort of build
that foundation and again we
believe primary care is one of
the main entry points for a
beautiful holiday in our primary
care providers are doing a heavy
left when it comes to behavior
health care in new mexico so we
are focusing that twenty million
on primary care and rural
community specifically thank you
mister
again I just want to thank you
for you know for being here and
sure in all this i'd like to see
the more input for me maybe
they're next legislature that we
can
now that they've already know
they met for the executive
session and their planning the
mapping sessions across the
state I like to just get I think
that's really important that
they're included especially more
focused on this and I just
wanted to ask them to chair for
clarification
we're reference in the april
health collaborative can you
where we with that due to the
the speed three such a
mister terror representative
look high and so the clabbate
sunsets
I think centrally we have
shifted we were kind of signed
at an agreement some of the
contracts that run through that
falling colors contract the esl
that shifted to the health care
authority so all of those things
kind of stay and plays that
bunding will still continue to
flow out to providers I was just
shifted under the health care
authority and we've kind of got
the legal.
Completion of that I would say
that even though we're looking
at a really different dynamic
with the executive committee
smaller group in terms of
overall sort of oversight of the
regional plans there was there
were three people attending in
attendance at the exact
committee yesterday we had a
very robust public content very
robust seem like a lot of
excitement around this is sort
of a fresh start so i'm really
looking for return the new
dynamic I think
you know
III think there's still a
process to get a lot of robust
sea holder and pertain anything
that was avenue yesterday and I
think people were really in some
ways energized by this new
process in a way that it wasn't
seeing before so it's really
nice to see that
and see holder sort of
participation on happening I
think book per twenty moment
going thank you mister and I
appreciate that and i'm sorry
i'm taking a little bit more
time but I think this is so
crippled click on pressure but I
understand and i'm excited to
have a new page to turn so to
speak but I
want this to on the side of
caution
we have these new citizens and
information in front of us
and I too have been attending
the mappy means before our
session asked last year and now
after and i'm hearing the same
exact things
and the needs in the what is
going on and we're you know
where the gaps are with housing
with affordability and
I don't think that's going to
change instead those are really
critical to us having success
and how we're going to measure
that thank you mister check
thank you
please
thank you mister chair thanks
secretary
I guess i'm
preps one of only one on this
committee that would like to see
less people on medicaid your
program sounds like it's
working.
Wonderful
and for those who needed i'm i'm
grateful for that my question is
can you show me or tell me how
many people are no longer
qualified for medicaid because
we have done our part and got
them a better job got them out
of this
mister terror representative
dunkins that's a very
interesting question
we we do now you know we had the
medicaid and why they all
experience that pain with me
where we had in a during the
handemic for about four years we
couldn't discend anybody from
the program and we are in romant
head over a million new mexicans
as part of that process now
we're closer to eight hundred
and thirty nine thousand so you
you can see that we kind of has
gone down quite a bit and sort
of levelling off we don't have a
lot of informal growth and
you're not going to hear sort of
like this interest appeared
skyrocketing increase in a roman
anticipated but one thing to
remember is that medicaid people
on medicator often working and
they are often working a minimum
wage job you can work a minimum
way start and still qualify for
medicaid we're not really
talking about people who are
addressed not working also we
have a lot of elderly and
disabled individuals on our
program so they're kind of not
in that sort of category of
people who really can go out and
get it get work so the way I
would answer that is to sort of
remember that when you have
people who are working and you
have new work requirements it is
very very careful about how you
administer that because you
don't really want people to just
leave the program because of
administrative hassle and he
think that is a very high risk
situation we've got you know two
out of three people who work
on the medicaid program and so
what we're looking at is sort of
reducing aldability by at least
ninety thousand keyboard mostly
do to paperwork.
How do you renew their benefits
twice a year
and how do you some additional
work requirements that are very
confusing to comply with for the
task of our agency it's going to
make sure be to make sure that
we do everything we can't take
that not harmful so that you
make it clear and understandable
people who are working make it
easy for them to comply with the
program and then we have we will
have to look at how we can
support people to get jobs and
we do pride a lot of that
support through our agency you
have a lot of overlap with the
department about for solutions
to a child support program or
snap program but now I think
we're gonna be looking at some
new partnerships that were going
to be needed on the medicaids
hide as well to sort of support
people's growth into jobs but
you know many people are working
and they're just working in very
low wage jobs or sort of in
hours that fluctuate many of
them are care givers of a family
member who unable to work so I
think that's a really
complicated and you want it
question it will be really
studying says we look at having
work in community engagement
requirements and medicaid I
speak right with additional
information
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary so from your
answer I would guess that you
and I are it different my goal
is to get people off your goal
is get people on
and so I still have my answer
and you haven't given to me and
that is can you tell me how many
people we've got off this system
due to a better job and what
we've done is legislators
mister chair representative of
junking and so just to clarify
what I want I want people who
qualify for the program to be
able to get their benefits
because they qualify that's
really what I want for for the
population kind of neutral about
how the program growth as they
just want people who are
eligible to be able to get those
benefits
and we haven't had traditionally
work support in the medicaid
program so in terms of if the
question is about how many
people have you helped through
medicare to get off of the
program.
I don't have any answer for you
on that question because that
work and medicaid haven't been
linked in new mexico they will
be linked I think and so we will
be having to look at some new
innovation in this at a will the
hopefully we'll take it to your
question better as you really
think through how we employment
these new work requirements and
there's such a square I think
there are other ways people can
comply through community service
and other things that are really
valuable
but you know I think we are I
cannot answer that question
because we don't we haven't had
that connection and medicaid
previously
thank mr we are getting that and
I will you'll be able to give me
that answer a year for now
well mr chair representative we
will work fine at I mean I think
we look at what our time frames
are going to be for implementing
new work requirements and
medicare which right now it
looks like they're going to be
the end of twenty twenty six so
it looks like
you know we'll be having to
think through these issues and
the data so yes I hope to be
able to answer your question
better thank you thank you
mister chair thank you very much
representing we have the
repeater that you and then
okay thank you chair and thank
you secretary into all of your
staff who was here and the other
work and very very hard
I have some questions around
aged seventeen of your
presentation the primary care
graduate medical expansion and I
want to say i've asked this
before but i'm not quite sure if
we were able to get a metric
together on this is there a wait
to give us data in information
to tells us how long it is to
see so so you have some good
data growth and I love all this
is good we would essentially see
improvement and what i'm about
to ask for which is some sort of
a metric that says you know the
average weight time to see AP c
p if you're a new patient versus
an existing patient and other
maybe there's some propriety of
stuff in there i'm not quite
sure how you'd get a hold of
that data but but is there a way
to do that and also want to see
it urban versus rural
specialties.
New versus existing patient of
our kind of stuff I just did
sort of a quick you know
google search etc in
you know I see some wildly
different numbers that I
personally have experienced and
I get a lot of questions all
over the state over this kind of
stuff you want to comment on
editor
mister chair sender option yes
in that such a great question
and it is a please where we are
just the data is inconsistent so
we are working that on that I
think the director of planner
and I would just talking about
that we were preparing for the
theorying and I think that's a
really logical question for you
to ask and if he did something
that you should expect how long
does it take on average at least
a medicate population for people
to get into the doctor
and I think that's why we set
those performance standards in
the mco contracts around average
we time to appointment right now
it seems like we're having a
hard time getting really
consistent data which is why we
have people on site at the
answers this would be really
working through it the is
questions about how are they
monitoring that work
traditionally I think the best
way that's been done has been
true secret shopper surveys but
I don't know that that's really
the best dealer it's sort of
experiencing it depends on all
these things so I think we
really need to work on this this
is like one of those areas where
you think we need more robust
information and I don't think we
have it today so it is something
that we are very focused on
though and you know trying to
really hold it and we created a
template for the secret shoppers
that and she has have new more
robust requirements but it
unfortunately don't think we
have consistent information or
really strong data
thank you chairman thank you
secretary yeah I mean III I
think we need to find a creative
way to get this together this is
a very important you know deal
here unsure that the longer the
way but hired the cost because
it.
Ideally you know potentially the
issue gets worse for the patient
all that kind of stuff and and
i'm also assuming chairman in in
secretary that you know there
seems to be an association for
lieutenant governors and
association for secretaries of
this is there an association of
all of you are role in a price
there and maybe you could throw
the cast the net out there is
how do you guys track this kind
of stuff because that is evident
something you could comment mr
terror sender please we do we do
actually there are people like
me as a destruction of people
like me and there's an
association of medicaid records
so we will put the billers out
there to see if we can I get
some direction on how other
states are measuring that or if
anyone's been successful beat
suggestions thank you chair
instead of reinventing the world
it's just gonna find something
that works and it's just
duplicated that you're thinking
there thank you very much
thank you mister chairman you
know work we're looking in this
federal cuts and we don't know
what's going to happen yet but I
probably can pass out by the
fourth of july then we're gonna
have a pretty good idea I mean
i'm looking in under tabman in
case anybody wants to know and
on pages twenty a minute start
in the last year we we dropped a
hundred and forty thousand
people off medication in there
wasn't partly anybody squawking
about the drop offs and here a
whole abroad and in this next
quarter we've dropped about nine
thousand after the medicaid
roles and I haven't heard a
whole lot I mean with the
federal cuts coming I don't want
to guess but I mean it's been
pretty quiet about the number
that are dropping off and in so
more drop off and what at what
point you forecasting is a
turning point in medicaid we're
where people are really getting
it hit I mean so we've lost just
call hundred fifty thousand
people with that any noise at
all
you have any idea what that's
going to look like
mister terror by sure I think
that's a good point I would say
in the and why do you most these
people probably didn't qualify
we did take some people come
back.
But it's overall sort of those
people hopefully have another
source of coverage you heard
earlier from the panel that that
exchange though are pretty big
increase in there and romance
people kind of shipped into the
most appropriate place the movie
that didn't qualify for
medicaid.
I think that as you start to see
the work requirements go into
place or the more infrequent
income verification
what will likely happen is it
more frequent kind of turn
people still qualify for the
program they kind of lose
ultimately then they show up at
an emergency room and they need
some things to come back on and
we can go through the cycle
which is a little bit painful
for providers but hopefully at
the end of the day people are
still able to get their coverage
at the qualified I think one of
the pin points that I just think
folks need to have in mind is
that we are also looking at some
provider payment reductions very
likely I don't think that the
federal government is going to
continue to sustain them we're
trying to make the argument that
we're a rural estate with a high
medical insurer and we really
need to be able to pay our
providers fairly but I think
that was investment above
medicare hundred and fifty
percent of medicare I think
those are very much at risk and
so I think you will hear about
those pain points that's gonna
affect providers bottom lines
that combined with sort of new
requirements around copies for
example in having to track
payments and try to collect
payments from a population that
traditionally has a paid is
going to be challenging and so
we're talking about a lot of
administrative confusion
I don't I think the ninety
thousand people you're probably
right it's it's a blip on the
medicaid screen right but it is
people who are getting care or
who might be in the middle of
treatment for example who can of
turn in and out these don't
qualify to come back the camera
and for six months they go off
for six months so it's going to
be i'm interesting to see what
those trends really look like
you I think the mail on the head
I mean we're going to see drop
the medicate but the the
reimbursement rates are going to
be the biggest detriment in the
job losses are going to be even
higher I mean the reports from
that hybrid kind of put out
fifteen hospitals at risk bill
those are fifteen hospitals that
are rest two years ago.
When we knew that right on your
funded but the job lost in the
nursing the doctors bad the
reimbursement rates are not
going to be there are going to
be greater to the speed when
I think i've seen some company
sent me something where you know
new mexico's the like the lowest
amount of doctors in in stay how
our weekend a plan I mean
whether they you would hope if
an ever just a minute say I hope
not but as an example start
sending me emails and text to
meet my clothes a hospital i'll
just use gall
it's been in trouble for years
the legislature stepped up and
thanks to them that hospital has
got it rebalance in there stable
now but it gives this happens in
in those medicate reimbursements
get reduced and they have to cut
staff and doctors those doctors
are probably not leaving to go
to albert they're leaving to go
somewhere else and so how it is
a stake in the manage that I
mean this is goes to towers do
we put forty million dollars in
a new hospital in the house and
if the medicaid reimbursement
rates are not there for the
providers to pay the physicians
in the nurses they are going
somewhere else they're not I
don't maybe a few good album but
how rigorous managed that job
lost because we already know it
takes six or eight weeks to get
an appointment and succeed weeks
to get another x rate in the
scan and how are we going to
manage that stirring that in the
I
on the reimbursement rates
that's the biggest worry some to
me because it if we lose doctors
and providers then we the whole
system crashed
this year vice chair
I I wish I had great answers I I
think it takes a lot of money to
make up for these at all funding
masses so you know one option
it's to back though.
Some of those letters is that
that with general planned but I
don't know how realistic add is
I think
the other thing to be really
aware of is that it is most
likely a cost that will be
passed on to those of us from
right of medicaid so for example
the commercial market is going
to get a lot more expensive
because there is going to need
to be some make up for the rates
and so those offs that they're
going to come most likely out of
private insurance are paying
more anything that's a very real
thing that will likely happen
because you always hear that
commercial insurance isn't
enough and new mexico and so we
have to read the medicaid rates
or the commercial rates and so
as the medicate rate goes down
there's like this offset I had
to happen in the rest of the
market to keep what we have and
we're looking at losses and
closures and those are fact
access to care for every single
new mexican particularly in our
rural community so I don't have
great as well as I think we've
sort of tried to leverage the
tools that are in our school box
and be really creative within
the medicaid space but so as
those policy levers are removed
or eliminated it's going to be
more challenging so we're gonna
have to really think through an
I I really appreciate the force
I
i've you in and the committee
and other let legislator for
creating about to keep trust
find I mean I do think maybe
there is an opportunity to try
and put some money away but it's
going to be hard these are
pretty big financial losses for
new mexico well we're a little
bit too late in the medicare
in the process of doing that I
mean the health care affordably
planned becomes really active
and how we see it saves and and
the cost in and so the dollar
for their but member were just
in the first year terminals
and and it could last for four
years
and even more cuts because my
real problem with it federal
deficit is.
If they do not fix the federal
deficit that the dollar collapse
and then we're really in the
world to heard and that's the
financial thing that the feds
need to get to not reelecting
and show your orders you can do
something but in in in saving
knows if we don't have the
providers here what were article
struggling with today
and we don't figure out how to
keep the providers and keep the
rates which the state cannot
maintain at a level for a long
period of time
I don't know III want the exact
mistake when bringing up I want
the executive and el of see the
start thinking about
you know it provider rates are
dropped or lowered at what how
many doctors we really need in
towers right in one of those
doctors that we we need for
basic provider services what are
they needed in portal center to
come carry to your c I mean
otherwise
we're gonna influx albert
which we already do
because of me not have or the
beating surgeons or whatever the
certain thing and how do you
rebalance that system cause if
you don't keep community
providers inside their community
then then we're we're gonna sink
the system that exists in other
communities about critical
outside
and how we do that and then you
know how are we
sold there told about the health
care for value plan and in I
agree with it it's now the time
wouldn't you really go to step
up and start looking at how we
keep provider rates low or how
do we keep health insurance
costs lower rate I mean it's you
see this had been all my mind
for years do we force them to
combine a q in pso seal seating
to get a lower rate and start
doing that I mean that's that's
how we have sold the health care
for me.
Build the he
am in a confused all the
acronyms
but I mean that's something
we're gonna have to step on the
gas piddle to do
because I
am in the tape
also retired superintendent in
when he retired and he figured
you know what his health
insurance costs were going to be
in and now they're going to be
the probably already double
right that may even go up again
and you have retirees working on
it on planning on what they're
fixed income was for retired for
retirement it's going to change
the system so I I think you need
to step on at a gas bill
and we really need to start
looking at I mean the other
committee which i'm on on the
federal codes but I think you
got to get ahead of everything
that's going to happen because
we got to have some strong
planning because if not
if people realize their doctor
realized they're not going to
have a job or have get paid the
same that they're they're out of
here
and they're going to go to to
other places I was service
center or near mission areas on
over the weekend
you have been medical school is
offering a family practitioner
position in three years not
seven eight ten right in three
years and I send that to you and
then medical school so had a
week how do we step on the gas
pill because that's what we're
going to have to do in order to
get some of this done and how to
how do we maintain our current
providers or doctors doctors
nurses across the board in the
state and what what is that
going to look like because
that's going to be some strong
budgeting as we move forward
because in the economy slowing
down
people on her starting to
realize a little bit
the world of vence in what's
happening
in dc changes like the wind
and so we've got to figure this
out and and we got a house from
balance because.
It won't take
six hundred million to go very
far to start back filling this
to for some basic programming
whether it's snap programming
whether it's you know keeping
providers here
it'll go away six hundred
million will go away in a harbun
recurring in in a bad of night
and then you're going to start
have to start thinking about how
you start reducing budgets
across support to make the most
people that need and the most
things that matter to people
affordable to them in the state
and that's where I think we're
gonna have to head
let me ask you in in our
performance
recommends
one dimension to you know as far
as this federal funds discussion
goes to is timing as everything
on this and so you know that
with the health care delivery
and access act the provisions in
the center fight the senate
finance committee version of the
reconciliation bill
you know they they feel is that
in over the course of I I think
it's twenty thirty or twenty one
or phase it out sorry or the
course of the twenty thirty
twenty thirty one so we do have
a little bit of time on that but
it is something that
you know got a look at
you
mr terror I sure I do think
that's right I think on the
hospital side there were looking
at a fees down but I think it's
very likely
that we will be capped at a
hundred percent of medicare
across the provider rates where
we're not using directive human
so for example when we get
provided to do a while child
visit and we're paying them at a
hundred fifty percent medicare
today that very likely will go
either also be fees down or go
away completely and that is not
really part of the reconsolution
that is just something that cms
can choose to do
administratively and so they
just want to be clear that.
That might be pulled out much
sooner than you know the twenty
thirty for the hospitals and it
looks like nursing facilities
may be okay that's a new version
seems to contemplate like paying
them higher and knowing that you
know medicaid is the pair of
care but I think just to be I
wanted to be clear to make that
distinction which is that I
think there could be some
administrative actions much
sooner than what we had well
i'll say this is any way right
you guys are government
employees and i'm a private
sector when we see something
coming at us we prepare for
what's coming at it even though
it may take a couple years
because as recruiting revenue is
on the decline over the next
couple of years i'm projections
we have to get out of head of
this because I mean unless
you've been here during budget
cuts and I think maybe you were
here you you don't want to go
there i'd rather be prepared and
looking forward in the three
year period at this year's
dollars then coming up and
seeing in twenty thirty I got to
come up with this money because
i've been here long enough that
I know how the legislature works
let's spend that money in when
it hits in twenty thirty will
figure it out I don't want to do
that III think we have to
prepare for a lot of this and
whether we throw the money in
the medically trust fund and
hold it and let the reactor
money build there's plenty of
ideas to do that but just like
you said you know some of the
stuff it's not going to be have
to be done with congressional
approval and so you better be
prepared
and we better have the skills to
in the knowledge today rather
than say push it down the road
because leave me i've been here
in this legislature and we
kicked a lot of cans off the
cliff and they're still falling
in and we still have not
built those those things up I
mean took the candidate road to
twenty thirteen will figure it
out then no let's figure out now
so we have a plan when we go in
if anything changes when you do
that let me jump to two other
things because I know we're
trying to get somewhere
on page it's on our performance
report card I don't let you
probably see me.
Care carrier not eric and share
with you but there's there's a
lot of
a bread in that green on on the
health care authorities report
to port card medicaid managed
care members new morning made a
k
department use right
hospital readiness for children
members under twenty eight
received comprehensive periodic
oral valuations that's dental
service right in so how we're
going to change these metrics on
their either yet a lower bring
and they're not all read I mean
that's
that's whatever here then what
you're looking at that i'll just
touch on on
page twenty six a tab in the
behavioral health system right
and that's what we're really
kind of focused on going forward
we gotta get some some
performance metrics up in the
mean
medicaid in providers discharge
from impatient in the red
reinmissions are in the red and
in I know that's a tough
scenario and in what you're
looking at that read that amount
of but a little more time so you
can look at it but center trial
may be right because I met with
the medicate psych cut interest
and just to give us a hire trip
once again their degree they
still have to go through three
thousand hours training which is
another year and happy for they
can even practice and so they
are spinning by even have to six
years getting prepared to do
this
I don't know if we have that
time bring the weight so that's
going to be adjusted as you're
looking at that but these are
some of the things one of the
other things that interest me is
in the newsletter that was hot
after pressing I haven't seen
this in in galvia but tell the
health boost
I don't know where they replaced
in in gal I just use my district
but they're placed in astec
mascular call up for some.
Maybe tell me a little bit more
about where the telehealth booth
that is in galiberatic in what
that looks like in house located
so I think maybe you got cut up.
Mr chair vice chair that was a
lot of questions but i'm trying
to let you read but I can I can
I think the first thing that
you're calling out is some of
the red in the performance
mattress they just I want to
call one thing out which is
so for the report card it's a
quarterly reporting and there
are annual metrics so you can
kind of see that the targets
were you know largely sort of
that in prior years but we're
kind of on this quarterly
reporting basis there are some
this alignments between how we
collect data and how it gets
reported out by lfc i'll take a
closer look it back they just
think some other performance a
kind of shows up red while we do
this sort of quarterly because
we are on an annual we have to
do medical record reviews for
example who do that like
annually so we'll take a look at
that while I was looking at the
report I I guess the one thing I
will say about quality metrics
is that we are always trying to
perform our metrics that is why
we have performance metrics and
forty percent of that is caters
tied quality mattress we want to
make providers have some skin in
the game we want to make sure
that they are really doing what
they are supposed to do that
when I just handing over money
and just paying for bad results
and we really want to move the
needle and would we do that when
we set up these quality programs
that really works we've seen in
the nursing facility quality
quality program metrics have
improved substantially and it's
because we hired money to
results and so that is one of
the major ways that we're doing
that for example at the hospital
readmissions I am sorry while it
was looking at your
out the score carding mister
minister question about the
teller health
tell health boost replace that I
I just tell me how they work in
how they operate minute picture
all fond before I had to put
quarters in and call someone.
Tell me how they work and it
says you have to schedule
appointment but
you know you run in the people
that mean metal health into hit
you should maybe go the gallery
library and they have a
telephone but you got a schedule
this point tell me how to tell
me how they work it's just an
interesting concept interesting
thing to kick out there and if
it's your terror base here there
there are some really
interesting players in this
space and yeah I would am as the
entity that put these tell
health boots in place but I will
say we've had some meetings with
tall health providers that are
interested in doing for example
tell health booths and real read
that I like senior center they
are actually very innovative I
was surprised and how are you
can have like you don't always
have to have an appointment you
can kind of go right and clouds
the screen the equipment falls
down on you can kind of do all
your tests that it was you there
is a provider that comes on the
screen kind of tell you what to
do and give you the result so
it's actually you can get
walking with a prescription as
the technology is quite amazing
it's self cleaning all of these
things are really happening
we we are exploring some of
these partnerships in new mexico
to see like what options we have
I have a preference for real
physician services in in person
at but you there might be some
really critical access to
shortages where that might be a
really good solution and under
some of these providers have
seen really good results for a
certain park at the berriers
like you know border frontier
communities where there's not an
immediate access point and so
yeah I think these are really
promising practices and i'd be
happy to connect you with one of
these providers you could get a
presentation because i've been
in a data with those lately so
well get the telehealth but I I
think it's very interesting to
meet because if you don't have a
metal health provider can get an
appointment right access to that
and immediate career in error
even in a police department that
arrest somebody or something
that needs a meeting mean help
you know you could.
Put him in the booth and get him
on the phone how would they work
but it's interesting to me
especially and christ its mode
how you could get those people
access those right or how you
could get him that in crisis
mode the critical access I think
that's it's very interesting to
me because when you can't get
appointments
that they can get to someone
somewhere before they kill
themselves for committee suicide
or whatever else happened so
that's interesting to me and
then then on the hero health
score court on page twenty six I
think should be that I mean
there's some performance metrics
that that are not being better
in one that really interest me
is if the medicaid in all visit
for children how that thing is
just dropped off the cliff less
than sixty percent of children
right around fifty nine percent
of this year roughly thirty nine
percent of children are getting
dental care
in the medical field in so you
may just want to look at that
answer me off line in in canada
do that but I don't think that
i'm watching out for but I mean
the other stuff that we talked
about earlier I I really think
eric in alexi and you guys need
to meet and and figure out what
what that scenario is going to
look like
when we get there because it's
common
but how do we how do we figure
out how to get ahead of that so
thank you mister chairman
thank you very much
and little briefly and then
we'll go ahead and rep
think it was to chair madame
secretary on page fourteen of of
your presentation the fifth
bullet children in state custody
cut my attention
the correct of it states i'm
reading a correct action plan
was issued to presbyterian to
address efficiencies and data
complaints network coordination
with cyfd for children and state
custody.
Now I see thank you that the
response is due
to your office by june thirtieth
my question is well this report
the available or the findings
the response be available to
this committee and other
committees and if so when thank
you mister chair
mister chair representative
little I will look into that and
make sure that we can legally
share that but i'm happy to do
that as long as that's something
that we can do so
we'll be happy to follow up with
you and provide that additional
information
just make sure that we cross all
our teases at all
certainly because thank you very
much mister chair
I think with all of the focus
that's come around as the way I
do this area is a critical area
that I think as you point out
making sure that network is is
more moving specifically is
really important thank you thank
you that's it great thank you
very much
thank you thank you matter
secretary we really appreciate
it committee we're gonna journ
for lunch quick no for folks
were going on the natural
resources tour please take tab k
from your notebooks from the
binters
so if you were going on the
natural resources to or which
believe that one grave tab key
thank you
that transportation
informal be out there store
so we have a little bit of time
will grab some lunch thank you
secretary thanks to all of the
