When you smile at kids, I would
always tell people that I
volunteered to work with the
kids. I got paid to deal with
the adults. So if I didn't have
to be in my office, I was
usually down in kinder 1st
grade, 2nd grade.
With the kids because the world
looks better through the eyes of
a 5 or 6 year old lots of times,
so, you know, it, it made me
very nostalgic for that, um,
today's agenda.
And let me remind people, we do
have a reception this evening,
you know, and the directions for
that are behind the little
yellow tab near the front.
But today New Mexico's approach
to a comprehensive literacy
framework and so Evan, our
policy analyst is going to lead
us on that with then Carla.
Injured, is that right? Stewart
Stiner Steinhardt Steinhardt.
I'm not reading well.
Steinhardt, oh, that looked like
a sea, no, it's old eyes that I
can't see, uh, director of
elementary education and Christy
Surgeon.
So please help with that.
When? Oh, I think I.
was in a class to help that.
Yeah, thank you. Oh yes, it is
an E, not a C.
All right. Good morning. uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Evan
Chavez, and I'm a recent
addition to the LESC policy
team. It's great to be here this
morning in Roswell, and I hope
you enjoyed this morning's site
visit.
And I hope our conversation
today can highlight the tireless
efforts of our of the schools in
our state.
Implementing high quality
literacy instruction.
I'm joined this morning with
Kyla Steinhardt, director of
RISD's, uh, elementary education
and Christie surrogit.
One, RISD certified academic
language therapists.
So today I will present a brief
that examines the evolution of
New Mexico's structured literacy
initiative, its impact on our
students, its components that
prepared our teachers and
administrators in delivering
high quality and structural,
high quality literacy
instruction followed by a
national comparison with states
like Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Colorado.
The purpose of this research is
to highlight the strengths of
the structured literacy
initiative, but also to discuss
the implementation gaps, so our
students are fully engaged in
learning.
Then our guests from RISD will
carry the conversation from
analysis to practice, and we'll
have the opportunity to share
their unique approach to
literacy instruction.
So the brief for this morning's
presentation is included in your
packet under tab 7.
So first I would like to draw
your attention to figure 2,
trends in K3 reading assessments
on page 3.
So, on your left is data
showcasing kindergarten first
and 2nd grade students
performing at or above grade
level expectations for reading
or on benchmark according to is
station.
On your right is data showcasing
3rd grade students,
demonstrating satisfactory.
Understanding of the concepts
and skills being assessed for
their grade level or is making
progress toward college and
career readiness according to
Nemesa.
As you can see from the graph.
There is a positive trend for
all student groups since school
year 22.
These evidence are
These outcomes are evidence that
the state's investment in
structured literacy must
continue but might consider a
shift in a focus on coordination
that is effective and
sustainable.
Because the ability to read
becomes the ability to learn.
to solve problems and ultimately
to work.
From kindergarten to grade 3,
children focus on learning to
read so that in 4th grade and
beyond, they are reading to
learn.
So this graph demonstrates New
Mexico has been making progress
in this area.
And so looking behind the scenes
of this graph is also important
because student growth is not
just a product of investment.
But a coordinated effort on the
part of state agencies, local
education agencies, teachers,
and administrators.
The core components that form
the foundation of New Mexico's
efforts and accelerating early
literacy outcomes are listed in
Bellfont on pages 2 and 3.
And these components listed are
local literacy plans.
High quality instructural
materials.
Professional training and
learning, multi-layered system
of supports.
And model and support schools.
So I will be referring to these
components throughout this
presentation.
Now shifting away from this
graph, let's focus on other,
what other states are doing.
And implementing a comprehensive
K3 literacy policy.
On page 4, you will find table 2
early literacy.
Policy state comparison.
This table provides a brief
overview of the state's selected
in comparison to New Mexico.
Alabama, Colorado, Louisiana,
and Mississippi.
So, the table summarizes 5
common pillars, so there's
scope, professional development.
Interventions, monitoring, and
parental notification.
Notice the age of each policy
differs with some implementing
literacy policies more than a
decade ago, while others emerged
slightly before the COVID-19
pandemic.
But it's important to know that
each state.
is responding to persistently
low literacy rates, with
particular attention to reading
proficiency by grade 3.
Right below that table, you will
find more details about each
state's literacy policy, its
implementation and amendments,
as you peruse the table and
state profiles that will explain
the similarities and differences
in implementation with respect
to New Mexico.
So first, New Mexico's literacy
policy components show strong
alignment to with other states
emphasis on strategic literacy
training and instruction.
Each state, including New
Mexico, mandated a new teaching
method, concentrated in
scientifically based reading
instruction.
Reinforced through licensure
examinations, literacy coaches,
and research-based instructional
materials. According to Pett,
140 school districts and charter
schools have enrolled
participants in letters
training, totaling 10,500
letters trained or in the
process of being trained across
the state.
Secondly, New Mexico's literacy
policy components align with
other states' guidance and
accountability for screening and
initiating effective
interventions.
For example, the multi-layered
system of supports or MLSS was
developed in response to a
growing concern that educators
and administrators did not have
a comprehensive and holistic
framework for addressing
Students' needs, dressing
holistic students' needs both.
Through academic behavior and
wellness in a timely manner.
This framework replaced a
previous RTI model and now
allows intensive support for any
student who needs them.
If you would like to follow
along, table 1 on page 2 titled
Multi-layered System of Sports
provides a quick summary of the
framework.
So the focus of layer one is
delivery of high quality
instructural materials for core
curriculum and different
differentiated instruction.
Layer one includes positive
behavioral interventions and
supports, data-driven
instruction, targeted
interventions to support the
acquisition of core content, and
that includes universal
screening.
The focus of layer two
interventions is individualized
and targeted interventions to
support core curriculum and
instruction.
Interventions may include
data-driven instruction, small
group instruction, instruction
with reading or math coaches.
And finally, the focus of layer
3, intensive interventions is to
provide students.
Excuse me.
To provide students with
instruction to meet their
individualized and significant
learning behavioral or social
emotional needs. Layer 3
intensive interventions may
include.
out services provided by reading
specialists, Push in services
provided by a behavior
specialists, counseling services
or interventions provided by
general education teacher in the
classroom.
Now, some key differences in
implementation include oversight
of implementation,
implementation plans, and
retention and promotion
policies. Mississippi, for
example, published its
literacy-based promotion Act
implementation guide detailing
precisely what the new law
dictates, the roles and
responsibilities for for putting
each component into practice and
a clear guide about what needs
to happen at the state district
school and individual teacher
level.
This outline of rules and roles
and responsibilities has
improved the understanding of
the new teaching methods with
increased facilitation with
educator coaching, but more
importantly, it helped measure
student progress with clarity.
In terms of oversight, Louisiana
created the Louisiana Early
Literacy Commission to study and
make recommendations to the
Louisiana Department of
Education, State Department of
Education, and the Louisiana
State Board of Elementary and
Secondary Education.
The commission's appointees.
Consist of school system and
school leaders, educators and
parents.
The Louisiana legislature
established the state level ELC
to develop and implement a
system providing research-based
reading instruction for children
from birth through grade 3 and
did so by doing 3 things. So
one, they reviewed the progress
the department has made towards
the recommendations laid forth
by previous uh early literacy
commission. Secondly, they draft
recommendations for the
following areas, comprehensive
literacy policy, diverse
learners, and
childhood literacy strategy. And
finally, they endorsed literacy
policy during the legislative
session.
And lastly, some differences are
on retention and promotion
policies. Mississippi and
Alabama mandate retention for
3rd grade students that fall
short of grade level
proficiency, while Colorado and
Louisiana remained flexible on
its mandate, but these states
also have heavily rely on
interventions and parent
collaboration for 4th grade
promotion.
That concludes our review of the
policy components in New Mexico
and its comparison to other
states, I would like to focus
our shift our focus to a 25 and
2025 analyses of nationwide
policies conducted by the by
Excelened.
To discuss its implications on
our literacy initiatives and to
reframe the gaps in
implementation as opportunities
to support our students and
educators.
Now, Excelined is a nonprofit
organization that conducts
research on how state policies
translate to rising academic
achievement. And they believe
that every, every one of us in
this room plays a role in
ensuring children have an
opportunity to build a strong
foundation in early literacy.
The 2025 analysis found 5 common
challenges when adopting a
comprehensive early literacy
policy that is inefficient
teacher support, inconsistent
implementation, inadequate
accountability, funding
allocations, and
miscommunication between
stakeholders. On page 6, you
will find table 3 titled Excel
and Ned's Report on New Mexico's
literacy implementation.
So the 50 state analysis from
Excelined reviews 18 components
under 4 categories. So in the
top left corner, you have
supports for teachers and policy
implementation.
Right below that you have
assessment and parent
notification in the upper right
corner, you have instruction and
intervention, and right below
that you have retention and
intensive interventions. So the
table
Shows a check mark where New
Mexico has implemented policies
regarding that category.
And we're gonna go through each
category.
To show what New Mexico is, has
been doing.
So New Mexico has adopted
policies to support teachers and
state policy recommendations
since the transition to the
structured literacy initiative
in 2019, the legislature has
allocated a total of $112
million directly to school
districts and charter schools.
Ped's statewide adoption of has
also trained 100,500 teachers
and administrators in the
science of reading will also
requiring the practice
elementary reading exam for
licensure.
A 2025 statutory amendment to
educator preparation programs
now requires the use of
structured literacy practices in
training future educators and
identifies structured literacy
as to the approach.
To teaching literacy for all
students.
For all learners.
The analyses also shows New
Mexico has adopted policies that
support assessments and parent
notification components.
Pets statewide literacy
framework, for example, ensures
all literacy instruction.
is evidence based and provides
guidance on universal screening
for first grade students, early
interventions for students
displaying characteristics of
dyslexia and implementation of a
literacy professional
development plan.
Moving on to instruction and
intervention, excel in it
identified two components to
strengthen this area.
That is the elimination of 3
queuing and structural
materials, and a parent read at
home plan.
So pet, as, as mentioned
earlier, prioritizes the
adoption and implementation of
high quality instructional
materials and requires frequent
monitoring of student progress.
School districts and charter
schools in New Mexico have the
flexibility to not buy from PE's
vetted list, but are encouraged
to select materials that satisfy
local cultural and fiscal needs.
As a result, 54% of New Mexico's
school districts have
Uh, implemented high quality
instructional materials for all
grade levels K through 12 in
English language arts. Now 54%
of HQMI implementation can be
interpreted in two ways. The
first is that.
The state's emphasis on
evidence-based culturally
responsive instruction is
growing, while the other is more
students need access to high
quality instruction materials.
And addition, in addition to
high quality instruction
materials, you heard this
morning that PE has initiated a
free summer reading program for
students in K through 8 with a
focus on reading instruction
with $17,000 17,000 students
enrolled for the summer.
And lastly, we will go on to
retention and intervention.
New Mexico, New Mexico state law
already requires parental
notifications of any student not
academically proficient.
And the process of retention
includes a discussion with
parents about available
interventions and support to
Assist any student in grades 1
through 8 not academically
proficient. Furthermore, any
students considered for
retention must be receiving
layer 2 or 3 interventions in
the MLSS framework prior to
parents or guardians being
notified of the school's desire
to retain the student.
Exelened recognizes this state
law, but recommends a policy
that is specific to literacy.
This analyses recommends New
Mexico require intensive
interventions and good cause
exemptions that focus on early
literacy and should include at
least 3 pathways for promotion
to 4th grade.
A predetermined achievement
level on state reading
assessment or an alternative
assessment and qualifications
for a good cause exemption.
Now that concludes our
discussion on Excel Excel in its
comprehensive policy components,
and I hope now that we are
distracted by one pressing
question.
What does a comprehensive early
literacy policy look like in New
Mexico?
As you ponder that, I will wrap
up my presentation.
So over the last two decades, we
witnessed more than half of US
states adopt early literacy
policies that require reading
instruction, interventions, and
professional development in
2002, Florida was the first
state to adopt 3rd grade reading
law that ended social promotion.
That legislation became a model
for Excelin's fundamental
principles, which addresses and
supports the needs of those who
are impacted the most, our
students.
And empowers those who are
responsible for their success.
Educators and families.
Mississippi, Mississippi's
literacy base, uh, promotion Act
was modeled after Florida's
reading law, placing a heavy
emphasis on prevention of
breeding difficulties through
screening, early intervention,
early identification and
interventions to address the
needs of students at risk for
reading failure.
And recent evaluations have
early literacy policies,
including retention, show states
with a comprehensive early
literacy policy, the experienced
substantial and sustained
increases in reading scores.
Mississippi, Mississippi's
literacy.
Excuse me, Mississippi targeted
literacy efforts from several
vantage points, including
retention and experience a surge
in 4th grade reading
proficiency.
So states like Mississippi,
whose policies mandate their
great retention, see significant
and persistent increases in
state summitative reading
scores. It's important to note,
however, that the increases in
reading proficiency are largely
attributed to increased student
supports rather than the
practice of great retention
itself.
Further research also reveals
that.
Some indication.
Retention in grades 3 and 4 is
more beneficial than retention
in in later grades, citing
evidence of positive effects on
students' sense of belonging in
early elementary and retention
in these early grades have has
large positive impacts on
student achievement through
middle school.
Now, as we seek similar
improvements in student
outcomes, we should also
consider the capacity necessary
to support these changes.
On page 8, you will find a
summary of policy and
Budget recommendations based on
the analyses.
Uh, New Mexico's literacy
efforts to date and alongside
review of national research and
policy consideration.
So the legislator should
continue funding and support for
structured literacy, so that
schools continue to use
research-based reading
instruction and ensure other
current literacy initiatives
maintain its effectiveness, and
2, the legislator should also
consider finding additional
instructional reading coaches to
provide appropriate services to
schools to achieve a sustained
intensive, and classroom focused
approach to literacy.
And to build an infrastructure
of support for improving
literacy outcomes.
That would require the public
education department to provide
detailed guidance for all
programmatic efforts in
structural literacy to ensure
successful statewide
implementation.
The public education department
should also consider providing
screening criteria and an
assessment tool overview that is
feasible for administrative
time, format, and language.
And to keep students engaged in
a culturally and linguistically
responsive education system,
school districts and charter
schools should develop a read at
home plan and provide tools for
families to support literacy
outside the classroom.
They should also adopt high
quality instructional materials
to guide teachers and support
learners for all students with
ongoing training and guidance
about the use of high quality
instruction materials to improve
literacy instruction for all
students.
And finally, they should
establish reasonable thresholds
and processes for K3 or
kindergarten through 3rd
intensive interventions and
potential retention policies to
ensure students require their
reading skills needed to be
promoted to the next grade.
And with that, I will pass the
baton to our host, the Roswell
Independent School District.
Thank you.
We had heard this morning in one
of the, the presentations and
asked the kids where in the
technology didn't work like it
was supposed to for them, and
you could see some of the
frustration from the kids on
that too, so.
But it's wonderful when it works
and frustrating when you're
expecting it to, and it doesn't
always work as smoothly. Please
go ahead.
On, OK. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Carla
Steinhardt, and I am the
director for elementary
education in the Roswell
Independent School District and
uh.
My partner here, so.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Christy
Surge.
OK
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Christy Surget. I'm the
certified academic language
therapist, otherwise known as
Celt here in the Roswell School
District.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity to address the
committee today. I, I want to
address the committee today. I,
I wanna start with just uh which
one is it? That one.
Oh
Oh, there we go.
Uh, just
Leading with the thanks, the
appreciation that we in Roswell
feel for your commit your
commitment and focus to literacy
in New Mexico and finding the
opportunities for these
initiatives for passing
legislation like I can tell you,
uh, that has been a really great
lever for the district
administrators to be able to use
to get people trained, um, and
really start focusing on the
science of reading. So thank
you.
for staying curious about how
what you do at the state level
translates into our actions at
the LEA.
In RISD, your support has meant
that we have letters training
for over 200 teachers.
We have, we've received the
structured literacy legislative
award where we can pay our
teachers to attend their letters
training.
Um
We've been able to also, it's
been gene generous enough that
we've been able to also provide
professional development, do
book studies, and really just
raise the, the level of of
Information and in the science
of reading.
We also have our disciplinary
literacy training and our summer
reading program that you got to
see today.
Just quickly, our demographics,
we in Roswell, we have an
enrollment of 9,0243 students.
We have, uh, we are 75%
Hispanic.
14% EL.
We have 25% with uh with an IEP
special education.
And our overall district
literacy rates right now are at
about a 36%.
So our literacy model that we
started in in Roswell has, uh,
we started in 2019, training
teachers in structured literacy.
Um, we also developed a
grassroots movement that we
could really lean into the
teachers on the ground that were
true believers in, in the
science of reading. We also very
early on, adopted a core ELA
program that was aligned to the
science, which was Amplify CKLA
core Knowledge Language Arts.
But our, our results weren't
really producing the results as
quickly enough, like we have a
sense of urgency to improve
outcomes for kids.
So we needed to get people
really deeply knowledgeable
about providing the
interventions and the repeated
practice opportunities for that
just really are kind of out of
reach for a classroom teacher
with 25 students in front of
them to provide. So our approach
to coaching teachers has been to
provide them with coaching
directly in their core program.
Uh, so that they don't have to
make that that jump between
training and what the materials
that they have on the ground.
Um, we
We also started a a cult cohort
certified academic language
therapy, cohorts so that we
would have.
The most knowledgeable people to
not only be housed in a building
where teachers have access to
them, but also to provide direct
therapy to our students because
what we're finding, the students
that are coming to us are, are
pretty that that limited in
their oral language in any
language.
We can talk about, but we're,
we're having to actually go
back.
When 70% of your student
population is not reading is not
reading, um, proficiently.
We need people to help provide
the exact kind of intervention
that those students need in
order to reach grade level
outcomes.
Part of our model also included
uh using in class dibbles for
informing instruction in our
classrooms. So we do our
iStation, but then we also do
our M class dibbles so that we
can inform our, uh, our
interventions as well.
So I, I just wanted to pause a
moment that just to talk about
the program purity because, um,
It's important that our, our
students have the same routines
and procedures across, across
their day.
So when we are operating in
silos, let's say a student that
comes in and they have their
core instruction and then they
might see the Title One teacher
and then they might see their EL
teacher and then they might see
their bilingual teacher and they
might even see a special
education teacher if we are
providing different.
Um
Routines and procedures or
calling things a different name.
It just adds to their cognitive
load.
Uh, an example of that would be,
uh, silent E or a VCE.
Uh, one teacher calls it a, a
sneaky, a magic, a bossye, um.
A BCE and then here's our kid.
I say, man, there's so many
rules for silent, you know, and
so, and so we just have to
really pay attention to some of
those things.
Um, 85% of our, our reading
specialists, uh 85% of their
time is spent actually working
directly with students.
The number of students that we
need an intervention right now
is not sustainable for our, our
current PTR like, like we have
to have people on the ground to
be able to provide that
additional level of, of
Of service for our students.
One of the things that we've
done 15% of what our reading
specialists do is also attend
teacher PLCs, talk to teachers
about their devil's data, uh,
about good routines to use based
on their data and so having that
resident expert in their
building has really had a lot of
benefit.
So we've been rolling out the
reading specialists now for.
2 full years.
3 years we've had 2 full years
of, of equipping. We do have one
school that has had a uh Celt at
their building for 4 years now,
and that would be Nancy Lopez,
and then we have another 3
schools who have just completed
2 years and then we're
onboarding another 3 coming in
the fall.
It's been a slower rollout for
us because we're funding those
positions operationally and, um,
you know, just
Resources
But we do receive coaching
support from the May Center for
our principals and uh and
That has been.
Truly
it, it changes the whole thing
when the principal it
understands what is going on in
their classroom in their
classrooms and understand it
changes the game in that school.
The principals had to assure
that in order to get that
reading specialist that they
would be um
It expecting core instruction.
With our adopted materials
taking place. So there were some
things that they had to do.
So how
How has student achievement
changed?
So, I believe in the during the
legislative session, you did
receive some of the data that
we're having, that we have with
Nancy Lopez, but now I have, uh,
this year's data. So, they have
continued their trajectory. I
started back as far as 2015.
And this is just overall
results, 2025, this is in a
masa, 54%.
Proficient
Now, one thing to notice is uh
Nancy Lopez is a small school,
have 192 students. They have an
EL population of 24% and a
special education at 28%.
That little star there
represents their 4th grade.
ELA scores. It is at 72%.
And this is at a school that was
traditionally in the teens and
uh even single digits in uh is
at grade level.
So 72%, I'd just like to say
congratulations for the hard
work of Nancy Lopez Elementary.
So if we take a look at the
individual grade data from from
Nancy Lopez. You can see that,
that before COVID, there was,
you know, in the teens,
twenties, there was a a little
group of 3rd graders in 2017
that never moved off 6%
proficient.
As they exited, they will be
seniors this year.
In 2022, they did uh uh.
Higher a Title One teacher that
was a certified academic
language therapist and even
coming out of COVID, you can
already start to see the gains.
And continuing
This year.
In their Spanish reading if
using the avant scores. What I'd
like to point out is, uh, so
what you see is the blue lines
are the students that are
scoring in the higher levels
like level 4 to 6 in Spanish and
then the orange bars are the
students that are scoring in the
lower levels 1 to 3. So you can
see a clear trajectory over the
last, since 2022 of the number
of students in Spanish that have
become
More proficient.
And here is the reduction of the
students that were scoring in
the lower levels of 1 to 3, and
we, we hypothesize that training
our teachers and structured
literacy practices has
translated over how they're also
teaching Spanish language arts.
And so
That teacher knowledge has
influenced uh instruction in
both English and in Spanish.
And so, in fact, let's take a
look at at how our schools with
a reading specialist stack up in
EL English Learner Progress.
These are from in Evistas.
The yellow bar is um the school,
so this is Nancy Lopez, the
green bars the state, the orange
is Roswell Independent School
District and the yellow is Nancy
Lopez. Now, where you don't see
bars for our district or or the
school, it's because that data
has been masked because it is a
small school.
So I'm just gonna flip through
these. This is one of our
schools with a reading
specialist. Here's another one,
Missouri Avenue.
And you can still see the
continuing.
They've only had a certified
academic language therapist for
2 years.
Sunset Elementary again, English
learner Progress.
But also, I wanted to point out
like Sunset Elementary is a, is,
is on the rise right here. Like
they have, they have an
enrollment of 246. They are 30%
EL 19% uh special education, but
their growth in reading is
phenomenal.
We're not seeing it in
proficiency rates yet.
But what we are seeing is growth
in their students moving
forward.
Here's another one of our
students, Burreo Elementary.
And you can see those tall
yellow bars going across there.
So what I'd like to do is turn
the floor over to Christy Surgit
for the next part of our
presentation.
that one.
Oh, so just for a little humor,
we called it a happy accident
that our focus on structured
literacy practices translated
into EL students benefit. All
students are benefiting from the
structured literacy focus, um,
EL students improved at a high
level.
The Spanish language assessment
results went up.
Not necessarily because we were
targeting a subpopulation, but
because we were following the
science. So this is not to say
that we don't have people who
are highly informed in the
practices, teaching the EL
students, we do. There are
people in our schools that are
trained. We have our EL
teachers, we have our bilingual
department, um, TSOL certified
teachers, all working with these
students in the schools.
But we were excited to see that
our focus on structured literacy
was translating.
So not being the experts in EL
we turn to some of the research
just to sort of double check and
see what, what these learners
might still be needing from us.
Um, I've listed a few here that
you could also um look into
yourself if you chose to Claude
Goldenberg, Lillian Duran, Alisa
Cardenas Hagen.
are all experts.
So what we've been finding is
that the reading science does
apply to language learners. Um,
they need to learn that letters
represent speech sounds.
They need to know that the
letters and sounds combine to
represent understandable words
and familiar sounds of the
language.
Foundational reading skills are
essential for learning to read.
Once they have those
foundational skills and even
while we're in the process of
building those skills, the focus
on language, vocabulary,
knowledge building, and
comprehension skills are needed
for continued development.
For all of our learners.
The reading systems in the brain
are the same for all children.
Learning to read involves going
from speech to print.
By learning the system in which
oral speech.
is represented by written
symbols.
What is understandable and
familiar for each student is
where the differences do exist.
Language learners have limited
already present knowledge of
phonology and semantics.
Our monolingual learners have
heard English a lot.
But some of our, our EL learners
have not heard it as much, so
some of those systems are new to
them and it takes a little more
brain power, a little more
support in the brain for them
then to learn those
representations of speech sound.
So what does that mean for, for
us and for our teaching.
We really do need to explicitly
teach those foundational skills.
But that's not all we need.
We also need to support
vocabulary development and text
comprehension.
We need to develop academic
language. We need to build
language awareness. We need to
provide visual and verbal
supports.
And build background knowledge,
all of the things that we learn
in our psyop training our TSL
training, those sorts of things
support all of our students.
And CKLA in particular really
supports our teachers in helping
build that knowledge because
it's a knowledge building
curriculum.
So oral language has been a
place as as we go through.
Each year we look at, OK, what,
what can our next focus be?
Where are we lacking a little
bit and, and we try to improve
every year.
Oral language is one of those
areas currently.
Where we really are seeing a
struggle and actually even
during reading first days, they
added oral language in New
Mexico is one of our focuses.
We've known for a long time, we
have students coming in who
don't have much language at all,
um, in, in either language,
their, their language deficient,
so.
Oral language development is
essential to students who are
learning to read, especially in
a language they're learning at
the same time.
Um, and, and I added this
podcast here if you had any
interest in.
Pursuing more information,
Claude Goldenberg talks about
that in the podcast.
And just the, the examples of
playing with words, the word web
for the word trunk.
And the different ways, the
different meanings, and then
adding pictures as an example
with the word text to support.
Student understanding.
And I'm going to pass it back.
So what's particularly startling
that is information that people
need to know.
is the the years of birth,
particularly birth to 3.
is where students are building
their brain connections to be
future readers.
These are things that, that, so
by the time a student comes to
us in kindergarten at 5 years
old, 90% of the brain.
is already created. Then the
neural pathways are getting
connected and in certain parts
of the brain where.
That will lead to future
literacy.
In any language, the same parts
of the brain light up whether
you are learning in Spanish,
whether you're learning in in
any language. And so it's just
such a critical time for brain
development, and yes, we can
still create the neural
pathways, but it's a lot harder
and it takes a lot longer
because the brain is ready for
that birth to 3.
I think I
Sorry
So just some wishes from
From my, I guess from my chair
is really taking a look at the
boots on the ground like in
order for us to really make the
gains that we need to in our
state. What, what is our pupil
teacher ratio looking like? And
when was the last time that that
was updated and does it
accurately reflect the adult
student ratio that we need to
have in our classrooms given.
The particular challenges that
we are seeing coming into our
classrooms today.
We, I, I'd love to see a
statewide campaign on
Educating families and their uh
the providers and that birth to
5 arena on the importance, the
critical importance of building
that oral language.
Looking for ways to unsilo our
department so that we don't.
Inadvertently.
Have rules, procedures, programs
coming out of different
departments and, and I'm really
talking about.
Even our district, where you've
got 11 group is in charge of
bilingual biliteracy. You've got
another group in charge of
special education. You got
another group that's in charge
of this particular program and,
and so just being able to look
at that whole child and having
ways that we can come together
to, for the benefit of our
student students, and then
Allowing districts with the
capacity and the knowledge of
structured literacy that have
this on the ground just access
to state funding, because a lot
of the work that we're doing is
private, um, foundation money
like with our our certified
academic language therapists and
things like that, so I just,
just putting that out there, um.
Uh, I, I guess that's
opportunistic, but with that,
Um
That concludes our presentation
from Roswell.
Thank you.
And anything else ready for
questions.
No, no, no, um, that, yeah,
ready, we're ready for questions
now.
OK. Questions from the
committee.
Representative Garrett, please
start us off. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, because my
observation of this district and
talking to you and observing is
you ran with the letters
training, but you understood to
implement it to really hard work
and you've analyzed it with
training specialists, not just
who rotate around but are
embedded in each school. So I
think that's a real lesson for
us, um, and supporting the
teachers in so they have someone
right.
in their building to show them
how to do it. The PLCs where
people are talking to do it, and
I think sometimes people don't
realize that letters training is
just part one. It's the part two
that makes it or breaks it, and
I, I thank you for your
suggestions, um, and I have to
say music education is vital.
I've seen music teachers open up
the capacity of the kids to use
oral language, so I just, the
arts.
Especially that music component
is great, um, and that unsilo.
And thanks for acknowledging
that it's not just the state
level, it's district level and
even school level, so I just
wanna thank the hard work of
everybody in Roswell who's
arrived at this. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Serana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
I have a question on, on page 4
of your presentation, Evan. The
individual reading plan. Do you,
have you guys looked into what
those other states are doing and
how they're doing it, how
they're using these plans.
Um, right now, uh, New Mexico
does have an individual reading
plan, uh, that's more um
centered on layer 2 and layer 3.
That's part of the plan, uh part
of the interventions available
in layer 2 and layer 3 of the
MLSS framework. Um, I believe
every school district in New
Mexico does it differently, and
other states, they actually, um,
individual reading plans are in
consultation with their parents.
So for example, Mississippi,
Alabama, and Colorado, they
heavily involve parents from the
very beginning.
So they, um, not only notify
them of how their student is
doing. They planned right then
and there how they would like to
or they set goals for their
student and throughout the
school year, about 3 times a
year, they check in with those
goals, um, and that's one of the
ways that other states have done
it so far.
Um, is, is that the way you're
doing it in Roswell, Mr.
Chairman.
Do you have
Mr. Chairman, and, and
representative in Roswell
whenever we have the student
that needs a, uh, an additional
plan. Our teachers in their
grade levels actually work
together, kind of like the, the
student assistance team and they
come together to collect their
data, um, provide interventions
based on our, our DIBELS data,
and then they move forward with
trying those interventions and
when those interventions are not
working at at least at the speed
that we would like them to be.
and we do bring in the parents
and have an official meeting
where we, we continue to
document that over time.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
guess in my brain for math, we
used to track and the kids would
keep track of, of their progress
in, in the notebook and so they
always knew where they're at and
how where they, what they need
to do, so it's, it's nothing
like that, it's more separate
kind of.
Just to add on to that. I, I,
our, our students do have their
data, so I was thinking about
the plan, uh, at the plan level,
that's probably the adults
talking, but whenever we're
talking with the students on
their goals and how they are
reaching those goals, then they
do have access to their data and
they use it. Chairman, I have
one more question on coaching.
You said, um,
coaching
In the core programs. How is
your coaching work? Is it in the
classroom? Is it after school?
How does your coaching work?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
so we actually have different
ways that we go into the
buildings, depending on what
their needs are. And so it could
be demonstration lessons with a
debriefing afterwards. It could
be, uh, uh, the teacher
demonstrates a lesson. It could
be our coach demonstrates a
lesson. It could also be a PLC
group where they're actually
looking at uh digital, uh, data
and routines and procedures and
so.
It, it could be during their PLC
block where they're, uh, where
we have the coach there all day
and she just coaches through the
PLCs for an hour and a half,
little mini PDs if you will, and
so that's, that's how our model
works and then they might
debrief after school.
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator is out.
There is I pushed the wrong one.
Sorry about that, Mister
Chairman, thank you very much. I
appreciate the information that
y'all have put out here. I'm
very familiar with Nancy Lopez
Elementary School.
Uh, uh, a complete turnaround
from one of the first time I
visited up until recently. I
mean, it's just remarkable
there. I do have some questions
regarding.
Uh
Unfortunately, my eyes aren't as
good as they used to be, and I
had a hell of a time trying to
read this, OK? And then I still
have a problem reading it up
there.
The, uh, you said that, uh, Ms.
Steinhardt, you were saying that
Rosal now has 9,243 students
enrolled in school here in 75%
of those are Hispanic, are those
from Spanish speaking homes or
they multi-language.
Mr. Chairman, Senator.
That is information, so those
aren't necessarily, uh, so.
When we do our demographics, so
that was a, that's a
demographic.
They may be uh Spanish speaking
household. They may be an
English speaking household, they
may be uh uh by uh language
household. And so that is just
that that is that indicator uh
the ELs are the students that we
actually test in and do them
that way, yeah. OK, what was
really disappointing to me was
the 36% literacy rate.
Is this
Districtwide, I'm assuming it is
that would take on the entire
district, yes. And that was,
that was last year's scores. I
didn't have.
The, uh, the masa scores for
this year are still kind of not
completely put together yet. I
was able to pull the data for
our particular schools that we
were looking at. So that's from
last year. I'm not sure and
we've shown, we've trended up.
So I'm not sure what our, our
actual scores are for 2025. OK,
and then leading me into my next
question, then you are able to
break it down into schools to
elementary schools.
And I'm not going to ask you to
be very specific on this, but I
do, 11 of the questions I do
want to
bring up
In the Rosville Independent
School District. There is one
rural school.
And I know that the population
there is not as robust as it is
some of the other schools, but I
think that there's more parental
involvement.
Can you give me, and I'm not
gonna name any names here, OK,
of the schools and all.
How did that school perform in
regard to what you're saying
here at the 36% literacy rate.
I, I'm real curious to know. OK,
so.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Azel, I, I
know which school you were
talking about and
that people don't they're
sitting up here and, and, and
that is an amazing little school
as well. It's also a small
school. We are super excited
that we are adding a reading
specialist to East Grand Plains
this next year. Yes, uh, Casey
Rodriguez will be taking the,
the reading specialist position
out of East Grand Plains, so
we're super excited to honor
board them uh this next year
because the results are as high
as they could be, um, they are,
and it hasn't been a real they
they've got amazing teachers and
they've got amazing families and
family involvement over there,
and I'm really excited to see
what happens with the addition
of a reading specialist at.
I was just kind of curious, you
let the cat out of the bag
though I was trying to keep
everything under wraps here, but
that's all right. I, I do find
that.
Usually
Our rural schools, the smaller
schools are more innovative as
far as being able to get this
learning process in place.
Oh, I think it's on.
The 2nd page of your handout
where it's talking about
literacy model for
sustainability in the RISD.
You said 85% of the time is
spent with the students. Is this
just during school time or is it
including
After school weekends during the
summer.
So that is during school time.
So they are providing direct
services to students.
Curious about that.
Um,
Uh, on your next slide down
where you're talking about
staffing elementary schools with
breeding specialists. You were
talking about the May Center.
Can you, uh, go into more detail
on that.
Yes, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Azel. So what we, we, we're
actually approached by the New
Mexico Literacy Institute about
3 years ago based on the, the,
the vision that we wanted to
have certified academic
language, reading specialists in
our building, and she says we
can help with that. And so she
partnered us up with the May
center and we had our first
round of teachers that went
through the practitioner level
with, with Amy Miller.
And then we transitioned so that
we wanted really taking a look
at sustainability, our district
count had been trained in a
different program with sounds
and syllables, so she, we, we
decided, OK, she's going to
become a certified trainer of
cults so that we are just trying
to grow our, our here at RISD
that particular knowledge set.
So, uh,
I
What was the best part of that?
I was going somewhere.
Oh, how the May Center supports.
Then we started seeing it, it
shifted a little bit. Thank you.
It shifted a little, little bit
whenever I saw the difference
that the building leader made.
In moving in important
initiatives forward.
So I switched the the New Mexico
literacy uh institute and the
May Center to more principal
coaching to really hone the eyes
and the and the knowledge of our
principles to understand what
our our teachers teaching is it
aligned to the science? How can
we give them improvement points
and so that's, that's how we
have worked with the Mason, so
she worked training our first
cohort of cults, then she worked
with.
Our principles on leading the
work in their buildings.
OK. Thank you, thank you for
that explanation.
Um
On I don't know what page number
this is. It's
I'm having to hold it out here
to read it.
Just get rid of.
Uh, Nancy Lopez.
It's one that has the bars and
the star at the top of it
sitting at 72%.
Whenever we're talking about
those particular students over
there.
Are the parents actually coming
to the school or is the parent
actually come to school because
I know a lot of these are single
parent homes, are they?
Is a teacher going out of their
way to visit the homes to
encourage parents to become
involved in the reading process
that was outlined in this, the
program that Evan was talking
about.
A read at home plans.
I can't really speak to the
parent involvement that that how
how involved they do have
literacy nights and they have a
principle that is on the phone
if those kids aren't in school.
To get them to school. They have
an amazing reading specialist
who's also TSO endorsed.
Working
at the table with the students
when they are there and we have
to have the students here uh
before we can even make those
gains. So I don't know what
percent is because of their
parent outreach they do have
that, um.
Or just
You know
as well.
OK.
OK.
As far as your bars go, I, I'm
sorry.
I can't read any of those. I
just can't read it.
Um
And Miss Search it received from
my questions for you here.
Whenever we on
about 1234 on the 5th slide of
yours, Miss Surgut.
It says, what does this mean for
our teaching at the very last
item, it says, build background
knowledge. How do you go about
building background knowledge.
I'd like more of a detailed
explanation.
One of the ways we do that is by
implementing CKLA, which is the
core knowledge.
Yes, sorry.
myself for the microphone.
Mr. Chair and Senator Azel, I
apologize.
One of the ways we do that is by
using that core knowledge
language arts.
Um, amplify curriculum, and it's
very well built in the knowledge
component. So there are units on
science topics, units on social
studies topics. So during the
literacy instruction, they're
gaining knowledge in content
areas as well.
How is that implemented once you
get that background knowledge.
How is that implemented to
improve the student's reading
ability.
Um, by essence of background
knowledge by just by the
students having more background
knowledge, they become better
comprehenders of the reading.
Once they get to the point where
they can independently read more
complex texts. So once they
reach middle school, high
school, we're expecting them to
do those things on their own to
study, to read, to understand
and by building some of those,
um those knowledge components in
early on through teacher read
allowance, through oral
language, through exposure, um,
then we're basically building
conceptual Velcro, where the,
the
continue learning over the years
is then retained um and learned
more easily.
I like that term.
Structural crap, that's good.
And E and I don't want you to
listen to this. I want to ask
the two ladies this particular
question, so you can sit there
like this.
Whenever we're talking about
retention of students.
We, we're reading on Evans's
handout on page 7, the talking
about Mississippi, we're talking
about other schools and what
they do.
I'd like to hear both of your
thoughts, even though they may
differ.
Unretention of a student in the
3rd grade.
And
Miss Surget, let's start with
you.
OK, Mr. Chair and Senator Azel.
I, I don't like the idea at all
of retaining a student in 3rd
grade.
But I also don't like the idea
of sending a student on from 3rd
grade unprepared for future
grade levels, so.
Um,
Sorry.
I am working with an 18 year old
who just completed his junior
year in high school, who is a
non-reader.
That is never.
Where we want those kids to end
up.
We, we are focused on this
relentlessly because we need to
meet these needs in preschool,
kindergarten, first grade, and,
and eliminate the need to even
have the discussion of 3rd grade
retention.
Thank you for stepping up and
helping the 18 year old that's
now a junior in high school, but
why wouldn't the intervention
taken place at the whenever the
problem was first discovered,
and that's what I hope that we
are able to overcome for all of
our students. Ms. Steinhardt,
what about you? Your, your
thoughts on retention.
I am very much of the same mind
that if we could invest in those
1st 3 years.
Because when we were talking
about we transition from
learning to read to reading to
learn. I turned to Christie and
I said, man, we're still
teaching kids to read, seniors
in high school and her student,
he has a, he has a goal to
become literally literate enough
to enter the Marines.
And he is all in.
So if we really concentrate on
giving students the, you know,
we know they're coming in it was
already with low oral language,
and we're having to train
behaviors and do all of the
things, but then if we don't
have enough people.
To really work with those young
our youngest learners.
How do we move the work forward
because if we retain them in
3rd, what are we going to do
differently? Are we gonna have
another person that's gonna be
able to give them the therapy
that they need.
That would be my, that would be
my, my, my, I, I, I don't know
what retaining it retaining them
will increase the likelihood of
dropping out.
Um
But I also
want there to be some holding
places where we can say let's
stop a minute and we'll, let's
get, let's teach him to read.
And Mr. Chairman, I do have to
bring up whenever you say that.
possibility of them dropping out
in the 3rd grade is not as
prevalent in my opinion. You can
correct me if I'm wrong. As peer
pressure as they entered the 9th
grade, the 10th grade, and on up
because that's where I'm seeing
more of these kids dropping out
of school because they cannot
read at an older age. They don't
want to be ridiculed by their
classmates, so there is a
problem right there.
I, I said it yesterday, Mr.
Chairman, if we could pass
legislation to get parental
involvement.
We've got it whipped.
Unfortunately, there's too many
parents out there that are
holding down two jobs just to
make a living.
They want their kids to learn,
but they don't have the time to
help them out and that's,
that's.
That's a shame. It really is.
But for these kids to be
successful, we have to.
Put together every means that we
can to get them proficient
before they leave the 3rd grade.
Their brain is still, in my
opinion, they are still like a
sponge, they're still absorbing.
Going on into the 3rd grade and
and completing that 3rd grade.
We have the ability to make
them.
More proficient in learning, not
just in reading, but in learning
in general.
And
I'm just um.
But whenever I'm looking at,
thank you for your responses,
and Mr. Chairman, I do have a
couple of questions for Evan,
whenever we're talking about on
page 5 of your head, and can you
turn your microphone to your, to
your voice, please. I was having
a little bit of trouble hearing
you.
I was born last century, OK, so.
And, and some people that were
up there in Santa Fe understand
what I'm talking about. Some
people notice where I'm
pointing, so those folks that
were born last century like we
were, I don't know, Moses or
something, it just kind of got
to me, uh.
Whenever we're assessing how
parents are equipped to support
their child.
How are you going to make
parents understand.
What, what it's gonna take to be
able to assess what their
children needs to learn. How,
how do you intend to do that,
Evan?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
apologize for making that
mistake earlier.
I still can't hear you. OK, can
you hear me now?
Move your microphone. Did you
have to lean forward.
Can you hear me? I can hear you
now. OK, good. Uh, so Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Giselle, I apologize
for making that mistake earlier.
Um,
I don't know what I, um, for,
for I can't tell parents what to
do, you know, I think it's more
important that parents are
informed of what their child is
learning, and they are more
informed of what their school is
doing, and I think this can be
sort of mitigated through
communication, open
communication between school
districts between uh local
schools and their parents either
through newsletters, uh, monthly
newsletters, um, anything.
that really keeps their parent
informed of what is happening at
school. So I believe that, you
know, I'm as an individual, as a
policy analyst, cannot do that,
but I think there are
opportunities for school
districts, uh, elementary
schools, middle schools to
increase communication for
parents. Um, so thank you.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, if I
could add just from a sort of
broader policy perspective, I
think what some of the, the, the
work that Evan's done here talks
about um specific practices
around when a student is not
performing proficient in
reading, for instance, that
there's a flag at which the
school is is saying to parents,
this is happening, right?
Because I think right now,
depending on the practice, and
I'm sure Carla and Christy could
speak to this, um.
When a student isn't proficient,
do parents even know?
And what does it mean for them?
And what interventions are, are
available to that student so
that the parent may or may not
have the the tools or resources
at their home to be the person,
but that they at least know that
the school has, in this case,
maybe a reading interventionist
or uh as uh Carla mentioned,
there's a student assistance
team. And so those processes
have to be clearly communicated,
and I think it varies at this
point, uh, based on the MLSS and
I think with some of the other
states have done in that read.
Read at home plan that you
mentioned earlier is
standardizing um specific to
literacy.
How to address individual
student needs and communicating
that very clearly to parents.
And while I appreciate that
explanation.
I also am very cognitive the
fact that one size does not fit
all.
Because when.
One area of the school district
might be totally different than
the other side of the school
district. So I think that it's
very important that the
superintendent, this all the
staff.
And the school board understand
that the differences.
Sometimes need to be adjusted.
And I hope that
That is what, what Roswell is
doing. I, I hope that's what
other school districts are doing
too, because like I said, one
size does not fit all.
Um, Senator, if I, I can
interrupt, we got a couple of
other people on the list. If we
have time, can we come back to
you for additional questions?
Well, no, I hope that other
people ask as many questions as
I do. OK. We won't get lunch
then.
I had a good breakfast, thank
you.
Thank you all for your
responses. Thank you, Senator,
and, and I will come back
around. I think we'll have time
if you have some other questions
or, or if it opens up other
things, I'd be happy to come
back. Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
sir, so, uh, Senator Kernan and
I had these discussions, uh,
every year for the last 10
years, she was in the Senate.
Um, and my argument to her
against 3rd rate retention was,
you know, I'm fine with that if
we can just learn how to teach
reading first because if you're
gonna retain kids and they have
the same teacher, even a
different teacher who still
doesn't know how to teach
reading. You get no difference
and so I, I feel really
committed that if we are
continued to be successful, that
then that would
a time that that might be more
appropriate. Look right now.
Kids aren't learning to read
because teachers don't know how
to teach them how to read.
That that's really what the
evidence is showing what we've,
what we've been using.
to the last 6 decades, we really
were sold a story. Uh, we were
sent down a path that wasn't
working.
And, and, and I feel bad for
teachers, um, having, having had
to do that and not really
learning how to teach reading.
It's kind of not fair to blame
us. It's really the education
establishment that has these two
iconic figures that we all
followed that were wrong.
Uh, so, um, so anyway, just
wanted to tell you that, that if
you want to talk about this,
I'll talk to you about it.
Um, but I, I, I would like one
of the Roswell slides to be put
up, uh, the one that says, what
is the long standing data story
for Nancy Lopez Elementary.
It's slide number 8.
Yes.
No.
Yes, thank you for blowing it
up.
So to me, this is the most
significant slide I've seen
today. If you look at that 4th
grade starting in 2015 at 9%
proficient, then you go to 2025
and it's 72%.
Proficient
We can do this. We can, we can
teach kids how to read. We can
move out of the bottom, but it's
going to take all of us, uh, and
it's gonna take us a agreeing
that we need to move forward
with this, so we just leave that
up there. That, that gives me
hope. It just gives me hope. I
bet it gives you hope too. So,
um, Ethan, thank you for the
excellent brief. Um, I'm looking
on page 6 for table.
3 where uh you've uh summarized
the um.
Uh
Excellent Es report about what
all the states are doing. You
know, I used to think we were
going to be ahead of the pack.
Now it looks like we're gonna
continue to be at the end of the
pack, cause we have 42 states
that are trying to move to teach
teachers how to teach reading.
You know, other countries, of
course, have looked at our
research, you know, they all use
structured literacy, 95%
literacy rate in Mexico, yes,
Spanish is much more
transparent, easier to teach,
but they use structured
literacy. All these kids know
phonemic awareness and phonics
cause they've got 28.
Phone names out of 26 letters
when English has 44.
Ought to have our head examined.
So table 3. I am really
interested in this one check
that we don't have under
instruction intervention. Well,
actually, there's two checks,
but the parent read at home
plan. So can you tell a little
bit more about what state is
doing that well, um, and flush
that out a little bit.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Stewart, thank you for the
question. Um, yes, so a parent
read at home plan, so there are
many ways that other states have
um implemented this component.
So, for example, Arizona, um,
most recently developed a
website for parents that offers
them sort of uh hyperlinks or
guides or even templates to help
them help students at home, and
these can be accessed through
iPad.
through, uh, you know, mobile
devices, uh, laptops, or even um
computer just regular computers.
Um, Mississippi and Alabama,
they actually, so a parent breed
at home plan is more of an is
more serves as an intervention.
So when a student in
kindergarten, 1st or 2nd grade.
is flagged for deficiencies, um,
parents are notified and they
develop a plan with their
parents. And as I mentioned
earlier, these plans include
goals, they include the uh the
schools, um, literacy plan for
that student, what interventions
will be used for that student.
And throughout the year, they
will do uh check-ins to make
sure that their students are
Increasing their reading
proficiency and they do progress
monitoring as well.
Uh, so I really do, I, I agree
with Senator so that I think we,
we don't do enough to teach
parents, um, but I really, I was
thrilled to hear one of these
teachers today uh agree with me
that it's, we want parents to
read to their kids. We don't
want parents to feel like they
have to become the teachers, uh,
so we don't really even need to
teach parents very much about
just reading to your
students and, you know, the
governor is sending books to uh
all kids from 0 to 5 through uh
Dolly Parton, um, and so, uh,
my, my chief of staff has 2
kids, and she's, oh yeah, I
think getting these books once a
month, I said what?
didn't really realize how
extensive it was. So I would
like us to train parents on how
to read those books we're
sending them, but not become the
teacher themselves, uh, so I, I
want to point out on that same
page, page 6, that seems to me
that the majority of other
states when they're moving to
structured literacy, uh, are
eliminating the 3 queuing system
that doesn't work.
makes kids guess, so that was
one of the things that was the
biggest, uh bugaboo about Senate
Bill 242. So why can't you just
let us keep doing what we've
always been doing, so we always
get what we've always been
getting.
Uh, so it's kind of amazing to
me. We heard it yesterday that
will just let us do whatever
we've been doing.
Um, so I really don't want to
think that our education
community is OK with these low
percentage rates of proficiency.
I believe it's a civil right.
for young kids to be taught how
to read. We know how to do it
now.
Not all of us we're trying to
learn that, um, so.
I'll get off my soapbox in a
minute. Um, so the one thing
that
was not part of the uh.
The 4, 4-page amendment that we
changed uh sent 242 from 22
pages 4 pages, uh, several
things important were left out
we gonna try to do in January,
but one of them, his parent
notification.
We are not really telling
parents, uh.
You know, you're, your child has
a characteristic of dyslexia.
We're gonna continue with our
intense structured literacy
program, but needs to be
monitored and what you can do at
home is to read to that child
every night.
Twice a year is what the public
education department was
requesting, I think that's very
important for us to continue to
do as if we don't tell parents
what is going on, uh.
You know, there's just too big
of a disconnect.
Between a lot of our parents and
schools. We've got to have
school be friendlier, more open,
more transparent, and I think
that is going to come when
people are more confident about
what they're doing, Roswell, so
confident about what they're
doing because of that 72%. I
want to see that in every grade
and we can do that, uh, so I
just wanna really appreciate
Roswell. I
used your name all during the
session without ever coming down
here or getting to know you
because these charts were just
so incredible. And this is, this
isn't even 2025 these church, we
blew them up so people could
actually read them. You can't
really read them. I don't care
if you're born in the last
century. If you're born in this
century, you can't read those
charts, so, um, so I'm looking
forward to charts I can read
better.
Uh, when we get all those test
scores. I'm just very hopeful,
uh, uh, finally, about what's
happening um.
Around the state, so thank you
to ob as well, thank you, Evan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, uh, uh
represent growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation and
congratulations on the on the
success. You were right. These
things to celebrate. Um, I have
a couple of questions just to
understand the, the program, Mr.
Chair, and
And the presenters here, first,
my question is on page 4, on
table 2 for Mississippi and you
may have mentioned it, it says
intensive interventions.
And you may don't have the list
of interventions, but if you
could provide them or do you
have them, I know that it is a
plan and communication and all
those things, but what are those
intensive comm uh interventions
in imply. What are the things
that are happening in there um
in those intensives
and also um just to mention um
if anyone here is familiarized
with uh Hades metaconnective
research we're talking about
retention is it talks about the
indicators of how a
It can succeed and what is the
most effective one and retention
is one of the ones who has a
negative impact. So that's why
I'm always uh alert when I hear
those things, uh, that the
connections in the classroom is
one of the highest indicators of
success. Uh, and that's when my
Well, that was a request. Um, if
we can have the list of the
intensive interventions. I would
love to hear what are those
interventions. Thank you.
Um, what about, um, I wanna ask
a couple of questions about
Nancy Lopez school.
Um, is, is that a bilingual
school? Could you explain to me,
Mr. Sir, what, what is, um, is a
9010 school's a dual language
program. What, what is, what
type of school is Nancy Lopez?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Gurola. I was looking behind me
because I do have the reading
specialist from Nancy Lopez here
today, and I'm not quite sure
which model that they have. I
know it's, is it, is it, uh
they teach Spanish language
arts. It's not like the 9010 or
9010 Spanish. Is it like
heritage language?
I'm not sure and English
language development.
That we can also ask um.
Katie.
Do you know?
You're the bilingual teacher at
every grade level or grade level
there's
Sorry. There's a bilingual
teacher at every grade level,
some bilingual teachers service
like 4th and 5th grade, and
there's the English language
development component where if
the teacher is TESOL certified,
then it's just embedded into
their language arts instruction
well throughout the day, all
content areas and then there's
an hour of Spanish language arts
instruction every day, um, at
each grade level. And so like it
last year, the Kinder.
And first graders were together
in a bilingual class. So it's an
hour a day of English language
development in an hour a day of
Spanish language arts.
Do you have any other questions?
Thank you.
So it's a dual language program,
probably 50/50. That's what I'm
understanding.
I would not say it's 50. It's
the emphasis is on just language
arts in English language arts
and Spanish language arts, not
any other content area
instruction. OK, uh thank you.
That's helpful. So, uh, on slide
9 and I didn't understand really
well and I, and I, I'm like a
senator here I cannot see.
really well here. But um, it
keeps saying that um and, and
it's true whenever, when the
teacher learns from uh when we
teachers learn strategies, we
can apply it to offer all of our
counting classes and that that's
why professional development is
so important for us teachers
because we can't continue
growing, um.
And that's what I was asking
because the the students have
tested in Spanish too. Um, the
the scores went down if I notice
on this graph, I, I didn't
understand that part that's when
I double check
you say yes, but um I didn't
understand the bars, so.
Mr. Chair.
OK.
So this is the avant scores for
Spanish reading at Nancy Lopez.
You can see there's a blue bar
and there's an orange bar side
by side. The blue bar is for the
students who are are scoring in
the levels, the higher levels.
Yes, 4 to 6, and then the ones
in the orange bar are the
students who are scoring in the
levels, the lower levels, 1 to
3. So in 2022, you can see just
over 30% scoring, yes, and so
then the following year, the
next blue.
blue and orange bar. You can see
that they were they a little bit
higher than by 2024 and this
2024, you can see.
Um, each year, they are
improving in the number of
students, the percentage of
students who are scoring at
those higher levels on the
event. And then the orange bars
shows a decrease in the students
who are scoring at the lower
levels.
Uh clarifies. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So one
last question, um, how did Nancy
Lopez school compares to the
schools who don't have this
Spanish development program.
Nancy Lopez is uh uh.
The things that they're doing at
Nancy Lopez with only having 4
schools, plus they've had a
reading specialist there for,
uh, 4 years instead of the 2.
Uh
Never before have they been the
leader in our district as far as
the scores that they are getting
the evidence-based practices
that are in place.
We're talking historically
single digits and 0s, 10% and
teens in reading and math for
very, very long time.
And so it just, it just shows
what that teacher knowledge and,
and the expertise that we have
in the building and the
leadership that really could pro
provides the conditions for
those for those students to
learn in their building. It's
just really
It, it's working and so they are
actually their growth is, is
phenomenal. Thank you, Mr. I
love what you say, providing the
conditions. I think that's what
we want to have in every school.
Thank you, um.
So the school is becoming a
leader now and and I think that
combination and having all those
resources are making a
difference. Thank you so much.
Thank you for clarifying my
questions.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
had a couple of questions and I
would like to go back to that
other slide that you had up,
which has the scores, yes, thank
you. Oh.
I'm sorry, please go ahead,
Senator. I'll ask my questions
then after.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I.
I, I don't want to be the dead
horse here because I think some
of this has been answered by
both the.
Senator and also Senator
Stewart, but, um,
I'm, I'm sensing there's,
there's an aversion to retaining
students at the 3rd grade level,
uh, across the board, and I
understand Senator Stewart's
comment with regards to the fact
that it makes no sense to do
that if the teachers who are
teaching them haven't been
trained and structured literacy.
Um
So, so I understand the argument
there. However, I also know that
it's, it doesn't do us any good
to continue passing these
students on to the next level
and then they're getting further
and further behind.
And so I'm struggling with this,
this aversion that we have to
retaining students at 3rd grade
because they're not going to
drop out of school, they're in
3rd grade.
Parents are not gonna just say,
you can drop out of school, and
what are you gonna go do?
So their 3rd grade, you, you put
them there and you tell them to
go back, you're gonna do it
again.
And I know if I was in 3rd grade
and I just told I had to do it
again. I want to get out there
as soon as possible, so I'd
start learning.
Um
That's just a personal opinion
here. I'm, I'm, I understand
everyone else's arguments here,
but it just seems to me that we
are not helping these kids by
allowing them to continue if
they can't read.
And so
So what I did here was also
Senator Stewart said that she
would be willing to accept
retention if the, if the, if the
teachers were trained.
And so it seems to me that, you
know, maybe we should certify
schools.
Uh, that at some point they've
reached the level where their
teachers are proficient and and
structured literacy.
And then
Once that school certified, then
they can start.
Uh, retaining kids.
At in 3rd grade.
In other words, get school
certified, then they can retain
the students. Um, so I'm just
trying to think ahead about how
we might want to do this.
Because I do, I personally do
not believe passing these
students on is the, is the way
to go.
Um
And when, when you have the
report from uh
Mr. Chavez, I appreciate your
report here. When you said that,
you know, we're doing all these
other things very well, but the
retention and intensive
intervention is something that
New Mexico is not doing well.
And yet you also stay in your
report on page 7 that
Mississippi is doing very well
with regards to this and that
because of what they've done,
They've seen significant
improvement in their subative
reading scores.
So it's something that works.
And so I do not want to ignore
that, um.
That aspect of what has been
successful in other states to
New Mexico just because we're,
we don't wanna do it or we don't
quite have the teachers ready
yet. I think I'm not worried
about the stigma at 3rd grade.
It's more of a stigma going on
the 4th, 5th, and 6th grade, and
you can't read.
So, I, I would really want us to
seriously consider retaining
students at 3rd grade level and
maybe getting that mandated as
they did in Mississippi, but
again, um, I appreciate all the
work, I appreciate all the work
everyone here has done. Great
report. This is very helpful.
Uh, just one other question, so
that was my comment, just one
other question. You mentioned at
the very end, uh, uh.
Miss Steinhardt, that you.
Said we need boots on the ground
and you, I was curious what is
the current pupil teacher ratio.
That, uh, currently exists and
what would be nominal for the
type of work that we're trying
to do here to improve student
outcomes.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Thornton.
The boots on the ground, so
right now our our class sizes
are 14 in kindergarten.
Once you get to 15, you get an
EA, an assistant, and then you
can go all the way up to 20
students with an EA.
OK.
In first grade, I believe the
cap is at 21.
And 2, 3rd grade, it's an
average of that that you can go
over. I think it's 23 and that
this is what we've had.
I think for a really, really
long time.
One of the beauty, one of
something that is really working
in our summer reading program is
those small group, the ability
to have those small group
instruction. When we have
students who are the challenges
coming to us as they are today,
we we and we are having to build
their brain networks in order to
be able to read at.
That work takes place in very
small group. Well, if you got a
teacher and 20 kids that doesn't
always pan out that way, so
having additional, uh, I think
Christie and I had the
conversation that really to get
our students that the number of
students that are that need that
intensive intervention, we
really need to reading
specialists at every elementary,
wanted to work K2 and one to
work 35 because we've got a
backfill some things, so that
That's what I mean. We just, we
need more people. A lot of times
our elementaries only have one
principal, and they're busy
doing behavior and going to IEP
meetings and, and it's hard for
them to serve as a true
instructional leader whenever
they are running up and down the
halls putting out fires all day,
um, so it, it's just taking a
look at that that K to 3 space
and I think you're right, like
we want to have guard rails in
there. But we want to be sure
that we are putting in the very
best.
Conditions for those students to
actually learn how to read, and
that may be that we have more
people available at those early
grades to be able to do that.
Thank you for that. That that's
all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh.
And I, I just point out there is
lots of research about retention
and that it is ineffective and
actually causes more harm in
most cases if it is done as a
blanket policy as opposed on an
individual need of a kid. There
are some kids that retention is
appropriate. Uh, they were the
youngest in their class, they
just barely made the cutoff to
get into school where it makes
some sense, uh, most of the
research is, it is detrimental
to their future learning and is
also greatly associated.
ci ated with poverty and we want
to make sure we're not retaining
kids until they become affluent,
you know, which is sort of the
the same type of thing with
that, so I'll just leave it at
that, um.
It had on that particular slide,
I want to point out when I look
at those, what I look at is the
diagonals. Those are more the
cohort of students where in 25,
the fourth graders at 72, it
went from 35 to 72, not 47 to
72, those, that's a different
group of kids, um, it looks like
there's a little bit of leveling
off on the earlier ones.
But you know, real curious that
group in 2025, you know, whether
that's going to continue with
the others, and prior to
starting the structured literacy
where there was little, I mean,
you can see the cohorts that
were low, stayed low. And so I,
I think that's even a more
powerful statement about what
has happened at Nancy Lopez
school. If you look at those
diagonals across the cohorts,
um, and the ones that didn't
have it all the way through look
like there's been some leveling
off where the others look like
they're continuing to
advance as they've had 345 years
of it rather than just a couple
of years. And so again,
congratulations to the, the
school for doing that, keep up
the great work, um.
In the very last slide that you
had.
One of the things that I find.
Frustrating sin has worked with
me in some superintendent is
we've worked on trying to get
flexible funding to schools.
It frustrates me when we see
great progress that requires
people, I think you indicated
that lots of this is being done
with grant money and with
outside funding.
And why do we try and do schools
on the cheap all the time when
we know that the funding that
schools are going to use it on
things like this, you know, that
we as a state we're a wealthy
state, we've got lots of money.
Why are we not fully funding
programs like this across the
state and giving districts the
flexibility to do that, um.
We clearly have the evidence
we're seeing statewide the
increases we're seeing very
specifically at districts that
have taken on this full bore and
the great results.
Now we need to fully fund it as
a state everywhere all the way
through so that everyone's
getting
Those benefits and we're not
doing it for the district, we're
doing it for the kids that are
the future of our state and it's
just frustrating to me that we
try and do education on the
cheap all the time and then
evaluate it for why aren't we
getting excellence, you know,
and we've got opportunities to
do that. These are great models
that show that very directly,
very specifically on how it's
making a difference for kids.
Welcome to respond but more just
comments. Thank you. OK.
Sit or so, I, I.
I, I think that it's very
difficult to navigate whenever
you want to improve, and you've
got this desire to improve, uh,
outcomes for kids, but whenever
you have districts or that don't
have the capacity, they don't
have the, the knowledge to move
this work forward and so there
has to come out of that some,
some ties to the funding, so I,
I get that, that, you know, so
if you follow this model, you
can have XYZ money.
It would just be nice for the
ones who have the capacity and
maybe have a little bit
different of a model to also
have access to that, and that's
all because that's a difficult
thing to ask our PED to do
because we do have people that
won't touch it, you know, so.
And, and I think all along I'm
similar our discussions
yesterday about uh counselors
and social workers is, you know,
we ought to fully fund the
districts can do that, but then
we have to make sure that
they're available to have. And
so we've got to build the
capacity of the, I mean I, I
learned a new uh acronym, the
CAT CAT cult, the CALTs today. I
first I was like, what is that?
I had to lean over and what,
what is that? Um, but we've got
to get more people like that and
we've got to get them trained.
up. We've got to get them in
every single school so that they
can support the teachers that
have been through the letters
training and others on how to
implement that well, so that we
start getting results like we're
seeing at Nancy Lopez and at
other schools. It's not, this is
not a one-off or a, a unicorn or
something else, this is what
happens when you specifically
teach reading.
Speech and listening of language
comes naturally. We've got
actual parts of our brain that
are designed for that. Reading
and writing is artificial and
must be taught specifically, um,
and I think we're on the front
end of that, and I think we're
starting to see that turn, uh,
people to hear me say regularly
that these kinds of things are
like buying savings bonds. You
don't buy the bond and be upset
that you don't get the perfect
or get the full value 6 months
later, you've got to wait for it
to mature, and we see that as
it's going through the cohor.
as every year that they've had
it, their scores are continuing
to go up. So, again, thank you
for what you're doing. Any last
comments before lunch, Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You've got me to thinking about
something, um, the, the folks
that go through the certified
academic language therapy
training, and it's a lot. I was
in it. I did it, I think 8
summers, uh, never finished it
cause I didn't have time cause I
was still holding down a job and
being a legislator, so, but it,
it gave me a uh enough knowledge
so that my teaching was better
and
So that I, you know, it's, is
what I'm in the legislature for
is to try to improve this for
our kids, so, but if we uh
funded more cult training
programs. It's those folks that
are the best at teaching kids
with dyslexia. And we kind of
ignore that, um, that, that er
portion of Senate Bill 242
demise, um, that made us look
at the dyslexia students and
give more services to them,
cause um if you are cult
trained, you can teach kids with
dyslexia. It, it's that much of
a training, so we're not doing
enough and it's 5 to 10%.
Everywhere, everywhere, no
matter what language you're in,
no matter what country you're in
because it's a different brain.
It's not a disability. Your
brain is wired differently. Uh,
so I think that that should be a
focus with the cult and I'm
gonna talk to the secretary
about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Any other last questions,
comments for lunch. Yes,
representative. You don't have
to go into this, but Mr.
Chairman, I noticed that you
talked about DILs, not just the
required eye station, but
dibbles, can you say three
sentences about that.
Yes. Dibble provides that DIBE
is given by the teacher to the
student. They, it takes out the
technology, the the the teacher
can actually be informed about
what errors the student is
making when they are face to
face and testing they can
progress monitor it really gives
the whole big picture, and
that's what we use to inform
instruction.
Representative Serana really
quick, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um,
What about math then? We don't
hold him back because of
reading, but what about math? So
my, that's my big concern. And
the other, another thing, right
now, the budget in our budget,
47% goes to education. I think
it's within the schools how it's
being spent because that's $4.7
billion. We're going towards
education, so we're putting a
lot of money in education and
the LFC committee sees that and,
and says, why aren't we getting
what we're getting? But so we're
trying, I know money wise too,
but we have to this.
You probably should blow up and
put, whenever you go in front of
LFC show that we are actually
getting results because they
need to hear that and they need
to see it. That's it. Thank you.
Yes, thank you. um.
With that
