Welcome back everyone before we
do two orders of business prior
to jumping back on to the agenda
madame president if you can tell
us where we're meeting for
tomorrow's tour yes i'm gonna
give you plus he does directions
to our officer area tomorrow
so you'll pass the library here
you'll get to the village area
and there is going to be a
school zone and a semiterry so
the schools own the school is on
your rate the cemetery of what
left sorry and the cemeteries on
your rates and then the next
road that you come to will be
coming on day last worth us and
you can only go left so you'll
go left and you'll take that
road you're going to get to see
all the work the pipeline
companies doing right now that
you may even get stopped or slow
down and then before you write
before you get to the community
center will be our turn and
they're going to pass some homes
and the driveway is going to
come up pretty fast we do have a
small sign that my dad fixed for
us yesterday that says san
antonio just land grant if you
get to the community center
you've gone too far and you'll
have to turn around and come
back there's two driveways so
ours is the first driveway and
there's a second for the
community center
coming out there last were to
and were forty one b is our
actual number and it's actually
on the back of the little hand
out that I did the address while
those were actually better
directions and what susan and I
are representative and about I
used to up north they typically
tell us past the house that has
the two tractors and then you
remember where that royal used
to be passed that into the rate
yes yes
go right on communities where to
still end up in the array see
you tomorrow we had breakfast
from the range so thank you and
thank you so much for that
wonder for month
and the careful with the wild so
thank you for the one.
And then before we have one
other order of business I would
like to ensure since we have a
quarter of now that we can
get a motion on minutes and then
on the agenda
do they have a motion to prove
the minutes motioned by
representative garcia seconded
by senator or t c penalty anyone
in opposition.
That an opposition so though she
did raise their head but then
chip with princess just kidding
and then the second one is
a major.
And then we did speak earlier
about a letter of that
representative gracious and
senator or teased the penalty
both agreed should be written
since we didn't have a quote
that letter would have come just
from me but now that we have a
quarter of can I get a motion to
ensure that the letter is from
the entire committee.
Representative editor seconded
by or t pinot anyone and
opposition seeing none that
letter will be drafted and on
behalf of the entire committee
okay we're gonna move on to the
next item on the agenda which
happens to be the authection
program status update by my good
friend jonathan martinez a
fellow bartender and he just
reminded me we both attended new
mexico boys state together and
that made us truly far more in
love with state governments are
good to see america
good afternoon chairman how to
meal and members of the
committee
thank you for having me to day
my name is john of the modern s
I am a native northern new
mexican grew up in.
Coyota and I will new mexico on
a secure my whole life so I were
my parcel there on member on
several secures on a
commissioner on two
of vora sec are seconds in the
obvious area
and so I I know a second fairly
well i'm in my upbringing
since it's the childhood
again i'm thank you for having
me today i'm here to kind of
just give you a little status
update on
kind of who we are at the
interstate stream commission a
secure program or second bureau
newly formed a bureau within the
agency administratively formed
within the agency um can who
your how it came to be and what
we do for a second in the state
to give you a little bit a
background the assector
rehabilitation program at the
mexico interstate stream
commission has existed since.
Probably the sixties at least
that I can tell maybe even
further back then that just
looking at all historic files
there's always been some type of
a program there to help us with
infrastructure projects although
i'm funding I think was very
limited at the time and there
wasn't a lot of activity
I came on board in the
interstate strim commission in
two thousand eight
to assist the asset your program
at that time of
the assector in the state of new
mexico were receiving more and
more capital outlay dollars
year by year leading up to the
creation of the position that I
got hired for um needing more
help there and so when I got
hired on there were four
individuals and there was there
was our second program manager
and three others me being the
newest edition there at that
time to help a second get their
infrastructure
on the ground particularly
capital outlet moneys but we
also managed the rehab program
that we were in house bill two
we were allocated one point nine
million dollars annually for a
second infrastructure is
basically construction dollars
i'm a lot of that money went
towards eighty twenty up a
program that we called at the
time where it was eighty percent
state funded twenty percent was
the local match required by the
asset yes okay
the other money that we got was
a lot of core projects US army
core of engineers the reception
to fifteen and two thirteen
through their offices we are
provided the state cautious
requirement for those programs
and so that's where a lot of
that money would go up at that
time
during the recession you know
state fell in kind of budget
shortfolds and hiring freezers
were put in place we lost staff
at the agency
and basically the assector
program staff dwindle down to
just two individuals for a few
years
and the role was not just a
secules anymore it was trying to
pick up the work load of other
individuals within the agency
that had laugh.
Managing canadian basin and and
some other areas there so
again went from a staff of four
dedicated to a second out of
staff a two that was spread very
then to assist a second
and and I think it was due to
that.
Lack of.
Been able to be super responsive
and assist the assectors like
like we were that there was a
push to create a bureau within
the agency
a bureau that was dedicated and
staffed primarily to help a
secure manage their
infrastructure projects and the
funding um in two thousand and
nineteen
a bill was passed in legislature
it was
senate bill four thirty eight
and it created the second and
community ditch infrastructure
fund act.
And that are basically increased
the funding that the state had
available
or the agency the new mex gonna
state string commission from one
point nine million dollars to
two and a half million dollars
annually
and that money was to be used
for a planning engineering
design services construction
dollars
and staffing if needed so that
we can we could fully staff the
program sufficiently to be of
service to the asset.
That that created some
additional work load for the
agency in that we have never
really funded engineering
services for a second
but we relied heavily on the
natural resources conservation
service they used to provide
that technical service to the
asset
and we found that that was
really the model neck a lot of a
secure needed infrastructure
improvements but i'm engineering
design dollars weren't readily
available for them to get the
designed done so that then they
could come to our office to
apply for the construction
dollars because our remember are
initial monies were construction
dollars so this now created an
avenue that the secures can now
tap into some engineering
assistance dollars
in two thousand and twenty three
as a result of the twenty twenty
two wildfire season that we had
especially the hermit's peak
cafe can and fires that were
very devastating to northern new
mexico as well as the fight the
black fires out in the healing
members area
senate bill for thirty sorry one
seventy six was introduced and
that opened up or amended the
acdif the the second community
reach ditch infrastructure fund
act to add in
disaster response recovery and
hazard mitigation as an
allowable use of these funds for
a second that were impacted by
these wildfires
one of the other things that
that that arm amendment in two
thousand and twenty three made
was it basically a loud also the
use of funds for any other
federal agency or the other
state or federal agency dollars
that might be out there that we
could use active funds as a
match if there was a matter
requirement and it eliminated
any cautionary requirement our
local costume requirement for
the asset yes.
So um as you heard earlier as
you heard me say previously it
was an eighty twenty program
that slowly developed into a
ninety ten program and then with
the passage of of center bill
one seventy six it eliminates
all local customer so now
everything state funded or
federal state funded on an army
court projects
so
that was kind of the recent
development there was also a big
push to like I said creating a
secure bureau and
administratively within the or I
think the push was actually
through legislative action but
it was our our state engineer
and our director at the time
that said you know we can get
this done internally
administratively and they
committed to doing so in april
of twenty three um that was
officially created within our
group I was hired as the bureau
chief of the uh a second bureau
within the agency
man we also received some some
staffing to go along with that
so of the current staff right
now is myself as the bureau
chief I have a staff manager
that has been a long with me for
many many years carry roy ball
she has now a staff manager
within our or organization or
bureau.
Um and then the newly hired
individuals that are are now on
board to help with the assectors
or max beer whose one of our
secures project managers julia
cliglitch who is a company me
here today she's our newest
higher she's been on board about
two months right now and then
ashley labor who was
joined us
probably about a year and a half
ago maybe two years ago but
she's out on attorney to leave
right now but we are now a group
of five and then we've got legal
support from our agency by the
means of of taylor charges whose
are state one of the staff
attorneys with the interstate
stream commission.
So.
With that I guess just kind of
give you a little bit idea of
you know what what we normally
do on a daily basis
we provide basically technical
support and project management
assistance for the
administration of our program of
the security abilitation program
within the agency
we working with all of a second
community ditches as defined by
state statute.
We perform field visits with
these are secures to kind of
look at what other needs are
during construction we're out
there periodically to verify
that the work is being completed
specially since were submitting
all the or processing all the
paperwork for payment requests
stuff like that so we just want
to verify that that things are
moving along and work has been
done on these projects
that includes having a draft all
the funding agreements
again processing all the payment
requests and project oversight.
And then providing educational
workshops for a secure on how to
manage um how to manage the
system had a navigate our
system.
Both the capital outlay side as
well as the second community
ditch infrastructure funds and
so you know trying to promote
our program and and provide
guidance on that
basic eligibility while let me
get back to a c d I f the cdiff
required that the interstate
stream commission were closely
with the new mexico secure
association and the new mexico
secure commission.
Uhm two per to develop a set of
guidelines and how we were going
to administer the response and
so we did so arm in the initial
phase when the first bill was
passed and then we went through
and revised those guidelines in
collaboration with them when the
senate bill one seventy six was
passed in twenty twenty three
that kind of changed a few
things within the program.
Basic eligibility requirements
and your secure is eligible
as long as they've got some
current buy laws they should
have valid water rates for the
resecure federal tax sid number
bank account of course of the
transaction a money can happen
and lastly the financial
complaints with the executive
order two thousand thirteen zero
zero six which is basically that
they are added compliant and
complaint with any dfe budget
reporting that a b required of
them
we've got.
Funds available for planning
engineering design services
construction moneys again the
disaster response recovery and
hazard mitigation and staffing
we have applications now that
are secures will apply for fun
so up until now
basically there were only enough
projects.
Available with designs in hand
that basically helped us spend
the money that we had available
there wasn't an overwhelming
demand for this money
with the creation of the action
and the elimination of a
cautious requirement.
The demand went through the roof
and so we created a process
where we're now accepting
applications and we're ranking
those applications and making
selections based on those
ranking criteria uhm
to to fund because the demand is
greater than the bond moneys we
have available.
Um i've got in the hand out
there some deadline select for
engineering design services for
for any of your constituents
that you might have so much is
in your area march thirty first
by three pm for engineering
design service applications
there is a link on their
takes you to our website with
the application the instructions
and
talks about all the requirement
that is on page three
about two thirds of the weight
down on your page and then the
construction funding
applications are due by mid
nineth the reason for the
staggered
application deadlines is that
the program is designed so that
if an assector comes to us
we're kind of figuring that this
is kind of like a two year
process they come to us here one
asked for engineering design
dollars get an engineering
design done so that they can
make the main deadline to apply
for the construction funding so
that very following fiscal year
state fiscal year they can
hopefully secure the funding to
build that project okay
so we give them a little bit
more debt more time on that so
they make sure that the designs
get done and they can make that
construction deadline.
Um.
Again those funds can be used
for just a straight ecdf graph
that's at the very bottom of the
page that's what we referred to
as the a secure construction
graph program
just a straight grap to the
asset years these are typically
limited to about two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in size
date projects okay
but they can also be used for to
fifteen to thirteen core
projects we partner with the new
mexican sociation of
conservation districts as well
they have applied and past years
for an assector regional
conservation partnership program
funds through the farm bill
I mean we've partnered with them
on many projects matching our
dollars to their dollars to get
projects of a larger size built.
They are I think in the process
now of reapplying for those
funds for another funding cycle
and so we're hopeful that
they're going to get be
successful with partnered with
them in that application we're
hoping they're going to be
successful in getting some more
dollars and bringing more money
into the state of new mexico for
a second and that we can
leverage some of our dollars
with thirty dollars to get more
projects done with them with a
new mexico and then any other
funding sources
will be non to the next page of
of my hand out on the very top
of the page as a little
brefunding history of the acdif
program basically since we
started funding projects out of
that program so as I mentioned
in two thousand nineteen that's
when the bill passed on that
created the second community
ditch fund act
it took us some time
collaborating with the asset
association and the insecure
commission on the development of
guidelines
and finally in twenty two we
were able to
basically announce a really
short funding cycle because it
was it was basically already
part way through the fiscal year
but we went ahead and made an
announcement opening
applications for funding just
try to get some dollars on the
ground.
Um in fiscal you're twenty two
we funded eleven a seconds for
engineering services and only
for for construction and that
work plan was about eight
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and size.
Fiscal year twenty three
we did a little bit better job
we had a nineteen seconds funded
on in the engineering side
antenna secures funded on the
construction side with the work
plan of about two point one
million out of the two and a
half million that we are we had
available then as you can see
and twenty four
we funded twelve of sick is for
engineering design projects and
twenty eight for the
construction funding but that
work plan was six and a half
million dollars and many of you
may be asking well how do you
find six and a half million when
you only have two and a half
million thanks to some special
appropriations and some capital
appropriations we had some extra
money that was allocated to the
interstate stream commission for
a secure project steep wide and
we utilise those monies to help
compliment basically the two and
a half million that we had
available and that's how we were
able to fund six and a half
million dollars worth the
projects so you can see the
demand went up quite a bit
twenty five with current first
fiscal year that were in right
now were slated to fund twelve
of secures for engineering for
services and twenty four
construction projects so and
where we're looking at five
point eight million again thanks
to some additional um.
Capital appropriations that we
received and and some of the
specials that were still trying
to get off the box so that we
can we can expend those dollars
down and and get the money on
the ground for these are
seconds.
Um so as I mentioned one of the
other responsibilities of the
assective bureau within our
agency as the administration of
all the capital outlet
that uh you as as legislators
provide two to your constituents
for their infrastructure
projects right and so where the
state agency that that money
flows through to get to the
assector so that they can get
their infrastructure projects
done
there's a little break out of of
basically the last six years of
a words that have been made to
and these are individual awards
not that does not include the
state wide money's that the
agency has received but these
are all the individuals i'm she
can see in.
Twenty nineteen sixty seven
individual secure appropriations
totalling almost seven million
dollars and twenty twenty there
were seventy two individual
appropriations to a second
totally approximately four point
six million
and on an aren't last year
twenty twenty twenty four twenty
eight of secures approximately
two point two million dollars
if you look at that work load
there it's about three hundred
and ten individual
appropriations that were
managing
and again not all of those are
active at the same time because
as they get expended they're
falling off the books but just
overall three hundred and ten
individual appropriations
totalling twenty seven million
dollars over the last six years
average is about fifty two
appropriations a year and about
four point six million dollars
on average a year that we're
we're helping administer helping
the secure holding their hand
getting them through the process
of of getting those dollars on
the ground and and their
infrastructure or rehabilitated
so that they can
they can continue irrigating i'm
in sustaining the livelihood
that they're they you know.
Been a custom to all these
years.
So a mr chairman members of the
committee
another program that i'm not
sure if if all of your familiar
with and we do offer a long
program through the new mexican
state stream commission matters
a low interest loan for a
second.
That can be for anything that
the assector needs on their
ditch maintenance repairs
emergency
it's basically a two and a half
percent annual interest on the
it's set up so that they make an
annual payment back to the
agency cause as many of you know
if if you're on in the second
yourself or familiar with them
i'm a secure typically have
annual meetings that collect
annual assessments and so it's
set up so that they can if they
have a loan and have to pay back
alone that they can increase
those annual assessments and
make that one time once a year
payment back to the agency
typical repayment of ten years
and we're authorized to go up to
fifty thousand dollars pretty
much with with no problems if
the request exceeds that it is
something that would have to be
taken before our commission for
their consideration and
approval.
Going into disaster response
efforts
we have been actively involved
especially with the hermes peak
caf canyon and the black fires
and i'm assuming now with with
some of the other fires that we
recently experienced this year
we're gonna be involved with
some of those but we utilized an
uncalled contractor that we had
within the agency to do some
planning assessment work with a
secules in these areas i'm and
basically that planning or
assessment was to assist these
assectors with their
applications for.
You know disaster assistance
with the department of homeland
security and emergency
management with the state of new
mexico as well as with female.
And so a lot of these agency
specially female they come in
from.
Add a state somewhere that
they're not familiar with note
the new mexico they're not
familiar with a second in the
state of new mexico and so
they come in they they do damage
assessments that probably don't
really reflect
the magnitude of the damages
that these are seconds have
sustained and so this this
assessment that we had one of
our on calls do was was
basically to assist the asset
years with defending their claim
to these guys that they really
did sustain these kinds of
damages and in these amounts.
A second committee be ditched
found the the isc the chairman
of the interstate stream
commission and sits on the a
second community ditch fund
committee that committee is a
committee that was created to
provide financial assistance to
basically regional asset your
sociations to assist them with
hiring professionals technical
professionals or or legal
professionals to assist them and
defending their rights during
the adjudication process and so
are chairman sits on again the
chairman of the interstate
stream commission sits on that
committee
there is a representative from
the new mexico secure
commission it's it's on that
committee and then the secretary
from the department of that
mexico department of a costly
sits on that they've got money
that's allocated to these
regional organizations for these
purposes and we basically review
applications made by by the
regional associations and
provide a recommendation that
are chairman presents to the
committee for consideration when
they're when they're handing out
these funds.
Um
and with that a yo.
I think i'm pretty much complete
my presentation and i'll stand
for questions thank you mister
chairman of members of the
committee thank you so much for
them to start up with
representative on.
Hi everyone my name is christina
but a horn i'm the
representative for house
district twenty five I apologize
for being late but in really
happy to be here with you all
today and thank you mister
chairman and members of the
committee mr martinez thank you
for your presentation I had a
question about the loan program
and wanted to just get some more
details on that that program is
really interesting to me and I
think it's you know could be
uses a model for other state
agencies as well and so I wanted
to know is the loan program
sitting within like do you do
you yourself in the state agency
manage it or is that through a
bank is it how how what how does
it work mr chairman and
representative put on yes that
that program resides solely
within the interstate string
commission so we managed the
whole program we we issue the
loan agreements uh we send out
the annual statements of
you know what to do back to us
delinquency notices all that
kind of stuff but it it resides
solely within within within the
agency and mister chairman
members of the committee is the
misremerting is is it is that
that the average payback rate is
ten years or is the so does it
very
chairman and representative but
a horn yet the typical repayment
is ten years
we as an agency we typically
don't not like to go longer than
that all the week have on larger
loans and the reason being is
uhm as a secure basically have
election of officers every other
year we don't like to take it
out too far because sometimes
there's the the information on
the loan is it passed on to the
next
set of commissioners and then we
kind of lose touch for a while
loans go to link went um and so
we we see that if we have loans
of a longer term we typically
have problems.
Uhm but
that's the reason for a typical
ten year we do have loans for a
shorter period as well so for a
second is no I don't want to
take your loan we're really to
pay it back in two years and we
can do you know any any
basically term
they but a typical term is
tannen and the reason the loan
program was created i'm in the
agency was that at the time that
we had our customer programs
that the asset he has had a
local cautious requirement and
basically that local cash
requirement was somewhat of a
burden for them specially you
know they have a hundred
thousand dollar project attempt
even on a ninety ten project
that's a ten thousand dollars no
many of them don't have that
funding but might be able to
provide a loan to help them off
set that we could spread that
burden out over time which made
it more manageable for them so
that was I think what helped our
create that that loan program
within the agency and the reason
it was it was developed
and my last question related to
that it's just is that
does that loan program and when
you're helping with the disaster
relief and applying for the new
mexico department of homeland
security emergency management do
the funds get like can you use
the funds to increase the amount
of funding that we get
federally.
So
again mr chairman and
representative put a one
you know we haven't had any
loans being used for any of our
disaster assistance stuff
it could definitely supplement
that
a lot of the federal program
spema or dhm have a customer
requirement associated with them
so it could be used to offset
that cash a requirement it could
also be used to just fund the
project and then once they get
reimbursed me back from the more
dhcm use those funds to just pay
back the long tour agency so it
helps them get some money more
up front as many of you know a
lot of those agencies aren't
quick to get dollars on the
ground and so they are waiting
sometimes several years
for moneys and again speaking
from as a commissioner on my own
assector
i'm two years out on a disaster.
And I still haven't received
payment so you know that's just
where these these programs can
kind of help
get money on the ground sooner
and then they can be paid back
once they finally get reimbursed
me back from from these agencies
thank you thank you
representatives senator gators.
Which german thank you great
presentation of gonna ask I had
some questions a long payment
program but you took care of
that
years ago i'd had a lawsuit from
state and maximum so my property
was in corro the second head was
in the mexico in brian gages
work for the
uh sector as said engineers
office he came to to try to
resolve it because I was going
to sue the state in the mexico
what happens it close a head.
And I had the call rather
compact going through my
property so it had a water
twenty four seven at that time
they are looking at doing some
metering
short tell metering or they had
radios you know if that's ever
gone through do we have that or
we use it I know that is as far
as the second your dependent on
your one.
And I had second judiciation of
water but if someone down stream
took water it didn't bother me
but the end user may not have it
i've just wondering if because
it eventually protects a second
as you're going down.
In being secondly didn't really
bother me but unlike the idea
that you
tell them
to be able to open a vote or at
least know how much water was
going for a second I just wanted
to pay i'm not seen mister else
and forever but it's just one of
the completed data continuing so
up mrperiod chairman and senator
gay goes again the metering
measurement of metering program
is administered by the state
engineers office are mr gaggles
has since retired he is no
longer with the agency um they
do receive
annual location almost annually
probably for meter and
measurement effort steep wide I
am not a hundred percent sure
whether they have followed
through with anything up in that
area but I do know that they are
actively installing measurements
on a second thread the state and
especially in a judiciated areas
our pressure that because I just
note that again never happened
to me but others had problems
getting their waters in the
lorio grand they talk about that
all the time.
As continuous towards texas but
I appreciate that and I just
wanted to clarify the continue.
Thank you senator representative
eleven.
And.
Minds working as well
mines working you can use mine
and blinking
I have read what is that silence
thank you mr chair and thank you
mister
okay I want to say thank you
because I have called your
office on numerous occasions
to say help me and you have an
and I I deeply appreciate that
i'm just curious when was the
asset yet commission not the new
mexico association
when was the new mexico as sec
as second commission created.
Mr chairman and representative I
I don't know of the top of my
head
I don't remember when they
recreated but they were created
by statute
and I could I could definitely
find that out for you i'm
actually representative and rick
it does have that interest in to
give you can come up to my
thank you mister chair and all
the representative so
i'm i'm sorry if you could
matter with the department of
justice that what it would be
his treaty division and we also
represent the as council to the
new mexico secure commission and
language council so the new
mexico secure commission was
created in the late eighties by
executive order and then surely
thereafter I think it was in the
every night they were created by
statute so there's a statute
that reflects the executive
order I think you can you tell
me what they are how many people
are employed by the second
commission and how much their
payers.
Mr chairman and representative
error so the new mexico secure
commission
is a governor appointed
commission eleven members they
do not have any of full time
staff they have two contractors
they have a a technical
consultant and a technical
system and I believe their
contracts
there's been a a pretty stable
appropriation every year to the
second commission that they use
mostly for those contractors and
it's around eighty three
thousand dollars for the two.
Thank you
it.
You know when this was created
in the eighties we didn't have.
It was just the beginning of the
new mexico second association.
And I really think like the new
mexico assess as second
association headed by politician
as kind of.
Surpass kind of the work of the
second commission
just my opinion and I get say
haven't trucked to a lot of
people about it and i'm
wondering if we need to
organizations now to represent.
A second association set.
That might be a dangerous
question for you so you don't
have to answer that but I could
turn to mr martinez and it might
be a dangerous question for him
to answer but i'm still
interested in what you think
yeah
mister chairman and and
commissioner I mean represented
a better excuse me
yeah I I don't know that I that
I have an answer to that I think
they serve different rules.
Um
you know the secure commission
is created to basically be kind
of a policy advisory type
committee to the governor's
office on a secure related
issues the asset association
does a lot of work in assisting
a secure with a governance
issues getting my laws up to the
they've been instrumental in
helping a secure become
financially complaint with the
executive order so that they can
receive funding as you know that
executive order does not allow
state agencies to release slows
once to these entities to the
assectors if they are not
compliant and so that's where
they've played a rule but I
think they've got they have some
different roles in and
responsibilities that they've
been key in helping a secure is
in the state with well just from
my perspective mister chair and
mr martinez I would say that the
new mexico asecu association has
really surpassed the commission
and really being the other case.
The advocacy.
Leader.
In the state and I really fail
to see what the commission is
really doing actively.
You know when I when I have a
when I have a a second and i've
got a lot of his.
Who as you know.
Who have problems with the
financial you know whatever I
i've never gone to the
commission I always go either
tier office or frankly to to
part to the second association
because they are the boots on
the ground in the north I mean
they they have people that go
how and do the engineer help
them design and judge hearing
her get ready for an engineering
report or get ready to do the to
to apply for the capital out a
funding so that they can get the
engineering study done but the
assist them and all of that work
and I I just I just don't see
the commission having an active
role or you know I I don't see
them working but maybe there's a
lot of i'm sure there's always a
lot I don't so I will admit that
but i.
I really you know sometimes we
create commissions and they just
go on and on a nominal and it
might be like how many times do
they meet a year.
Mister chair representatives at
the me once a month
is and do they have a core every
almost always over the to the
the the commission itself was
not fully
didn't have a full commission
for a little bit of time with
the governor has recently made
some new appointments
and some of those appointments
I I think we've seen.
Change in the in the commission
the sense that there are some
new new members and they are
showing up to meeting so I mean
I I but as far as I remember
even before representing them
they've.
For the most sport headquarter.
Well miss your chair and I guess
everybody here I I see them
selling up the process more than
anything else because not only
do we have to get agreement for
the second association which is
hard in that parts of is there
any have to go get agreement
from their secure commission and
you know and sometimes it comes
in sometimes it us and sometimes
they're at odds with the
assetting association and they
can't because they are pointed
by the governor they can't they
aren't the lead that the
assection association is i'm
just i'm just saying.
I don't think it's a good thing
anymore but that's up to me and
members of the legislature to
decide but
uh i've uh overstayed in my
piece oh I have one market.
So
you know these interest loans it
at the
water trust board the they
started giving no interest lots
to
to organizations that were
really
had a low level of.
I mean it's really state money
that we're longing do we rarely
really loan people in interest
rate that you know I know two
point five is pretty good I I
get that but at the at the
at the mfa they just started
eliminating the interest rates
on those lands because they are
really working with communities
of poverty which is really what
you are dealing with in the
assetting association so have
you considered taking that down
to a zero interest on I mean it
just is state money if we get it
back it's fine do we need to
make money out of people
mister chairman and commissioner
rarer that we we really haven't
considered that but I will
definitely take that back to our
or
or director in our commission
for consideration I can tell you
that the loan program since
there is not a cautious
requirement on any of our our
infrastructure projects anymore
the long program is basically
almost died off.
Um again I don't I don't know
now with with all the disaster.
You know and hazard mitigation
stuff within within the state
due to the wildfires whether
there'll be some some
you know moment regained
momentum there or not but I will
definitely take that back as a
consideration I appreciate that
thank you
and I this will be my last
question mister chair but i'm.
The.
I'm glad to hear you have five
people on staff I really am
about what here's what I see is
doing a s- as a state
legislature is taking me a while
to get this but what we do is we
ask communities a poverty to do
amazing kind of work in their
spare time while they have a
real job that they have to go to
during the day and then at night
they're supposed to come home
and say I guess I guess well you
know restarter wastewater system
inability this week I mean
the enormity of the job.
And the in the year and the
aging infrastructure.
Has really lead me to believe
more and more that we need to
put more people we we ask we ask
ordinary citizens to do
impossible jobs with the least
amount of money we give them so
it's it's like it's just a
crushing blow almost and I I
know we give money and I know
and I can't capital outlay my
way out of the problems in the
north i'm gonna tell you that
it's not going to work and I I
read it was what five point six
billion the other day in the
paper for water infrastructure
it's probably triple there if
you and and what has happened
and I will introduce this year
we were looking at you
representing uh garcia I tried
four years ago to pass a rural
infrastructure.
Act you know thirty six million
a year like we do for the tribal
and the colonies and I tried to
pass out there was dead on
arrival when we had a different
chair I think it's I think it's
unfortunately unfortunate that
the only two regions of our
state that had the
infrastructure money for rural
communities happened to be in
the places where they had chairs
of appropriation committees so
we have a tribal infrastructure
committee and we have a
colonious infrastructure
committee and all of the rest of
the real new mexico has no money
I will be introducing
legislation that we do a uhm
yeah a set of sight for a real
infrastructure so that we will
have another you know both of
those both of those groups
tribals and colonies get about I
think thirty six million year so
that the other rural
infrastructure will get thirty
six million a year for
infrastructure funds for huge
projects I have all of our water
systems are seventy five years
old in the north as you know we
have no separate allocation I
think it's it's really an
inequitable formula I will be
introducing that legislation
thank you missed mister chair
anyone can join me if you are.
Representative I think I would
love to join you and that bill
sender stephanie.
Thank you mr chair
some of my some of the comments
of come up
from representative here about
you know the volunteer aspect of
people working on mutual
domestic waters a sake years
waste waters etc.
I was wondering about that two
point five percent interest
because usda has dropped it to
zero and one percent I mean
they've had the one percent in
one and a half but they've even
gone to zero.
And one of my in my district
which is varied.
Some of the entities would not
even approach people about
paying back.
Along because there are not
resources to do so.
And even raising a water rate a
few dollars is catastrophic
through some people so then it
puts a project on hold.
And I understand and I think
it's great I was looking at all
i'm getting rebound from
somewhere but I think it it's
great all of what's happening
with their capitally in the
funding history but.
I think we still have to think
about how to serve those
communities that are volunteer
and are very low income people
who.
As I can have always said
they're another cash poor and
landridge.
They've inherited they have been
there for years.
But they're not really prepared
to put lots of money in now we
do have some.
Areas.
That have a sake years where
people are professionals they go
to work every day that come home
they have a good paycheck and
that's not the person i'm
talking about so
I wonder if you have any
recommendations about that
interest.
Mr chairman and sender
stephonics like I said I I be
willing to take that before
commission for consideration on
an reducing the loans to a zero
interest loan
as I mentioned a lot of our
infrastructure programs are all
orange restriction programs are
a zero customer requirement on
the locals and so there is real
no need it's it's a hundred
percent free grates to these
individuals to help them with
their infrastructure projects
and as I mentioned you know the
real duties are of my position
and my staff is to hand hold
these individuals through the
process what's next what do we
do next working with them you
know on a daily basis to help
them get their infrastructure
project completed yes thank you
mr chair
I appreciate that very much so
if somebody was starting.
And head had nothing done no
plans knowing engineering and
and you all and your staff were
trying to help them are we
talking about a year out or two
years out from money.
Mr chairman and and senator
stephonics it really depends on
what what the project and tails
and what the real need is
if if there's really a lot of
uncertainty on what the best
solution is for their problem it
may be a three year project it
may be something that you're one
we utilize some planning
assistance dollars we have to
get an engineer on board to
provide them with some
alternatives i'll look at the
problem and provide him some
alternatives and really rough
estimates of you know if they
choose option e it would be if
they chose option be and be why
option c would be z dollars
something like that so they can
go back to their membership and
make an informed decision on
what the right solution they
feel is for them
if it's something that we
already know what the the the
solution needs to be basically
it would be almost a two year
program they could apply for
through our program for the
engineering assistance dollars
rataway you're one
if selected they'd get their
engineering design done and then
apply for the construction
dollars you're too and so they
could get funded in in two years
basically.
So mr chair do you think of it
would be beneficial to for your
program to have a fund.
Uh.
That was just for planning that
people didn't have to apply for.
So like you would have staff
designated staff person and a
little part of money for
planning so mr chairman and
senator stephonix on basically
that's what we do with the acdio
fund monies we set aside a
certain portion of that two and
a half million specifically for
planning efforts i'm in those
are are kind of discretionary
funds they don't really apply
they can contact us we will go
look at it and if we feel that
we need to send out a
professional to provide them
with with the um
you know kind of a per
preliminary engineering for
whatever you we call it a
reconnected report and we have
that part of money to do that
with that we can get that that
while ruling without having them
apply for it
so mr chairman and mr martin is
my last comment is I think that
this since we have designated
this program and we have put
money into this program which
seemed great results and i'm
really glad about that in in the
past prior to these years people
really struggled so thank you
very much
mr chairman and center
stephonics thank you very much
they use senator senator or
teasing penalty.
Thank you mister chairman and
and thanks mr martinez for a
great great report I I can crew
with senators to finish about
receiving a lot of it's nice to
be able to say that we put some
money into something and no we
can see the benefit of it
I had a couple quick questions
but the first is.
I can remember years ago when
the big emphasis was on trying
to line the ditches.
And and trying to uh put
cement concrete is that what
what's the current status then
there was a the counterveiling
thought that well that then
prevents the see that we really
rely on to keep our our forest
selfie and the and the uh
restore the the across what's
the current feeling about lining
ditches is that something that's
still done uh mrperiod chairman
and senator or t c penalty.
It really depends up from a
second your secure you know what
their values are a lot of them
are opposed to it because they
feel like it.
Changes the the cultural aspect
of the assector on the link your
cleaning the ditch that kind of
stuff um we still have some
asset gives a plane for it
not so much concrete lining but
a lot of pipe lining of a secure
now
but yes there is there is some
concern about you know then what
does that due to all the the
need of education along the
banks of the second but it's
it's kind of very weak we do see
some of it still but we're
seeing some opposition to it as
well
so mister chairman and mr martin
is there's not a one size fit
all answered you take each case
in the local sake it wants to
line the ditch you would help
them do it in the best way and
if they don't and it's fine too
mr chairman and a senator t
supenel that is correct and this
is really their project
you know we we kind of go with
what they want to see on their
secure embarrass you're correct
in mr chairman the other
question head was the the what
is the money that you use the
loan phone for where does that
confirm is that still part of
the the same annual
appropriation you get her or
reserve a fund created some
years ago that you're tapping
and then replenishing as the
loans are paid back yes mr
chairman and senator tc penal on
the loan funds are provided from
the irrigation works
are construction fund which is a
trust fund that rely there
lies within the agency um for
irrigation projects and
development of that and so it's
separate from this two and a
half million strictly for for
these other purposes and and
building infrastructure projects
that's correct though then my
final question mr chairman the
when we passed the canabas
legalization bill there was a
lot of concern expressed by the
asset associations that.
Can of escrowers producers would
be.
The.
Increasing the drain on
unavailable water for other
crops
is that something that you hear
anymore is if that been dealt
with adequately or is that still
a concern
uh mister chairman and senator
tc penal I don't know that I
really.
I really hear a lot about that
in what we do uhm I can tell you
that we deal with the second
associations through their
elected commission arm and so
all the projects we do are for
the mean ditch um we we don't
deal at all with any of the
canabas
entities or anything like that
but
haven't really heard about any.
Big drain or
use of water that is impacting
other other other assecure uh
parcel desert or members.
Thank you senator representative
herself.
I don't see less than people
trying speaker
thank you mister chair thank you
john I think for your
presentation.
Just after that
has the state engineer this year
done any temporary approval of
the water in the oil patch.
Mr chairman and representative
garcia I don't at all deal with
any of that so III wouldn't have
the answer to that question okay
thank you
also mister chair.
Ah.
Some years back i'm the same
eight years.
Six eight years.
This committee was in the color
the colorado language.
They had a problem with their
secure.
In that the reotal color shifted
flow.
So water wasn't getting to the
head gate of the real.
To supply that secure where
water.
That would have taken some
really tough engineering.
Design to kind of make that a
second active again are you
familiar with the.
With with the second that the
color ten what's been done.
To kind of a upgrade the
floor on the reotal color there
too.
Bring water back to that secure.
Mr chairman and I representative
garcia I am not familiar with
the situation you're describing
I am familiar with many of the
assectors in that area I can
tell you that we have worked in
recent years with us some of
those are secure the second
thought on chico some of those
aren't doing some projects and
there are seconds to help
increase their efficiencies some
of those were sections of a more
put in pipeline in areas where
they were having some seepage
losses and some issues with that
royals are causing problems
but i'm not familiar with the
exact situation you're you're
dealing with your describing but
we have worked with several of
those in the in the recent
years.
With hoscello sarah and some of
those guys here can also mister
chair
this committee was in the higher
language
that it's been a long time I
want to see maybe twelve years
ago.
Maybe more like fourteen years
ago.
But
the langrand.
Kinda word took us on a tour.
They show us there are second
system.
It's a very high tech.
Yes it's operator digitally.
So
you could be flying on a
location to the bahamas and book
trigger in the irrigation on
their second
you know and that and they would
control the flow in terms of the
the cfs.
You know and so that there
wouldn't be any over.
Overflow and they would also
control the flows to the parts
on this.
You know and I don't know if
you're familiar with that system
there in a higher the hoyas a
language between the land.
And so coral right next door to
that though
what is that this is is is
february
that that doesn't.
Yes so yet
but there's there's a a rough
famous bird refugee reviewed by
scanning up by check yeah that's
the one.
So you familiar with that with
that setup
mr chairman and representative
garcia yes we we we've worked
with a larroya secure and
several infrastructure projects
for them the the system that
you're describing is
they're one of the fewer seconds
in that area or by the only sick
in that area that is not part of
the middle real grand consumer
she district but they get their
water from the middle real grand
conservative district and I I
think the infrastructure you're
describing as part of the
infrastructure that the mrg c d
the middle again conservating
district has put in place
because I think they have that
up and down the the middle
valley at for all their canals
on the amount of water that each
one gets and being able to turn
one on and one of us
but yes I am familiar with that
in fact we're currently working
with with the whole secure right
now on blinding a section of
their ditch as well and we're
seen a little bit more of that
type of infrastructure even up
north we've got a few seconds
that are experimenting with
those types of automated
controls to open and close head
gates and their southways
so that it maintains or
regulated flow for the assector
I can say that it below in the
lower for your channel valley
below about you damn
releases out of abu are
constantly fluctuating I mean
almost on a daily basis and
those are seconds are being
asked by the state engineers
office and and the medium group
to maintain a certain flow
through their ditch well when
the riverflows change that
changes did flows and so the
marilyn was are constantly out
there trying to just head gets
and so there have been a couple
of us secures that have done
some automation to try to
minimize that effort
and be you know become more
modern
well that's good because it's
only interesting model that we
were exposed to and you know
mister chair
the issue training.
Not a colored day last and
outstanding leader.
And you'll or whatever she
passed away early summer.
Angelo was kind of
the brain of the language in
terms of
paperwork will keep being
attended.
She was also the brain
in terms of the need to
domestic.
In terms of.
Making sure those are paperwork
and of their lines were met
adopted she was also the brains
of the second
no so my question is when we
have a avoid like that.
How does your entity.
Your second you're on.
Help fill that void.
And what comes to mind.
It is because of us because of
the job situation and economic
scenarios in some alone
language communities are second
communities.
Um.
The issue of income is real
important.
So like in the case of.
And allow.
You know is there something
within your bureau.
They would actually pay.
A stipend.
For an individual drop on the
community.
To learn.
The twelve dynamics of.
What it takes to operate in a
second.
In terms of the management
will keeping part of it the
paperwork etcetera etcetera
cause I think that's what a lot
of our.
A lot of our
asset cars and then grants.
Yeah.
Where there's avoid.
In that basically a part on us.
To gain this knowledge at our
expense.
The.
And and what word of what we're
why we're gaining this knowledge
mister chair is for the sake.
The government.
You know that then has benefit
to the entity.
So I think the government.
You know should play or all in
the train.
That we addressed these voids.
Of.
Kind of.
And.
Skills.
Technical skills.
You know when they when they
occur and went in when it and
when we need to feel that point
so what what do you say for that
mistake
mr chair and representative
garcia yeah we we don't have a
program within or
fond or or anything within our
our agency that the can provide
a stipend for that
as I mentioned earlier you know
if an assector is in need of
some assistance and they need to
navigate the process to apply
for monies where there to assist
them hold their hand walk them
through the process help them
fill out applications kind of
get him through that but as far
as the are training program
that's that's nothing that
currently exists within our
bureau
and food less things one mr.
So at all a higher
or so that the language which is
between.
Branch.
And lagona bumble.
Lined there are secure.
And we went out there.
Again there's been a while.
Maybe.
Twelve ten years ago.
And what happened when they
lined it with concrete.
Is.
The herbs that had grown
naturally in that area for
hundreds of years dried up
and also some other while for
trees.
You know they grew up in that
area
yeah right here
I know if it was telling their
backs and that but well my one
so they learned the hard way you
know in terms of that project
and it was it would just
do a counter duty to what they
had intended because it was
basically a letter saying you
measure that really prove
disastrous in terms of these
other aspects of whenever we're
doing these projects you know on
exact that concerns he district.
They started using best the size
on our second three score and
boom they killed often the
quality of it killed after the
months are
they about a month so he killed
all these serves that people
have been used to harvesting.
Every fall.
In our end the same is happening
violent account and buttons are
county along those irrigation
digits and command the bellin
area so necessary you know so we
learn the hard way.
You know in terms of of that
aspect.
Lastly mister chair is the a
second community ditch
infrastructure fund what is the
revenue stream from that.
Mr chairman and representative
garcia that is also uh pulls of
that two and a half million
directly from the irrigation
works construction fund which is
a trust fund that the agency has
available for for infrastructure
projects and when mr chair words
that were does the revenue
stream for the trust one
mister chairman and
representative garcia I would
have to get that answer back to
a I don't know exactly off the
top of my head what generates
the revenue but there is annual
revenue in string to that that
trust fund and I I can
definitely get that answer back
to you okay thank you for that
the next thing mister chair are
long the same line is up on the
second community ditch
infrastructure fund
who makes the decision on what
gets funded.
What is that criteria.
In terms of putting for the
proposal.
And what is the average.
Kind of
disbursement.
Um.
Per request.
So a mr chairman and and
representative garcia um so on
the engineering applications
actually on all the applications
there's ranking criteria that is
set forth in the application
process it's it's out there for
for everybody to see the
applications are are there
available
again we start with highest
ranking is a second working on
diversions right if they can't
divert the water what good is
any other project downstream
rate so obviously more points
and then it kind of an order of
importance going down from there
that's one of the criteria
whether it's a collaborative
effort with any other securities
in there and the regions I mean
there's there's a whole bunch of
different categories were
basically based on those ranking
scores we rank every application
that we receive
we lay amount from top rank to
bottom and then we just start
figuring out where do we need to
draw the line based on the
funding that we have available
where do we have to to make a
cut off at at what score
engineering applications bury
anywhere um from a few thousand
dollars to probably.
Twenty thirty thousand and we
may have a few more over but I
would say average they're
probably close to the twenty
thousand dollar mark uhm if you
if you wanted an average number
on the construction side were
probably averaging anywhere from
two hundred and two hundred and
fifty thousand for most
projects.
Cherry I kind of oversaw another
question to rule simple one and
won't take line.
On the yard kafkanyan hermes
peak.
Burn area affecting in a second
there are secures have the
option.
Of finally an application with
him or pursuing no private
actor.
In terms of their claim
mr chairman and representative
garcia I I believe it was
optional and how they wanted to
address that I I have not been
on the grounds as much dealing
with the individual secures in
in submitting applications I
think that effort has been
spirited more by the new
explicit secure association and
politicians group with with
helping those individuals I
navigate the process of how how
they were going to do it I do
know that there are some
assicates that refused are any
federal assistant any kind of
governmental assistance so.
They they just didn't want to
even go there
mr romero would do you have
anything to add to that.
Mr chair representative so I I
the same thing as as jonathan I
mean my understanding is that
the second can apply for
assistance individually so there
is a separate process for a
second to the plate for the
assistance and then some have I
believe retain attorneys
but I that's about as much as I
know and I would defer to
politician for example who's
much more familiar with what's
happening there thank you for
that thank you john thank you
mister chair thank you
representative representative
mcqueen.
Thank you mister chair I just
wanted to add something to you
as comments on rural
infrastructure fund.
You know she she made the
comment that she.
We have somebody needs we can't
capital outlay our way out of it
in that first fall totally true
in the secondly
we isn't legislature some point
we need to recognize that
catholic funds don't goes far in
rural districts.
You know in my old district I
had five senior centers.
I mean think about it like my
district was pretty big how many
fire departments you know parks
sewers I mean it's just
different and it's really
unfortunate that there isn't a
way to.
Provide more funding to
rural districts because they're
that's where it's needed and
there certainly needs in some of
the urban districts but yeah I
i'd certainly familiar with you
know some of my colleagues
you're looking for ways to spend
their capitality money because
you know they are even fixed up
the senior center and their
district is you know so small
does insure up on the map.
You know I mean this that's an
ongoing issue
we can hear calls for reform of
our capital at least system
because the money's not getting
spent.
That's a separate problem but
like getting the money towards
needed is something we should
all be aware of thank you mister
chair thank you for that comment
representative and I want to
bring that up because last.
In rom committee we had with
land rams one language wasn't
too happy that my comment when
they asked for money was.
I need a stick to my district
first and if I have anything I
can then move out of district
but when you think that I
represent four counties and one
of those counties is the county
and poverty the average request
I get per year on capital outlet
is thirty nine million dollars
and when I came in to the senate
as a county commissioner I
assumed that three million was
hitting the jackpot.
But I didn't take into account
that I had four counties and
then communities where the only
funding they get is capital
outlet I then have to make those
decisions do I keep the money
within my district or do I help
those outside of the district
and I choose to stay with them
the district just because those
are the people who sent me too
santa fe that advocate for them
and represent them and so i'm
happy about that comment because
sometimes I do see that I go to
urban senators and ask for
assistance because the need is
so great in northern new mexico
in rural new mexico so thank you
for that comment so I just have
two comments and so one is and
what is actually a question
there's a constituent of
representative that it has an
eye who has developed a lining
for ditches and he's he's
garmination wide and so for some
weird reason we can't get him to
get meetings on the state of
your mexico his company is now I
believe in ohio and he is trying
to meet with our national
delegation to talk about how he
can then contribute to president
bins environmental regulations
and funding that's coming out in
ways to help with with climate
change now we know that a
seconds are getting a high
evaporation rate because of the
high temperatures that are
happening we're losing water
secures because of seepage but
representative you made a good
point that seepage sometimes
helps up some of the native
vegetation by any chance as
anyone come to you to talk about
this company that was
spearheaded in chummy the new
mexico that's now in ohio and is
doing things across the country
mr chairman i'm not sure if
you're talking about the fostage
product is that the one you're
talking about so
in
years of fears past we've done a
couple of projects with fast
ditch
but then we really haven't heard
much more from them since then
so and so then my question is
any chance I can get to back in
communication they're trying to
get with them.
Congresswoman stands bearing and
lead your fellow and the one
question congressman ledger for
disaster well what are these
thing in your mexico with a
security so if you don't mind if
I can put you in contact with
them again.
Okay best determine that yeah
you can definitely do that thank
you and then this is another
question represent evidence and
I found ourselves calling each
other at ten pm when method I
less flooded we were concerned
on what was happening with and I
list is a small community north
of espanola rains came in so
strong during the month soon
that it redirected with salt
that pushed through the flow of
the real chama and when the real
chamber lost its course it
flooded so much property in our
district but then it damaged so
many are secure and so my
question is if we find ourselves
calling each other at ten pm.
Any chance you can offer us a
personal self over week send you
a text you get in the message I
mean the message the next day to
help guide us on what we do
because at ten pm we're trying
to lead each other and we're not
too sure sometimes what avenues
to take when it comes to
disaster
yeah mr chairman i'd i'd be
happy to show that with you
we'll get that off mine but I
want to thank you for that and I
want to thank you for stepping
in with that flooding and I know
that you stepped into a system
in a major way because a second
are a way of life were rough of
economics and more so in
northern their new mexico for a
ranchers and our farmers to
thank you and with that my
friend it's good to see you i'll
pull up the old boy state your
book one of these days they can
share it with everyone
mr chairman of members of the
committee thank you very much
with that we're gonna go to our
next agenda item which is the
donya and a band colonia grant
with israel chavis who's the
president of the dining room
village association he is
joining us via zoom we're not
going to be able to see him we
don't have the capability to see
video but we will hear him if we
have questions I want to note
that you will hear a delay from
when you ask the question there
will be a delay before he
answers because it funds them
and vice versa so if I am if
we're asking a question there
might be a delay
but know that we're here and so
when you're ready we're ready to
hear from you.
Chair can everyone help me hear
me okay
thank you and mr chair it's
great to see so many friendly
faces in the room of folks who I
have known over the years
which you may or may not know is
I I returned to where I grew up
my great grandmother is ninety
four and when I was visiting her
one day I just sort of had a
revelation that I needed to be
back here and so i'm here i've
opened my own practice in los
cruces but I grew up in the
village of donato which is the
oldest continually inhabited
village in southern new mexico
the oldest church in southern
new mexico is in our village the
original court house and county
building is in our village when
the village stretched from texas
to the california
state line there was no arizona
was new mexico in donate county
stretch the entire border area.
So I want to also express a lot
of gratitude to mark the council
for the committee he was really
helpful in in allowing me to be
able to do this I really just
wanted to to start with the
primer for this committee I love
what you just said mister chair
a seconds are a way of life in
new mexico and they have been in
new mexico for a long long long
long time but something happens
in a in about the mid eighteen
hundreds just after this gland
grant was established in
eighteen thirty nine.
In eighteen thirty nine a group
of
native native people from the
impossible area we're seeking to
sort of return this way this way
meaning toward
toward their original home lands
in what was pure publo outside
of the coral new mexico folks
will recall that there's a sacro
texas and is according to mexico
that's not accidental there's a
real strong connection between
those two areas and those pure
people petitioned the mexic at
the time mexican government for
a landgrand because they were
being pushed out and mistreated
by the newly arriving americans
in the bus area they established
the donate band call any land
grant which you have in your
packet there this is a copy of
pretty much my whole
presentation you have a really
great image of what how big the
land rep was and you'll notice
that the message is civil colony
grand is also listed and the
river goes on the other side of
the of macia those of you
familiar with southern mexico no
that now the river is is that
there are rather than river
shifted at one point from one
side of macia to the other.
The the village of donator the
donate grant it it fell in some
disrepair over the years but the
history here is really important
to understand
where after it was established
it was kind of the the the main
hub of everything in southern
new mexico it was as I said it
was the the the county seat when
the county stretched from
california to texas and it also
was the main passage way to get
through get the last stop before
you entered the hotel now that
went though
going north and then you you're
only next rest up with the
quarrel I want to also note that
shortly thereafter the
information santa fe ring began
and
despite the name santa fe ring
it was started in macia museum
in mexico senator elkins catcher
and fritz they were all
practicing law in mesia and what
what those americans arrived in
and and concluded was the power
dynamic could not be indone
much in the way that in
albuquerque old town was
abandoned by the americans for
what they called new town which
today we called downtown that
happened all over new mexico but
the difference was is that
southern new mexico to some
degree with sacrificed to
american expansion and are up
until the turn of the century
there are news articles that
talk about the my and thomal of
the doniana secure.
Today we have no my normal we
have known a secure that is
governed locally by our
community it's all taken over by
ebid which is the elephant be
irrigation and they said we
pinky swear we're going to
protect all the culture and.
Aspects of the asset ya well
today that that's not the case
when it was established it was
established by
natives of the public cynical
you'll see that excerpt that's a
direct excerpt from the petition
on page two arm and and and it
was established because of
complaints by folks native folks
in the public seneco
pure pure public members i'm
saying we're getting pushed out
we're we're being stolen from
and they they face displacement
in all passel.
Two centuries almost exactly two
centuries earlier those bureau
people were a part of the group
that were either forcibly or
went willingly during the public
revolt and you can see a small
map there of what was
established following the public
revolt i'm on page four you have
an eighteen fifty four map of
showing what are valley looked
like.
In an in in the mid eighteen
hundred all of those little dots
you see there along the river
are cottonwoods.
And today they have been
displaced by non native picon
orchards that are mostly owned
by about five or six families.
And when and all the discussion
we talk about the natural right
parent environment and how that
how are river has been treated I
mean you can all you I know you
all have seen what our river
looks like compared to our
northern counterparts this is
what it looked like went just
after our grant was established.
The alcohol they have are little
village established last
crucials because done and I got
to fall.
He said he ordered dellow sacket
lieutenant in the union army to
plate out lost crucials and
established in eighteen forty
nine and then in nineteen oh
eight when when an arizona
catholic priest told the
bureau's in last crucials you
can no longer dance in the saint
jennifer's catholic church he
told them you're out you can't
use the church anymore for
ceremony the done and a colony
brand grate grant granted land
to the tortuogus publo and I
know many folks are aware of the
traducas publo petition for for
for recognition under the
federal government and so
there's a rich history here a
rich and indigenous rich mess
the so hispanic new mexican
history here but what is it lost
is that.
What during all of this
transition.
There was a a very conscious
movement to strip land and water
rights from new mexicans in
southern new mexico it wasn't
until eighteen sixty eight the
US court of private land claims
confirmed the thirty five
thousand acres are in the grant
and it included the village of
the yana it included what is
today lost crucist or two gus
it's it was unwanted maceo was a
part of it the sea was
established actually funny
enough when the when the
american boundary was drawn
after the mexican american war
mesia was established by donatos
who didn't want to be americans
so they crossed the river
because the river because
mission was on the side river at
the time and they established
myself because they said we
don't we we we we don't want to
do this and then the river
shifted in the became part of
the united states as part of the
gadst and purchase and so our
relationship with land with
water and with the foot on data
is something I think
not that not only deserves
attention but I think that we
we kind of let go of a cultural
institution in southern new
mexico namely the second
landgrads
we are by.
By the turn of the century
nineteen twenties i'm sort of
the tail end of the all
throughout the santa fe ring and
early nineteen hundreds that the
donate band calling grant which
at the time existed as a
corporate energy and was
dominated mostly by a newly
arrived americans and their goal
was to
piece off all the land get rid
of it they wanted to have their
water rights and and and and
they would buy up water rights
from the grant legally or not
they would disable dissect the
land from the land grant and so
it's funny enough there was a
piece of land near on the
village of done yana and and
nobody owned it
blame said no we don't know in
it and the county said what we
don't know in it and they wanted
to use it for a flood flood
project and when we went and
researched the.
The titling it actually
originally belonged to the
landgrant but because no
election had been held there was
no way to revive or reclaim that
and so today.
Today that the the grant
technically I believe still
exists in article five
as a done yeah a grant there was
a couple of others that are
seattle grant them see a grant
and but this is the first one
and it had in a second I had a
functioning government
now
something that's important for
folks to know is well we talk a
lot about colonias colonials in
general are unincorporated they
rely almost exclusively on the
county to to provide
all services and that i've
talked to to chairman small
about this no matter how much
capitally money that seems to
come to our our county
government they always say well
we don't have the resources to
get it out the door and that's a
conversation we've had with with
our representative but I think
that there's a creative
future for done after for our
region that could that could
restore a cultural element of
southern new mexico
and by reviving this grant our
organization is a five one c
three and we're actively
researching this and.
Much of the land that would have
belonged to the grant is is
destroyed or or overrun with the
kinds of the detriment of the
right parent environment along
the river but
the spirit and the community and
the culture our families who
have been here for for
generations
are still here and I think that
land grants all over new mexico
are looking at what.
Landgrants what's the future of
land rent of a language going to
look like we have a a common
place in our village and many
villages do and the county
repeatedly says they don't want
to have anything to do with that
they they they the county is
hard pressed to retain that the
buildings that
and senator married late senator
mary jane garcia fought to
restore and preserve
but many of the much of this has
been pushed aside and and and
frankly many many southern new
mexicans aren't even taught
about the rich culture of a
second and landgrads in in our
in our education we grow up and
an I think that there's some
intentionality but behind
keeping this history.
Keeping it asleep because it
benefits the power structure
that exists down and the reality
is is that for the the small
farmer of southern new mexico is
is somewhat I think in the past
as our seconds in langrades and
today they're massive corporate
farms overwhelmingly machine
driven
and and it's not the same rosy
color I mean i'll note that on
the board of the donate ben
colony grant was capped in
thomas brannigan who they named
a bill of a library after and he
was a he was he was a part of
that group that was focused on
dolling out land to new arrivals
so they could affect effectively
defunct the language and and
those those that come from
language communities in northern
new mexico we know that history
we know that the power dynamic
that that land grants provide
for hispanic communities in
rural new mexico and and that's
something that we have not been
able to enjoy for a long time
and so
today you know I think my ask is
of the committee is that we
explore that that reconnection
that perhaps the committee look
at
research funds for if if if the
the path that we end up going
down is.
Re establishment as a c l g a
certified local government
energy assected our landgrand
i'm sorry language.
Then we would need to do that
hereditary research that is
required under the law
but also and that would that
would be something that I think
the committee could help with
right allocating funds to do
that research to help us
understand
how how difficult it would be to
establish and re establish
something like this but I see
the donatic band colony grant as
something that could be a
similar to a land trust
something that protects historic
buildings southern new mexico
did not preserve itself like our
northern brothers and sisters
they tore down beautiful adobes
all through downtown last
crucials they have lead above is
all over our county.
Desent a great and disappear and
without cultural institutions
like a landgrad entity to fight
to advocate the really exist
nothing else
because colonials themselves the
village of donate is eight is a
colonial the oldest colonia and
we have no town and structure
that the the the county does not
want us to incorporate and so
this is some this is really
getting back to our roots and
understanding how we could
access
power as a as a very poor
struggling community with so
much rich history.
So miss chairman I want to thank
you for letting me address the
committee today and III know
it's it's a brief presentation I
know that some of your stuff
typically draws over so i'm
happy to to stand for questions
from the commit.
Thank you so much for your
comments and for giving us the
history on your area of southern
new mexico.
Do I have any questions senator
or teasy penalty
thank you mister chairman and
thank you
good to hear from you again
my my first question is you know
the map on the first
page of the material you handed
out to us.
What what year was that what
what you're de- with that map
date from.
I believe that this i'd have to
go back I pulled it from you and
them I believe that's a
that's during the court land US
quarter private claims case it
in eighteen sixty eight.
Eighteen.
Or they're about
wizard was there every attempt
made and mister chairman and and
mister charles reserve a attempt
made to uh to get a pattern for
this grant or anything of the
sort of it was just allowed to
dissolve into local government
down there.
The.
Mr chairman it's my
understanding that the the grant
was patent and I was trying to
find that information prior to
this presentation I do believe
that the donate band colony
graph was patented it was
acknowledged by the court of of
private claims
I didn't find the pattern but I
think the pattern happened
shortly after the recognition by
the the court of private claims
and that.
That.
Listed as a as an entity mister
chairman that's what it was sort
of peace staff and it it sort of
ended up being a non entity
because there was nothing left
to to be a grant of
because the the county ended up
condamning a lot of the land
that belonged to the grant.
In mr chose was there was there
ever like a.
A listing of the families it
belong to how would you
determine who the relatives of
the scrantor of this.
Great question senator yes there
is a list there is a hundred and
sixteen families that
that first petitioned we have
all of their names and there was
an additional thirty two
families that applied to join
the group in eighteen forty
before they departed that is on
the top of each two when there's
a typo in there they had not yet
the party from el paso so we
have the list of all of those
names of the petitioners who
petitioned their government of
mexico at the time.
Okay well that's good than so
are you are you and mr chairman
are you actually actively
pursuing trying to reestablish
the land grant.
Senator by mister chairman and
senator that's a great question
I think that that
and this was too fault and we
can't do this without
our friends in the north who
know this process better we need
to know and we are continuing to
explore through our total
his last name is now escaping me
but he's at the the
land he he does a lot of the
abig is in the room probably
right
always help the light the
community governments land a
attorney commission has been a
part of this process as well
that the legal aid attorney
works morning all avenues
because we also know that if
hereditary if if her if
hereditary lineards
is
too constraining then it may not
be the right fit to re establish
I know there are other line
grants that have remained non
her hereditary
and so for example my lineage
does go back to the original
landgrand I just spoke on the
phone to s- semantical stylists
her great great great
grandfather was the was the
actually the signer of the
petition to mexico
his last name was gostolors as
well and they live in the same
house they've been in the same
house since the petition since
they would sit that was built so
I don't imagine that it would be
impossible to establish
hereditary claim however
i'm concerned about the
constraint and without support
from this committee I I don't
want to step on folks toes but I
also want to figure out that
this law this is to me is sort
of like a lost cultural element
for our community then and it
could build power across the
state
by having AAA an established
language and so the new mexico
again and so I think that we are
exploring both is that
hereditary establishment and
none of those are establishment.
Just won't finally come into
the
mention you made of the torture
as public and having an appriced
from arizona who tried to
prevent them or prohibit them
from performing their ceremony
at the church and that still
goes on we just said the the
situation in in miscale were the
priest and I think he was from
arizona but he was from some
other local
took down the incredible icon
behind the altar of the never
how jesus and
refused to allow the uh
the petchy besco are a petchy
community to to perform their
ceremonies that the church took
in it uh strong appeal and
support for them widespread
support from them
that was just earlier this year
to to read to head that I can't
restore it and and
for the bishop to back off from
supporting that price actually
got him transferred out so the
miscollectors had to rise open
the man there traditional
heritage be recognized but thank
you thank you is real for this
is good to hear from you
that mister charit
representative of garcia
thank you as to my chairman and
thank you is right for your
presentation
you know you mention a couple of
things and I think for the
formal was the issue of research
and and how may be this
committee you can help you know
maybe fun the initiative my
suggestion to you
is to utilize existing
kind of resources
that can be start the process
and.
We have this committee funded in
established the language
thirties program at unm
and we have an excellent
individual at that language
thirties program by name and
doctor hockey back
I would suggest to you to draft
the proposal
to a call back on the in terms
of the research that you are
seeking and and then let him
through the resources that we
have a union to the language
program then exhaust everything
that they have at their disposal
and present that to you and see
what is lacking in terms of what
you're striving for in terms of
information knowledge
documentation etc and then maybe
we can go a step beyond you know
so that would be my suggestion
of backer has helped many line
recommunities do these
preliminary kind of historical
studies under a grand
especially of grants that are
reorganizing for the first time
after being
dormant
in the impetus for that was a
two thousand and four
legislation where we create a
damn language as a units of
government and so that's one
once of just a night and I can
see where the research would be
held for to you because
you mention that the unyour
language was confirmed in
eighteen sixty eight by the us
quarter of private land claims
the thing is that the court of
private nine claims income to
existence to ray eighteen
nineties early nineteen hundreds
so your grant was confirmed by
that the congress and so if
there's a pan it is with that
congressional act and not with
the us quarter private languag.
But I could see you know how
your kind of of striving to kind
of ground your your data and
the other thing is right is I
really want to complement you
in a europe I and you're down
there and and you know the
farthest language that we have
it is in the hoya which is you
know in that bosco patch area
of which the bosco budget was
common former comprehensive the
whole young and grant you're not
and that's a world renounder
game refuge
but so I really applied to
efforts and kind of being their
own ranger down there cause we
need long rangers down there
and so I really you know i'm
personally I really kind of want
to you know get to know you
better in and in in in kind of
you know help you I mean as you
know that i'm the founder of
this committee and we've been at
this for twenty one years in
also there's a lot of
institutional knowledge that
members of this communication of
four july you know at a personal
level
the other thing that's of
interestingly is the term peter
what is the english term for
peter.
The.
Representative thank you for
your comments in and i'm to my
knowledge there's not a an
english translation
was the was a large plea below
outside of sakoro
then and i've only ever heard
the bureau people referred that
way I am a descendant of pure
ancestory and today there's a
group that's commonly referred
to his pure monzo and tea well
which are three groups that had
sort of joined together post
public revolt in the end pass
the area and then made last
crucial's valley their home
subsequent to that
no.
Oh no well thank you for that
not need other reason I ask is
because i'm
in central and northern new
mexico we have the surname
amongst the chicago plugging we
have this her name panel
and panel is spanish for pony
you know so I thought maybe
there was a similar correlation
with the term peter but you're
right there was a an abandoned
public I I guess right around
the time the star orders came in
in the inner late fifteen
hundreds
another thing of interest is
where in relationship mister
chair is is is the total as
public in in relationship to the
village of gonyana
mister chair and represent.
The donative village if you're
driving south on my twenty five
is it it's sort of the access
you recharge you pass the border
checkpoint radium springs done
yeah is the next steps that exit
nine and then you get into the
city limits of lost cruces then
you get out of the city limits
of lost cruises or rather near
that and it's right next to the
town of mesia so it's south of
mesia.
You know is that I ended up the
interesting thing about or took
us
that are two indians
is that
there are a group of anisoro
indians that recited in the toma
language
in valencia county and actually
the president about the midland
rent was with us this morning
here at the committee hearing
and at some point
in in and there's oral history
that the our ancestors have
brought down to the modern
generation in terms of that
settlement then it was along the
real granded between the man and
the village plaza and the real
grandday and for some reason
the way that the oral history
reads is at some time during the
the eighteen thirties through
parcel eighteen forties there
was a arm
the torture
did a migration
to weather at right now
they left their settlement in
domin and they moved to weather
out right now and so
that's an interesting peter
piece of history that you
address in terms of that article
as relationship to the donate
but that and
you know that's that's all I had
a mister chair and but I do want
encourage is I am to you know
put fourth of proposal
submit it to
her call back on with the
language thirties program and
seeing that you've have the
contact information for a
tourist letter you know that
that would probably be the more
likely canada to kind of
share the contact information of
the doctor have called backer.
In kind of start you on that
path of research that you're
really
wanting to engage in but that
would be a first step in in the
when drakobackers exhausted have
processed based on the resources
that he has as a disposal and if
there's other kind of much
needed information that you need
the maybe this committee can be
a of help with then I think
maybe that's what that weaken
may be entertained that and and
look at that possibility
you say that you have mister
chair you have like a non profit
and.
Mister chair representative
that's correct we have a five
one c three and and I i'll also
plug where we're gratefully
funded by the outdoor equity
fund grant and the trails plus
grant that the legislature
enacted and we love that because
it helps us do a lot of this
work outdoors exploring the the
original hand began secure in
our village is still there
government albeit governed by
somebody else and but yeah we're
a non profit right now it's
called dava the donia and a
village association and as a
part of that we're trying to
empower our community of messy
so it's an easier weblow people
detribalized people and and
really to understand our history
and where we're going and what
what this looks like and and as
an aside I I invite
perhaps the whole committee but
if we can't bring a committee
meeting all the way down here if
you're down here on a different
committee call me and i'll give
you a little tour and you can
see it with your own eyes it is
a site to be hold the national
park service has said our
section of the community is is
one of the most intact in the
united states because all the
buildings are still there from
the early eighteen hundreds and
sell yes we are a non profit and
we do a lot of the work in our
community through this this
legislature is already funding.
Not going to restaurant.
That that was that
representative thank you.
And and thank you mister chair
that's all I had
thank you any further questions
and threats I think what we need
to start looking at if and an
appropriation to assist with
their so I think you should
circle back with an email and
let me know how the meeting goes
with a cover but I also want to
thank you for the information
and gave us
didn't know much about data when
it comes to landgrounds we just
assume it's all northern new
mexico and so thank you for your
comments and for the history
less than and on a side note i'm
happy to see every time I will
last crucials and one of your
ads for your law firm it makes
me very proud to see native new
mexican doing so well in
southern new mexico.
Jeremy and members committee I
look forward to seeing you all
again and I appreciate your time
and support will be will be
moving this ball ahead and and
include you and on all of those
discussions.
The.
One take an opportunity to see
why daba was on this agenda
while at the las vegas grant is
on the last agenda in jason a
cruise dealer can you know that
was on the first agenda
the the respect from of
communities out there that
either had been functioning
langrounds suncrues delakana
that had been a political
subdivision language and then it
kind of disbanded or just eh it
couldn't get enough people to
run for a volunteer board with
no resources about fifteen years
before the statute was changed
to list the various languages so
they'd been defunked for about
fifteen years when you put when
you change the political
subdivision statute
but there is a spectrum they
have an active steering
committee trying to get back to
the level that they were before
and I hadn't realized this when
and are torrowing a couple of
suggested that we put these
various other groups on the
agendas but it's similar to win
this committee for started and
it was just learning what was
the what were the range of
communities out there that had
been
active
community landgrounds.
In
that's what why there's a
spectrum this year it doesn't it
work those presentations weren't
recommendations by your staff or
by the language council staff of
oh these they are ready to move
into article one and people that
could subdivisions it's more of
putting them on your radar
screen and saying okay here they
are you can evaluate the level
of
whether they're ready yet to
come in and whether they should
be included and I I just wanted
note that because there was a
little confusion partly it was
confusion of my part cause I
started working on this
committee after the committee
had done its preliminary work
and you were mostly only dealing
with already existing a
established organizations
similar to the seventeen year
day last wednesday they
increased
let some of these heart
just getting back to looking at
their history
thank you for the current work
comments work and now we had
onto the last or second the last
item on the agenda which is the
general update and community
landgrants by our total are
challenged at a good friend of
this interrupt committee
did you finish last
almost
okay
welcome
to the red
correct perfect thank you mr
chairman members of the
committee a many mistake through
actually the
amv director of the land get
council as well as the claim
getting which said institute you
and m which i'll talk a little
bit about in the presentation.
I do appreciate this opportunity
this afternoon to present before
he was always a pleasure to come
before this committee and the
majority of our work that we do
revolve surround policies that
this body passes as well as this
general support to landgrands
and so
wanted to just also take the
time mr chairman to think and
senator or dc penal for all of
his years of dedication to the
language communities
he has been definitely a
champion of our cars are in for
all the years that he has served
on this committee and even when
he hasn't been on the committee
he's been a great champion for
us so we are going to miss him
greatly in fact we wouldn't even
be at unm if it wouldn't be for
us and her tc penalty sort of
making the suggestions and he
wanted you guys try you and then
when the council was sort of
floating around trying to find
it it's pleased to land so we do
appreciate saturday she'd been
all of your hard work over the
years and we're gonna we're
gonna treatly miss you
so mister chairman hopefully you
are received copy of the
presentation I I like I chose
this image because I thought it
was very fitting for a couple of
reasons
one kind of represents sort of
the new growth that we have for
landground communities in recent
years because of the sort of
infusion of what you could call
I guess like fertile hisa for a
communities that the that has
been provided by the hard work
of this committee and we're able
to sort of grow new life out of
these deep rooted stumps that
were sort of ready clinking to
life as a result of sort of the
past and justices that are
communities have felt and then
also because it's a stump I
decided I was going to just
double sited prince I apologies
for save some people receive a
tree still maybe a little bit
part of along
no no no I had found it it was
actually one of the little
suggestions on the for the power
point I think that's perfect
so
just to start off mister
chairman and just a sort of set
up.
Some a little bit of additional
end of the previous presentation
we have been working with mister
chavis over
past year or so i'm kind of
having these discussions very
interested in you know working
with that community and
determining how they can sort of
maybe receive some support as a
landgrant that'll help sort of
enrich their community and
provide opportunities for them I
will note that they were a
landgrant that was patented they
did actually even have a board
of trustees I found a case from
nineteen fifty six for the board
of trustees was being involved
in a in a adverse possession
lawsuit and it was named in a
suit that was actually went up
through the appeals process so
i'm at some point the board
dissolved and and
but they did actually were
organized under that statute and
so in talking with mr chavis we
had discussed a couple of
options one would be to sort of
reorganize a language under the
existing statute but because
it's a article five
with it deals with all the doing
your unallen grants and those
are not the local subdivisions
of the state so that would sort
of be a quick track on interest
or organizing that we are then
seeking status potential status
under forty nine one i'm sort of
come in with a most of the other
landgrans and the other one
would just be to sort of
reorganize and and request that
under article one but we will
continue to sort of work in and
provide support to inform this
committee down the road
so mister chair members of the
community the first thing I
wanted to report is something
that we've been working for
several years now at the end of
received mexico and that is the
establishment of the language
said institute and so i'm glad
to report that this is now
official couple of months back
we were able to actually sort of
make the the language and
institute official category
three center within the office
of the vice president of
research and what this means is
a category three center on these
essentially a center that
functions outside of a typical
department of college and it has
the ability to work cross campus
with regard to research as well
as public service.
And so we thought that this
would be the most appropriate
weirder sort of house on what we
do at UNM as I mention the
council is that you know
university new mexico through an
intergovernmental service
agreement we are misriving
attached to the f a and every
year we do an interim
governmental service agreement
between the council dfe and unam
to provide the staff and support
for the council's mission and
then the landgrad studies
program and which was funded by
this body or the the the
legislature in two thousand and
eight
it or was a program that was
established to help feeds a
couple of things one feed
students into the last call
programs as well as do research
and support for landgrands and
that program is still alive
university of mexico but hadn't
had a home for several years
when it was initially created it
was created under the southwest
hispanic research institute and
then when directorships changed
to kind of just was out there on
its own sort of floating and we
had the council that originally
came on to the university under
the
I pair which was the institute
for public
education and research I think
is what it stood for our policy
education and research and on
that entity that category three
center went away so for several
years we've sort of been on
campus but we've been sort of
not belonging in any specific
space and and we've been working
towards remedy that and we we've
done that is by creating this
language and institute at unit
at the university of new mexico
which is as mentioned a category
through center and we are very
pleased that this is going to
allow us and I only continue to
do the work that we've been
doing but also grow into some
new areas and one of those areas
that we hope to grow in is to
provide more legal services to
language communities and
possibly other communities.
I'm maybe as as a completely
separate program
I will make a sort of correction
of the record I have not
actually graduated from last
school yet i'm in my final
semester I will be graduated in
december and then i'll be
sitting for the bar in february
hopefully i'll pass and if if
that happens then
one of the the goals is to be
able to sort of do this work I
have already been sort of we've
been having discussions with the
union law school we have a very
close relationship with the
as you as you heard this morning
with not only the community
governments attorney program but
also with the clinical our
program and providing support to
landrids and so because that
program in itself has challenges
in terms of not only making sure
that the students are sort of up
to speed
in sort of ready to sort of
represent clients in that
atmosphere it also
has a turnover it is by design
of the faculty that oversee the
clinic so the.
The clinic faculty rotate in
announce there's three
professors at sort of rotate in
and out every semester and so
that can provide for sometimes a
little bit of
discontinuity for some of the
clients in a lot of our cases
that we bring to them whether
they be language cases or a
secure cases are often times or
lengthy and especially for get
into litigation and so they'll
cross multiple semesters in fact
we had one keys that just I
think recently closed out and it
was one of the original cases
that that clinic took on so
you've had actually probably I
think the clinic is now seven
years old so you've had about
fourteen semesters of students
who have passed through and that
in in in our opinion that's an
excellent thing because you now
have all these different
students would be an exposed to
langround in a sicky issues and
will hope we have a a boring
bench that'll be more cognizable
these issues with the movement
of the future right and that was
part of the sort of the grand
design of a program
but it does have its challenges
and so while one thing we have
discussed is utilizing the
category to recent or two maybe
create that sort of other arm
they can serve as some of that
continuity and can work in
partnership with the clinic on
super rising some of these
students and continuing some of
this work i'm in expanding the
programs that we offer in terms
of that a legal support to
language where excited about
those opportunities
in terms of the council itself
and we continue to provide
direct support to language
mercedes throughout new mexico
and this includes general
government support is always and
which may mean bailer updates
helping them run their elections
as well as just general advice
on any given day of the week
we've received a call from one
to maybe three landgrants where
they have either a burning issue
or an urgent question where
they're trying to sort of
resolve something and we do our
best to try to work through
these processes with them
sometimes it can be a challenge
it has really been a guide sent
for I think for for that only
the council but also the
language communities that the
treaty want to be the all good
division is now.
Sort of functioning at a higher
level and we're able to sort of
really work with that division
as i'm the service cancel to the
council and so we're able to
will you get to the router some
the issues that typically we are
as the council are staff aren't
able to directly sort of a dress
on a road and so that's been
that's been you know very
helpful we continue to to work
with as well a department of
financial administration but you
know finance bureau and they
oversee all of the budget
reporting in requirements for
linguines and so
you know with greater
architect that who's on our
staff she provides its direct
support to language with making
sure their complaint with the
budgets really making sure that
they're sort of meeting the
requirements and building their
capacity we've launched
a getting land mini length
grants not all of them but we
have about fifteen to sixteen
language that we have purchased
quick books for and we've been
working at integrating them into
that system so they can update
the way they report that just
their budgets but also having
the prepared and ready to get
their on it's done in timely and
and be able to keep track of
their finances so that's
something that we've been
implementing and it's been going
quite successfully every time
it's funny cause we we get some
initially we had some resistance
for language who were kind of
think afraid of sort of doing it
and then as they've sort of
started to use it like wow this
is which easier this is so much
better for us in terms of
reporting instead of keeping a
spreadsheet and so we know that
that's definitely building
capacity for those communities
we also continue to support them
on the audit side and he sabaca
and staff on she continues to
work with landgrads to help them
from the beginning of the
process to procure the contract
to get in those executed and
then help in sort of
troubleshoot when when we when
they've engaged certified public
account is doing their work and
they may have some challenges we
try to step in around to the
extent that we can if we have
some of the records because
we're working with them on their
budgets or another things were
able to sort of help
walk them through that process
and it's been a learning
corporate language but I think
it has.
It's definitely improving their
ability i'm not just the
capacity but they're sort of
understanding on how to manage
funds and sort of operate up as
apart from just being volunteers
right we do have several
languages that have been
engaging in hiring staff
professional staff to do some of
this work and so it's been kind
of good and bad in terms of like
the the way it's worked out what
it's it's a process that's
that's continuing to wall then
we see that a sort of really
been the work of the future you
know infrastructure capable
improvement planning not just
the plans themselves but also
the implementation of those
through capitali many of you see
us there during the legislative
times get looking chasing down
signatures on behalf of the
language and then helping them
actually get that money expended
all the way from the sort of the
procurement as well as just the
steps required at the local
government division in terms of
the notices of obligation the
request for payments and if it's
a dispersement that's necessary
we were candid hand with them to
try to make sure they're doing
that one of the great things
that we sort of fell a pine or
discovered this year
was a organization known as the
cooperative education services
ces in that's an actual an
entity that operates under the
state statutes that provides are
there does request for proposals
for a variety of different
things whether they be
procurement of equipment or
services in the initially
started out as an interview that
provided that just for schools
this morning districts that
couldn't do the procurement
themselves they would actually
go through that process and then
since there are sort of
beginning they've expanded to
allow other local small local
governments to join their
cooperative out and and utilize
their services and so it's been
a a real sort of game changer
for us because language can sort
of go to them they have a blue
book of actual services that
they provide or not services but
request proposals that they've
already approved.
And language can just piggy back
on those they can become an cess
ensures that they get the same
rates
whether it would be for services
or if it's the actual goods that
they're purchasing and because
the procurements already been
done it sort of meets all of the
standards keeps the line grants
sort of making sure that they're
not doing any inever and
violations of the procurement
code and all of it comes at a
small fee the way that ces
operates as the they charge a
small fee to the vendored for
utilizing their contracts so
there isn't even a direct
payment from the entities
themselves you know obviously
it's i'm sure it's wrapped up
somehow in the prace that speed
but it's only I think around a
two percent I might be been less
than that
that the vendor pays directly to
ces for utilizing those
contracts and so that's actually
going to be really a game change
especially if we're talking
about treating some additional
infrastructure of funding moneys
that line grants can sort of go
for i'm just or help make sure
that they can get that money
spent in our door appropriately
and we do continue the legal
services I talked to audio a lot
about what we do with the clinic
but in addition to that we do
also provide extra and ship
opportunities for some of the
law students to that are in law
school to actually do an extra
ship and then we place them with
either new mexico
legal aid we've been in
discussions with the department
and justice are placing them
there as well
and then if we have this center
we can probably do some work
directly with them
and then we also as you all know
we work directly with the
mexican legal aid through a
contract to provide services for
length grants and so i'm
constantly when we get issues
that come about and he we're
getting the stuff we got served
with this last who i'm only
trying to figure out he had a we
how do we tried this and where
do we send him to get him sort
of moving before before they
have to go just find sort of a
private attorney to to do some
of the work and so and that
happens as well and we that we
can't do it also there are i'm
now that randoms you have some
funds one of the things that
most of them have done is struck
putting a some money in their
budget for legal services.
Are in the event that they do
in counter lawsuit
we continue to provide serving
services for landgrands you know
one of the challenges has been
that there's not enough
surveyors in the state in
general but we do have
we've had a a service the
contract with um the service
mister chris chavis I with your
toyota service for several years
and he's only quite good because
he he used to work for the four
service he understands sort of
the history understands how to
sort of interpret deeds
they'll especially are old
spanish deeds in sort of you
know kind of understanding that
when you are doing some of the
survey work that you have to
really get understanding of all
the adjoining properties and and
the challenges that that can
have and so we've been here very
pleased with that work and it
again it's not enough well our
contracts are never enough that
to cover all the work we have we
do try to chip away at it
natural resources management's a
huge thing and we've been
working with a the department
adjusters they just we just did
a training with them on their
working real effectively I think
i'm trying to identify more
enforcement for some of that
protection as well as trying to
help line grants access funding
for projects and then youth
development you know a couple of
years ago we received some
funding from some junior money
from from the legislative wider
from any of you are we were able
to utilize that to do some
projects and the councils
continue to invest in those so
we do work with a couple of
different organizations a one is
in really back county we work
with some water the easter
reversal on a conservation
district many of you may know
marcus folders and they do a
tremendous job of having a yc
programs with a train sort of
kids to you shouldn't see kids
because some of them are
actually some of them are
college students when they train
them to you relies our gis and
and provide mapping and other
services and we've been part of
with them and getting some
actual concrete reports and
projects out of them for line
grants that surround those
communities and we've also
worked with a program called
ancestral la.
And which is out of er a larger
sort of national outfit when
they provide work trues yc crews
are initially they were a
specifically geared towards
tribal communities and and need
of travel cruise and digital
cruise and they've added a
length rent crew on the even
hired an individual out of the
east mountains out of the
community of tortion who sort of
heads up trying to find projects
are in the language communities
and so we've funded a couple of
projects and with them for
example last year we funded a
project in today on with a bunch
of youth from on those mountain
communities are to think out as
well as with some treble youth
to think out on their creek and
so to clean that up and improve
some of the flow that goes
through there so we've done uh
we continue to partner those
those um you know
we've funded that either
directly we've also partnered
with them on applying for funds
we had received some outdirect
moneys a couple years ago to do
some projects on all the
eastbound language and so we do
try to do as much as we can to
sort of be in in as many
communities as possible
last year we also worked with
the ex youth are up in touch in
the common share sort of
traditions that they have been
some of those dancers and we did
a semester wrong youth project
with them.
So
that's been exciting and
obviously there's some
other work that we do related
specifically to policy and so
this we continue to work on
federal traditional use
legislation the those bills are
sort of currently just waiting
to move forward it's been sort
of a slow ago at this session
but uh we are looking forward to
either moving of this session
depending on what happens at the
end potentially the writer we
did get and this legislation
passed the congress the house
two congress as a go but didn't
pass the senate and then last
congress it passed the senate on
a writer but it didn't get past
the house so we've made out at
two chambers just not in the
same congress
where we're hoping that will
keep that moving out we've also
been working with commission
delegation on similar terribly
turns for some of the small
their use of the small tracks
act and we do have several
languages that have summaries
historic cemeteries that are on
our federal lands in if they're
in foreservice there was an
amendment to the small tracks
act a couple years ago and
allowed for the return of
cemeteries so we've been in
discussions with the delegation
on sort of identifying and
moving some of those projects
forward also expanding feel what
access on the national forest
public lands and state trush
lands and we continue to work
with the forest service on
expansion of the mirror though
more projects where they
actually work with local
communities to get local field
into
projects of that are sort of
managed and completed and
implemented by the local
communities and so they've been
had a real successful go at it
in touch county we do have a
contract last year with
individual who sort of overseen
someone's programs and mister
jared logan are to work with
some of the languages in reariba
county and then they the for
services also now looking to see
how can they expand it into that
region to the western zone in
really burn and also the the
santa fe national forces looking
on how to sort of expand ended
up that program as well we've
also had some field wood
projects on.
With bomb
as well as state trust lands are
we have two projects one in the
vehicle whether area as well
with the sunny government bother
language as well as one in the
east mountains that includes a
participation from the can you
on the convention that should be
the twenty one day he get
and so we look to excited about
continuing the work on now in
the fall again.
We've been also working on
trained at help in any way we
came with the female relief
efforts when it comes to actual
compensating some of the
landgrants we've been a
providing input to female over
the course of the past a couple
of years to try to keep that
moving and now the the treaty
will be all good vision has also
been able to store to step in
and and help along with that
process
property tax exemptions I know
that the folks from us worth
this mention to that this
morning we do have
length grants we work closely
with the department attacks and
revenue to a sort of launch
landgrants requesting are these
exemptions we have had several
endrons in some some of the
counties that have received the
exemption so torrents county did
it
telstra did some of their those
line grants that applied
received um I believe the real
reba county also arm has
provided those exemptions so the
jury not completely decided in
terms of where that goes
but we are planning a meeting on
october the twenty ninth with
the association of a assessors
where the council will be making
a presentation sort of about
this effort and sort of some of
the meats and bones as to why
that exemption is something that
can put they can support.
Are we being continued to work
with the new mexican finance
authority on funding for land
acquisitions as you all remember
we had a bill to try to create a
fund to do that and they say can
we do this through the mexican
finance authority they agreed to
sort of take on a paylet project
we have first one which was the
monzano langrad for the purchase
of seven hundred and sixty three
acres that was approved for
funding just about a month ago
so we got approval by the numbey
board and now
we're just kind of working on
towards the closing and there's
going to be some some technical
stuff we're gonna have to price
and a legal support with them on
just to get that across the
finished line but we did make it
pass the enemy fee finance board
for approval on that project and
that's going to be I think
around five hundred and
something else i've had about
five hundred and five hundred
and thirty thousand
then I was made successful with
some of the capital that they
received are from some of you on
the other you know we've been
continuing conversations with
risk management they have a new
division director the dot was
able to put together a meeting
with us just last week where we
were able to sort of talk
through again whether some of
the needs were some of the
coverage issues are that
language have and we're looking
forward to them sort of giving a
more specifics on what they can
do and and whether they're sort
of potential risks we may need
to get covered on the private
market.
And mentioned already the sort
of legal services are although
we did also
the department of justice had a
convenient of several entities
to come to start talking about
this which I that was very
successful and were happy that I
were part of that conversation
on how we can make sure that
we're continuing to provide i'm
the necessary services for some
of these understand communities
historic understood communities
in the language that is program
we've been and earlier that was
talk about curriculum
development and that has been
something that has been a
occurring for the past several
years this body has been funding
new mexico highlands are the
second land grant education
project and so they've been
having workshops throughout the
state we've been partnering with
them on those workshops on that
have actually been developing
curriculum so they actually have
on their website highlands I
can't remember the I always
forget the name of the specific
department it's for the like
center for the steady of the
first populations I think
they actually are starting to
upload some of those curriculums
so that educators can actually
use those and pull them down in
in the way they've been doing it
is getting teachers from some of
these local communities I want
to show credit development as
well as a community members that
sort of have some of the the the
knowledge and putting them in
these rooms over the course of a
weekend and sort of just working
on getting a little bit of
background and then developing
curriculum so we are seeing that
having some some good
outcomes of that oral history
interviews we continue to do
those around or language
communities any time someone's
interested and he says able to
go out she has actually a
background in media so she goes
out we have some really makes
equipment and she's able to go
help I help them do oral history
interviews with some other
seniors or elders in the
community that we want to make
sure we preserve their stories
and then just brief general
research and support to language
and then also a acquisition of
language related resources over
the past several years we've
been purchasing.
A lot of machine break mr you
break was a length rent scholar
from for many many years he had
the center for landgrade studies
out of
pita
and he's in his nineties now so
we want to make sure that we're
able to preserve a lot of the
things he said and so he's been
able to provide us with
digitalized copies of a lot of
his articles research were right
now in discussions with him
online some of the
transcriptions that he's done to
some of the quarter predashland
claims in other land records and
so that this is just all
resources that were compiling
that we can sort of be able to
make available and then also the
digitization of michael film
records we've been doing that
for several years we had
acquired a micro from copies of
all of the spanish and mexican
archives
we've been slowly digitizing
those over the years so that
they're not on microphone but
actually on a digital copy that
we can sort of put on a platform
and and folks can access.
When we talk about landgrandma
said is themselves we have a ton
of initiatives that have sort of
really we're starting to see a
lot more growth for language
communities given that they now
have access to the language that
assistance find one of the
meaning things are that language
have focused in one has been the
acquisition of a reacquisition I
should say of some of the former
common lands in order to make
sure that they can continue to
protect those natural
water and watershed resources as
well as provide opportunities
for local community members to
be able to access the resources
on those on those lands and so
and not only just for natural
resources but also for
even really thinking of the
future we talk this morning a
lot about affordable housing
projects and affordable housing
developments and how does that
work for it for language
communities mister mister
chairman representative where
she is you know he was spot on
when he said that she released
or to have been the innovators
of of doing that type of work
there already moving on to their
third sort of affordable housing
development and I think
it's a really great to see some
of their working and the way
that they really view things I
was fortunate a couple of weeks
back we had a presentation with
some folks from
out of new mexico a fellowship
the nationwide fellowship and
they were interested in coming
up on about language and we one
of the places we took him out to
a steering
and were able to sort of talk
with them sort of about some of
the work that they're doing and
it's really amazing to see one
sort of their outlook when she
really land grant talks about
why they do affordable housing
projects it's because they want
to ensure that their youth can
return to their home land and
they really look at this is that
homeland and how do we assure
ensure that our kids can go out
and get an education go out
maybe it's the military pursue
trade whatever they do but have
a place to come back when they
finished that's affordable for
them and so there already on
their third housing development
they've had a couple of
challenges one of the challenges
you know.
Landgrands have zone authority
and and in the number talk about
some of the policy
recommendations that we have but
you know they do have only an
authority so they can zone these
one thing that they don't have
or that were now there's
starting to be a question is
whether or not the can subdivide
those lands and they don't
subdivide him and sell them they
just subdivide him for leasing
purposes and now they're sort of
bumping up against some of the
county subdivision orders and
trying to count in uh
stolen some of those projects
right so that's one definitely
something we want to look at the
other thing which was talked
about this morning was is the
renewable energy i'm one of the
the biggest costs she really now
they're trying to do their third
development and I think I was
talking with chairman sanchez
the other eight and I think in
order for them to just get the
power
to the location but not actually
to the individual homes I want
to see it was like two hundred
and eighty thousand dollars for
p and m to move that power
across the road and so to do
that and so I mean you sort of
think yeah can we can we utilize
some of these opportunities to
just do renewable energy in the
provide their own power for
these developments and not
actually have to draw on on the
existing ones who were
definitely interested in looking
at these opportunities that were
mentioned this morning and
figured out how we can integrate
these into some of these
language affordable housing
projects
community and economic
development than that sheep in
many different ways for
landgrands as you are familiar
with the tomal language has been
i'm not only at the interested
in in some acquisitions for
affordable housing they've also
been really trying to preserve
some of their agricultural lands
and allow for up and come in a
youth in the community to
continue some of those farming
traditions as well as historic
preservation and some of their
buildings and their museums and
for losing who have been out
there you've seen what I
wonderful job they've done of
preserving their historic plaza
as well as doing some other
projects and we have other
bankrunts like some regardless
of other who were sort of
focusing that same direction.
We have some language that have
been working on really
bolstering their zoning codes
are the convert language is sort
of the the one who's the four
runner on that in that regard
and they've actually developed a
very robust zoning code and the
three two sort of start
implementing which is really
again sort of next level stuff
for some of our bang rants and
then as I mentioned earlier
helping language that are
sleeping political subdivision
status.
So based on all of these sort of
initiatives that are taking
place in the work we're doing as
well as the individual language
we do have some policy
recommendations for this
committee that have been
endorsed by the council as well
as the landgrant recent
consequence regularly meet with
that sort of advocacy group we
are tender quarterly meetings
and just to make sure we're
still informed in terms of what
are interested in doing and the
sort of top priority is the
language that assistance fund
the the fund has been phenomenal
for landgrants but we recognize
that there are some tweaks that
need to be made based on the way
that we've seen the fund work
so one thing that's necessary
that's needed is raising the cap
on the language it assistance
fund for distribution levels you
know we initially that cap was
set in accordance with the
tiered system for the audits um
and we find that it's doesn't
really make sense it's actually
kind of the way it's currently
structured with the cap is it
kind of penalizes language and I
give you an example we've had
some landgrands that have
utilised the funding from the
fund to try to then go get
grants and other things and
leverage that money and when
they get grants if it's not a
federal grant if it's a state
grant it counts against them and
so we've had a couple of
incident made let's see the
total revenue for that you was
like fifty one thousand and
majority that's like dedicated
funds for a specific project
like let's see AAA youth project
that they're doing well
that fifty let's say they have
fifty one thousand will that
extra thousand dollars in a
distribution here could cost
them twenty five thousand
dollars of the distribution
right so it's kind of like it's
almost a disincentive for
attempt to like try to do things
if it's going to cut their
funding that they can receive
because that's a that's a big
trade off a thousand for for
twenty five thousand
so one of things who would like
to do is raise the cap on and
just that the first second level
i'm so just really adjusted so
that it's a hundred thousand
dollars
for a sort of cap level of the
other thing is removing the
reversion class from the
assistance find.
When we had envisioned the fond
and were sort of creating the
intention was that the fund
would be a big part of money and
then everybody would get certain
levels and then those
distribution levels if you got a
seventy five percent
distribution that extra twenty
five percent would get
redistributed between the
language that had less but
because of the ford millers and
just trying to work that it's
hard to sort of catch that sort
of moving train so what it is
happening is it just reverts and
so those funds
you know last year I think we
had about a hundred thousand
cause we had like four language
that i'll had seventy five
percent distribution so I was
about a hundred thousand a
glanger they got seventy five
that extra twenty five just sat
there and then just get swept at
the end of the year
one way to address that would be
to remove that and then allow
for that money to just get
redistributed in the subsequent
year if it doesn't revert then
it's not gonna be a lot but like
this year I think they'll public
around sixty thousand and
that'll just give every language
maybe in an extra
four thousand dollars or that
they'll get in the next year's
distribution.
And then you know those are sort
of some direct stuff and I have
some some draft language that
you all can sort of look at and
in the future needs would be
providing additional funding
streams to make sure adequate
distribution levels the reason I
say future is because we know
that we have twenty seven
landgrads that are potentially
eligible for the fund
if every land grant at a minimum
how to run a hundred thousand
which we kind of have seen what
the language are doing and sort
of spending that makes sense in
terms of them continuing to sort
of grow and support their
programs and their communities
that would be like two point
seven million
this year the fund that the
total amount in the fund was
one point or where made trying
to blame
you one quick second and i'll
look at it but the the money
available
it was a little over that year
like one so last year the first
year was two million cause you
all funded it then the
subsequent year is like one
point five and this year were
not quite at two we're just
we're still a little bit shy
and that's has turned out to be
decent distributions for a
couple of reasons is that it's
not looking at all and grants
are that are potentially
eligible haven't all meet the
cut right and so we continue to
work out the kings on how we get
language and compliance and how
we pull them in and we will see
that number continued to grow
but you know right now this year
we only have seventeen language
that are eligible to see with
last year we had seventeen
language different language we
recognize out there some
challenges that some of them
when they get the money in terms
of like making sure that they
get their audits and all that
done on time in the the
interverting fall off the
recognize what that means for
them falling off and then they
work really hard to sort of get
back into complain and so you
know the first year we had but
three languages that fell off
those have all come back in the
fold but there's three languages
from last year that they got it
the first time in the like all
we weren't able to sort of
comply and so we're working
those kings out so we do know
that it will need to figure out
how we continue to fund.
Draw the fund into the future
but that's not a current issue
that we need to address this
legislative session
so in terms of the first sort of
request there is the third of
the draft language based on the
portion of the statute forty
nine one eleven six d one and we
would just need some of those
sminer tweaks as you can see
just to change the cap amounts
so that the line that's going to
be penalised and then forty nine
eleven
six e is where we would
need some language change to
remove the reversion and allow
for that money to just be risked
redistributed in the subsequent
year so I know it's always
helpful we provide draft
language to the
electricity after mark I know
he's a very busy man so just
making sure we will get on that
on top of that
and it's and always gets tweaked
because I wouldn't where I you
know it's not perfect but it is
AAA good starting place
the next area is the community
governance attorney program you
heard this morning I think a lot
of woods is needed to sort of
fix that program the council is
on board with those potential
fixes
in
specifically the expanding on
who was eligible and so we did
provide some some draft language
we would like to see not only
the department of justice but
other nonprofit agencies and
even potentially government
entities like the council
may be the assector commission
to be able to he at the point we
have this thing up and running
in their sport attorneys that
are out there working it mean it
may make sense for us to be able
to help sort of some of the work
we do by pulling some of those
folks in as well as other non
profits and so the language were
suggesting we think it's pretty
bright and then also just
removing that fifty percent
state match requirement and I
understand sort of the intention
of of why it was there but in my
mind it doesn't make policy
sense if we do have
eligible entities like the dot
that can employ that are already
doing work and that have it as
part of their budget for us to
sort of restrict.
Their ability to to sort of do
this arm because of that the one
thing I will say
the community government's
attorney commission you know
it's been sort of trying to get
get off the ground sort of up
and run in I don't think they've
been as successful at having the
same kind of commission meetings
that we that were used to with
the council where with the
council really was in sort of
policy and adopts a sort of move
forward and so I think we're
where we're hopeful that now
that they've got some new
appointments that they can sort
of get get into that real
but I will see that the one of
the recommendations this morning
which was to have the approvals
of the contract to be by you and
am as opposed to the commission
I would actually caution against
that I think why I think it's
important that the commission
approved those at least even
it's just approved the contracts
and maybe it's unem that
executes them
is that the the really the when
the commission was created the
intention of the commission was
to be
members of those communities to
ensure accountability right that
the work of the commission and
the contracts that they're
making are in step with what the
needs are and having currently
been in the law school being at
the university of new mexico
even though some programs like
the cynical law program can work
directly with
individual anger communities
they're not the commission and
the commission the university
right now where it's house at
thought and sender they can be a
little bit sort of insulated in
terms of not necessarily
having to be accountable to the
communities and and where their
placing some of those contracts
and so in my opinion a good
policy would be to ensure that
it's the commission that still
has authority over those
contracts as opposed to just
giving it as an administrative
function I think there can still
be the the administrative
function that the law school on
dozen terms of the
implementation and then we're
more than willing to provide
support and see how through the
new category three center how we
can be of support and help grow
the commission and and it's
mission so
that would be our suggestion.
And then the last sort of
uh recommendation that we have
again relates to this issue that
we've seen happy with affordable
housing projects now in that's
excluding landgrants from the
new mexico subdivision act
you know it's not only is it a
subdivisions that are projects
taken on by language communities
but but also is impactful is
when you have just these
subdivisions that land grants
where there you know it's if its
leases or whatever and it's it's
it's that seemed family whose
now trying to say I I need to
expand to have my my
son or my daughter's once to
leave her as well and we need it
you know expand or whatever and
so they're just making a new
lease on a juice and property
and which is in a full full
housing project but it's still
creates an opportunity through
that sublivision for someone to
sort of continue to have access
to affordable housing and so in
reviewing the new mexico
subdivision or needs I found
that the definition of
subdivision i'm actually has
thirteen exceptions
and for example one of those
exceptions is a subdivision does
not include land that is
subdivided with it I mean this
appallingly and the reason that
is just because it's giving the
authority to the minister polity
to overseas subdivisions within
their mountains and so
the draft language that I
propose here is something
similar that it would just be an
exemption of that subdivision
under those under the act is not
included to vision a land by
lingering which said government
is a political subdivision of
the state that way they were
just sort of example them and
there's I guess that there's
thirteen different exemptions
that's where this ones are
number fourteen
but that would really sort of
help looking future forward
about how do we continue to has
length not only utilise the
common lense they have but if
they acquire lands for these
type of projects that they can
ensure that they're not running
into any kind of rule blocks
and they're just as concerned
with making sure that those
subdivisions are standard you
know they'll have um often times
that they can should release
case they've worked with.
Planning firms in injuring from
some sort of ladles out on the
want to comply and make sure
that it's not going to have
training advertised impact
issues that it's not going to
have detriments of the local
water sources so and there are
still other sort of laws that
that they put in place often
times like immediately they also
run the local water so they
understand the impact of
expanding the water system i'm
expanding sort of some
infrastructure systems are too
to those subdivision in those
communities and so they are
planned out in there i'm sort of
well for our projects
and without mr chairman members
of the community I am getting
thank you for this opportunity
and I stand for any questions
thank you
any questions from the committee
representative load.
The.
Thank you miss chair i'll be
very brief cause I have to go to
an event after this
first one thank you for all that
you do and think of the
conversation earlier because I
was talking about getting ready
to do my capital outlay in it
assuming I win and all but we
were talking about that and I
have some my language that are
ready to go with their capital
outlay and then I have another
I won't mention my neighbor they
have compliance the issues since
very frustrated because they
need that capital outlay as well
and help and so I know this is
all the work in progress and I
think is things progress it'll
get better in i'm waste hoping
that there's some sort of hate
to save almost like a office
policy manual where this is what
happens when you're the new
president these all the things
can happen please he will teach
you everything you need to know
thank you I appreciate that you
did all these droughts that is
very helpful second I was
wondering if we're going to run
into issues where the county
says you can only do this right
and we need to do the example
and so that they can move
forward with their projects
and think you do the people who
came before me like a represent
christian senator or t p new for
paving the way for this that's
all I have thank you
thank you representative
mcqueen.
Thank you mister
arterlo to see you
had a couple of thoughts on the
for someone the policy
recommendations
on the assistant phone
the
sometimes
we said these dollar amounts in
statutes
in the they tend to get old
and so you are sometimes when we
try to add a c p I just like a
mechanism that they can the
dollar melts can change over
time without having to go back
to legislature because that
tends to be a limiting factor
in any thoughts about if you're
going to go in there and tweak
it anyway whether that's
something we should look at
As I mentioned these statutes
are drafted off of the audit
activities to stump to since the
reporting and even the churches
of reporting when that was
created
by palace decago that system was
mirroring the audit requirements
at this federal level and so
that that highest cap which was
five hundred thousand was based
on when a single added kicks
into the federal level well that
amount is now seven fifteen
eight I heard that it's going to
move up to a million so even
that statute is sort of out of
sort of deep in terms of the
inflation and what that means
for for sort of those caps and
so yeah I agree I I think that
that would be an excellent idea
I cannot assume that anything
about it before you mention but
I do think that is something
that would be important to you
so to give some discretion on
how that is bumped up without
having to go through a
legislative change of every
several years.
Okay that language can be tricky
but it's something about
on the um the distribution.
You know
yeah I guess I kind of regret
that it is a reversing fund but
I think the thinking was that it
would be paid out every year and
it it sounds to me let you know
a fine making a non reversing
fund but it can sounds to me
like it's more of a math problem
than anything else I mean it
seems to me you should be able
to uh it might depend on the
timing but if you determine the
told number of shares including
fractional shares yeah you
divide that by the money
available you should be able to
distribute everything out
with german representative queen
yes I think that's an excellent
point and that's where it got a
little bit I think tricky in
terms of
getting the smooth forward so
one of the reasons that that
reversion was initially sort of
in there was because we knew
that this was this particular
piece of legislation I was like
a snobble chance and hell and so
we were here we were making our
best efforts to say how do we
put in the things that would
have created this as the most
appealing potential product to
sort of get things moving and
then we were very fortunate to
be able to sort of get it
through at the in the last
session of a
a speaker egos sort of last
return right in so he we were
able to sort of get him on board
and we were able to sort of fast
track the legislation and move
it and when we were trying and
attempting to figure out what
that math was we couldn't do it
within sort of the constraints
of getting an out the bill and
through the committees and sort
of sort of getting complicated
but I think you know if if
there's a way for us to to
figure out what that is cause it
is a mathematical formula and
like how do you ensure that
people get a distribution that
those that already have some
resources
or allowing for some of the
those that have less resources
to gain a little bit more I
think an equal distribution
across the board might be
problematic and this was
actually from the language of
some sort of like everyone to
make sure that those with less
get more.
And so how we figured out that
math it's a timing issue and we
also recognize that there's a
time in issue with how it's even
distributed now because we have
landgrants that are everyone's
on a state fiscal year and the
fiscal year you know ends june
thirtieth so they don't get the
distribution till the end of
october so they have a quarter
in a month that they have to
make sure that they're planning
for their last year's budget to
keep in reserve so they can get
through that first quarter plus
one month before they get the
distribution
I don't know that we can fix
that timing issue but we just
know we inform linguistics we
advise them how do you make sure
you put it deserve and and
they've been successful at doing
that but
yeah if if there's ways we can
fix that language i'm game if
marks game to work on a matter
for me
for how we how we get that
distribution out in one year as
opposed to having to worry about
the reverter
and I guess i'm not suggesting
mister chair return putting it
formula and statute III just
think it's a process and it it
might depend on timing like if
you you know how much money
you're going to get
and you know how many languages
are eligible in you know there's
fifteen full share and there's
you know three of the three
quarter share you know if you if
you know that information at the
time you
you know a three quarter share
isn't
three quarters of a number of
the total amount of money it's
just a three quarter share and
so you would you end up with you
add up all the shares you divide
there by the total and then you
determine the payout so you
don't determine the payout first
you terminate the shares first
but you know if someone flight
they're trying to get their
audit or you know maybe they're
going to qualify maybe they're
not you know that might not be
possible
mister chairman replacement
between appreciate that and I
think right now just written I
don't know that we could do that
because it's it's a.
It's it's seventy five percent
of the total amount available
divided there's like an actual
formula in there so we might
need to look at how we tweak
that
this proposal removing their
right that was the simplest
easiest to swallow but I think
another possible way to address
it would be the tweaked language
so that we do have more sort of
discretion on how you determine
what those are at the inner at
at the implementation level
another way to potentially do it
would be to
have a second distribution where
you have the first distribution
that goes out and then any
landground that received a
hundred percent distribution
would be entitled to a second
distribution that goes out like
in the spring of the money
that's remaining in the fund and
then that would be a new sort of
calculation but that would again
would need a tweak because right
now the waits are in its very
time formula can so there are
some challenges like we get from
the auditor's office the list
supposed to get a september
first this year we got it
september tenth and so we then
have thirty days to like get all
of our checks to make sure that
they've complained with all
these other things so we start
reaching out to langrance in
like july and say here's
everything you need to comply
with here's all the
certifications you need to get
us these documentations you've
done these things
and then we sent out to every
potential and then after we get
the list for the others that we
got to say okay sorry you seven
sorry but you're not going to
qualify because you didn't even
comply with the first tier or
the first cut off which was the
audit act i'm compliance and
then but the other
seventeen or whatever the
gallery let's make sure we get
you across the finish line
and so far we've been successful
at getting most of the ones that
come through the door from the
auditors list out the door to
dfa for their distribution which
then has to happen thirty days
after we get them the list.
Thank you.
I'm i'm curious how much you
think this is only been a year
so how much it how much of these
are started and how much of
these are long term problem i'm
i'm very curious about that
because I think you did an
amazing job that you know I was
hoping everybody had their money
on july second then I heard it's
not going to be till october
first and then it was later
because of this missing this
investment again it was a huge
learning crew for your
organization our total but I
wonder and also on the other
side for them so i'm just
curious what what do you think
is the the start at what what it
is is that start a problem or is
this long time term
mission share representative of
the I I think I think it is
partly a start of problem right
it's getting i'm all sites
because remember on our end it's
not just the council it's the
auditors office it's the council
it's the treasure's office and
it's a department of finance
administration and so you know
we do our best to get everybody
and I think we've got everybody
now sort of in the room and we
understand what we got to do and
we sort of take the lead on
making sure everybody's i'm
where they need to be
and then for the language
themselves getting them you know
complaint with any view I think
for some of them it's been hard
it's been a challenge in terms
of you know they're all
volunteer board so it is
somewhat a start up issue in the
sense that they're still
volunteer boards when we are
having more bringing on staff so
it's we're seeing I think that's
going to work out in the good
after you know we get everybody
sort of and where they need to
be
the the limitation with that is
we recognize that you know you
could end up if if because the
way that the funds currently
funded is is tightered groceries
taxes so in good years the funds
have been good and plenty in
years where we might hit a
recession we could see those
numbers really low so if we had
twenty six we had all the
language running and roll rocket
and rolling twenty seven twenty
six languages getting
distributions we hit a recession
and then now their budget drops
to thirty thousand or forty
thousand and they've got
professional sta.
Half now or staff hire that are
working on developing their
projects that could be an issue
for them right so that's why we
were thinking I don't think it's
an issue at this point in time
but we do know what we need to
work on figuring out how do we
properly find the funds so that
there's like a guaranteed
minimum and the language would
receive so that they could
continue to do the work and not
have this volatile you know that
was one of the biggest concerns
that nfa had we would explain
the fund and and they were going
do some of these loans because
those low interest loans the
monzano one for example it's
going to be over twenty five
year term and so they're like we
want to make sure that they can
you know pay that like will we
do too so that's we want a long
link longer term so that it's if
there's some volatility they can
smaller payment but for them
they're like you have all that's
that's a little bit tricky for
us because how do we know that
they're gonna that they're not
going to have a downturn in the
economy and then bone now they
they don't have a budget
and they still have to pay for
an auditor and they still and so
they're audits are more
expensive now right are there
they're doing a great upon
procedures most of them and so
those beautiful procedures
audits where they were before
doing a great upon procedures
only when they had capital
outlet so it's like reviewing
maybe one to a five transactions
in a capital expenditure process
we're casting him about fifteen
hundred dollars now that they're
doing a a
tier four or five audit whether
it's either their because of the
amount or that their amount plus
a capitally those are cost to
them around five to six thousand
dollars and so there's a pretty
significant increase it is more
work for the auditors we
understand why that's a case and
there's also a challenge in
making sure that there's enough
um ips out there willing to do
the work we had one ipa that got
out of the business of doing
this type of work and that was
detrimental to a lot of
linguists because he pulled out
a bunch of their contracts and
so we had a lot of lingering
scrambling and try to find
somebody else to sort of do that
because there's not a lot of it
pays out there but I think these
are all growing pains though I
think it is i'm sort of start up
growing pains I think we're
gonna get there I think these
recommended changes are based on
that as well we recognize he
there's.
Now that we got some time in the
sattle will you we know where
the source spots are and we got
a sort of work those out and I
think will over the course of
the next several years will
pubby continue to sort out try
to refine that process I encome
to this body when necessary for
for a specific legislative
changes
just one more question than a
mischair
the the subdivision this year I
got a little nervous around that
just because you we know the
card sequent long term
consequences of bad subdivisions
and we can see how it affects
languages right so we get we get
the leniers up in crystal
delicerna and that's effectively
a subdivision that some days can
need to be fixed
similar similarly similarly the
tomat language you know their
historic lands you know
substantial subdivision and
really hard to fix that you see
it over in a real rancho as well
so I mean that subdivision is a
fairly technical process and if
you don't have that that
expertise in house in your
subdividing land that could have
consequenced itself they I mean
how how do we do that make sure
they're still a robust review mr
chairman now reprising or can I
appreciate those comments and I
agree I think
definitely as we sort of
continue to expand and grow the
capacity for landgrants
work as of of those sort of
challenges I think it's
important to kind of recognize
that subdivisions of land also
include deleting some of those
previous subdivisions right and
so
as landgrants are able to
require some of these bad
subdivisions some of them still
have all the subdivisions on the
books but they may be able to
require you truly leave for
example in a good job of
acquiring a bunch of this
defunct subdivisions that were
created back in the sixties and
seventies and their parcel by
parcel they're acquiring those
and so being able to.
Get those into one continuous
parcel as they are able to
that's that's technically a
subdivision rate it's like the
reverse but it's still
considered part of a subdivision
I I think part of the way we
address that issue is continuing
to build not just the capacity
at the local level but building
the capacity of organizations
like the council like the
department of our justice treaty
division you know my hope is
that if we can provide services
when I talk to you about like a
creating another sort of program
that provides legal services
that would include things like
helping them with their zoning
right making sure that they're
doing because they have only
authority now making sure that
they understand that's only an
authority in that you're doing
it correctly right and that
takes a legal mind sometimes
when it comes to actually
drafting the ordinances rate
working on subdivision
ordinances or making sure that
they're doing them correctly
right now the way they've
unveiled because of the scope in
the scale you know and chili
lease instance like we're not
talking about these huge
subdivisions where they're going
to sell land in its these are
insurance they've done three
stuff for their working on the
third development I think the
first development was the
largest with like fifteen sort
of lots of this one that their
date the second one that they
sort of worked on was I think
like ten this one was a piece of
parcel that they were able to
purchase back in its only really
suitable for about five
lights on it so they're not huge
developments but it does provide
them an opportunity to sort of
go back to some of that cluster
development where they're sort
of having the the village center
be like where the houses are and
they're preserving some of those
a common lands for natural
resources of postages sort of
having folks lease out wherever
and then you have this hodge
parch so it does allow them sort
of control some of that
management
and so I don't know what those
challenges are at the level of
the you know when it comes to
the county and where there's a
rub
but we do know that they can
start a stop some of these
priced checks from moving
forward if there is something
that.
The land itself isn't going to
be able to meet whatever that
sort of county or in its house
and so
in our mind it's a little bit um
awkward to have them have the
zone ability and authority to
see ever going to have zone this
for affordable housing and we're
going to do a project here but
then but then the subdivision
things what it gets in the way
and so will have to sort
continue to to figure that out
but I I understand the concern
and I appreciate those comments
mr chair uh so that in safe you
need the the threshold for
administrative review is twenty
four lots so anything twenty
four in render like you don't
you have to go before they can
commission I don't know if that
standard across counties I just
know that's the number and santa
fe for for what this work
in the of course you also get to
be careful to make sure years
you're lots of big enough to get
you know septic permit stuff
again in the media
so there are other factors to to
keep the money
and appreciate that thank you
representative garcia
thank you similar chairman I
think you are through
for your real thorough
presentation I was really uh
outstanding
you know on the
policy on the
on the work of the council.
On the legal services and the
services I know that we had kind
of funded these services in the
past
a lot of it through june
refunding
and
so now
that you haven't received june
refunding for these services are
you incorporating
are you making these services
part of the general budget
in order to kinda keep that
level above service
consistent in terms of what you
we've been doing in the past
which junior funding kind of
keeping the services consistent
mr chairman represents if that's
correct fortunately
for the past several years
except for last year
a lot of those junior fun
appropriations so to help the
council grow its budget so we
receive a junior fund
appropriation and then the next
year they kind of make our base
budget that and then we get
another appropriation and then
we kind of make our based budget
the you know it's a kept growing
and the very first year several
years back we did receive I
think a eighty thousand and
article was to try to actually
hire a serbian we found out the
challenge of actually trying to
get find the professionals for
reading that you could hire
because of the shortage and so
we have putting that into
contracts
and then since that time the
council has made it a priority
as our budget grows we always
make sure that we include an
amount said aside for legal
services that amount has been
around sixty thousand for the
past several years and then the
surveyor services are it's
usually somewhere between a
forty to fifty thousand it
depends on on how much money the
council is available this last
year was the first year that the
council's budget state
completely flat
and so we
are actually public had to make
a little bit of sort of cuts in
terms of how much goes to those
contracts just because
everything else still increased
in terms of costs but that are
budgeting didn't move it also.
But dumb the council has
priorities that are leave really
sort of have gotten into
a really good group I guess you
could say of identifying areas
of need and trying to make sure
that they keep those met and
have continued at grow programs
and so every year we put in a a
budget request to the department
of finance administration that
is way more than we get but it's
kind of a full blown budget and
it includes enough funding for
those services like legal
services as well as contract
other contract services but we
would love to be able to have a
robust enough budget to have on
staff a community development
planner of natural resources
manager planner that could help
language with some of these
projects on it
are several attorneys on staff
they could sort of help you know
either with directly the worker
transactional work and so we're
constantly looking at and out
still love to have a service on
staff at the council if we could
find a ford it and find one
somebody who can you soon say I
i'll take a job as a survey or
there and then they could just
work with language on getting a
common lens relative definitely
always have an eye towards those
things and any junior money we
get we do put to has best use as
possible to well thank you for
that
I know that you were contracted
are really outstanding so
slower challenge now he's an
earlier school and grant their
way live you so arm so where if
you are fortunate that you
really have planned it in cases
is itself data story in them he
knows a lot of the histories of
these lane grants
and their struggles that be
outside that was a good pic on
your policy recommendations in
your language and there's
assistance fun
are you ready though to really
tackle or drafting the bill on
that
it seems that in your discussion
with
return a queen that there still
may be some things that need to
to be ironed out or are you
ready to move forward with.
What you have here in terms of
drafting the legislation for our
last meeting in terms of
endorsement
mister chairman
yeah III always bring these
forward to the committee these
recommendations as like a
starting point for us to discuss
I would be a
remissive I didn't yet push for
getting something before the
interim committee for
endorsement I know that it's
it's the windows always short I
think the same we have to
sometime in november but and we
will work hard and more than
happy to work with with mark on
any sort of drafting issues but
we've I know the endorsement
from the committee's nighthard
necessary it's not something
that's it's not fatal if you
don't have it but we recognize
the importance of having that
committee endorsement and
knowing that we as the
legislative process continues
i'm sometimes we have to make
tweaks and committees
if there's an issue but we would
hope that we can move forward
with something that would be
ready for endorsement for the
committee in november I let them
such a remind asking
mark to kind of open a file on
this but you have to be
understanding that our expert on
this issue is rips in them in
the queen so so if we have you
figured out where when
representing anything before the
twenty point five session on
this particular issue the
assistance fine is going to be a
reserve a queen that's going to
be that she sponsor so that's
why I think there should be some
come into the mind of what we're
sort of a queen raised in terms
of maybe some some
that clear thinking in terms of
what you have proposed so better
we could do that and climb in
and move in that issue for the
big idea
also mister chair on the
on your policy recommendation
regarding the community
governance attorney program.
You know adrian august being
mentioned the incorporation of
adding
the
into
the
um part of the unities that
would kind of provide the job
opportunity for the young
for for the attorneys or sight
for the attorneys and I think it
would be who you to get with
ongoings me in terms of
because we opened the file on
the recommendation
based on what information he
brought for but it it be it
would be I think to
mention the additions that
you're making I don't think
there beat there's a problem
with that because these are
really good additions for just a
matter of protocol and courtesy
to mister all goes me to kind of
run that by him the other thing
is this we more than on state
match
you know what that's going to do
it's going to increase the
budget
you know and all those we
presented a budget increase of
under twelve thousand for one
year student or for one student
or two hundred and twenty four
thousand for two students
so if we remove the match
that members gonna have to
increase
you know because now the state
is owned to pick up the whole
amount for
the governance attorney
whereas before the way that
originally read the state was
putting and half of the match
the entity was put in the other
half so
the did you think of
in terms of that that was always
gonna happen in terms of me so
your proposal or
mister chairman representative.
Yeah so to the first point eight
ar I did speak with the mister
will be right after his
presentation in between the
break and kind of showed with
him the sort of i'm draft
language that we had put
together
the in terms of the of the match
in uh I book I believe that the
way that the language currently
works is that the match there
would still be a requirement for
the program to put in fifty
percent of the salary but the
non state match is the fifty
percent portion that the
employer has to put and so the
way it reads is that each
contract with search brighter
shall have secure sufficient
matching nonstick finding to
provide the full time position
so it's on their fifty percent
so they still have to bring
fifty percent of the salary so
it shouldn't impact the budget
of the program cause the program
still only going to pay for a
fifty percent of those funds
it's just that were ever that
employee or that employee lands
so if it's with the department
of justice the department
adjusters could use some of
their state funds to fund that
other fifty percent the wait
they'll are currently reads is
they would have to use some
funds other than their state
funds so this would just remove
that and they would be if they
fit in their budget it's in
their budget it's still a uh
cost savings for the employer
like the doj or or the council
or someone down the road because
there's no only having to be
fifty percent of someone salary
it's just this allows them to
use their if their money to rise
from state budget it allows them
to use that
market that are you understood
that
okay I understand the argument
mister chair represents
what i'm picturing is whoever is
sponsoring this bill whether it
is you and sitting in front of
the house appropriations or a
single are a me of the sitting
in front of seven finance.
They're going to get grilled
done exactly what you brought up
this is doubling the states
costs cause where whichever pot
of money it's coming out of it
still state money soon yes it's
it might be a benefit to the egs
office because they don't have
to put their budget but
it's the bottom line in still
the state tax parents go
be paying for it is going to
come out of the general fund.
Soon if you're willing to make
that argument in front of the
preparations committee
along the lines that her tour
articulated then I can draft it
that way
well mister chair
there is a no bank reference
tomorrow is because.
He was the architect on this
legislation I mean with his
language that kind of really
moulded the legislation in on in
the final stages but
but I think if if I total you
know it is
kind of understanding of this
process and mark is kind of
what i'm wanting to kind of want
information that into the
legislation knowing that there
might be these consequential
issues like that you know where
the budget committees but you
know I mean if we got the
experts there in
I know I don't equal will have
any any big setbacks with that
so lastly mister chair.
And and it it regularly such as
also august we would be
congressing others remove the
other
match
leslie is this
is the subdivision act.
One of the things that i've
noticed in my twenty eight years
and legislature
is that one one one issue that
stores at the honestness more
than the other one is when we
think over the subdivision act
in our end
and i'm not real clear in terms
of your proposal I know that and
I know that to ring the fourth
based on the comfort conflict
and contradiction and with the
housing initiatives from the
chile grant but mr I really
don't know how your
recommendation can solve that it
but at the same time it helps
mitigate the overwhelming
opposition that we're going to
get from the developers and from
the real estate industry you
know so I think we have to
really
go in there with a really
holistic
plan and also where we're not
kind of really
you know hitting the hornets
list with a room and shaking up
those last
okay I know what can lead in or
to a piece of legislation just
kinda not point anywhere and
so I don't know if it would if
if this is something that's all
you want to pursue and I came
out of my making a suggestion to
the chair or to open a file on
this but I think you would have
to do some follow up with the
real estate industry and the
development community you know
in terms of what's being
proposed
just to know
get a feeler
you know
from these entities because
these energy so kind of sweet
with majority of the
legislators
and then not particular to one
party
you know so.
So I just thought I kind of
mentioned that
but if you're willing to kind of
move forward I don't mind making
a reform recommendation to open
a file
missus chairman so thank you for
those coming to appreciate that
yet and I think part of this
would be that the education of
what this actually does and how
it wouldn't actually affect
those two i'm sort of lobby
groups because if we're talking
about subdivision of a land that
the language already owns and
has jurisdiction over
that doesn't really impact them
in any way that I can see I mean
I I have to stop think through
it because it is fresh fresh
idea but
yeah I I could see I could even
see what it would be beneficial
because if you then
if a language and then partnered
with some of these entities to
help them with the development
you know down the road I could
see the how there could be
exciting for a developer we have
the ability to work with them
but you know the intention is
really for addressing the
ability for a landground to have
the authority to do these
initiatives in these projects
that are going to help for the
housing and if we need to sort a
tweak with that language is to
make sure that it's meeting that
intention then I think we'd be
open to that sort of figure out
what that is
let me know
i'm like that recommend that
mark open a file on this
particular recommendation
one of you for that gentleman
over three people that can do
the market we can open a final
way to appreciate it
that's on the hand restriction
thank you thank you
I do know I just want to thank
you for everything you do on
behalf of lamb grants across the
state of new mexico and so it
doesn't matter which land grant
I go to my here positive things
of what you and your staff are
doing and I have the opportunity
to come and visit your new area.
And loving the new office and so
and encourage anybody from the
committee to come and visit our
could off and hit staff on the u
and m south campus and so I
thought I would want to public
comment think you are to do I
have two people who are online
and I don't know if you wanted
to speak if you do want to speak
i'm giving two minutes each for
a public comment the first
person on there is a hard.
The.
Go.
Valuary you would have two
minutes to make public comment.
The.
Online I guess my mom didn't
show up to make that would come
some people signed in and I
think that there's some times of
misunderstanding that it's that
they don't see the last column
her asks that it asks if they
want to make a public comment so
anyone in the room raise your
hand if you signed in and you
wish to make public comment.
And so seeing none reminder that
tomorrow we will have our tour
of the landgrant and I want to
think the president and her
board for the hospitality today
