Welcome back a rave people that
state for the the last day of
our meeting appreciate everybody
coming back
we've got a
good presentation and then kind
of the business side of
updates from the director today
and I think we're scheduled in
somewhere around eleven thirty
to the new or so uhm anything
director
good morning everybody know
really mister chair other than
just want to say uh thanks again
to the staff wanted to think
mark is just happens to be a
presenter it's I guess it's got
kind of a purple tire and his
good ethicates you colours on I
mentioned on wednesday when he
was out of the room that in
addition to being at an analyst
for us he's the president of the
eleven day board for a highlands
university and so he helped us
lot with organizing the speeding
appreciate that when it had to
feel awkward before he presented
again just think it's to all of
our stuff who do this who do
this work for you
we've got a couple of folks who
are this is their last meeting
with us wesley who is again our
teacher on special sign in and
again just a brief description
we put out a call at the
beginning of the summer hoping
to give educators around the
state and opportunity to learn a
little bit more about education
policy in the legislative
process that the committee
hearings so that they can go
back hopefully to their schools
and when someone says who came
up with this idea they like
actually I know how those ideas
keep about and also severe
gonzalez who's our legislative
intern and will be returning to
uc berkeley in the fall
and search we are glad to have
both of them and this will be
the last time they'll be with us
for a meeting they've got one
more week with us at work but
this is their last meeting with
us wanted to say thanks to them
as well.
Thank you director and so our
first
presentation today is turned a
school governments and support
merc take it away please
good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is mark motoria I am a seasonal
policy is with alia scene before
I begin I like to welcome our
guests and ask them to bring
features themselves and will
start to my left
thank you good morning mr chair
members of the committee my name
is because I am the chair of the
pec for this year I also want to
quickly just acknowledge I have
a couple other members of the PE
c sitting behind me are vice
share patty gibson and our
secretary stewart ing
good morning mr chair members of
the committee just have asked
though i'll cook a public
schools.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee i'm pretty
russell I am the new director of
the charter schools division apd
good morning everyone amanda to
bell serving as deputy secretary
for the ped
thank you thank you all for
bring you
during the twenty twenty five
interim station
we saw several bills introduced
house bill through sixty five
and villa two forty five and
senate bill five sixteen these
bills would have significantly
affected governance and charter
schools in mexico given that
alliances staff that would be
helpful to take a step back and
offer a broader look at charter
schools and the structures that
are in place on the state we put
this panel together to provide
perspective and insight from the
two largest authorizing entities
in the state pc ten csd and also
pd to talk about their work
alongside pc and authorizing the
state charter charge schools
we're gonna talk about how they
operate how their health
accountable.
And the support systems are in
place for the schools
the goal today is to offer some
context and my informed future
discussions about chorescores
i'll start with a brief history
and an old review I walk through
the governance and oversight
talk on financial structures and
summarize a few takeaways from
our charter school site visits
to happen throughout the interim
and offer some policy
considerations they start with a
bit of a history the first
harder school in the united
states was formed in same paul
minnesota in nineteen ninety two
since ninety ninety two a number
of charter school the number of
charge goes has grown quite
significantly today there's
eight thousand one hundred and
fifty charter schools in the
nation.
They serve about eight point one
i'm sorry to do sorry three
point seven million students are
about seven point six of the
nations k through twelve
enrollments they also make up
about eight point one percent of
all schools to the nation they
mexico has active enacted house
bill eight eighty eight in
nineteen ninety three house or
eight eighty eight allow the
creation of charity schools
however initially they were only
only conversion schools are
allowed existing schools that
converted into charter schools
in nineteen ninety nine the
state of doctor the trotter
schools act.
This allowed for start up or new
charter schools to enter the
system in two thousand two
thousand two thousand two
thousand one school year ten
charter schools were an
operation this was a combination
of start up and conversion
schools that's forwarded to last
year twenty four twenty five
school year there were ninety
nine artist was an existence
serving just over thirty point
three thousand or ten percent of
all key through twelve students
in the state.
Figured two on page four of your
presentation which is behind tab
will give you a representation
of the growth from that first
initial you.
Quick no if you look at the
report I did not that there will
be three schools do you new
chargeballs opening and the next
coming school year I did receive
note that one of the schools was
should be prospering there
opening until the next or the
twenty six twenty seventh
school.
Now that we have a good idea of
the number of charter schools
and operation and the mountain
students
will start with the concept of
charter school authorizers
so a charcoal authorizer is an
entity legally responsible for
approving overseeing and holding
charter schools accountable
authorizers are value
new charter school applications
established performance
contracts monday academic
performance and make decision
regarding not only the approval
and renewal of charters but also
the replication or cancellation
authorizers serve a vital role
in ensuring that charter school
delivery quality education
operate responsibility and meet
the terms of the contract that
they have entered into.
Now another national kind of
landscape forty five states and
additional colombia having have
enacted lost remaining charter
schools and as you inspect
authorizing shutters between the
states different quite a bit if
you glance at the table on the
top of page three your find the
list of all the entities that
service authorizes across the
nation you will also see the
strength and limitations each of
these entities possess in this
capacity
for the rest of presentation
i'll stay here in a mexico.
Um so how does authorizing look
like in the great saving of
mexico and our state charge
calls can be authorized by one
of two entities the public
education commission or the pc
or local school board traditions
like aps
those authorized by pc or
consider state charter charter
schools i'll be using the
transcribers out of
presentations like that
establishment now and locally
try to charge
our schools are authorized by
your local school district
during the twenty twenty four
twenty twenty five school year
there are sixty stage harder
schools and thirty nine locally
charter schools on the state
again figured one on page four
provides a brief history of the
authorizer transfer out to
state.
Naturally some key differences
between the two types of charter
schools state charter charges
are considered their own local
education agencies or alliance
to them as micro school dishes
the act is their own fiscal
agents they must qualify a
school as boards of finance and
they receive both of state
eclation guarantee a federal
funds directly.
On the other hand local charter
charge calls are not considered
allianz their funds flow through
the school district their
authorities down
the governor structure of stage
harder scores is also distinct.
And her comes a little bit more
alphabets but as mentioned pc
provides oversight of that again
oversight of the other state
chird schools the charter school
division which is part of pd
provides the portuguese seat
although pec is statutory
attached to ped the two entities
operate under a memorandum of
understanding or an mou you will
find a deeper explanation of
this relation in a short history
of the pc on pages five and
seven of the report but i'll let
our guests from pcmp provide
more detail on these during the
remarks that said I do want to
spend a little bit of time on
that more you.
The mo aligns the agreed upon
roles responsibilities between
peace and pd including items
such as budgeting record keeping
administrative emission they
were aminitive support and
clerical assistance it also
defines how the charter school
support budget is calculated and
managed this budget is funded by
the statutory administrative fee
retain from the state from
charter schools
commonly referred to as a two
percent hold back i'll go a
little bit more into detail on
this topic a little bit more in
the presentation and pd will
also address this during their
portion of their presentation.
Finally in mo there's also a
provision delegating pc
statutory responsibility to
oversee vocational education or
call me referred to as creating
technology education
throughout the state and mexico
the pc as proposed several
changes to the move thousand
place these changes have.
It being semi to the secretary
and are currently awaiting
decision the problem the
proposals for the three main
categories budgeting staffing
and audi designations of charter
schools first the public
education commission is asking
for more transparency and
involvement in budgeting
specifically and how withheld
seg distributions or that two
percent hold back are used and
how the charter school support
budget is developed second year
requesting more authority over
staffing decisions including the
ability to be more involved in
hiring the evaluation process
and if necessary recommend
removal of key personnel such as
the sisty director and pc layer
some positions and third.
They would like state charter
schools to be designated as
primary government entities for
auditing purposes this would
allow charge goes to negotiate
and hire their own auditors
rather than using pds and also
charge schools would be removed
from his annual articles
many of these proposals are not
new somewhere including a
previous legislation such as
house bill through sixty five
during the twenty twenty five
session and this is also
discussed in greater detail
within the red box on page seven
of the report
together these proposals reflect
pc's desire for more formal
authority and key areas charter
school governance and oversight
particularly in areas where they
feel they are accountable or not
fully empowered.
Aside from the proposed changes
to the mo pc commissioners have
also raised questions about
their statutory role in overseas
occasional education
their responsibility is
currently delegated to pds
college and career readiness
bureau some people see
commissioners have expressed
concern that the commission does
not have the technical staff nor
the expertise to meaningfully
overseas ct programs in the same
these concerns suggest that
there may be a need to revisit
the statutory responsibility and
a line with psy's capacity and
structure moving forward
this suggested changes to the
more ongoing evaluation of the p
c c s d p d structure going
forward.
Save it.
During the twenty twenty five
interrupt l c staff visited each
other school to better
understand their governance
operations of finances I would
first like to think those
schools are taking time of their
very busy day to talk with me
and provide very candidate
feedback and just reminders to
what we talk or why we talked to
the schools i'll go back to me
and talk about the research
questions that john presented
during the work plan
presentations.
The questions are asking where
how do authorizing procedures in
government shut us different
between state charter and
locally chartered schools what
types of operational support to
charter schools receive how is
it funding it and wish entities
or is possible for providing
that support.
And three hours accountability
performance in the financial
management enforced across
different charity entities
the school staff visited include
four stage harder schools that
was explore academy eventual or
curry charter schools are
espanola mission achieving a
success charter school and
albertricky erases the
severation actually community
school and last crucials.
And four local charter schools
were academy for technology and
classics are the sanity public
scores correll sorry coral
community chore school and
arbitrary damning society areas
high school at a damning public
schools and a nancy charter
schools out these scores
represent a range of size
geography and authorizing
entities from large authorities
like aps to small authorizers
which only have maybe one or two
charter schools under the bell.
The.
Sat used a consistent set of
sight question site visit
questions and include those on
the panics be of the report for
your reference.
A key focus was understanding
what supporters is school
received from their authorizers
responses varied revealing
differences not only between
state and local authorizers but
from district a district stage
harder charter school received
last day to day and operational
support from their authorities
as mentioned above they tend to
operate as a small district
taking on a lot of
responsibilities that they are
task with internally and also
contracting third parties to
augment their operations in the
case of local tool school tires
the level and type of support
from authorizers varies widely
some schools reported strong
support and clear communication
from authorizers well others
noted limited assistance are
inconsistent practices
this variation exists from
district to district as I said
figures four and five or pages
ten and eleven provide summaries
of the areas of support
discussed and the responses from
each charter school.
With that i'll shooting to
financing.
Similar to public schools
charter school receive state
funding from the seg state
equalization guarantee.
And capper isla capital ali like
other schools is also a concern
from charter schools artist can
access capality and three kiwas
the red legislation
appropriations they may be
included in general allegation
bonds and they have access to
several sources of financing the
two key sources of financing the
state and medical for charter of
course on the public schools
facility authority or the pierce
of a or the name of finance
authority animate I have
provided a summary of all the
programs available to the
charter schools for these
entities on page twelve all
these programs are available
there in eat characteristics of
charter schools I make barriers
for them that provide i'm sorry
they create barriers for them to
take for advantage of these
programs legislators who serve
on the public school capital at
least test for specific orders
in the mexican amount the
mexican finance authority or
side committee we have heard
about these challenges first
time
to examples of the challenges
the lack of direct access to
dual bonds or tax revenue which
could serve as revenue for local
match requirements or loan
repayment and also there's lead
these pretty recent agreements
we take of water.
Lease purchases purchase
agreements the least
arrangements such are schools
may be in may provide many
difficulties for on writing
loans on there a lot of
technicality such as the way
that they can walk away from a
lease and that would leave
finance you're like animal fee
and a pretty awkward position
holding a loan for a property
that's not attached
now we'll talk about to two
percent with holding starting on
the bottom of page twelve we
begin the focus conversation of
the two percent administrative
holding that's in place for
charter schools this is a key
talking point when talking about
the financing of charter schools
unlike traditional public
schools charter schools do not
receive one hundred percent of
the s e g distribution I statue
two percent of the seg phones
may be withheld
by the respective authorizer for
the purpose of providing
oversight and support of charter
schools under their preview two
percent sounds minimal but I
would like to put this number
into perspective
doing that during the twenty
twenty four twenty twenty five
school year a total of eight
point nine million dollars was
with health and charter schools
five point nine million from
state charter schools and two
point nine million from local
charter schools a complete
breakdown of the two percent
with holdings by charter school
is providing a pentagon.
One of the items we have asked
pd to speak about today is a
management of the two percent
without funds for state charter
schools I will briefly point out
the calculation on page thirteen
which shows a formally used to
determine the amount you see and
see received and the amount pd
received from that two percent
with holding for twenty twenty
five.
As we discussed when talking
about the mo in place between
pcpd and pcp pc is looking to
have greater input in the budget
making a transparency process
for these funds another point p
d will be covering is the
reversion of unspent funds
generated by the two percent
with holding from state charters
if you recall these funds come
from seg distributions however
if they're not used these fines
will be very to the general
fund.
Two percent for local charter
schools
similar to the support local
charge could receive from
authorizers that we talked above
use an accounting of the funds
with held by local authorizers
various dishes by district we
have schools on both sides of
the spectrum example such as
academy for for technology in
the classics that appear to have
a good level of transparency and
a clear understanding of how
some of the public schools uses
the without phones on the other
hand staff also spoke to schools
in which this was quite a
different case
i'll provide one brief account
that I spoke about one charter
school locally charter school
announced that or described
during their very lengthy
charter
relationship with their
authorizer they had received one
savers and that site is it was
very surface of all very quick
cannot check box types
that's not anybody on the panel
so don't look at anybody here
but that was one story that you
come up during the discussion
staff had a charter schools and
authorizers surrounding the two
percent hold back three
considerations quickly took
shape whether a flat two percent
with holdings are appropriate
for all charter schools the lack
of general accounting of how the
with health funds are used and
whether charter schools are
receiving the level of oversight
and support the two percent
withholding was meant to provide
past proposed legislation such
as hb through seventy five and
twenty twenty three attempted to
address these very questions
accountability
let me start by saying charter
schools are subject to the same
state and federal laws as any
other public school their
charter school contracts may
include some waivers from
certain pd or local school board
rules and policies but those
waivers must be explicitly
approved and reading into the
charter contract figures saving
up aged fifteen and provides an
overview of the responsibilities
authorizers are tasks with.
In state statute the secretary
of ult education has authority
to review charter school
decisions either through an
appeal or on their own court
appeals may be filed within
thirty days of a charge closed
in that revolt are not really or
if unacceptable conditions are
imposed the secretary must hold
it hearing within sixty days and
may overturn decisions if it's
found to be arbitrary on lawful
or unsupported by evidence they
may also deny charters that
violate civil rights or oppose
health or settings oversight i'm
wondering if that schools is
carried out by public education
commission and pds chargeable
division and your side visits
performance evaluations and
cracked off action plans or
standard for locally chartered
schools oversight is
responsibility of the local
school board or practice is more
very and they are also
accountable to p these
provisions some schools report
strong engagement from their own
with authorities and again like
I said some report that
oversight is very minimal
scores consistently ever size
the need for clear communication
for their from their authorities
and raise concerns that the two
percent I mean she does fee does
not always match the support
that they are preceding or the
over.
On the financial side charter
schools are considered a
component unions of their
authorizer and are included in
the authorizer authorizers are
some argue this enhances
transparency others believe it
limited schools autonomy and
drives up are costs during the
twenty twenty five session
senate bills to forty five
senable to forty five proposed
independent audits for charter
schools or senate bill five
sixteen focus on tracking
spending and student outcomes
for each of these bills that I
mention I do provide context and
little more detail in the report
if you like to refer to that.
Just to put auditor in
perspective a little bit pd's fy
twenty four audit had two
hundred eleven findings however
one hundred and fifty one or
from charter schools with
recurring issues and financial
reporting budgeting and
procurement aligning the needs
for continuous focus on
governance and fiscal.
I'll now talk about some policy
considerations I have these
listed on page eighteen
and broken out in two things
that the legislature p d and
local or transit should consider
the legislature should consider
establishing transparency
requirements
for how authorizing entities use
the two percent i'm initiate a
fee with hell from charter
schools
the literature should be valid
whether the two percent with
holding from charles schools is
the appropriate amount to
adequately find overseas
activities anyone a highlight
this one a little bit more what
we're we're seeing what i'm
saying here is yes we need to
see that the schools are
receiving the support that
they're paying for but also in
cases were to checks are
providing good support we need
to look and see if that needs to
if what they're getting for the
two percent is actually
accounting for the support that
they're providing.
Do this teacher should also
explore additional training and
support make his mechanisms to
assist local authorizers and
effectively overseeing as
supporting the local charter
schools under their generous
diction
the public education department
should commit to regular
publicly accessible reporting on
the use of the two percent
administrative support of fee
used for the oversight and
authorizing functions of state
charter charter schools
pds are also evaluate and
expansive poor available to
local authorizers to help them
fulfill their governance and
oversight responsibilities
local authorizers should commit
to transparent ongoing
accessible reporting on how the
two percent was holding is used
including a breakdown and
service is provided to locally
charter schools and the
associated costs work they
should also work laboratorily
with pc cstmpa pd to identify
tools resources or practices
that may strengthen authorizing
quality and issue charter school
received the appropriate
supporting.
This concludes my portion of
presentation on they'll turn it
over to the panel traditional
comments and insight about being
authorizers in the space.
Think you mark good morning mr
chair members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity
discuss the public education
commission today
this is something I like I could
yeah about all day to
so i'll keep it high level and I
am so excited to be here on
members of the pc we take our
work very seriously and we love
the opportunity to share what
we're what we're doing the pec
consists of ten independently
elected commissioners each
representing distinct geographic
districts across new mexico this
insurers that are decisions
reflect diverse community
perspectives and alliance
closely with local educational
needs and priorities the pec
functions primarily as the
authorizer in overseas of state
chartered public schools
throughout new mexico
traditional neighborhood schools
remain the corner strong of
public education and charter
schools compliment this by
providing specialist educational
choices and innovative
environments tailored to meet
unique student needs recognizing
that every child learns
differently even within a single
family charter schools offer
options better suited to
individual students who require
or desire alternative
educational settings without the
need for them to have to have
the wealth for private education
or to even have to move across
town
the pec overseas a wide variety
of schools providing unique
educational opportunities for
students and families across new
mexico our diverse pay portfolio
include schools focused on
specializing instead of
education arts integration dual
language immersion career and
technical education early
college opportunities as well as
high school re engagement and
environmental sustainability
among many others
just this euros invited to
several end of your celebrations
that highlighted the incredible
accomplishments of new mexican
charter school students I one
charter school students walked
across the stage with not only
their high school diplomats but
with their level when pilots
licenses another their
international back laureate
certificate.
One was an end of your arts
exhibition involving every
student performing original art
in front of a massive crowd of a
dooring family friends and
community members another school
in a historically underserved
community achieved in ninety
five percent graduation rate
with an over seventy percent of
those graduates were first
generation high school graduates
at another school graduation I
listened to the solutiorian
speech crediting her ability to
represent new mexico as the
number of fourteenth nationally
rang gimnist in the country as
the app whip and that she didn't
have to choose between her
athletic success and a quality
new mexico education through
attending a virtual charter
school she was able to learn
from new mexico teachers
alongside other new mexican
students all while pursuing her
athletic dreams across the
country
are authorizing duties and
oversorry responsibilities are
clearly defined through a
performance contract established
between our commission and each
schools governing board this
contract outlines the
expectations responsibilities
and specific performance metrics
by which schools will be
evaluated and I want to point
out in your handouts there's a
lot of information that I i'm
i'm generalizing in my
presentation but one thing I do
want to point out is that in
addition to all ped state laws
requirements procedures all of
those have to be followed by
charter schools in addition they
also follow our contract in our
performance metrics as well so
it's a dual level accountability
system for charter schools
a distinguishing aspect of our
oversight is the pc performance
framework it's a nuanced
accountability model that
respects each schools unique
mission and educational approach
rather than so solely focusing
on standardized test scores our
framework allow schools to
demonstrate effectiveness
through multiple metrics aligned
with their specialized
objectives the pecs high dent
has intensified its commitment
to addressing achievement gaps.
And promoting equity ensuring
that all students especially
those historically underserved
like those listed in the
martinez lies of yasue have
access to quality education and
equitable outcomes and I want to
point out in your latter on my
last page of the hand out
specifically that's in our
academic category and the
performance indicator one b
which we specifically look at
individual student growth and
looking at it in student groups
and identifying achievement gaps
between student groups
are key responsibilities include
evaluating new charter school
applications authorizing schools
continually monitoring their
performance and ensuring
rigorous accountability to
fulfill these responsibilities
we implement for injuries
standards for academic success
financial stability and
organizational effectiveness if
school space challenges the pec
works to proactively address
issues through clear
expectations target support and
cracked of action when needed
the pec as mark discussed was
funded through a two percent
administrative with holding from
the operational budgets of state
chartered schools this funding
model insurers are oversight
activities are sustainably
supported however we have face
many challenges over the years
as a commission in accessing
what exactly that looks like
transparency is another critical
area where we continue to make
significant enhancements not
only have we improved our
processes and communications
with our schools we are actively
improving our public reporting
systems and in the process of
developing accessible dashboards
that clearly communicate school
performance to families
communities and policy makers
these improvements aim to foster
greater trust informed
engagement and meaningful
community involvement in
education we sincerely
appreciate your interest in and
collaboration with the pec as we
strive to support excellence and
innovation in education for
every student in new mexico.
Thank you
mr chairman members of the board
bring your greetings from
albacore public schools and
board president daniel gonzalez
superintendent doctor gebrail
fleaky and we have a new boss
were excited to
tell you about the daniel
monzano who used to be with
public education apartment now
works with us and our board
services teams are excited to
have him or someone acknowledges
the martinez and christian
benjamin and art military who
were here today.
I'm some going over my
presentation i'll go high level
and our course will be available
for questions but if you notice
on page one you know we do have
a mission and that mission is to
not only support our schools but
to hold them accountable and
that is the charter bargain
right of what authorizing should
be
and we strive to be our vision
is to be a model authorizer
holding our schools accountable
for being not only academically
enriching but for also
supporting schools and under
resourced communities
so my work i've been with a
court you public schools for
twenty years now and have been
doing this work for ten years
I do have the honor to serve as
the board share for the national
association of charter school
authorizers which really set the
national standard for our work
I think that's a big
accomplishment not only for
myself but for able creek public
schools and new mexico if you'll
see on the board coming on the
board one of the things that I
did is to diversify
some of the board and to really
work on getting more
representation from not only
from our part of the country and
so having more diverse
representation on a national
level the principles of quality
charter school authorization are
maintaining high standards for
school so all school should be
having clear academic targets
that they are focusing on
supporting and upholding their
school economy so we should not
be dictating to them exactly
what they should or should not
be doing and also protecting
student and public interest of
her your public schools has
actually closed seven charter
schools over the twenty five
years and six of them have been
for financial reasons one has
been because of special at
compliance so I think you know
those two examples are those
examples show you we do need to
protect the student public
interest.
Albacore your public schools
board of education has taken on
student outcomes focused
governance so you'll see on on
page three our board of
education has set community
goals that you've seen hopefully
before from everything from
early literacy you know reading
by third grade all the way to
self regulation and really
understanding the social
emotional components but it's
important for us to know that
even if we hit these goals there
are significant number of
students who will not be
professional so if we made our
goal and third grade proficiency
sixty three percent of third
raters will still not be
professional so it's important
for us to know that we have a
huge push to have and it is
important for us to understand
that yes we cannot dictate to
the school to the charter
schools that they need to meet
their goals but i'm here to
report to you they have taken on
that challenge and we are
working together to have the
same goals for our entire
community
your c kind of the
the the struggle we have if you
look at cohort graduation rates
we have a school that has ninety
one percent graduation rate all
the way to school that it's in
the twenties so are portfolio
has the spectrum of performance
and then and the focus that we
need to push them to to meet
these academic standards
you'll see some comparisons are
very data on page five of what
our demographics look like not
only two from them aps charter
schools but aps schools in
general and then it's in the
mexico school some one thing to
point out is that app hurter
schools have less economically
disadvantaged by percentage
but have higher percentage of
special edge students than the
state
and that is correlated to aps
having a hired number of special
students that's connected to r
geographic location and
resources.
The.
And page six you'll see our
total enrollment of our
portfolio is close to eighty
nine hundred students we would
be the ninth largest school
district if you just take our
portfolio and compare them to
other school districts
we provided you and roman to buy
school unpaid seven but really
want to also highlight to you
that are charter schools as
executive a directors principles
they operate very similar to a
school district they are in
charge of hiring
you know everybody they do not
only report to the board the
government councils have one
employee and that's executive
director just like a school
board so I just wanted to
make that connection.
So if we look on page eight we
do for our new application and
renewal process will we take a
team aspect for it we have rtr
team who doesn't evaluation
along with two APS
administrators
and then two charter school
administrators who receive
training to understand the
process the statutory
requirements but also how to
follow our rebrick
and they are providing a
consensus recommendation to our
board of education at the time
of new application or renewal
hearings
you'll notice that a lot of our
work
mark talked a little bit about
the difference of support
from local vs state and so for
us our work is really focused on
providing that professional
development and holding the
schools accountable for what
we're expecting so for example
bringing them in and and
supporting them in completing
the new mexico dash in the
ninety day planned to meet our
august first deadline from many
of our schools who are in
priority status
we have also designated our
schools which are entire
district has designated our
schools so we have schools that
range from distinction to
priority and that means that is
that differentiates are
engagement with them for
distinction schools for visiting
once a year to learn from them
about what they're doing great
priority schools were visiting
every other month looking at
data and diving into
their strategic approach of
improvement
so wonder share with you some
observations on page ten
our work is really been focused
on coaching our school leaders
need support in improving what
they're doing so even if they
have a ninety one percent a
graduation rate like eastbound
in high school we are still
talking in giving them coaching
as to strategic things that
there.
Trying to do he is implementing
a middle school for example so
supporting him on how to do
middle school differently by
starting with a huge orientation
program for example
our schools are very great at
providing social emotional
support for students but really
struggle in providing that
social emotional support also
for for adults so the adults are
taking on that second hand
trauma and do not are not being
supported and how they process
that
I think the ninety day plan then
the mexico dash have really
helped us focus on what needs to
change for adults so that teat
that learning improves and I
think that's really been
significant and finally I think
our schools are just really
setting a set apart in student
engagement for example you spout
in high school requires every
teacher to do engagement
differently i'm so that no
student can sit in the back of
the class and think that they
can't be called on so they have
really great protocols for every
teacher to understand how to do
them
one thing I did not include in
here is that business management
we have some contracted visit
management managers and local
fte and schools that are
business managers and really
fine that qualified accounting
staff is barely been difficult.
Turning to recommendations
wanted to point out on page ten
recommending under authorizer
accountability that there is
accountability of authorizers
that we should be held
accountable not only for having
professional standards of
authorising into doing the work
correctly but to also make sure
that our portfolios are
performed so if we are I far
schools are performing we should
be held accountable as portfolio
as authorizers as well
but also taking that and
creating a formal mechanism to
provide structured support
training and mentorship to
school districts who aren't able
to fulfill their obligations so
if we're able to do our work as
authorizers and we're being
labeled as professional
authorizations in the state we
could do that work for other
school districts who maybe have
one charter school but it's a
very difficult to do to do some
of that work
on page eleven we talk about
authorizer shopping so that the
cases of schools wishing to
switch or seek a authorization
really thinking about should
there be legislation that is
enacted to establish a defined
threshold governing when a
school can be eligible for
a transfer so if they are in
turnaround or if they are being
pressured they shouldn't escape
seek another authoriser to a
skept that accountability.
When we think about off
administrative fees you know two
percent as what we have and
state law nationally that ranges
from point five percent to five
percent
but thinking about
if we are qualified authorizers
and are being held accountable
maybe there's another mechanism
for funding us to reckle then
requiring starter schools to
actually pay that out of their
their budgets for some of them
it's it's significant
and then finally on page twelve
really aligning timelines and in
statute to practice so for
example the renewal timeline I
put here as an example would we
recommend to change renour
submission from october to
august
and then contract approval from
january to february which would
allow us to negotiate if there's
issues during that time or if we
see or if there's a closure
because it's still gives us a
non time to close but we also
don't want to close the school
in december at that step you
know and then the students not
show up in january so those are
some of our recommendations and
really want to think
the less staff and mister metoya
for his great work and
engagement.
Thank you for inviting me to
address the
committee mr chairman and
and da and committee members I
appreciate the opportunity to
share more specifically about
the funding and operations
related to state chartered
scores so state chartered
schools as opposed to local or
district charter schools are
their own lease their own local
educational agencies so that the
the director of a state charter
school is in effect the
superintendent of his or her own
district and as independent
ldas state charters interact
with the public education
department in ways that locally
authorize charter schools do not
deputy secretary to bell will
speak more about how
the public education department
as a whole service state charter
schools with the portion of the
charter two percent allocated to
to the ped generally after which
I will speak to the portion of
the the charter two percent that
funds the charter schools
division and the public
education commission and how csd
serve state charters.
And slide to
we are going to take a look at
how we have seat charter schools
that we've heard a little bit
but this is just kind of
highlights in the numbers a
little more so we have see
charter schools that are
authorized by the pec we have
the independent local education
agencies like we just heard
doctor escobar though speak
about and there we currently
serve sixty two state charter
schools for the twenty five
twenty sixth school year there
are eighty nine districts plus
sixty two state charter school
so the ped has a responsibility
of the oversight and monitoring
of a hundred and fifty one
distinct lease
with that local in district
turters school
authority that is within there
we are sea have forty district
authorized scores so they're it
within their districts there are
forty charter schools thirty as
we just heard from doctor
escobato are in the albuquerque
public schools and then we have
ten that are authorized in nine
districts that are across the
states
so on side three we have heard a
lot about the charter two
percent and
it is super important for the
paired as we work to support
all of the now and the net the
one hundred and fifty one
distinct lease the sixty two
state charter schools across the
state for this schools the two
percent is pulled out for that
charter schools to division to
work within the ped and it
supports this the costs that are
associated with what we have
heard already from mr montoya
federal and state requirements
the two percent also has been
agreed upon.
Between the administratively
attached pc and the agency the
two percent is then used where a
portion of the money is budgeted
by the pc and consultation with
the charter schools division to
do their work and the remainder
is budgeted by the agency again
to support the work across the
divisions so we still have for
example schools better
identified as m r I c s IT s
side so the priority schools
division has the responsibility
of working with those scores we
have schools like we heard i'm
chairbirth speak about who are
receiving cte funds we have the
obligation to support and to
ensure that perkins dollars as
well as our career connected
dollars are being used and
monitored effectively and
efficiently the two percent is
an alignment with other states
in general there are fifteen
states that withhold more than
two percent of the charter
school funding for oversight and
support and there are five
states that appropriate less
than two percent for that
overseas other states use a
combination of years of service
that a charter school has been
an operation
as well as other funding streams
for the work required to offer
charter school options direct
data state comparisons in
correlations are hard to make
because of the different funding
mechanisms across different
states and the two percent as a
total amount does fluctuate
slightly from year to year as a
number of state and district
charter schools change for their
fiscal year twenty six the
formula is the number of state
charters divided by the total
number of charters plus the
number of districts so to do a
little bit of math that is sixty
two divided by one hundred and
two plus eighty nine districts
are we know that there should be
the previous.
Okay one previously pleased no
other every go okay.
So sorry it's hard to see with
eyes in our back of her head i'm
not in the classroom teaching
anymore
this two percent is not an
arbitrary figure it reflects the
balance between the robust
necessary oversight and
maintaining school level funding
the pec authorized charters are
again independent lease which
means that full oversight
responsibility does lie within
the charter schools division and
although there are sixty two
state charter schools the csd
and the whole of ped supports
are one hundred and two charters
score state wide including those
district after race schools that
we've heard about now doctor
russell will take us through a
little bit more detail of the
charter two percent
and we are on slight four
announcement.
Thank you
secretary mrperiod chairman and
committee the portion of the the
charter two percent that the
charter schools division
managers supports a range of
critical services first does the
sd provide staff support for all
public education commission
meetings and hearings throughout
the year this includes the
monthly pec meetings community
and put hearings for new charter
applicants hearings to approve
new charter applications and
hearings for the commission to
vote on renewal applications the
csd conduct oversight in
monitoring of all state charter
schools including annual site
visits and annual performance
reports the csd business every
state charter school every year
and we visit schools up for
renewal in the fall and we visit
other schools in the spring
charter schools division staff
review
charter applications for renewal
and knew our applications to
open new charter schools and
once a
charter school is approved to be
authorized by the commission the
charter school division and then
supports that school during what
we call it's implementation
you're as it prepares to open it
stores the csd also provides
governing board training
switches required by statute
all of these other functions are
for state charters only but
governing board training is
provided to all charter schools
state charters and district
charters as well on slight five.
The charter schools division and
public education commission
implemented two new programs
over the path two years in fy
twenty four
we are piloted a data system for
the oversight of state charter
schools this is a system called
epicenter which was constructed
and um and
begun in fy twenty four and then
an fy twenty five was it's first
europe operation it provides a
repository for state charter
schools to submit all documents
required by the commission or
the division with a deep stamp
ability to
to provide comment to return
them to the school so that there
is a there's a permanent record
of of everything state charters
have had to submit
in the school year that in five
twenty five the pec inaugurated
a school improvement grant
program that the csd
administered this provided
support to state charter schools
in areas where the schools were
rated below meet standard on the
performance framework so schools
would apply for a a grant in
support of say improving their
financial processes or improving
math instruction or improving
graduation rates or improving
any other area of the financial
operational or academic
performance framework three
hundred and ninety nine thousand
dollars were awarded to support
forty one state chartered
schools and with the average
award around ten thousand
dollars.
This the charter two percent
overseen by csd also funds an
annual charter school conference
or a district and state charter
leaders staff teachers and
governing board members gather
for professional development
we
the charter two percent also
funds professional development
for csd staff and for public
education commissioners as
needed to support charter
schools on slate six you see the
organization chart of the
charter schools division there
are seventeen and a half ft
positions
two of those are currently
actually three of those are
currently vacant so we have
fourteen point five on staff
right now we have a new south
member joining us in a few weeks
the the core of the the csd team
is shown in green this is the
authoriting team this is the
team that goes out to visit
state charter schools and
provide any old monitoring and
oversight as well as technical
support upon requests from from
schools the the pink boxes are
the ta and training staff which
also provide all of the of the
the governing board and school
trainings and then we have
administrative stuff i'm
supporting the authorising and
ta change.
I think the next month you yes
so over the last couple of years
we have heard about the the
reversion amounts that have come
from the charter schools
division
and in order to support
transparency about the last two
years of reversing the next
slide which is slides number
seven we are demonstrating the
the reversions back to this
state
we have done a lot of digging
because this is concerning
because it is true that this
year's money is for this year
students no doubt
and so we have been looking at
rationale for the high numbers
of reversions one I would just
like to highlight that the pec
and the ped have formed a really
strong relationship and much of
this work is relational and so
having a high quality strong
relationship it has really
helped us to begin to delve into
this and look at ways that we
can support the spending of all
dollars for each year so we know
that the infusion of federal
funds through our best and serve
two and three did impact the way
that schools were able to spend
money many times they we were
making choices to spend the
federal funding dollars but four
or a head of state dollars next
we will also admit that there
has been not truly efficient
efforts with making sure that
all state dollars were expended
in appropriate time for a state
deadlines and we know that each
reverted dollar is a
misopportunity this is why we
have introduced the changes to
ensure that the funds are used
more effectively through the
mini grants for example their
doctor russell just highlighted
ways that we can be more
supportive to the scores and for
free twenty five some of those
improvements.
Really also include internal
streamlined processes and we
just highlighted one very
important one and that is the
adoption of the reporting
mechanism that schools now have
in
a episode center episode center
so we are working closely with
the pc to ensure that our
collaboration continues to
reduce and that
any reversions at may have but
also any unnecessary delays with
data reporting that charter
schools rely on the paired four
because we do hold onto their
data from testing from
assessment that all schools take
part in and because the fy
twenty five expenditures are be
still being processed the exact
reversion for this last year is
not yet available but we would
be happy to make sure that that
does become available but we do
anticipate it being somewhere
between seven and nine percent
of the total charter two
percent.
So as we are looking ahead we
are exploring legislative
solutions that would allow the
unexpended two percent funds to
go into the charter school
stimulus funds rather than
reverting to the general fund
this would help us to retain
funds for the strategic
reinvestment in high performing
or high needs charter schools
and the ped has focused on
supporting a performance based
expansion growing successful
models and bringing quality
choices to understand
communities where there are not
currently charter schools
sometimes we call them charter
school deserts because we could
offer more choice in voice for
families if there were more
charter scores our performance
framework does allow for a new
one's evaluation including drop
out recovery for special
populations and we also support
this will also support the work
of the new mexico ped strategic
big five goals
during the implementation year
for a charter school there is no
seg that is being generated yet
by that particular school
because they don't have schools
yet so the cost of the opening
up as score finding a building
buying things like desks
computers for teachers to use
hiring staff is a cost that is
absorbed to buy that charter two
percent as well
and if legislation like we sell
last year were to occur as
senate bill three fifty six but
ped does feel strongly that
there would be much confusion
around how regulation would work
who would actually be
responsible for the federal
regulations and other star that
all schools must follow and
since the pec is here to serve
and work with a long side of the
ped we would like to know how
the relationship.
Between the pec and the ped
would work effectively
significant work would need to
be done to decouple the agency
and it's administrative body the
agency would still need to have
significant oversight of the
charter schools and again this
might lead to redundancy as well
as extra expenses for the
supports that the agency is
currently providing to scores
and I think I will just am
finish up by reintroducing
doctor bridge at wrestle as the
new charter schools director we
know that she is committed to
she's been working with charter
schools for nearly a decade now
she is working a very diligently
with her team to reduce
inefficiencies strengthen
internal systems and keeping
student outcomes at the center
of everything that they do thank
you and I think now it's we've
gone a long time this is a large
presentation and we're here for
questions
I think you are reduced and for
any question
thank you mark
questions team
representative cohen.
Thank you mister chair so I had
to have some comments but earn
some questions so it limit
disaster the first part is how
much training does the
government are required to do
per year.
Mr chairman and representative
that was recently changed and
statute it had been eight hours
a year and it was changed to
five hours a year but new
governing board members are
required to have ten training
hours during their first year in
the mission and so
cause they don't go through the
new mexico school board
association so they have their
own training in is that this
after the training that of that
conference that you're doing per
year or how are they getting
their training as good morning
for members mr chairman and
representative there are a
number of ways that continuing
board members can receive their
training all address new new
board members at the end
continuing members can
receive their training at the
charter schools conference that
we offer every year though there
are certain sessions of the
conference they're designated
for broad training credit the
charter school division also
provides free monthly trainings
for continuing board members so
any board member can receive
training by
by attending online classes
provided by the charter schools
division at no cost all they
have to do with email and
register for it there are also
easinchiness courses in canvas
that the csd has developed and
made available
csd has also provided one say
trainings out at no cost to
schools at the request of
individual boards they've said
we want to get all of our
training done in one day we want
to have a board retreat can you
come on site and our staff will
will make those arrangements
upon request some other schools
choose to obtain their training
from peace public charter
schools of new mexico pcs and m
or from other pd approved board
trainers that's for continuing
board members new board members
have to take.
The ten hours provided by the
charter schools division and
that is available asynchronously
in canvas so the the new board
members have you know they're at
their leisure at their
convenience they
they obtained that training
thank you mister and is there
any consequences if they do not
take their trading
good thank you mr chairman
representative yes there is a
well for state charter schools
the consequence is a rating of
working to meet or does not meet
standard on their performance
framework but the the charter
schools division reports to all
authorizations including the pc
about charter board member
training so we provide a report
to albuquerque public schools
here's all of your thirty boards
which board members completed
their trainings which do not
it's very granular and we
provide that to all of the other
ten districts are night the
other nine districts that after
I one charter school each and
tells this case to charter
schools okay and thank you
mister chair and so I was
looking at some of the one of
the presentations I think that
was with aps when you were
looking at there are some that
are graduation rates set think
the lowest with about twenty
three percent
was that correct or some around
their twenty nine percent i'd
like to find a slide this year
chair
representative that is correct
and so
what is the front I mean how
long have they been about level
and account of what i'm seeing
is is such a low percentage
where you at how long does it
take for you to implement plans
to bring it up or that it gets
closed I kind of want to know
the process because that's an
ex- unless it's I can
alternative type school for a
credit recovery those type of
things
which I tried to look.
That school up so i'm trying to
get some little bit information
on that mrperiod chairman
representative yes so what's
happened and albuquerque is we
have very few district
alternative schools and so the
charters have really filled that
space in the high school area
but what's great about charter
schools is that they can get up
to our it's a five year contract
that every school receives all
we talk about renewal that is
what room were judging them on
how did they perform in the
previous four years of you
so for in this case are one of
the schools with low performance
so they have set their own
goals and targets as you can see
as an example that we have every
school do on page nine you can
see this score as an example of
what they set their targets for
for reading so for example one
you see those projections all
the way through twenty six
twenty seven because this is one
four charter contract so at the
end of that it is state law
allows us to non renew if they
did not meet academic standards
and so
all of our schools you are
either making progress or we are
working with them and counciling
them to say hey you're not
making progress renewals looking
unlikely in two years and that's
where we also get into the space
of should they be allowed or not
to switch authorizers if we're
pressing pressuring them on
accountability for academic.
Question when required app
so i'm a little concerned in
this it sounds like you know
kind of oversight on smith
especially with the expenditures
of money sounds like we've
dropped the ball for a couple of
years on this is what it sounds
like can I ask how many
directors you have gone through
the charter school divisions in
the last couple of years
chairman soles and
representative call and we have
changed one time now
and send out there's been a lot
of turnover over at head just
prematures
so I am concerned when we're
looking at you know and
reburning back to the general
fund not going where it release
should go
with them.
So that that's kind of what i'm
looking at but thank you so much
miss i'll have big
representative senator result.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative colon as the
questions I was going to
regarding the
board members of our charter
schools and I guess I need to
direct this question to mister
montoya whenever we're talking
about that two percent
administration withholding this
all takes place i'm
sick page twelve I guess your
hands out
policies compare with their
surrounding states are they
withholding more or less as far
as our charter schools go.
Mrperiod chair said result thank
you I think period of great job
kind of providing a national
landscape with does range from
about point five or two in one
point five
steeper state we have
pedirect
spoke to it's not an arbitrary
amount that we did this is in
line with national standards the
two percent I think the point
that I was trying to make is
that we just need to ensure that
that you present is being used
for putting you know account but
it's been with help for forget
purpose and then just having
transparency and where that's
actually going
and as far as audit go is each
charter school responsible for
getting there are its done or is
it up to the state too to step
in and be able to help up so
stay trying to schools and this
was a actual point of
legislation this past year p d
those charter schools fall under
their audit be used the same
auditor they pay for that their
portion audit costs but it is
included and their audit and
then as far as for locally they
follow under their local
authorities
alright
and let me see there's anything
else here.
No sir I think
representative colon did very
good job asking the questions I
was had concerns about thank you
mister
most mr chairman represent other
mister chairman represent.
Thank you so much mister chair
thank you guys for your
presentation all of you guys I
mean it's a lot of information
so sorry if I have two million
questions but i'm just gonna
start with I guess ped or the
last doctor to bill just a
couple of questions I believe
you said at the end of your
presentation it was like slipped
in there you said you want to
reduce an efficiencies can you
tell me what specific
inefficiencies were referring to
sure
chairman romaro since germans
will send less stepped out it's
confusing too and represented a
black so some of the
inefficiencies that we have been
working on since twenty twenty
four is really the data system
that has been put into place
and we are also looking at how
the charter schools division can
more closely align with and work
with the other divisions and
bureaus within the agency so
that charter school data that
they need that come from the ped
are more effectively
inefficiently given to them so
that they can do their site
visit reporting for example
and they're reporting back to
the pec I think another strong
piece of collaboration there is
work that we've been doing
internally in the agency with a
project called the coherence
project.
Thank you so much mister chair
thank you for that and then I
guess I would just go back to
your slide seven about what's
reverted back could you tell me
from that three point seven for
foy twenty three and that four
point five million how many of
those are going to f t how many
individual
full time employees are
overseeing these dollars that
necessary to keep them there to
continue to put the money out
sir so
in
and doctor russells and
presentation also she went over
the charter schools division
currently has seventeen point
five full time employees but we
also have support from the
fiscal and accountability
accounts payable team that are
refunded with the charter two
percent
thank you and thank you mr chair
thank you doctor develop and
then I guess this next question
would be for probably chairwoman
but can you tell me more about
what what your processes when it
comes to
collaborating with the ped and
then what you see as
inefficiencies that could be
fixed through legislation or
other things I know you kind of
touched into it but maybe I
guess if you want to give a
laundry list of other the great
things that you want to happen I
would love to see that on a
legislative level thank you
thank you mr chair
representative
yeah I think we've actually got
into a place where the pec I
would say before twenty twenty
two when the most sign the pac
was actually left in a lot of
dark spaces when it came to
collaborating with pedia's very
difficult after commissioners to
get information from ped csd
never siesda's always been you
know the
weight we need yet they are our
staff they do all the work for
us so csd has always been very
gracious in in clab reading with
us because we're instructing
them on how to what what what
information we need.
Working with ped has been
difficult on because we do see
ourselves from the constitution
from the statute that we are
independently elected board and
so we do have a difficult time
allowing ourselves to be truly
independent because we do have
to constantly ask for a
permission from ped for
expenditures for doing things
the way we want to do them for
example one of the things that
it was challenging but we did we
were able to clarity enough to
work through the process and get
it done was we wanted to make a
rule that defined our processes
so that schools as as
commissioners changed over
that school leaders who stayed
the same wouldn't be disrupted
by that transition every two to
four years and so we wanted to
run a rule the pedi wouldn't
allow us to do our own role
because they held them money so
that we couldn't pay to do the
rule on our own so we
collaborated with them so that
they could do the role on our
behalf even though it wasn't
necessarily ideal for us but we
were happy to work with them
i'm it was a difficult this is
just one example of kind of the
though odds situation we get to
be in sometimes we we the way we
see it as the pec's procedures
how we do things is independent
of PED we don't have to ask
permission of the ped to do our
procedures the way that we want
to but when we ran the roar ped
staff reviewed correct made made
revisions of our processes in
procedures and because we don't
have independence with our
finances we have to kind of
submit and well okay you know
it's not exactly what we want
but we're going to get a lot of
it so we'll give what we can and
take what we can to to do what's
best for what we believe is
doing with best for the kids
that we oversee
so we did end up running a rule
through the ped for our
processes and procedures that
has created an immense amount of
clarity in of roll.
Of rolls of procedures that are
schools can go back to now refer
to and feel confident that
commissioners is we come and go
there procedures get to stay the
same so that's an example of
kind of some of the tension that
we have in trying to be an
independent and a truly
independent commission without
actually being truly
independent.
Thank you mister chair thank you
so much for that and I I would
ask five or six more questions
but I know we're sort of time so
i'm just going to give that to
other people and hopefully they
ask what I was thinking thank
you mister chairman thank you
thank you and if we have time
will will do another round if
people have additional questions
that were represented
thank you mister chair thank you
for all of you
I just want to remind our huge
listening public that they are
public charter schools in new
mexico other states have four
profit organizations our law
makes this non profit public
schools I just think some people
some of their charter schools
always advertise tuition free
well their public score so
there's no tuition
yeah back to that two percent I
think that really has to be
addressed I had a bill that was
pocket vetoed in twenty twenty
three that said added one word
up to two percent so I think
that's concerning and i'm
concerned that that money isn't
reverted to the schools the
money for the two percent comes
from specific charter schools I
think any reversion needs to go
back to the schools also it's
hard for pd when you talk about
the two percent there is a
mixture of federal phone state
funds and the two percent so
it's a very new and situation so
just want to say that
i'd question I have renewed
on the rule making the pec is
constitutionally created as an
independent organization so why
I don't understand why you can't
do your own rules I think that's
that conflictive situation have
you gotten any feedback from
like a legislative council
services.
So we actually did receive
a letter at one point from the
late senator um oh neal
talking about the intention of
the rpc and that they that there
was an intention to allow the pc
to create it on rule we
submitted that to pd but once
again because we don't have
access to on funding I mean it
was I want to say we got to a
place where I think it was like
a a fifty dollar
check needed to be written to
you know state records and they
wouldn't write it for so we so
we're happy to then collaborate
you know if that's we we want to
do our work efficiently
effectively and so we will work
through whatever barriers we
come across so like I said we
still did end up we do have a
role that we felt very good
about that our our schools can
be confident and but we did we
did differ that we felt like we
could run her own rule but you
know that.
There wasn't really much we
could do about it.
Thank you because what i'm
hearing is who makes the
policies we have an elected body
of ten people from around the
state and we have the ped with
the charter schools division and
i'm hearing
I feel like this is a unsolved
limit which is why I sponsored
house bill through sixty five
that you'd actually get your own
staffing because when we talk
about the use of the money i'm
using it for
like exploring charter school
deserts frankly if we had
charter schools in some of our
areas it would destroy the
public school system the other
school district of six hundred
people and then you bring a
charter scored that's an issue
which were not going to talk
about here but it's but it came
up with arm of the policy
explanation who makes the policy
could some of you way in on that
case i'm seeing a problem there.
Think you have mister chair
represent it
from our perspective as the pec
we do believe that we have the
autonomy and oversight authority
to open and review hopes was
accountable and then close state
charter schools independently
that is now a ped initiative
that is duties as stated to us
in state
we we do not oversee ped buros
we do not oversee pediwork we do
hold ourselves very separately
and we hold our role very
seriously that it is separate
from the ped duties and they are
in addition to way all schools
are new mexico have to abide by
every ped lawn rule the short
the schools that we oversee have
additional policies and
performance framework that the
pec holds not the PED
so it was concerning when I saw
some of the things that are
listed in the ped reformation
that were being seen as p d
initiatives that are not
many of these items are pecky
initiatives that are under the
funding that we are utilizing
and almost none of it was why
PED is doing to support the
state charter charter schools
with that two percent money so
it was concerning to me that
once in a lot of this
presentation from the pd is the
PE c work it's our initiatives
that we are supporting through
our portion of the funding
that is independent of PED and
this is once again I I know you
know that representative because
i've had a lot of conversations
with you but it does put the
system itself puts the charter
schools division in a pickle
because we are directing them
independently of the pd with our
initiatives are performance
framework what we expect from
our charter schools very
specifically in addition they're
also being instructed by the
pedian ped initiatives it it
does put it in a very precarious
position especially for our
schools.
When they are when they get
received by a charter school
division employee it's very
difficult for them to separate
what the pec is holding them
accountable for and what the PED
is holding them accountable for
and they're they're trying to do
it under the same entity and
it's they're not the their
different we do have different
standards that we need our staff
to really be honed in and
focused in one
that separate an independent of
what the PED initiatives are so
it's it is it's a little bit of
a wonky system and I think you
can have an incredible person in
that directory and it's going to
be a very awkward situation for
them almost daily by having
multiple people telling them
instructing them on how to
perform the duties of the pec
and PED.
And ped do you want to comment
on that
at a certainly terror and
representative I I feel like
two things I do I do admit like
that the soul rule making
authority right now does lie
with the ped and as such the ped
has been given
the authority for doing that and
so how we build and continue to
build the relationship with an
elected body will continue to be
an area for growth I think that
we will always have new folks
coming in that are elected
making sure that they are caught
up to speed with what the
governing body has been doing
itself so that will always
be an area for the charter
schools division and the pd to
work on and where and I would
just like to respond just
slightly is that the the
presentation from the pd is
because of the work that the
charter schools division does in
collaboration with the pec and
in many areas we are in complete
alignment with the pec although
it is different courts to be a
charter score operator so
running a charter score because
by design you are jumping into a
world that contains multiple
systems in our case in new
mexico you have the pec system
as a governing body but you also
have the worlds of public
education as an authority as
well so you have different
entities that you are obligated
to just to serve students with
thank you miss shoulders have
one more comment I know that
there's been efforts to bring
back stay board of education
that hasn't happened that's.
Theory so I don't want to
justify police season concerns
that are theory article
and that disadvantage the pec
because something that might
happen I don't support it
personally I don't support it
returned as state word of
education myself so I don't want
us to use that as a what if to
make our policy decisions today
thank you
thank you representative
representative robot copy at
all.
Thank you mister chair and think
you offer your presentation this
morning I before I begin I just
I do need to and want to
acknowledge my husband who is a
former public education
commissioner and I always still
eh in light of the our
presentation and also doctors
come whether and I were of
students together and the school
of public administration got a
masters together so i'm really
arm proud of our relationship
i'm going thank you so I i'd
like to.
Begin by going to
the
presentation by my mister monday
on page of fourteen and I I
already have had a heard our
colleague several colleagues
resume respond to this
and give common about the
importance of reverting first of
all it's stressful to see that
we have those amount of funds
reverting
second of all the position is
very clear I believe that those
funds also should be returned to
the school so whatever way that
we can build upon the onvoint
relationship between elia c and
all of your processes we've got
to find a way to
ensure that those funds go back
to wear in our opinion or best
served and I think we all agree
on that I I think we just need
to find the mechanisms and
reporting processes that are
necessary to
insure the oversight that we
have all of the son are
shoulders
I do want to make a comment
about what representative
garrett was just speaking about
and it's important to note that
in my view I I do understand the
degree of autonomy that blies
with in the public education
commission and the commissioners
oversight of the charter schools
that they're responsible for
I also see the unique mister
chair relationship between
pdmpec because of the public
that in the interest of all of
us and they think you've heard
me say this before that I
believe that the public
education department is charged
with
that oversight and that
monitoring it.
All of of the responsibilities
that are related to ensuring
that our children are
constitutionally protected under
the preview of public
and I think that's the key so
whenever there's public funding
involved in in any aspect
especially in public education
we must maintain that
responsibility within the
department so that we as a
legislative body
can turn to that body
for that responsibility sold it
is that unique relationship I
don't I think this is where
legislative education study
committee and our staff come in
and can be very helpful and
trying to work out the best way
in which to
give it's not so much the credit
but incorporate what it is that
pc it is seen on a regular more
regular basis
as it relates to the children to
their chargering
responsibilities so I have a
question
in my question goes to and I
have to always look at this up
I want to know how the charter
schools are going to under both
the pc and under the tragical
division of ped and I think
you've heard a racist point over
and over again how we're going
to insure that
cultural and linguistic
relevance remains as a core
element of instruction
and lies within the compliance
review in assessment processes.
As it relates to directly to the
martinez yazi court orders
that's a key provision that
remains within the review of
public education department but
that pec is then the unique
position of them having another
layer of
insurance on that that's one and
so then i'm interested in
knowing that answer and then how
does p d
is pd when the insure that
oversight within the realm of
the responsibilities of the
court orders and then another
associated question are it's
just a three is how is the pec
and the puddy jointly going to
promote the upcoming stakeholder
meetings that are going to be
held around the state to inform
and discuss the proposed key
components of the action plan
that's been rolled out and i'm
sure i'm helping that you all
mister chair are
informed of what those key
components of the action plan
are if not I can really quickly
through them but that's a three
prong question and to never I
would believe that first
question I mean the first part
of it goes to pc charp women and
then ped and that in that order
and then I have one final
comment in that set thank you
mister chair thank you thank you
mister chair think you represent
robot calling cabinet and I
think he thought thank you for
his service as well
so I think this is actually a
i'm i'm so grateful for this
question because it actually is
a really gray opportunity to
really exemplify the roles and
responsibilities and separation
of duties between the pec and
pediatric I I love this.
So from the pec perspective
while we are not held the pc is
not named in the in the lisa
however we have taken equity
very seriously it's part of our
values as part of our mission
and it's encompasses how we show
up every day when we when we do
our work as pc members are
performance framework has so
when we look at charter schools
from our role we look at their
outputs as accountability folks
we always talk about how we are
kind of looking in the rear view
mir we're looking at our schools
outcomes their inputs is where
we protect our their autonomy
from from pervie so we allow
charter schools to have autonomy
on their inputs we review them
we have a contract in which we
review their educational program
we review their things like
cultural linguistically response
of education we review those
tenants as part of their
education plan is part of their
contract we actually have even
had a school that dead come to
us that we felt like was not
providing a c l r I kind of
education for their students and
actually as when we approved
them to move to the pec we
actually made them have getting
training in culturally
linguistically responsive
education as part of a condition
for them to actually start our
oversight and that school
actually took it they hired
doctors rockie doctor holly to
come speak with them and it
actually improved not just the
at the data the outcomes that we
saw but in improve the quality
of the environment of that
school because the teachers all
they embraced that that teaching
and learning and implemented in
their classrooms after so really
are focus is looking at okay
where inputs are you choosing
for your students how is this
model you need how is it
different what are you promising
to these families and students
we take a look at that we talk
about it with them and then we
look.
Annually at their outputs and in
our performance framework that
we just adopted two years ago so
it's in full it's in
implementation for several of
our from up for about half of
our schools are on this new
performance framework and it's
the first time that we are
specifically looking at
student groups at that score
we're looking at whether that
school is meeting the individual
growth targets for students so
we're not looking at proficiency
we're looking is the schools
meeting the growth targets for
every student in their score by
subgroup so our expectation is
that we're going to easily be
able to see which of our student
groups and all of our schools
may be being under served
because we're looking at growth
where every school should be
meeting that students individual
growth
so we're looking to see exactly
which student groups are in
every single one of our schools
and then we're looking to see
how those schools are meeting
their individual growth targets
and we do not want to see group
we you know we don't want to see
charts where it's up high for
some student groups and really
low for some student groups so
we're actually going to be able
to take action on that which we
believe is actually exactly why
the judge from the martin is
yazi case is looking for is
looking for data like that of
how are all these student groups
being served equitably so that
is something we actually
committed to about a year and a
half ago and are implementing
now.
And then it sorry and that but
when it comes to the actual
content of the cultural
linguistically response of
education we we
we need their seat alter the ped
to carry out its duties with
that and with their division and
then provide us report so if
they see though a charter school
that we oversea is not doing but
they're supposed to be doing
when it comes to the oversight
that the PED does that when we
then can take action
madam yes and chairman and
representative about cover you
know I would also just like to
add so yeah with high quality
instruction materials so
designing right now we're doing
an adaption we have invited
charter school leaders and
teachers to participate in the
selection of high quality
instructional materials that are
culturally in linguistically
relevant we are monitoring
through our language and culture
division how students are
performing looking at access
scores special education
department regularly reports
back about how students are
performing in terms of their iep
goals are etc so I do I do
believe that is an area where we
are in lock step with the pc and
making sure that we are holding
schools accountable to address
their stay colder engagement
around the yazi martinez case
we have invited all charter
schools as we get ready for an
incredibly busy august
with alba kirky
being probably one of the
largest especially with the
huge number of charter schools
in the metro area but we will be
traveling to mass clara
farmington santa fe rate on last
crucials espinola clovis carl's
bad silver city and suni and so
as we are getting the word out
about those stay colder
engagement meetings.
Our charter schools as well as
our individual lee districts are
are being asked to help promote
that as well
thank you mister chair and think
that's very very important those
take holder meanings arm and
bite the communities and I think
that not just
administrative iraqi damage
entities but opening it up to
the actual parents and families
and
activist educational activities
that reside in all of these
communities is really important
so how we get the word out thank
you for that that's very
important my final comment has
to do with arm
the I think it's the page eight
and the very last bullet and I
just want to arm
before I go on to that room
quickly just even though pec was
not named specifically because
it falls under the perview of
public and constitutional
protections we have to have that
is insurance that ped and pec
are providing that necessary
oversight and review and
evaluation and assessment and
that's a great arm
chairwoman but you presented a
very enthusiastic and and great
way of a manner in with you
under taking their seriously so
the final point is just on payg
where it talks about support new
charters and communities without
school choice I understand the
supporting part but i'm not
quite sure when we say school
choice it's actually referring
to a particular mindset
that that might not be
this might not be the place for
this and I just say cautionary
that I think the students
choice.
And what's best for what's going
to work for the students and why
we need to insure that those
processes protect the students
future and there are successors
and not getting involved in two
the political
could be construed as the
political main set of the
discussions around school twice
so I would just ask you to to
kind of
provide that in a more neutral
manner but thank you very much
mister chair thank you thank you
senator ramos.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you parallel you you really
educated me today and I
appreciate that I i'd really
don't have any questions because
they've thought there's
senators are representatives
have asked some great questions
but I do want to make a comment
in my district I have to really
get charter schools outside such
a charges and although leopold
and their great schools and in a
lot of these kids visiting when
i'm visiting the schools I just.
Am I appalled to see how awesome
they treat their director in
there their teachers and and
they're loving their school the
atmosphere there's just just
above and I visit my other
schools you know the cobrin and
silver it's it's a little
different it of course we have
some great kids everywhere but
in these charter schools the
connection that is made with
these kids is amazing to me and
a lot of these kids when i'm
going through I I talked to
means they say I wouldn't be
going to school right now if it
would be for this charter school
so think you offer what you're
doing I appreciate you and I
know that all our hearts are in
the right police who were of
trying to do it's best for all
our children and I don't know
about the other charter schools
but these two there are have in
my district are arson and thank
you very much for what you.
And
the information in general and
the more specific details for
sure
I have a question on
some of the information that
were shared on the map I love
this map thank you
on page twenty three and it says
it looks like it says that there
are fifty six charters in
burning your county and I
imagine that that's a
combination of state and
district charters and i'm
wondering how many of those
fifty six and there's a little
three in order one but they look
like there is with different
counties of other than burning
all young
how many of those fifty six or
aps turners
mr chair.
Mr chair and representative
thirty.
Thank you mister thirty or aps
districts are charters.
Um
so that's still quite a number
of
of charters and
um and so my my question too
would be just um having looked
into this at all this is all new
information for me
but since there's such a high
concentration in bernald your
county are my question might be
or future consideration looking
out where are there differences
in needs in terms of operating
charters in berlio county as
compared to some of the rural
counties
and and that's for further
discussion later
don't want to take up too much
time
on the app presentation I was
wondering and I had it here on
page four
there is this beautiful map with
lots of colors and it's um very
important map for looking at
graduation rates was wondering
if we could get a copy minister
chair of
some information because some of
the colors can or look similar
and it's hard to distinguish
which schools are.
At which line on that group so
it would be wonderful we could
get
some information specific to
graduation rates for each of
these that are mentioned and
they're on page nine I think
it's page line you showed us age
of I think this is achievement
rates and i'm wondering are
these the percentages of
students at proficiency doctor
scobalto and mister chair.
This is share representative
will get to we do have a
graduation a rate one page we
consented which will have that
details but I was trying to
demonstrate here is that the the
performance is all over the man
so I think we we can't approve
the point but we won't provide
you that information.
Can you tell me what you mean by
the performance as all over the
map well if you look at
just just the graduation rates
ninety one percent to twenty
percent is the full spectrum but
will get to the details of high
school
i'm also interested mister chair
on page nine and two categories
specifically that are specific
to the martinez lawsuit
and yazi losses and I and I
understand the charter piece is
not part of the
official martinez last week but
I have questions here on some of
this data
mister chair and representative
what I was trying to demonstrate
here is this tables actually in
each of the schools contracts so
what we are doing for example is
requiring this score to look at
their baseline data from twenty
one twenty two and in their
contract really look at
projecting performance and
that's what we're holding them
accountable to but specifically
with yazi martinez we are
working with each school to make
sure that we are closing gaps
then we are perpetuating five
percentage point gains for every
student group or we're not going
to close the gaps with yazi
martinez and so given them that
reflection is really been
helpful just go whether i've
known you for many years I love
you dearly but it's martinez and
yansee it's two last suits and
martinez filed first so please
keep that in mind
in terms of this is one
one
score is that right
this is yes this is one example
of one school and their contract
so I actually don't remember
which school is
okay and mister chair I bring
this up because whether we're
looking at charters or we're
looking at public scores I think
it's very important that we
recognize um what we are doing
with students with disabilities
in charters and with students
who.
Are in the economically
disadvantage category I don't
know that we have any district
smister that don't have students
and poverty and that was a huge
part of the martinez last year
that's where the judge got the
matters done terms of the
evidence that was provided and
so
just wanted to make sure that
both of these categories even in
charters are being addressed but
I have one last question and.
I said so um
that's okay i'll escalate her
thank you mister chair thank you
any other questions where I get
some my questions
if that let me start out
doctor assistant director I
misunderstood her it didn't make
sense on the two percent you
said is on a district is all of
it goes in and they get still by
by sixty two charters I not on a
head town of the seg money I
don't understand oh no so and
doctor russell can probably
speak to this way better than me
but i'll take a stab first so
the charter two percent
fluctuates every year because it
is two percent of each schools
seg and so as the schools
membership increases so does
their contribution to the two
percent
but then it gets distributed out
on a school basis on an equal
thing so that that large diploma
charters are footing more in but
getting the same but getting a
smaller percentage back so
they're subsidizing the small
ones in my understanding
mr chairman no every charter
school receives ninety eight
percent of its seg funding two
percent of the funding for each
individual state charter score
comes to the ped and two percent
of each individual district
charter school goes to that
district so it doesn't all go
into one part mission
achievement success you know
with over a thousand students
pays two percent of its very
large seg whereas you know dream
to turter
has a very small enrollment and
they pay a smaller total amount
because it's two percent of
their total sec okay I think I
understand now thank you because
I was like that I thought you
know see is a head count and
then it sounded like it.
We were doing it back the other
way up
several years back there was
lots of concern about the online
statewide charters do we still
have online state white charters
however they performing on that
and let me kind of ask the next
question that's embedded within
that at the elementary level or
they required to teach the
science are reading a letters
and our other elementary
charters required to teach the
science of reading and letters
like all of the the traditional
schools
mr chairman yes there are still
two fully online state charter
schools pacober academy and new
mexico connections academy both
of those schools are one hundred
percent online they do teach the
science of reading they do
receive letters training just
like all the other schools
thank you as i've watched
letters being done in the
classroom I don't know how you
do that online
that would be very interesting
you know but that all the the
teachers that are teaching that
have been trained in letters is
what you tell me yes
mr chairman that is the goal and
I believe so we always ask about
letters training and about
literacy in our annual visits I
will say that that
monitoring virtual only charter
schools has been a challenge and
we have thought about internally
you know how we how we do that
is there
you know and we're looking at at
best practices in other states
because it's it's very easy to
to to monitor in person charter
schools we go on site we observe
classrooms we talk to the
teacher focus groups that
renewal we talked a family focus
groups
observing classroom instruction
in an online school is more
challenging because we have to
you know where we have to get
the zoom sign in and then we
yeah it's it's it's a different
and it's
it it is more it is much more
challenging.
Thank you kind of in governance
and the board the the governing
board is not publicly elected is
that correct
mr chairman yes that is correct
that is correct on each
governing board according to it
has its own set of bill laws to
determine how board members are
recruited and on boarded and
selected there are some charter
schools that have
finite terms after which a
member has to leave the board
and they recruit another member
and the board boats and approves
the new member other charter
schools don't have term limits
and you you have board members
who have been on the board since
the charter school opened
thank you and part of the reason
that comes is there one of the
charters down in los cruces
there were some serious concerns
about the head master for lack
of a better term and the board
and having closed meetings there
are public body or their their
meetings are supposed to be all
following open meetings act lots
of people they were calling me
who do I talk to about the
concerns who has oversight when
there are closed meetings when
the board has been selected by
the headmaster in vice verse you
know they they felt like there
was no
oversight for what is supposed
to be a public body who do they
go talk to
mr chairman for a state charter
it's us and I I am i'm aware of
which school you're referring to
um
currently that school is that
school was on a corrective
action plan
with the public education
commission we have made
additional visits to that school
and one of the things that the
csd does monitor is adherence to
the open meetings act and so any
school that is having closed
sessions for anything other than
the personnel matters then it is
appropriate for up aboard to
have a close session for
personnel matters.
Um
if members of the public believe
other things are being talked
about
if we have no evidence of that
we can't sit a school for that
but if a school is
you know to our knowledge not
conducting open meetings that
school will get a does not meet
standard on that
that indicator in their
performance framework and that
will be reported to the public
education commission which can
take action and thank you so you
would be the the proper person
to refer them to because I was
kind of like I don't really have
any direct say I think I
probably referred them to that
he gives it
and so I was sending them to you
batty so I was probably why you
were getting a lot of calls
sorry
couple other questions if if you
don't mind
so one other thing is just like
a traditional school board
governing boards are also
everything by the attorney
general and the omay act so if
there's that we we actually do
not ask our csd staff to make
those kind of calls we were for
folks to file complaints with
the attorney general's office as
that's their duties so we do
that is the oversight four
governing boards for charter
schools and that it there is
clear direction directly to that
for folks to i'm submit their
complaints and then once the
attorney general does it's
ruling then we have csd take
action and that's when the PE c
does as well yes thank you and
and I did refer them to that was
one of the other relief
mechanisms to them up in new
mexico and we just passed a
fairly large program for free
reduced price they're not that
mean for free lunches and
breakfast do charter schools are
they required to provide that
for all of their students as
well
thank you mister chair so
statutory they're not required
to however we do have it as part
of our contract and we have been
encouraging all of our schools
especially new schools and then
at contract negotiation to
provide scores we actually talk
about it frequently on the
public education commission.
In addition to transportation as
well i'm charter schools like
many of our rural schools
actually have a lot of
similarities in some of the
difficulties with providing food
to students and under the
accordance of the national free
and reduced lunch program and
then with the new i've healthy
foods act that was passed it
creates additional burdens that
sometimes are difficult for
schools to be able to follow
charter schools have unique
actually I I actually as i've
traveled around this day I feel
like sometimes I see a lot of
similarities between traditional
districts you are in very rural
areas i've new mexico and
charter schools even in
albuquerque
it it really takes on
depth of its own when it comes
to providing resources for
students and I actually try to
connect them some of our charter
leaders with rule school
superintendence because I hear
them have a lot of the same
things you know the
superintendents having to go
pick up food you know in that
then their own vehicles bring it
over and I hear that from our
charter leaders as well often so
they do have some unique
challenges that I actually think
you might hear very similarities
between some of your very rural
i'm and smaller districts as
well yes thank you and and
regularly we talk about charters
are like micro districts you
know we have a whole bunch of
micro districts came to belong
the same thing and when the ones
I hear about is the charters
don't provide the specialized
services for instance someone
comes in with the level of
behavior disorder and your
parents are being told like well
yeah we can do it but the public
schools really you know the
traditional ones are going to
search your child better that's
concerning you as to where it's
there or same thing if somebody
comes in needs more by lingual
services or bike you know their
public school are they required
to provide that level of
services and what we often hear
are those kind of gentle but
yeah but you know you'd be
better somewhere else how is
that handle.
Thank you mr chair I i'm going
to be very frank with you
because i've heard those those
concerns from families as well
so i'm not going to sugar co
anything generally charter
schools do you have larger
special education populations I
mean we have many charter
schools I mean some of our
charters have over fifty percent
are our students with special it
with disabilities i'm however I
have heard that
kind of behind the scenes and
you know they they charter
schools are required to accept
every single student that
applies to their watery and if
they do a lottery and that
student is drawn they are
absolutely required to provide
the absolute best education to
that student regardless of their
disability so we do not support
that kind of beating around the
bush or maybe it's not
appropriate and we if if it's
ever reported to us we would
have conversations with those
schools and I would encourage
like I will encourage every
family if you ever hear that
from a charter school from a
traditional school because we
hear it from traditional schools
every once in a while too
report that it is in appropriate
is not okay and but I would say
for I don't think that's the
norm I do think there's
exceptions where I have heard I
I do not I do not believe
parents are making that up
however I don't think that's the
norm I think there's many
charter schools who not only
encourage students with special
needs to attend their school
because they actually feel like
they can provide exceptional
services that may be at a
neighborhood school may not be
resourced to do and actually
they could provide um at the
charter school so it could be a
little bit of a mixed bag but I
I totally understand where
you're coming from cause i've
heard it myself but it's not
something from the pc's
perspective is not something
that we would ever allow a
charter leader to come and
present to us and talk to us and
let us know that they discourage
students from attending their
school we find it highly
inappropriate any legal.
Thank you that that's nice to
hear I know special edurance get
very tired of having to fight
for every single thing and often
avoid trying to get on the list
feeling that they're going to
have to fight to get the full
services
but you know why when I hear of
those I will will let let people
know because it does happen and
in the bilingual realm and in
the parents who their kid needs
free and reduced lunch up and
feel like it's not worth the
fight and therefore you'll get
moved over more to the
traditional public school
but thank you I I appreciate
that that's it's kind of subtle
and underneath nobody's going to
come out so yeah we don't allow
those students so but thank you
I appreciate your response
we often hear lots about the
salaries of some of the leaders
and the staff that are paid
substantially more than the
public the traditional public
schools are able to pay what are
the average salaries for
principles for teachers and
others within the chart and I
went to comment also many of the
come back on the last topic to
wonderful charters whose mission
is to pick up the special edge
students a number of the special
lead numbers are inflated by the
gifted students a deal with
themselves we have to be careful
when we're talking about the
number of special edge students
that are in charter schools that
it often is inflated by gifted
programs in those schools that
that is some of their mission
but i'm sorry I remember that as
I was telling the.
The question so not salaries
thank you mr chair actually
that's not something that the pc
overseas that I would be
something arm that the ped
overseas under its umbrella
tiered licenser and if there's
any allowable id be under the
legislature that's not something
the pc overseas however I will
say we have had schools before
where we have brought up how
much it the school leaders are
being paid we believe that's a
governing board training item
i'm which actually we really are
turning a lot of focus to our
governing boards and really
looking to increase the quality
of the training because just
like a traditional school board
we see often times when you have
an incredible governing
council and governing board of a
charter school they tend to
choose and really great school
leader
they make appropriate
they they do set this already of
that school leader with the
quality with high quality
training rigorous standards that
they understand their roles
obligations and that they
actually have a lot more
authority than they may feel
like they have when coming on to
a board we feel like we can help
support the quality of governing
boards in making decisions like
that but when it comes to the
actual contracts of especially
teachers and people that get
hired in the schools the pec
does not get ourselves involved
with personnel matters and it
really goes back to you kind of
the license or the tiered system
and any systems that would be
affected in that way
mister chair members are just
just for context so often for so
while we have minimum salaries
for teachers and corresponding
factors for principles and
assistant principles at
superintendents both in local
school districts and often
charter leaders are senior
superintendents do not have a
minimum or a maximum and so
there's a
school districts and charters
are using their discretionary
authority to use operation of
funds and we have some will
follow up with actual numbers
and averages for you.
About charter leaders and
superintendents for that matter
in partnership with the
department because they do hold
that information but it does
very from what you might imagine
a school principle or
superintendent might make it
then there are some outliars
that are making significantly
more and that goes for teachers
as well and there are again
they're using that discussion
the authority to make those
decisions
thank you and I think we have
gotten a reporter I remember
seeing a table and there were
some that were job dropping both
for the average teacher salary
and there the the leader salary
and when I got some comments
from some of the public might
have been a teachers unions I
don't remember where but that
were concerned because the board
who is authorizing though
salaries is not publicly elected
they can't go to the board and
say yeah we're not gonna vote
for you if you're going to give
you that leader two hundred
thousand dollars salary and so
that's where some of that
concerned that the board is not
publicly elected and therefore
the public dollars the local
doesn't feel like they have any
input into your how much the
salaries are or the pay or
anything like that as to whether
it's fair equitable or or
reasonable
I think that kind of gets to the
questions that I heard about
things any other questions
represent please go ahead.
Mr charm so glad that you
brought up the specialized
question I will keep the short
um i'm hearing in the overquirky
area and I don't know if it's
APS districts are turners or
state charters but their kids
with disabilities are all being
sent to um else king charter
school and i'm wondering if
that's now a special ed score
or if that's just practice in
and kind of like to see
some equity and and that's why I
was bringing up the that graph
that
kind of like to see that kids
aren't being segregated so it's
just wondering about that
question mister chair
mr chair of representative so
dodo who is sending them we are
not sending them more advocating
for that we do have a special
education ways on that provide
support and oversight of that
and I could tell you with ours
king they do have a higher
percentage of
students and I think that that
has come because their
specialized program has really
been approved in their practice
from that only compliance but
actually delivering services to
students they have students that
have a spectrum of services one
who's two who need one on one
ease who are non verbal and and
who you know in the in that type
of situation to you know the
other spectrum but
so I feel like in naps we have
done a really good job of
supporting the
the compliance of special ad but
also holding them accountable
for delivering the services
equitably so but love to have a
marvel conversation with the.
Thank you any other questions
not thank you very much and very
helpful very informative than
you hear some of the questions
concerns from from committee
members about things that we
hear regularly so I appreciate
it and thank you all for your
time thank you mister director I
think europe
i'm sorry dinner so where were
you
then your speed talking no just
getting.
So an update on federal funding
sources and things and how it's
affecting public schools in new
mexico.
Whenever you ready daniel
miss chairman members of the
committee my name is daniel and
I cover a public school finance
for the less see I am now we're
running behind on time someone
got really quick we are now on
tab thirteen of your binder with
an update on federal action
since our last meeting in
roswell
so starting on slide two of
their power point
the federal reconciliation bill
was signed on july fourth and
included a lot of changes to
medicaid and snap that are
projected to reduce your
mexico's medicare and roman by
eighty thousand people and snap
in romant by fifty eight
thousand people
with those changes we are
expecting to see several impacts
to public schools and we listed
a few of them here on this
lights like two
first the medicare changes could
impact ninety six point one
million dollars and federal
payments
I to schools for student
services because when a student
is medicared and rolled their
district or their charter score
can request reimbursement from
medicaid when that student
receives direct services like
physical therapy case management
and counseling and they can also
get reimbursement from medicaid
for administrative activities
like outreach and transportation
and those medicare dollars are
with sustain a lot of the score
based health centers around
state so if we see if you are
students in rolled and medicaid
as a result of that bill
I that could mean less medicaid
funding going to support those
on site services or students
next we have snap changes which
could potentially impact about a
hundred and sixty three point
one million dollars in federal
reimbursements for school meals
and snacks
as a stay we heavily rely on
federal reimbursements to pay
for the universal school meals
program.
And snap data is what helps
helps us as a stay identify low
income students who generate the
highest rates of reimbursement a
federal reimbursement and so if
we see reduced snap in romance
that could reduce the federal
reimbursements that we get for
school meals
we also have an impact to the
three hundred and six point six
million dollars that you are
push out through the out risk
index in the seg as we use snap
and medicaid data to identify
about fifteen percent i've
student household incomes
throughout the state
and I didn't include this in the
power plan but I think it's
important to know that the
changes just snap or also going
to impact the federal title one
allocations that we get because
the federal government uses snap
as one data set when they had
identified student poverty so if
we see fewer students and snap
that in the impact the lump sum
of money that we get from the
federal government for a title
one and then it'll cash over
into how their money is actually
pushed out to each district at
each state charter school and
then it'll cascade over into
other federal funding streams
because they use the same
poverty data for other federal
programs
so those are few ways the bill
may impact schools and the
fiscal impact on education and
the stay as a whole is going to
ultimately depend on how you all
respond to those changes as a
body and that work is currently
taking place at the federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee
turning to slide three
in our may a day I mentioned a
general concern among the staff
about title three funding for
english learners being at risk
of now being distributed and
then in june I mentioned a
concern about title two funding
for professional learning
both programs have now been
impacted.
With the federal government with
holding about six point eight
billion dollars in funding that
had already been appropriate by
congress four k twelve programs
as part of a broad programmatic
review of how their money is
being used by states by
districts and by charter schools
we listed the impacted programs
here where title one c migrant
education titled to a
professional learning title
three a english language
acquisition title four a student
support and academic and
richmond entitle four b twenty
first century community learning
centers
for each of the impacted
programs periods it should
guidance saying that
reimbursement request from these
programs may only be completed
if leaves have carry over funds
available from prior years
and we have an astrist for title
for b because that funding was
released last friday but it now
has a pretty new requirement for
how their money may be spent
and before we move on I want a
flag one thing that may happen
in the next few weeks on this
funding
so far though with holding was
part of up briad programmatic
review of how the money was
being used
but there's now a lot of talk in
dc that the administration was a
mare a recision request to
congress that includes at least
some portion of that funding
that we have listed and so if
they are required to submitted
to congress to permanently
define those programs for the
current fiscal year the funding
will be frozen for forty five
days while congress considers
the request from the
administration
so because of that possibility
we included information on slide
for
showing the impact of the
withheld.
Funding in total we had forty
four point eight million dollars
that was withheld and those
funds supported a hundred and
eighty six fte throughout the
state where ten p d and a
hundred and seventy six at
districts and charter schools
there is also an hour last year
challenging the with holding the
legality allowed withholding and
new mexico is one of twenty five
states I had joined that last
year and what are d you are if
there's an outcome on that last
year before our september
meeting
on slide five
we have the revision to federal
guidance that could impact early
childhood and higher education
than you briefly heard about
from ecd yesterday
so just for broad historical
context under the personal
responsibility and work
opportunity reconciliation act
non citizens are prohibited from
accessing most quote federal
public benefits and in the past
the government interpreted a
federal public benefit to not
include most k twelve
educational programs because of
a case called player versus joe
where the supreme court ruled
that undocumented students
can not be denied access to a
basic public education and
because of that a lot of
federally funded k twelve
programs have his storically not
been included in the
government's interpretation of a
federal public benefit because
that would have restricted those
students from accessing those k
twelve programs
but the federal government has
now issued a new interpretation
of what constitutes a federal
public benefit under federal law
and under that new
interpretation the federal
government is saying post
secondary programs do not
consider a basic public
education because they believe
the supreme court did not that
supreme court case.
Did not extend to adults and
neither did it say that miners
have a right to access post
secondary programs there are
also saying a federally funded
early childhood program that
provides benefits similar to
offer benefits like social
service or nutritional services
can also be considered to be a
federal a federal public benefit
so because of that the federal
government has now prohibited
quote non qualified aliens and
quote from accessing some
federally funded had started
programs or dot education post
secondary programs doing a role
man's and early college programs
and you heard from ec city on
this roof or had start yesterday
so we're not going to see much
more about it other than your
staff your lac will be
collaborating with our ecd and
hed in assessing the impact of
the new guidance.
Moving on a slide six
we have other updates on federal
actions
first the department of the
labor will now be taken on a
greater role in administering
federally funded adult education
family letter see and programs
with those functions being
transferred from the department
education
congress has also been going to
annual appropriations process
and release their recommendation
for public education some time
and early september in the house
and that'll be the document
where we might see someone that
proposals to permanently define
title to title three in a few
other programs I in subsequent
fiscal years so this is the
process we're going to be
washing pretty closely
the federal government is funded
through september thirtieth so
we need congress to pass the
budget or a continuing
resolution before then and last
we may see more reconciliation
bills or recision packages
considered my congress that
focus on reducing federal
spending so will keep an eye on
that as well
and last slide seven
we wanted to mention the things
that we've learned are staff in
the last few months to start
some conversations here in the
committee that could guide the
remainder of the intern
we talked about this for but as
federal agency is sort of poor
back our state agencies are
going to be even more critical
in carrying out the policy goes
that you are half where the
state and for aza earlier ce die
means ensuring that pd has a
capacity to carry out its
mission we've also been reminded
of the importance of interest
agency collaborations with
examples being the partnership
between the health care
authority and pd on medicaid and
the outrisk index so we want to
see more of those partnerships
between agencies and through
those enter agency
collaborations and partnerships
also comes the importance of
data governance.
Where we are not only collecting
data but where we we are also
building our capacity to analyze
it and use it to make informed
decisions with an example of
that being the public education
and reform find as a tore for
program evaluation which you are
her from tim on earlier this
week and as time also mentioned
yesterday I believe your data
governance will be part of the
last year work planned for dated
for twenty twenty five
specifically around how we align
data systems between ecdped and
aged
on the next bullet we're seeing
a lot of trans impacting scores
which you all heard about this
week and the federal changes are
just one more layer to those
challenges so you all know we're
seeing the clienting and
romantra to stay increases in
special education and english
learners changes in community
expectations and now we're
seeing volatility and federal
funding so in the lect
workplatform twenty twenty five
we have a conversation in
october planned around whether
long term strategic budget
planning could be a tool in
preparing charter scores and
repairing school districts to be
more strategic and more
intentional and how they use our
resources in the long term and
the federal changes are sort of
reinforcing our interests and
how we insure communities are
responding and preparing for
those long term changes in
resources
for bully three
we now know that even short term
delays and federal funding can
have a pretty large impact on
programming throughout the state
and we're saw that and we're
still seeing it with twenty
first century learning centers
where despite the disruptions to
the programming and the
personnel there was no
formalised mechanism and there
is no formalise mechanism at the
state level to prevent those
impact to communities so that
funding was restored with new
requirements but we still have
thirty four million dollars and
frozen funding.
For other federal programs
and ped is pretty limited and
how it can respond to that
especially as a school your
approach is so I staff we're
thinking about how we could
potentially avoid those short
term disruptions are in the
future through flexible
contingency finding that allows
the previously federally funded
programming to continue as you
are have in death conversations
throughout the insurance around
whether you want to continue
supporting that previously
federally funded programming
with state funding
I related to that is our final
bullet as we wait for the
federal government to decide on
funding and we start to see the
impacts of those medicare and
snap changes you all will have
to make a lot of decisions in
the next few months in the next
few years around how you all
want to respond to those changes
and as you're thinking through
those decisions we want to
elevate that you all have
multiple mechanisms already
employees and statute they will
allow you to respond to the
community needs of your
individual communities and as
responses could take different
approaches like flexible funding
in the seg a non recurring
appropriation for a specific
initiative or a multi year
appropriation through perfect
for a program that was
previously fairly funded that is
already shown to be promising
and that you want to see
evaluated through the perf
framework
and we'll be here I start to
help you think through those
decisions as they come up so
that is it for me and I stand
for any questions and I just
want to say the situation is
pretty fluent as you can tell
and so you are may have a lot of
questions we have a lot of
questions and will be sure to
follow up or answer as best as
we can
thank you daniel and probably
they'll be some repeat of this
performance about a week from
now up in towns when the better
open stabilization subcommittee
meets the night I think this is
part of it is how it's
impacting.
Public schools and things and
there may be updates at that
time so of anybody's board and
once another meeting next
thursday friday up in a tower
will be up at the ski valley
discussing these things
questions from many members
represent star nana
thinking better chairman I just
wouldn't know I guess I just
want to wear a comment we have
to make sure we are keeping up
with lfc we we have to make sure
they're here every meeting so
they hear this and we work with
them closely because we don't
want them skirting a surrounding
since we've we're all here and
not in love
I just worry about th.
If I could very quickly I think
you representative
debited director half away and I
were looking on monday i'm sorry
tuesday to hear the federal
funding framework
can I read out a time of that
presentation I think but we're
going to work with listen staff
to make sure that we're in a
limited network sharing numbers
to make sure we're reconciling
all of that and I would say the
same thing for our partners that
peed either
already I think unattentive
agenda for next friday the
secretary will also present with
us
on federal funding for k twelve
and so making sure that we're
all saying the same things and
understanding them the same way
is going to be really important
I represent her vice ceremony
thank you mister and I would
like to just add on that that
it's incumbent upon us as
members of the body as well is
not just staff making the
decisions but us as legislators
whether to adopt some of those
policy recommendations or
funding recommendations so
working within our own caucasus
and with their in our own bodies
to make sure we get funded what
we want funded and need to get
funded and but daniel I did have
a question about
the
tax adjustments in the recent
bill around private schools
and my understanding is is that
the governor would have to
give the green light to those
tax credits
do we know what the governor or
what people's thinking around
that might be
mr chairman by sharow you're
correct the bill did include a
private score some kind of
scholarship tax credit
and the bill did say that it was
it would be up to the governor
of each state or their
respective designer to opt in to
that program that program would
begin in twenty twenty seven I
believe so there hasn't been any
really concrete conversations.
Far that i've heard about
an in
mr chairman and daniel
do we know or have any thoughts
on what the impact's might be
if that were to get adopted in
the state on our public schools
mr chairman vice romaro there's
traditionally a few bills that
are introduced each session
around the same general topic
that we analyze in the past
again the bill doesn't go into
effect until twenty twenty seven
so I think it'll be i'm pretty
big topic to consider the next
insurance enough to tractor has
aim or context
mr chair much by sure a great
question I think what we're
hearing obviously that's similar
kinds of programs exist in other
states
and some of what we're hearing
obviously is there's a lot of
interests from some of those
states so much so that it's it's
cost and distress I think to
their budgets but also
one example that we heard in
talking some legislative staff
is I want to say architecture
instance found that eighty three
percent of the families are
students who were participating
in these kinds of programs where
students who were already in
rolled in a private score so you
know in terms of if it's
increasing access to private
schools or other kinds of
education what they have found
at least preliminarily is that
this is
something that is benefiting
students who were already in
road that those schools and
hasn't necessarily yet at least
increased access how that would
plow in new mexico I think
that's still something we want
to continue to look at
in and thank you for that
director cause it's something
that i've i've looked at quite a
bit as we've had these bills
flow through the region
legislature for for years now
and when we have struggles in
our public schools
just saying we should give up on
our public schools and create
competition which you know the
results in other states are
showing that it's you know
subsidising families who have
already put there.
Students into public to private
schools that I don't think it's
really an option
because they were a will say
mister chairman that I feel that
we do have in there is an
assault on public education at
the federal level going on write
their small men when we've had
just over the course of the past
three days a
very fruitful discussion on high
impact tutoring for example in
the question got brought up how
much money would it take to
really expand this state wide
and the number was was well I
don't think it number was given
but we can guess as to what the
number would be is very high and
when we have deficiencies in
other places they think that
having thirty four million
dollars being withheld is is
very scary and it seems like we
keep trying to move the ball
forward in the state various
ways and then we get knocked
back a quite a bit
in its frustrating so I just
want it or some of my
frustration of woods you know we
all are trying to do very good
things and have done good things
in our public school system
and I just see that that
some of what we're talking about
with this federal funding um
specifically for public
education but what's going on in
health care
is really has the potential to
really distruct some of the
progress that we should be
making or have made in this
state thank you mister chairman
the representative senator
figured out
thank you mister chair and thank
you daniel and my question is
about communication how is this
information and who is
responsible for getting this
information to school districts
and superintendents as we'd
figure it out and who is then
responsible for getting the
information back up to.
Us or to paid when school
districts are making
programmatic cuts or staffing
cuts or changes based on this
how are we going to get that
data back to us so we can make
decisions we need to
so mr chairman center after
the p d as I mentioned
when slider was like three pd
has been issuing memos with some
guidance around how they
navigate that with held funding
so there is a mechanism there is
communication right now from ped
two communities around how to go
bal
reallocating fte continuing
programming
as right now i'm not sure how
the information is flowing back
from communities to pd at
something we should prior to
talk about with pedi a bit more
in depth oh gregs here.
Mister chairman members of
committee great for us that
assistant secretary of education
in the public education
department
mister chair we are releasing
probably we have already
released
a survey of the liaise to ask
what the impacts have been but
that was like a month and a half
for two ago and so everything
has changed since then and we
are planning to were we're in
the final review stages for
another survey to be released
today again we're trying to get
the freshest information that we
can have for you all but also
for the subcommittee next friday
mister mister chair if I could
too just added I I think what
you're probably hearing from
folks in and maybe even from us
in this presentation is there
there's just a lot of
uncertainty and as daniel said
period is putting out
communications we've spoken to
school districts and
superintendents as well
things are moving so quickly I
think it's hard to keep up with
sort of the formal communication
has as a hard time keeping up
with it with the cheap that the
pace of change so the other
thing I would I would just
suggest maybe you are or put out
there is however we can if
you're hearing from your
constituents about or your
school districts about things
that they're worried about or
they have questions about we're
happy to ask the server
obviously they're they're one of
the welcome it should be
reaching after pd but if there's
ways that we can can be a condot
for that conversation both from
people to to school districts
and vice versa happy to do that
as well
thank you mr chair thank you
daniel and deputy director I
think it's that disconnect
that's of concern that it's
fluid it's rapidly changing and
there's a lot of speculation but
on the other hand there are hard
contracts that have to be signed
and programmatic decisions that
have to be done
and they're being done on fluid
and speculative information but
we need we need at the very
least.
That hard data that come back to
us what decisions are being made
as fast as we can get it.
Thank you representative.
Thanks mister endes my involved
greg here again i'm not sure if
ped making a list checking twice
for fifty times because of the
first thing that cons my mind as
we have the free breakfast and
lunch breakfast after the bill
cast a lot of many
I don't know if schools are
required to still fill out those
forms do we still fill out those
forms that used to determine who
got a free lunch
mr chairman representative gary
I believe if you have a certain
proportion to poverty in your
score about that proportion that
the restaurant you're not
required to submit those forums
but once you far below that
threshold there is still a
requirement to submit that
documentation and so that's a
concern for us because
i'll have people probably won't
submit those forms and so it
does have a cascading of effect
on the federal reimbursement
that we receive
thank you because I know in my
district have the schools aren't
titled when and half of them are
so it's just when you start
looking at millions of where
you're going to current programs
it's concerning thank you
thank you represent a block
thank you mr chair thank you
daniel so I I think it's a
really lot of good information
here number one i'm just
wondering when it comes to who
is going to oversee this on the
federal level I think we talked
about the department of labor
have we had any open
communication channels with
secretary which have a zero and
what she might be thinking when
it comes to those funds
mr chairman representative block
that are dears is pretty new it
was only like a week or two ago
but I think there is some
general conversation around the
administration's priority around
ct and work force development
and there is a general
conversation around potentially
redesigning the.
Perkins funded programs to a
line generally more with short
term work force development are
to a line with a new changes for
pell grants in the
reconciliation bill and I now
provides funding for a short
term programs and so that's one
thing that we've heard about
sort of changing perkins funding
perkins funded programs to a
line more it was short term job
training potentially
I think you mister chair and
then another question daniel
when it comes to the snap
changes do any of those dollars
go directly into our free
couldn't get free lunch program
here in the stake
mrperiod chairman representative
block
actual snap dollars only go to
snap recipients the snap data
that poverty data is what it is
used to actually guide the
reimbursement money is that come
for school meals
mister chair representative add
to a down just said so as as if
a if a student qualifies for
those benefits or their founding
qualifies for the benefits there
what's called direct certified
and so add to the number of
students in a school as then you
were saying that qualified for
free reduced reduced lunch it it
determines the level of
reimbursement we get from the
federal government
and it also adds to that
percentage of students in a
particular school
that qualify and then therefore
qualifies a particular school
for instance for free reduced or
free lunch for all students and
federal reimbursement so it's
the it's both the funding but
it's also the number of students
who qualify for those that will
impact the reimbursements that
we receive from the federal
government.
Thank you mister chair thank you
john thank you daniel so I guess
i'm just wondering I know I know
the bill it didn't just totally
cut snap it didn't didn't just
have a cross the board gone so
i'm wondering when it comes to
the bill itself and what it did
the big beautiful bill can you
tell me mr chair and daniel
specifically how would this
effect schools and I were
counting schools with snap
recipient potential children so
i'm wondering when it comes to
direct dollars to those schools
how did the changes in any way
cut those dollars
so mess your chairman
representative block I tried
framing the conversation not
through the lands of the bill
directly impacting public
schools but it having cascading
effects on other areas including
public schools so for it as an
example in the bill requires or
expands work requirements for
some people if that person
doesn't meet that work
requirement they lose their snap
eligibility their child may also
lose that eligibility once the
child loses that snap
eligibility we can no longer
directly certify the household
income of that student and if we
can directly certify them and if
they don't submit that meal
application we have no way of
getting the highest
reimbursements for school meals
from the federal government so
we're we're reimbursed out of
much a lower level so that's
where the cost to public schools
to public education manifest not
directly as a result of the bill
but do the cascading effects on
that data collection process
okay thank you mr or mister vice
chair and thank you daniel so I
guess the the way III see it i'm
a guy who likes less government
pretty much everywhere.
And so when it comes to the
state of new mexico would I
would like to see is a long term
approach when it comes to
the federal dollars coming in
because we're I think when
number two when it comes to
federal dependence across the
board I don't know what it what
that is education wise and I
would like to see mister chair
a more robust approach from the
new mexico level and have a
larger conversation about okay
well if the next administration
changes and they just want to
completely eliminate our
government for example what is
the state of new mexico we're
going to do if we want to
sustain our programs or if we
need to cut certain things that
are not necessarily the most
important so I just I would love
to see that kind of conversation
I don't know if that other
committee is making those kinds
of decisions where they're
looking at those federal dollars
but I would love to see a more
resilient framework on the new
mexico level so that we don't
have to have these conversations
of something was cut we need to
go into the reserves we need a
special session we need to to
pretend like the sky is falling
because something was not funded
in a certain department on the
federal level so I don't know if
those conversations are being
had at those committees I don't
know if you've attended those
say I have not personally saved
wasn't put on that committee but
are they talking about those
kinds of things when it comes to
trimming some some of new
mexico's budget two weather
certain kinds of I wouldn't say
storms I would say the little
bumps in the road when we become
more independent as a state
and i've never represented yeah
i've if I had a could just
because i've been presenting to
that committee in open part of
some of the conversations not
all of them but I think and here
comes the court share of that
committee and he could probably
also speak to this
that that is the entire purpose
of that subcommittee is
evaluating one I think where
where what you're hearing from
us is pretty much what we're
telling that that subcommittee
as well and part I think part of
the challenge rate now is how
rapidly.
Changing all of the information
that we're getting is so in the
case of the impoundment and
withholding of those funds we're
sort of in a waiter see are we
going to get them are we not
going to get them and again as
daniel mentioned one of those
title funds was released just
last week so we were all waiting
to see what was going to happen
and then it then it happened
great so I think part of the and
again all that the the coach are
speak to this part of this is
almost fact finding and kind of
track that as you go the next
step as you as you mention I
think is
determining which of the
programs that might lose funding
do the does the legislature want
to continue to fund at what
level does it want to want to
continue to fund those programs
either fully or not and I and
i'm not the expert to speak on
this but i'll just mention
medicaid more broadly
some of these are such large
amounts of federal funding that
it isn't about deciding whether
or not to keep individual
programs it's whether or not the
state can afford to in the long
term afford
critical services for for
residents of the state and again
i'm not the experts I don't ask
me any follow up questions but
but but but I think that is the
the genuine general conversation
for that subcommittee
I missed the basic question so
my I would think so mister chair
I guess that what I was talking
about specifically with
making new mexico more resilient
when it comes to federal changes
and is that something that's a
conversation in the committee
that you could chair is is that
I guess looking for a long term
strategy to be more resilient to
any kinds of changes externally
when they happen
the basic
purpose of that committee I
don't think is to look at the
long term reason yet it's more
as was indicated gathering
information booking at where
what are the current needs there
are some things that are
happening live and as we speak
that are effect.
Directly and there are ones that
are a year two years out that
are going to be affecting us and
I think the resilience come in
as we've got a couple of years
to plan for how we're going to
address those things when if
they they actually happen the
committee doesn't have any
specific power but to make
recommendations to the finance
committee for this upcoming
legislative session other than
gathering information the
governor keeps talking around
potentially calling a special
session
most of that my believe would be
if there is a specific thing
that we need to come and must
back bill right now before
anything that happens in the
legislative session would happen
and that kept be done with a bar
or a transfer of money from the
cash reserves into covering that
that requires the legislature to
come up my belief on that also
we is she's not going to call us
up
wide open to discuss all of this
if it's not all pretty well
worked out that this is what we
need to go up and spend two
hours you have signed the bill
and and go back so that we can
back fill that particular peace
that is having a an immediate
direct impact not something out
in the future I hope that some
thank you mister chair it is it
definitely is then we know the
targeted session is much better
than one that is not because I
would hate to gave a line and
then just say was gave allow
enough
so III do think there's a larger
compensation to be had but I do
think when it comes to the
federal governments approach I
do see the relevance of certain
cuts I don't necessarily know if
there I I didn't vote on the
bill think i've something not in
congress pretty low but if I was
i'd have those questions to and
I think it's a very important
conversation to be had how does
this effect us on the
microeconomic level vs macro on
the under federal government
huge giant bureaucracy level so
I mean some people could make
the the kind that we have a
giant bureaucracy in new mexico
as well because we have so many
cabinet departments but.
That's another topic for another
day so thank you mister chair
president you
were very fortunate in that we
have over three billion dollars
of cash reserve
right now and we've been moving
water that into the federal
permanent funds and so other
states don't have that ability
that we do and I think that's
part of why this subcommittee is
there is which things is it
important in which things are
potential up in the the future
in which things are people
screaming the the sky is falling
my attitude is this guy's not
falling yet but nowhere you hard
happiest.
One nineteen four one page six
public line number one nineteen
four you said that
there were some changes coming.
Mr chairman man represented
twice glass gets you referring
to page six the third bullet
mr cherry yes so is returning
representative towards the last
guess that's just the number of
the federal law that funds the
government is to september
thirtieth so the governments
funded through that period need
to pass it by j before then to
keep the government operational.
Thank you mister chair
that was all
wonderful
thank you mister chair and thank
you for the presentation
I really appreciate this and
especially looking at it.
From a holistic view and we're
talking about medicaid we're not
to slick and at specifically the
health care piece but how it
impacts public education the
same for snap.
Look the sky might not be
formally today but
for many people they feel like
it could happen and while we
are.
Still in discussions in
speculating what could happen I
think we know where the
intentions are and so.
As a state we have to prepare
for that
hum.
And I agree with the vice share
about you know I do also believe
that.
Public education is under attack
amongst other things and we have
to understand that to be able to
defend that my question mister
chair and great you might want
to pop up as well
it might be more for your area.
Where about to start school
we've had discussions here about
how do we improve our state how
do we bring in more resources
more things that we want to do
and now we're talking about cuts
but we've already talked about
also some of this funding that
usually comes in coming in late
and the impacts to our schools.
So while we're having
discussions here and I commend
work mister chair what you're
doing on the committee in the
fact finding and making
recommendations where about to
start school and so how does
that impact.
Right now with hiring of
teachers and and resources and
schools and some of these
programs
that what might be concerned as
thanks mister share daniel green
mister chair and senator so
definitely one of the things
that we have been working with
schools on right now is is that
particular concern and providing
them the information that they
have around their carry over
funds for the impounded funds at
at present so in in those
particular areas many districts
because of the federal awards
are generally for two for twenty
seven months they have to spend
the money and so most do have
some funds that they can use to
get the year started with and we
are still hoping that these
impounded funds will come
through from the federal
government now some of the other
programs that daniel is talking
about such as medicaid
reimbursement those are are a
little bit more tenuous but I
also think we'll we'll take some
more time to be realized so i'll
let daniel talk more about that
mr chairman senator report has a
greg mentioned in the media
concern as I was currently in
pounded fines greg mentioned the
carry over funds are also
available that's a lifeline for
a lot of dishes and lot of chart
schools in the short term rules
greg mentioned I think the real
large the biggest concern is
those medicare and snap changes
that are gonna take place in the
next 1-2 years it's a longer
term impact but I think that
that's where the actual work
needs to be and planning out
those impacts
thank you mr chair thank you
great thank you just
one more question
I know you talked about I think
I always forget that term the
revision I know the held those
funds and I think they had that
vote on
pbs npr is that really the same
type of mechanism that they're
doing now holding it and then
within the forty five days
congress votes and can strip
that is that still a risk.
Mr chairman center of pope two
different legal mechanisms
that's too different legal
mechanisms are federal law
required them to push that money
out and july first so they
didn't do that so the currently
calling it are with holding
pending a programmatic review
and so that's what the last year
from the attorney general is all
about whether that with holding
for that review was even legal
the recision process is the
process in federal law that says
the administration can request
two congress that congress
resend funding that it's already
appropriate for a specific
program so two different legal
avenues are currently I think
operating parallel to one
another so once that request
pops up in congress at though
those found are frozen entirely
for forty five days and so
that's going to be the new
process if they do submit that
request
thank you mister chair and thank
you
you know just goes to the point
I was saying we're
dealing with what happens in
congress and cuts but
unfortunately we're also dealing
with money being with hell that
congress is already appropriate
it's very dangerous
the times that we're living in
thank mister chair
thank you anyone else
if not we're down to the very
last
though not least report that we
have all been waiting with
baited breath for the directors
report.
Thank you mister chair start the
timer
i'm gonna try to be very quick
uh don't have a tunder to add
here
okay great so the first thing
we're gonna talk about and we
need like I said try to be very
quick about this in your binders
behind tab fourteen I think
is your monthly newsletter as I
said last month this is both
hopefully some information for
you as members but we also send
this out and obviously people
have access to it so generally
it's sort of a recapper a
preview of some of the work that
you've already done are are
going to do the the one thing
i'll mention from this one is
actually your your letter mr
chair
that's part of the monthly
newsletter and it's because I
wanted to to call out as you
kind of mentioned to earlier
that the number of times that
new mexico was called out at the
education commission of the
states for doing really good
things and actually being sort
of ahead of the curve in a
number of various I just wanted
to call out in your letter
the teacher of the year
presented to to the forum and
called out new mexico for its
work on teacher salaries and and
how far we've come in in
supporting teacher salaries and
new mexico is also recognized
first early childhood programs
it's high school summer
internships as well as math
tutor you can teach a
residencies of for those of you
who who go out to these sort of
things or or have been to me
it's always sort of fascinating
even though we struggle in our
outcomes or not what we what
we'd want are often times new
mexico is being recognized for
being a leader in a number of
these fields are enter it is
being looked at as a model for
how other states can do some of
this work you all revise the
school funding formula this last
year but that was a formula
that's been in place since
nineteen seventy five and we
have a lot of states who are
just now.
It have fifty years later
getting to some of those kinds
of changes in terms of how we
serve students and how funding
flows out to to school districts
to to make sure that all
students are served equitably so
just wanted to call that out
your welcome to take a closer
look at the at the newsletter at
your leisure
the other thing I wanted to
mention and I think we're gonna
pull up a couple of things you
should be getting a hand out
real quickly this is a actually
it's it's something that you can
find in your annual report but I
wanted to highlight it based on
some conversations that we've
had this week what you're
actually going to get right now
is copies of some demographic
information
at the school district school
district and charter school
level and this is going to take
way into our martinis yassi
update I think we're sorting out
handouts right now
I think the staff for doing this
this was the last minute
as you although I was a high
school teacher and I love the
autonomy of being able to drive
to work and listen to something
on the radio or see a newspaper
article that morning and say you
know what we're gonna do today
we're gonna do that thing today
and being able to shift a little
bit and hopefully students
always felt like all this is
actually from today like we're
not reading out of a textbook or
something that was written you
know fifty years ago we're
talking about real stuff so as
we were talking this this week
about martin siause and some of
the questions that came up about
martinez yazi funding that flows
out to school districts across
the state I just wanted to point
people back to these charts that
are these tables that identify
for you the demographics in your
local school districts and
communities
so I won't go through too many
of them separately oh i'm going
to go straight to the end
of that demographics just the
last three columns in this
table.
Talk about economically
disadvantaged and you'll see
direct search in parentheses
there that ties directly to that
snap conversation we were just
having but these are the number
of students that are identified
through direct certification as
economically disadvantaged the
percentage of english learners
in each of these school
districts and charter schools
and and the percentage of
students with disabilities in
each of your
school districts in charter
scores and the reason I wanted
to point that out as we start to
talk about martin is yazi i'm
going to just talk a little bit
about those community engagement
meetings at that peda along with
their partners are doing
as some etc earlier there is no
community no school district no
charter school for the most part
that does not serve at least
some students in each of these
for in each of these three
categories and these are the
specific categories called out
by the last year
so just wanted to I think if you
attend those meetings based on
the planning i've heard it is it
is a reminder in a recognition I
think that they're going to to
bring up that every every
community in new mexico every
school district in every charter
school service what we could now
call martinez yazi students.
So with that
what we have up on the we didn't
have a we don't have a hand up
for you here
will forward out this
information to you if you
haven't already gotten and i've
heard a number of you already
referred to it so it's clearly
getting out somehow but will
send this out to you as well is
the schedule of meetings that
the public education department
with its consultants the land of
foundation and western
are holding across the state as
a way to engage all communities
as minique as many communities
and as many people as possible
in this planning process that
the ped is undergoing so here's
the list and again we'll send
this out you don't have to
memorize everything in that way
you can have all the leaks
accessible to you august fifth
is farmington espinola last
crucials august sixth is rather
august seventh santa fe
miscollaro and clovis august
fourteenth silver city zoony
carls bad august twentieth
albuquerque and august twenty
sixth there will be a virtual
community meeting as a way to
try to reach anybody who could
make it to those imperson
meetings
obviously you although we have a
very diverse state in terms of
geography and so everybody
trying to get to all these in
person despite the best efforts
probably that's not going to be
possible so they want to have
that last virtual meeting I did
want to update the committee
that as far as staff
participation goes we've spoken
to ped is at their partners the
partner of consultants myself
just a car and timbedo are going
to serve a sort of
less see representatives that
each of those meetings and so we
will split up and we will be
it's one of us will be at each
one of those meetings and an
analyst will accompany each of
us to make sure that we are able
to capture this information
accurately inappropriately and
report all that back to you as
well as full filters those
duties that we committed to in
our member to the department.
Uh about a month ago in terms of
doing research legislative
analysis some fiscal analysis
all those things will be
bringing that information back
doing our part of that work as
as you've authorised authorized
us to do and then be able to
report back to you
and with that mischair stand for
questions
questions so rumors.
Mr chair director thank you very
much for for your report for all
true transparency I I just will
have a question for you I know
that there's been fifty million
dollars available for state
white student information system
and I wanted to see what it was
the process used and factors
used for disqualifying some of
the benders I hear there's only
two vendors and you know for two
transparency and and duh
you know I know a lot of these
vendors have already
participated in many school
districts that were disqualified
and
i'm just truly concerned that we
only have two vendors when
others are available
thank you mister chair senator
almost so just to clarify
there's the you all appropriate
at twelve million dollars for
the student information system
and what we've heard from the
department is that they've they
conducted
focus groups and listening
sessions all over the state with
school districts talking to them
about the student information
systems that they already were
using over some of the pros and
cons of those student
information systems and I want
to say that the department was
using a state where price
agreement
and the narrow does those
choices down to those two based
on the feedback they got both in
terms of
how districts felt about how
they're those problems those
systems were working for them as
well as how they would align and
work with with the department
costs nova which is the internal
data system at ped that gathers
all the information from systems
across the states or the school
district submits their data to
people it all goes into the
snover system and so on to
ensure that whatever
sis was chosen was compatible
and would work well with that
existing system because again
that's sort of the point of the
up your appropriation was to
make sure that that information
was.
Flowing and a timely matter and
also accurately and mischair
I I do appreciate the answer I
just feel that whenever you have
that much money going out and
you have so many vendors within
the state already I mean surely
we should have qualified you
know more than two
and that's just concerning to me
because sometimes when you're
when you minimize the amount of
people putting in for a project
it's a
sometimes they take advantage
and utilize the whole twelve
million dollars if if it's not
even if it's not required to
when it when it comes to their
costs and and and their pricing
so been a business man always
look at that and and
I was trying to save as much
money as we can and when you
minimise it to two I I think
we're doing the stated
disservice yet mister chair
center I must happy to follow up
with pd about the process and
try to get you somewhere
information appreciate it
yet
thank you mister thank you any
other questions
if not we will see you in
gallopian little over a month I
think it's about five weeks
misread her and I think we sent
out a flyer but we are having a
far and rearranged show they're
going to be a community event on
the thirtieth so if anybody's
kind of run that area they want
to go it's open to the public.
