Henri and.
I'll just let you introduce
yourself and go ahead and
Thank you for being patient.
Wonderful. Thank you. uh, great
to be here, Madam Chair. Um,
Uh, committee members, some
Henry Ham and Paul, uh, I'm the
director of Community Health and
safety for the city of Santa Fe.
I've been in my role for about 8
months, um.
And I come to this work with a
variety of experience and uh
managing humanitarian crises
nationally, uh, internationally,
as well as working in an
emergency management, um, in New
York City and in the health care
system, uh, as well as the state
of New Jersey. Um, so, in my
role just to give a little
context about maybe the
perspective that I bring to
this. Um, uh, I oversee a
department of about 225 people,
uh, and
Uh, it is inclusive of the
Office of Emergency Management,
uh, community services, which
includes recreation facilities,
libraries, and senior services,
and then, uh, the youth and
family services division, which
uh we are in the process of
renaming to be more fit for what
it actually does, to be the
human services division, um, and
that work is inclusive of uh
homelessness services in the
city.
Um
Before diving in, uh, well,
I'll, I'll dive in. I'll give a
little context about um
And I apologize, the slides
aren't numbered, so, uh, uh,
we'll, we'll work together to
make sure we're all on the same
page. Um, I'll give a little
context about what we're seeing
in Santa Fe, and hopefully that
will um.
give some flavor to the types of
interventions we're pursuing.
Uh, so if you go to the first
slide, what is this about? Um,
homelessness is really like a a
zeitgeist for uh a lot of
challenges in our society,
right? People look at
homelessness and they
Put their own um perspectives on
what, what are the causes, what
are the impacts of it. Uh, you
see issues like, uh, it, it, it
encaptures issues as complex as
affordable housing, health care,
public safety, um, you know, the
nonprofit sector, uh, a lot of
talk about accountability and
transparency, tourism, retail,
um, so it, it really captures a
very broad spectrum of of
topics, uh, and it just is a
name that
Kind of touches on all of these
other ones. Um, and I think
that's important because uh it,
it, it is a lightning rod issue.
Um, so from my perspective
though, what I'm charged with
and what my, my team and I do is
really focused on achieving
outcomes in two specific areas.
Uh, first, um, I'm, uh, charged
with improving the lives of
residents and businesses in in
the city of Santa Fe, and um
That is very key to the set of
initiatives that I'm putting
forward for my team, so you
can't have a conversation about
addressing homelessness with out
of a conversation of, uh, how do
we make everybody in our city
feel safe, protected, uh, and,
and listened to. The second is,
is, uh, equally important, which
is actually improving the lives
of folks who are experiencing
homelessness. Um, so, while I'm
committed in my role to uh
strengthening our provider
network, um, you know, all
these kind of auxiliary outcomes
that people want to talk about
at the end of the day, what I'm
really focused on is outcomes
for residents and neighborhoods
and outcomes. Uh, I'm gonna go
on to the next slide which uh
has a bunch of little red
figures on it. Um,
So this just kind of puts it in
in context. I think data is
important to tell this story. So
we, there's a lot of counting
homelessness and quantifying it
is, is very difficult and
nationally, uh, folks don't do a
good job. Um, that's everything
that we see here in Santa Fe or
New Mexico is is reflected
nationally, nationally in other
states, um, other cities as
well. So we have something
called the by name list in Santa
Fe, the, the Prince.
there is that it's a lot easier
to tackle a challenge if you can
actually name it. Um, instead of
just the monolithic boogeyman of
homelessness, uh, you actually
know that there's individuals
who have names and you're trying
to, uh, uh, you know, put
individuals in in different
positions, uh, to move them
along in their lives. Uh, so, so
our by name list is about 400
individuals on it. Um,
Uh, and then if you go to the
next slide, uh, we actually only
have 280 shelter beds in our
city. So, math doesn't add up.
Uh, if, if you want fewer people
on the streets, uh, you gotta
have beds to put them in. The
simplest solution to to getting
not having street homelessness
is to have people in beds. Um,
so that, those are low-end
estimates. I'll also say that if
you go to the next slide, uh,
the New Mexico Department of
Health, uh, recently did an
analysis that is pretty
important and, and reflective.
of what folks in in the um
sector nationally say, which is
that, you know, the, the low end
estimates, uh, I should actually
be kind of 2 to 4 times, um, to
get the real number, and that's
what this study represents. So
we actually have probably closer
to around 1600 unhoused
individuals in Santa Fe. Um, so
again, that 280 bed number is,
is uh quite small compared to
what we understand is the, the,
the large need.
Um, the, the next slide, uh,
starting with hundreds of
children in Santa Fe are
homeless, um, there's a lot of
ways to count homelessness, uh,
I would say like the most basic
is probably the the least
effective and the the most basic
way is uh federally mandated way
of, of counting homelessness
called a point in time count,
um, once a year, uh, everybody
in the country goes around and
counts people that are homeless,
you go out on the street,
volunteer.
count folks, you count folks who
are staying in shelters, there's
a lot of reasons why, uh, this
shouldn't make sense
intuitively, um, uh, folks
sleeping in cars, people who
are, you know, hidden from plain
sight, people who maybe one
month ago were homeless because
they were pregnant and got
kicked out of their parents'
house, and now they've been
reunited with their family. So
it's a pretty bad way of
counting public schools count it
differently, they have a more
inclusive, uh, metric that enco
that counts folks.
Uh, like sleep kids sleeping in
cars, uh, kids who are doubled
up, kids who are moving, couch
surfing every week to a
different friend's house. So
that's kind of a truer number,
the Santa Fe Public schools, um,
Am I good? OK. uh, Santa Fe
Public schools, um,
Uh, in 2024, uh, reported 741
homeless youth in our public
school system. Uh, and that's a
7% increase from 2023 and an 11%
increase from 2022. So, uh,
these are, you know, the New
Mexico public education
department numbers, um, they
have this for every school
district in the state and every
school district in the country
actually reports this, uh,
because of something called
McKinney Vento.
Um
All skip to the next slide, I
think just, you know, we see a
lot of uh dynamic shifting at
the national level, um, changes
in funding structures, things
like that, we can expect cuts,
uh, to some of the kind of uh
funding mechanisms that many uh
cities rely on and we can expect
more of a burden to fall on
states and cities, um, for
better or worse.
Next slide. Uh, so just in
summary, we have a critical
shortage of beds in Santa Fe,
uh, 280 at the, at the low end
of our estimates, right? Uh, we
have about 120 bed deficit at
the high end you're really
looking at, you know, closer to
1000.
2nd, if you want fewer homeless
people in our city, we need more
beds. Uh, you don't want people
sleeping on the street, uh, the
simplest solution is don't have
them sleeping on the street and
put them in a place to sleep,
um, and then the third piece is
that
Uh, and I think this is a really
critical piece, um, the
The way that people think about
homelessness, uh, often focuses
on kind of what's the tip of the
iceberg, street homelessness,
very complex populations,
difficult to, to, to, to serve
and to rehabilitate in many
ways. Um, but that really is the
tip of the iceberg, I think the,
the, you know, historically when
we deinstitutionalized um uh
psychiatric institutions and
the, you know, 60s, that
population was basically just
subbed out into street
homelessness and and that.
It's a, a complex and nuanced
conversation, but the reality is
90% of that iceberg is under the
water and it's not folks who
are, um, the folks who kind of
people assume represent the
large population of
homelessness, but rather it's
families who are working for,
um, and, you know, people are
temporarily homeless. So, I
think it's important to start
telling that story, so it's a
little bit more accurate and
reflective of the reality. Uh,
so I'm gonna go on to the next
slide, which uh I'm color blind,
but.
I believe it's orange, uh says
overview. Um, so there, there's,
uh, just for context, right?
There's, it's, it's a, it's a
complex problem, big problems,
sticky problem, uh, the, um,
there's no way that we can have
a realistic and, and productive
conversation about homelessness
without talking about things
like affordable housing, big,
big, uh, you know,
Systemic changes to a lot of the
ways we do things. I would say I
would put 3 things that that
really need sizable investment
at a national level. One is
affordable housing and and our
housing stock and
infrastructure, uh, the way we
build houses, the way we permit
houses, uh, the way we fund
construction, things like that.
Um, the second is, uh, um,
stemming the flow of, uh,
illegal drugs and, and really
destructive community destroying
drugs like opioids into our
country.
Whether that means coming from
the border or enforcement
locally. Um, and the third piece
is improving uh access and
quality of mental and behavioral
health services. Uh, so those
are big picture investments that
we all need to make nationally,
and those aren't going to be
changed at a local level. Um,
you, you, you can move the
needle, you can mess around on
the margins, but big picture,
uh, those are, those are
investments that we need to
actually make to to change the
situation. That said, there's a
lot that we can do kind of on
the acute immediate.
Front, and that's what the plan
that the city has put forward,
um, in October really speaks to,
it's a set of emergency actions
that we're talking about, uh,
and making progress on, um, that
really affect the kind of street
conditions and the felt
experience of uh being a
resident of a city, uh, to make
it so that, again,
Residents and businesses aren't
feeling the pain and then, and
then also that individuals uh
who are experiencing
homelessness, uh, have services
and access to to positive
pathways. Um, I'm gonna skip the
shot slide that says shared
responsibility, um, you know,
uh, the next slide, it says this
plan is not, um, just kind of
reinforcing what I said. Uh, you
can't, you can't have a real
conversation about quote unquote
ending homelessness without.
Conversation about affordable
housing.
And, you know, investing in
addressing the fentanyl crisis,
illegal drug trade, um, and,
and, uh, our mental and
behavioral health system. Uh,
the next slide, uh, what it,
what this plan is affirmatively.
It's a set of focused emergency
actions that the city is working
on, um, we, we again launched it
in October 2024, so it's been in
place for about 7 months now.
Um, and it's really about, what,
what can we do in 18 months to
do, to make some sizable
changes.
Um
The next slide says to implement
this plan. Uh, we need that,
that, that, um, this, this
probably will uh resonate with
many folks here. Funding
partnership, community support,
political will, uh, operational
excellence, um, I think these
are, these are critical kind of
assumptions that need to go into
any kind of work that uh that uh
city does to address.
Uh, complex challenges like
homelessness, um, one of the
things that I'm particularly
invested in is how do I build
capacity locally, uh, in the
city staff, I think we need to
have a strong uh operational
team, um, and that's one thing
that we've been able to move the
needle on getting funding to
really build out a a properly
staffed and funded and supported
team. Uh, so the next slide,
this, it really breaks this work
into 6 high level objectives.
Um, uh, and, and I'll
Go through these relatively
quickly, um, and leave time for
questions that folks have, uh,
questions about how specifically
things are working, um, but the
big, big buckets of areas that
we're doing things in safety,
security, and stability. Um, so,
again, a lot of this is is about
getting a critical mass of
support. How do you align people
on, uh, moving in the right
direction altogether. Um, so
part of that is acknowledging
the pain that communities have
felt because
of the impacts of homelessness
and kind of vagrancy, uh, so we
have a set of actions that are
uh oriented towards supporting
neighborhoods and businesses,
uh.
Also expanding non-congregate
shelter options, um, I don't
expect that many folks uh follow
the news deeply in Santa Fe, but
there's been some recent shakes
up, shakeups um that we've been
pushing as a city about the way
that we are supporting uh
certain types of shelter
operations, um, and ultimately
the city wants to move away from
what we call congregate folks
being in the same place
altogether solutions and move
towards non-congregate. Um,
again, there's, I think
some kind of principles that,
that hopefully resonate with
folks, which is uh the things
that, that many community
members, um,
Uh, are upset about when it
comes to homelessness in, in, in
a city, are things like illegal
dumping, trash, uh, loitering,
etc. um, so when you have a
system that's designed around,
you let people in for a night,
they all spend the night in the
same room together, and then you
kick them out at 9:00 a.m., of
course, they don't have a place
to to store their things, they
don't have a place to be during
the day, so logically for the
city, uh, we've decided that we
want to move away from models
like that and invest in.
that are more about um providing
places with for people to be,
uh, through throughout the day,
places where they can store
their belongings, um, so that,
that has to do with uh bullet
point number 2, expanding
non-congregate shelter
operations, um, options, pardon
me, uh, number 3, improve
outreach and navigation
services, um,
Along the spectrum of uh
homelessness, uh, you have to
have interventions the, the
whole way. Uh, so, um, we need
at the, at the very front end
when people are entering
homelessness or street homeless
aren't engaged in the shelter
system, we need to have a robust
set of uh uh services that go
and actually engage people, tap
them into existing systems so
that they can access them and
move along the pathway towards
uh rehabilitation or
il ization um, the next step
would be improving the shelter
system, so you have to engage
people to get them into a system
once they're in a system, make
sure that system works well. And
then ultimately move them out of
the system into housing. Um, day
services, 4,
that is, uh, again, about the
fact that if we don't want folks
just kind of loitering around,
uh, uh, throughout the day. Um,
there's, you, we have to have a
way for people to be somewhere
and and to engage them
productively.
Um, so day services would
include things like having a
place for people to to go um get
access to certain type of
services, potentially drop job
training access, things like
that. Um, number 5 is
coordination. Uh, so again, kind
of harkening back to my
experience in the emergency
management space, uh,
coordination is critical, and I
think you see nationally and the
best practices that you, you
take an emergency management
approach to homelessness.
Um, so you are not just having a
bunch of folks working in silos,
but instead are engaging people
to be, uh, aligned, um, and
working as kind of a functioning
system in a unit similar to, you
know, the the way emergency
support functions work at a
state level or or things like
that. Um, and then the last is
data policy and advocacy, uh,
really how do you strengthen the
the bureaucracy itself to better
tackle these issues. Um, so each
one of these six areas uh has a
set of
associated with it. Um, I'm not
gonna go through these in depth,
but I'm happy to speak to any of
them specifically, uh, just to
give you kind of a sense of some
of the ones that I think are
pretty um novel and uh and we're
excited about, um, uh, you'll,
you'll also see tiny tiny dollar
signs, which means that they've
been funded, um, so on, uh, one,
the next slide, which is one
safety, security and stability.
Um
1.2 support small businesses. We
have an innovation fund of
$250,000 that we're going to be
deploying for businesses and
residents that have been
affected through, uh, you know,
either, um, uh, vagrancy or or
small damages to their
businesses like broken windows,
uh, so they can submit a police
report and receive funds to have
a window repaired based on uh
receipts, um, similar.
you can proactively and that,
uh, you know, request a grant to
install a camera system or some
sort of security monitoring
system. So that's a grant that's
gonna be going to residents and
businesses, um, and I believe
it's, uh, Albuquerque has a
similar program, if I'm not
mistaken. Um, uh, let's see, um,
uh, another one that's, that's
really important is 1.3, uh, the
city recently uh contracted with
a group that um is
the national nonprofit, uh, that
does, uh, street outreach and
community-based public safety.
Well, they're hiring 40 local
individuals uh from the area to
create um outreach and
community-based public safety
teams that will be patrolling
and and engaging uh into
critical hotspot areas in the
city, um.
I'm going to, I'm I'm not sure
how I am on time, OK.
Um
Uh, expanding non-congregate
shelters, so this is the next
page number 2, expand and
uncongregate shelter options.
Um,
Uh, I, I, I spoke to this
briefly, but I, I, I, it's not
only enough to address the fact
that, uh, what congregate
shelters are no longer no longer
kind of fit for purpose, if you
will, in terms of what we need,
uh, to really address this, this
challenge, uh, we, we need
better options out there, um, so
one of the better options is
expanding what we're calling
micro communities, tiny homes,
um, you see this all over the
country, it's a really
successful model, they work, uh,
they address certain.
things that are major pain
points in communities such as uh
the fact that many congregate
shelters don't allow folks to
stay in them 24/7, so there's
this force function of pushing
people out onto the street, only
let them back in the evening and
it creates this cycle. Uh,
instead, if you give people a
place where they can store their
belongings, uh, shut their door,
uh, you know, be safe from kind
of predatory other um influences
in the community. Uh, it's just
a model that works.
Um, in areas where
microcommunities are tiny home
communities have been
established, you see things like
increased home prices, decreased
crime, um, and it makes sense
because the, the, it's not like
you're choosing between, uh, a
tiny home or no homelessness,
you're choosing between street
homelessness or sheltered
people. Um, so, uh, when it
comes to uh home values, things
like that, people
sleeping in arroyos obviously
has a negative aesthetic impact
on a community, whereas people
staying in a in a tiny home, uh,
mitigates that, if you will, um,
similar to crime, uh, people
sleeping in arroyos creates uh
opportunities for people to
either pre prey on them or for
them to do crimes out of
necessity, things like that. You
put people in a stabilized
environment. Uh, it just
mitigates a lot of those kind of
negative opportunities.
Um
So, uh, I'm going to just for
the sake of time, cause I wanna
be able to answer questions for
everybody. I'm gonna skip ahead,
um.
To the end of these orange
slides, and the next slide is uh
big bold letters it says a
positive path forward.
Um, so a positive path forward
requires more resources, more
shelter beds, and more high
quality services, uh, and I
think quality is important, not
all services are created equal,
uh, in this space, and, and this
is a big thing that that I am
committed to for my position,
which is, uh, it's not
sufficient to just keep doing
what we're doing. We have to
make sure that what we're
investing in and what we're
putting money in, uh, is
results-oriented.
And data driven, um, so there's
a lot of status quo, uh, when it
comes to the way that service
providers work, uh, across the
country, um, and we need
disruption there. Uh, so, so
when it comes to what the city
has done in the past month, uh,
there's been 3 pretty um sizable
sets of activities that were uh
investing in and, and doing to
really um
Take concerted action along what
I'd call the the continuum, so,
uh, uh, again, just as a
refresh, if we think of
homelessness as a pathway, um,
at one end, you have people
entering homelessness in the
middle, you have people who are
actively homeless, and then at
the the end of it, you have
folks who are exiting
homelessness into stability. We
need interventions that along
that whole spectrum. Um, so the
city put forward 3 initiatives.
uh, to kind of shake up our
system and and make positive
interventions. Um, the first is
at the beginning, we need folks
who can engage people who are
entering homeless who who aren't
adequately engaged, so we have a
a 4 year $8 million contract
with an organization that's a
national organization, but will
be hiring locally,
interestingly, it's also kind of
a jobs program. They
predominantly hire formally
incarcerated and formerly
homeless individuals to conduct
street outreach, um.
And so, uh, these, they will
have two teams that are deployed
to hotspot areas in the city. So
this is about how do you engage
folks who are proactively
engaged folks who are doing
things that are, uh, let's call,
uh, anti, uh, not, not
necessarily aligned with what we
want in our community in terms
of, uh, you know, how folks can
act, so whether it's people, um,
pestering businesses, uh, on the
more negative side, uh.
were loitering or uh you know,
actively using drugs in public,
uh, going in actively
intervening in those situations
and, and being a positive uh
intervention of, of moving
people towards uh services or on
the other side, um, not only
deterring negative actions, but
also uh encouraging more
positive types of engagements,
um, and this organization is uh
Also going to be connected with
our uh first responders, so, uh,
you know, a lot of folks are
like, oh, just send the cops in,
we need more cops. The reality
is that police are uh very well
positioned to deal with many
things. It's not a great use of
our law enforcement to have them
dealing with non, uh, you know,
critical types of public safety
intervention. So basically
triaging out these these lower
level incidences to people who
are
Trended, uh, but not ultimately
drawing down on resources of our
public safety, uh, colleagues.
Um, the next level, so they'll
have 40 trained staff working
across the city. Um, and they've
begun hiring already again
targeting under chronically
underemployed populations,
including the formerly
incarcerated, uh, and, and the
formerly homeless.
Interestingly, this
organization, um, has a, has a 9
96% of the
staff, the, the group's called
Urban Alchemy, 96% of their
employees uh are formally
incarcerated. Um, the national
rates for recidivism, I believe,
are 50%, uh, this organization
has a 2% recidivism rate. Uh, so
it's, it's a very successful
model that uh we see working in
the states, uh, like Alabama,
um, California, Texas, uh, and
I believe they're also deployed
in um Oregon. Uh.
The next intervention, so we
move one step into down the
pathway of this uh homelessness
continuum is strengthening our
homelessness response system. We
have a, a low barrier shelter in
the city here um on Syria's, uh,
that is, um, has long been a, a
problem, uh, property for, for
many folks in the city, um, and
the city has decided to uh end
our lease with the current
operator and transition to
a new operator as a means of
closing ultimately, uh, you
know, that specific location
moving away from the congregate
shelter model and towards uh
non-congregate. So again, the
idea is that when people are all
in the same space, it just
creates too much opportunity for
riff Raff and, uh, not, not, uh,
ultimately, you know, again,
it's not only about what's
happening in the moment, but
it's what's the ultimate
objective and, and, you know, at
these low barrier shelters.
People aren't talking about what
are the outcomes.
What are, how are you moving
people out of homelessness into
housing into stability. Um, so
our, our goal is to within a
year, uh, so, so starting August
1st and in about a month, uh,
we'll have a new operator
managing that facility. Um, uh,
and then the idea is to, uh,
within a year transition to a
different model, uh, no longer
at that location. Um, the, uh,
the key thing here is that it's
not about taking resources away
from our.
community. Um, I would not be
doing a good job if I said that
was appropriate. Uh, we need
more resources, not fewer, uh,
but we need different types of
resources, so I've committed uh
from my position that we're not
gonna see a reduction in beds,
uh, we need additional beds, uh,
so, but we need different types
of beds in our city, um.
And then step 3, this is that
kind of end of the the spectrum,
so we have early intervention,
the response system, and then
what's the off-ramp? Um, so
we're going to be adding beds to
our shelter system by uh
establishing um at least one new
microcommunity, uh, in the city
and hopefully more, uh, I
mentioned earlier, we have at
the low end estimate about 100%
deficit of 120 beds in our
community. Um, so one way we can
cut into that is by
building tiny homes, we're gonna
deploy about 30 to 50 tiny
homes, um, at a at a uh location
that's city owned, um, uh, and
that's gonna be the first kind
of way we, we tackle that, um,
this first site that we're
building is going to be
specifically for families with
children. Um, I pointed to
earlier at the beginning of my
presentation, that there's about
741 homeless children in Santa
Fe, according to the Santa Fe
Public schools.
Um, so this is designed to help
address that specific challenge.
Um, I, I'll say that this, uh,
these, these uh micro
communities or tiny home
communities they work, um, when,
when you talk about outcomes,
which is what I'm focused on.
Uh, you see things like
comparatively tiny home
communities have 72% that we
have a pilot here with 10 units,
72% of the residents at that
pilot have moved on to either
permanent.
or have a voucher that's
compared to, uh, you know, the
national average of like 10 to
15% at congregate shelters. So
if, if the goal is to get people
out of homelessness and into
housing interventions like these
work.
Um, I will say that there is,
uh, and it wouldn't be a
presentation with that that
ultimately moving towards some
sort of cult action or ask, so I
apologize in advance for that.
Um, uh, this is a regional
challenge. It's a state, it's a
national challenge, it's a
regional challenge, it's a state
challenge, it's, you know, this,
it's not one actor that can do
everything. Um, and, uh, when
there's an artificial constraint
that we have here in in Santa Fe
and I imagine it's.
in other, uh, in other cities in
New Mexico, which is um we need
cities and counties uh to play
well together. We need cities
and counties to be able to
leverage state assets better.
Um, so, so right now in Santa
Fe, the city is committed to
providing 100% of the land for
these types of interventions,
100% of the capital development
costs 100% of the operating
costs and 100% of purchasing of
the actual micro community
units, um,
Um, but that artificially
constrains what's possible. Uh,
if we can expand this
conversation to how can other
actors, not only public actors,
but also private philanthropies
join in this work, I think you
can really see some critical
mass to move the needle on this,
um, so with that, uh, I'll pause
for questions. Thank you very
much for the opportunity to be
here.
Thank you. So, so far I have um
Representative Lu Han, Senator
Gallegos, um, OK, it looks like,
I think what we'll do is we'll
start with Representative Lujan.
We have, I'll give you about 3
minutes and that's question. OK,
well, that's question and
answer, so, and I know that's a
short amount of time and I
apologize. We got a late start,
but um,
But trying to keep us on
schedule, so 3 minutes and, and
I have to be the good cop and
the bad cop. So we'll just go
along if you eat, don't feel the
need if you don't have questions
or want to say anything, just
pass, but so we'll give
everybody a shot. Go ahead,
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Madam Chair. 3 minutes is
very generous.
Um
I, I do have a couple of
questions in terms of um sort of
the plan that you've laid out,
the micro communities.
Are those intended uh for
families as well.
Uh, and, and I apologize. I'm
not 100% familiar with the
decorumir, Madam Chair,
counselor, or, uh, I spent a lot
of time at city council, uh, uh,
representative, um, so, so the
beauty of the model is that uh
you can design these communities
to meet specific population
needs, uh, so we have one
community that we are investing
in that's actually gonna be near
our community center here, uh,
and, and next to a fire.
Station, um, that is gonna be
designed specifically for
families and children. There's
been a lot of conversation in
the city about what are the
stipulations we put in, is it uh
restrictive of substances, um,
etc. etc. Uh, so this, this one
is going to be for families with
children. We do have a pilot,
uh, community that's 10 units,
and that one is not uh low
barrier or that is not, um, it
is a low barrier facility. The
only requirement is that uh
people are engaging with.
services, um, and getting
counseling and things like that.
Uh, I will also quickly say that
these are not like anybody can
come type of facilities, there's
an enrollment process, people
become actual residents, you
have to be screened to get in
once you're in, you are, uh, you
have a key to your door, uh, and
you are in that that facility
until you move to your permanent
house. Uh, so it's not like you
stay for one night and then you
leave. These are, these are more
permanent stabilizing. I'm not
sure if that answers your
question.
And so the other question that I
have has to do with um
supportive housing, and that's
the housing that you're shaking
your head so you know what, what
that is, right? And so, um,
where in your plan, um, is
supportive housing for those
folks who can't, who need to be
housed but can't necessarily
maintain themselves and need
need lots of supportive
services.
And what does that model look
like? Yeah, uh, Madam Chair, um,
representative Chavez, uh,
thank, thank you again for the
question. Um, so, so
self-admittedly, this plan is uh
not the long term plan we need.
Um, in that, it doesn't address
things like affordable housing
or permanent supportive housing,
which are longer term
investments, uh, those need to
be addressed and covered. Um,
this plan is really focused on
emergency actions that we can do
to make a
immediate impact in in their
community. That said, there are
um many investments that the
city wants to make when it comes
to affordable housing and
permanent supportive housing,
um, and, and those models, uh,
You
I mean, sorry, with, with the,
is the question to describe what
those look like or to describe
our plans for them. Yeah, just
describe your plans for them.
Um.
Uh, so, so, uh, I might punt on
this. I'm not, I, I wish I
oversaw the office of Affordable
Housing, unfortunately, it's not
under my remit. Um, but there
are, we need about 1500 units,
more or less of permanent
supportive housing in our
community, and we have, uh,
maybe at, at the best, best,
most generous count.
5 to 10% of that right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And Senator Pope, and
if you have, if you aren't,
haven't weren't here yesterday
when you ask your question,
please introduce yourself.
Um, Senator Pope, do you have
questions?
Not at this time. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, um, uh, Representative
Wuhan, House District 48, and
the majority of my.
For the entirety of my district,
I is in the city of Santa Fe. So
thank you for the presentation.
Um, we've had lots of
conversations of what's going
on. I'm glad you're here
presenting. One of the things I
want to know is with the new,
uh, the change of of
Of guard, if you will with the
um.
urban, um, coming in urban.
I can be coming in.
Where are you going to hire the
previous um groups folks because
you say you need 40 individuals,
and I believe you're gonna be
paying maybe $19 an hour.
So bringing in
And you're saying you're looking
for as a formerly incarcerated,
so I would assume you're working
with corrections. I assume
you're, you know, you're looking
at those programs. I thank you
for that because that's, that's,
that's a, a, a big niche we
need, but in Santa Fe, you can't
make 15 or $19 an hour and live
here.
Um, so how are you filling in
the gap there? Thank you, ma'am
chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Luhan, thanks for
the question. So, um, the, the,
I'll, I'll kind of say two
things. The current operator at
that location runs on a
volunteer model, um, they have
an operating budget of about
$1.6 million the city has chosen
a contract with Urban Alchemy
for $1.5 million in urban
alchemy won't be using
volunteers and, and I am, uh,
well, I believe deeply in the
value of
Volunteering, uh, I, I was a
Peace Corps volunteer, I
understand the, the importance
of, of that type of service in a
community. When we're talking
about um having really
outcomes-driven work, uh, we
need to pay for the results that
we want and uh hiring
professionals to do that work, I
think, is, is, uh, you know, we
wouldn't hire a, a volunteer
bank teller or uh a volunteer
doctor necessarily, and I think
if we want to see positive
results.
in this space, we should really
be focusing on professional
services with regard to the
hiring, um, uh, urban alchemy,
uh, has been working with parole
and corrections had a hiring
fair yesterday. Um, I believe
they made the offers to 16
individuals out of the 40 that
they'll be, uh, trying to
recruit and hire for locally,
um, I, I know that um there is
uh
Um, more than enough need in
that population here, uh, in
terms of, I know there's been
some recent coverage of
uh yeah, I'm gonna interrupt you
because I don't have a lot of
time, but the, the fact of the
matter is when those formerly
incarcerated come into um.
To the workforce, um, they don't
have a place to stay, and we
don't have any accommodations
for them. This is a huge issue,
so this is why I'm, I'm being a
little stern here because I've
been talking with groups I've
been having meetings and I think
that this is something that I'm
sure if you don't mind, um, this
is, this is intimate to uh this
conversation and I'm the
representative for the city, and
I just wanna, I just wanna
really emphasize that there's
gonna, you need to really work
at that infrastructure, what
we're going to do in the higher.
and I don't know that, you know,
how you're going to do that, the
volunteer, I would say peer
support groups are highly needed
across the board for many um
areas, especially when you're
dealing with our individuals
with these behavioral health and
substance use disorders. So I
would say training, creating a
pathway for.
What is absolutely necessary
in saying that we just need to
hire and have a professional,
um, workforce is, is, um, just
one piece of the pie man here. I
don't think it's, I don't, I
think it's relevant, but I think
you need all hands on deck so to
take out any volunteer or peer
support type of model would not
be to our city's benefit. So I
have other questions, but I'll
catch you offline. Thank you I,
if I may just, I would just say
I'm, I'm hopeful that, uh, the
city as a whole.
in our community can find
places, uh, if, if I would say
that if, if we are not able as a
collective community to find
places for people to volunteer,
that's like more of a reflection
on uh a, a failure of our
broader community, there's more
than enough places that people
can volunteer and, and my, my
perspective on this is if we
want to see results at a
specific shelter, then we need
to make sure that we're able to
hold uh individuals to accounts
in that regard. Thank you. So
it, it's gonna be
see when we have these full
agendas. If you missed the
presentation or the questions,
you don't get to ask questions.
So, um, you can follow up. So
we're gonna go, we'll come back
to the vice chair. We will go to
uh represented uh representative
Chandler.
I pass it this time,
uh, representative Jones.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you so much for your
presentation. I can see you've
done a huge amount of work and I
And in such a difficult problem
all over the state, you know, I,
I'm from way down south, we're
having the same problem and I
would really like to take this
back home and show them what
you've accomplished here in your
plan. But um one thing that
jumps out at me, and I wanna
make sure that that we're all
connected on this, the
presentation we saw yesterday
with the behavioral health and
how we're developing, we're
mapping the SIM mapping that's
going on, I wanted to ask you if
you are, if you're involved in
that sin mapping.
Madam Chair Representative
Jones, thank you for the
question. Um, I've, I've been,
uh, tangentially involved that
participated in the Santa Fe
County and mapping exercise, um,
it was pretty early on in my
tenure here. I've been with the
city about 78 months. Um, so
tangentially involved, uh, I
will say that um,
Uh, I'm also was recently
appointed to the behavioral the
the county's, I can't remember
the acronym, uh, behavioral
Health Leadership Committee or
something to that regard. So
I'll be involved in in those
conversations, uh, at a county
level.
That, that's good to know. Um.
I do want to point out that if
you look at the sequential
intercept model, we have that uh
handout from yesterday. The
Intercept 0 that we talked about
in depth and and Senator
Antoinette Cedillo Lopez
mentioned it and was really
concerned about that. You look
at the model, it is community to
community. Everything that
happens in between is
individualized, um, according to
that person's needs, but, but
what you're talking about, what
you're doing right here is
intercept 0. It is.
Preventing people from getting
involved in the court system. It
is, um, it's essential for that.
And so I hope that you'll really
be um connected because I think
that, you know, not only will
this, you're addressing
homelessness, but, but it, the
problem is so much bigger than
that, that you're gonna prevent
a lot of if we can um intercept
at 0. And, and what's
interesting is you look at the
people, the urban alchemy
people.
Those are folks who who have
recovered, they're on the other
end of community, they're
intercept 5.
So there's, there's a place for
everyone but hopefully that
those 1 through 4 intercepts
will decrease as you implement
this model, so, um, I think all
the rest of my, um,
I'll just let other people.
I know John has a lot for you.
So thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for your
presentation.
And just an explanation. I'm
sorry. So if just a few people
have questions, I will go in the
order that I see them if it
turns out that
50+% have questions, we just go
in order to keep it easier for
the chair rather, so no one will
be left out unless you miss the
presentation, as I said before,
but that, that's how we have uh
carried on this community and
this committee in the past is
just going in order and I will
switch sides, etc. do the front
first, so, um, so with that, go
ahead representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for being here,
Henry, and uh a couple of
questions for you. Number one,
I, I know that a drug, drug
problem.
are huge and then a combination
of drug and mental illness,
mental health problems is big.
So I'm just wondering when it
comes to your housing
initiatives here in Santa Fe
when it comes to tiny homes,
whatever it may be. Is there any
kind of intervention services?
Is there any, any kind of
services that mandate that
someone has to be in these.
programs because I know in some
states, they have housing first,
but it also includes.
Alongside a treatment scenario.
So I'm just wondering what kind
of things Santa Fe is looking at
for that, just to make sure that
you get the best bang for your
buck. Uh, you're not wasting
money when people are damaging
houses, etc. like that. So I
just want to make sure that you
guys are not just spending money
that's going to be wasted in the
future. What, what are you doing
from accountability mechanisms.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Black, thank you. Um, so, uh,
it's, I hope this answers your
question. Uh, so each
microcommunity is really
designed for a specific
population, um, and the, the,
the providers who manage those
uh population uh manage those
sites, set the rules, um, and
they set them in concert with
the city who's providing the
funding as well as the uh kind
of neighboring community who
who's engaged in that.
conversation.
Um, and at some level, these
types of decisions are best left
to clinicians and professionals
in the the space when it comes
to what is the best practice
about, uh, for instance, drug
testing or things like that. Um,
So the, the long and the short
of it is that these are managed
24/7, uh operated sites, uh,
with staff and security on
premise. Um, and that some, some
of them, uh, some of the sites,
depending on who it is designed
for, uh, if it is a group, uh,
that will be inhabiting a site
like one we have here, which is
the pilot community where folks
are, um, I'm not encouraged to
use substances, but are allowed.
To, as long as they're
On an active path towards
treatment, then there are active
mechanisms where people are
being, uh, supported and checked
in on, um, to make sure that
they are breaking bad habits and
things like that, but it is not,
uh, the model that, that, that,
that site pursues is one where
it says, OK, we acknowledge that
someone's addicted, but we're
gonna actively work with them to
get out of addiction. Uh, but if
we don't accept them into this
facility at all, because they're
addicted then that they're just
staying on the street. So, so
they are
Um
Uh, the condition in that in
that site is that they have to
be actively engaging in
services, uh, so, so I think it,
it really depends. But the point
is, is that these aren't just
kind of free for alls where it's
like anybody's welcome and you
can do whatever you want. It's
each one has a set of rules and
and conditions for uh being on
that premise.
Thank you. I wish I had more
time, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry for the long-winded
answers. We have to get back in
shape, um, Senator Scott.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, first question.
What is the average occupancy
rate.
Of your existing 280 beds.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Scott, um,
Uh, we, we run at about 95%
occupancy, which is, uh, uh, you
know.
You don't want to operate a
system at 100% ever. Uh, it
leaves no slack. So, I mean,
ideally I would like to run our
system at about 80%, uh, because
we forget that these assets
shouldn't only be for people who
are homeless. We need like
emergency assets for if there's
a fire or if there's, uh, you
know, we recently had a housing
develop in the city, um, have 16
residents, uh, leave because of
a fire that happened there, and
these people had to go to a
motel, there's no, I mean, they,
it was a lower income.
silly, but there's no reason why
we couldn't have the assets if
we had more slack in our system
that other people could.
OK, so.
Another fifty-ish beds would get
you out of that.
Immediate bond
And
And is is that accurate?
Uh
yeah, madam chair, Senator
Scott, I the low end estimate is
we need about 120 beds.
Uh, can you tell me what
The average cost of housing is.
In Santa Fe and compare that.
To, for example, the rest of the
state.
Is it very high?
I, I could say without knowing
the exact figures that it is
quite high.
And that would be a factor.
In creating some of the
homelessness.
Accurate.
Uh, I think there's nuance
there, um, yes, uh, I think the
lack of affordable housing is a
critical component. Um, but you
see a lot of, I mean, the, the,
the cities that have less
homelessness in this country are
ones where there's uh still the
same levels of poverty. Uh, you
see Midwestern cities posting
the industrial cities like
Chicago, Minneapolis, Cleveland,
and the reason they have as much
if not more poverty than many
cities in in New Mexico, but
The reason that they have less
homelessness is because there's
more affordable housing stock.
So it's, it is a function of it
being a higher cost environment.
Um, but it's not the only
reason.
And Madam Chair, and there's,
there's a legislative council
service report out there that
That uh details.
All of the state support
programs that are available to,
for example, single person up to
uh
The four-person family. These
numbers range from $50,000 a
year.
To $100,000 a year.
To what extent are these
resources being used to support.
The housing needs of uh
Madam Chair, Senator Scott, I'm
not 100% I'm clear on on the
question is, is, is the
question, how are we tapping
into state resources, uh,
To, uh, I, I'm sorry, I'm not
100% clear. OK, Madam Chair,
there's, there's a report out
that says, for example, that a
single person.
With one minimum wage job, which
is equivalent to
About 20,000 plus or minus a
year.
It has an equivalent revenue
stream.
With the state.
Program support added to that.
Of over $50,000.
just so sta a substantial amount
of monthly income.
And that goes up to $100,000.
For families with children.
Do any of these.
Program supports.
Help to alleviate the unhoused
problems.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
um, I understand the question
now, sorry about that, a little
slow sometimes, um, uh, I'm, I'm
not 100% sure I, I have an
evidence-based answer on that, I
will say, uh, that many of the
supports, whether they're food,
food and nutrition supports, um,
those are, those are pretty like
life stabilizing and critical
supports, um, uh, those do make
a difference in terms of not
making the problem worse.
Uh, I'm, I'm not able to, to say
affirmatively
representative Benaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, one
of the things that stood out to
me in your presentation that you
had mentioned is this desperate
need for the state, the county,
this is something that I learned
before coming into office. That
was an issue for many things,
including housing issues. Um,
but something is, um, an issue
with zoning, and I'm wondering
if that plays into this as well.
Um, you know, we know
microcommunities work, we know
tiny homes work, um, but I've
heard it talked about mostly
with affordable.
And I'm wondering how the state
can be a good partner or player
in that when you're talking
about zoning correctly, playing
well with municipalities as
well. Um, do you have anything
that you would recommend for the
state, um,
in, in Madam Chair,
Representative Ananya, um.
I'm not a, a land use and
planning experts, so, so my
perspective on this is, is, uh,
not based in the doctrine. I
would say that, uh, I, I haven't
seen.
Overly regulated and articulated
zoning plans ever help with?
Addressing affordable housing. I
think in, in many regards.
Deregulating that, uh,
ultimately will lead us towards
greater production. That's what
you see in places like Houston,
um, which, you know, there's
many problems with sprawl and
things like that. But if you
make it easier and cheaper for
people to build and people to
get permits. You'll see, you'll
see more units, um, uh, I'd also
quickly say that 11 interesting
thing with regard to playing,
you know, nice in the sandbox,
um, is that there's just not a
lot of, uh,
Incentives to do that in some
regards, um, the city is the
center of gravity for, for the
region. Um, and, you know, we're
happy to carry that
responsibility, but, uh
That there's not an incentive
necessarily for the county to
come to the table other than
goodwill. So figuring out how
you create those incentives for
shared responsibilities is
pretty important. I'll also say
one thing that would be really
helpful is, um, uh,
understanding how the city can
use uh lodgers texts, uh, more
broadly, um, understanding that
homelessness and uh crime and
things like that affect our
ability to drum up revenue from
tourism. Uh, I don't believe.
We're currently allowed to use
lodgers tax to fund, uh, you
know, social services or alarm.
Thank you, Representative Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for your
presentation. Um, I have some
quick and I have some
long-winded questions, so let's
start with the quick, uh, your
city site that is uh geared for
families that is near the fire
station? Is it near
transportation?
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. Have you
worked, uh, are you looking or
trying to view to see whether or
not the closeness of that fire
station can um be able to
provide some sort of medical
oversight for the residents of
that program during certain time
periods, is that a possibility?
uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Kits, um, so that's a, it's a
auxiliary benefit. It's not the
intent we will have full time
staff.
On the site, uh.
Who are clinically trained, um,
but our, our fire department
does house our emergency medical
service, so that's an added
benefit. It's also the site is
next to the uh uh a large
recreation center where we have
a lot of programming for
families and children already.
OK, thank you, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, and, um, so I, I
really appreciate you seeing,
you know, we need to increase
the beds, I understand, um, the
benefits of having individual
housing like the tiny homes
I've, I've read all the
newspaper articles on the pallet
homes here in Santa Fe and um,
and they seem to be successful
in a very small pilot process.
We don't know how they are as
they implement my concern and so
I'm gonna
I'm gonna, I'm gonna start with
the end of the question. The end
of the question is whether or
not these successful programs
that only have had a 2% uh
reciism in like Alabama, Oregon.
Do they have what I didn't hear
from you is a comprehensive
program that has uh
transportation, medical, uh, job
training, uh, addiction
services, not somebody that
comes on Tuesday afternoon every
other week, but to actually.
have a site so that I may just
be using the beds right now with
a locker for my stuff. Um, there
may be uh porta potties outside
for when I leave, but that
they'll be transportation there
if I want to do addiction
services, then they'll have that
if they have a medical, um, I
would like to know whether or
not those 2% recidivism rate,
those programs have such an
elaborate, do we have plans on
creating that, um, is one of my
questions.
and I will say that
Uh, the reef crisis center in
Albuquerque. I don't know if you
were, you said you were fairly
new to your job. I don't know if
you're new to New Mexico, but um
the rate prices center in
Albuquerque, it's been around
for like 20 years and one of the
wonderful design features of it
as you walk you through and you
can make a left and go through
law enforcement, you can make a
right and go through social
services, you have uh really
record your, your, your, your,
your, your accounts, so you
don't have to keep repeating it.
It has a medical room and has a
place for clothes, has a place
for housing, and it's all one
site, so we're not keep dragging
people more. I was shocked by
your statistic that the average
individual that is unhoused is 5
years and 6 months. That is an
unbelievably long time to live
in crisis, and so thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. And Representative
Garcia and Senator Gallegos will
be, uh, next, but don't forget
to introduce yourself.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, state red Miguel Garcia from
Marisco.
District 14.
Just one quick question on that
program.
Um, regarding, um.
Uh, recidivism.
Um
What is
And for how long have they been
running? Um, so, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Garcia, um,
uh, the, just, just for
clarification, the
The city does not run a program
uh focused on addressing
recidivism. We are contracting
with a nonprofit whose model is
to hire formally incarcerated
people, and their results as an
organization have uh
Remarkable data on how when they
hire formerly incarcerated
people in their organization,
they have a very low recidivism
rate compared to national
averages. It's kind of like a
two birds with one stone thing
for the city, we're hiring them
to do services. Uh, it's a, it's
an added benefit that it's a
jobs program. Uh, it is, that is
not the, the only reason we're
working with them. We're working
with them because they deliver
results
is the name of that nonprofit.
It's called.
urban alchemy, uh, and they work
in California, Oregon, uh, um,
Alabama, Texas, uh, and now New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mayor Cha.
Thank you, Senator Callegos.
Thank you, apologize for being
late, but I, I like some of your
numbers here. Uh, I saw where
you have a homeless individuals
by name of 400, and she thought
that was a Walmart area by
itself, but I'm glad you guys
are at least trying to get their
names and information, but my
question goes back to
When we had our first year of
marijuana.
Revenue of then Senator
Rodriguez, who I think is the
namesake for the, you guys have
that um.
Facility where you're gonna make
the the small houses, uh, right
next to her. It's, it's um all
um but it's that sector of town,
uh, where she's got that, um,
her namesake out there, but
going back to this, uh, at that
time, I understood we had 300
million to go towards homeless
here in Santa Fe, uh, and I
understood we're gonna do, uh,
one of the
Uh congregate model.
facilities
Has that ever been done and has
that money, I, I like the idea
you're looking for to invest to
get the biggest bang for the
buck, but has that ever been
used? And if so, what did that,
uh, madam, Madam Chair
Representative Gallegos, um, I'm
personally, I've, I've been with
the city for 7 months. Uh, I'm
not personally familiar with 300
million in funding that was
given to the city, I know that
we've gotten this past year
from, I believe, the um
Uh
We got 400,000 for to add
towards this, I believe in years
past we've gotten to the tune of
1.2 or or so million, but I'm
not familiar with uh an an
appropriation of 300 million.
Well, thank you for that.
Afterwards, I'll get your
information so we can follow up
because I remember the bill that
she'd had and it took all of the
revenue statewide for marijuana,
one community, Santa Fe. I just
want to make sure that money
was.
I love the idea you're trying to
put it in the right place. I
just wanted to track that, see
where it went, so with that all
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
OK, uh, vice chair.
Lopez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you so much for your
presentation and um as the chair
and I have been discussing
previously the issue.
Be on house is, this is just
like giving one little snapshot.
Um, a picture of what's going on
in here in the local community
of Santa Fe, but it is an issue
around the state.
And many of our communities.
And um
We were just on a recent road
trip vacation, the kids and I.
And as we were going through
Phoenix, you know, driving
through southern Arizona and
California, you know, there
were, there definitely is a
homeless issue, unhoused issue
in all of these cities that we
were visiting.
Um, so I know, Madam Chair,
we're one of many who are
dealing with this, um.
Serious issue.
I just wanted to point out some
stuff for, uh, so I can put this
out in
The universe, um, and when we
talk about um homelessness,
being unhoused with our
children. You mentioned services
for children, um, and their
parent or parents, whichever it
may be.
Um, in Albuquerque, we have
about 2700.
on how
nationwide we're looking maybe
approximately 1 million, but as
we know, Madam Chair, that's
all, uh, an undercount when you
really look at that.
Um
What I've seen, Madam Chair,
just in Albuquerque this past
year as I've driven around is I
see an increase in um
Older women?
who are now homeless.
And I've, um, you know, I called
the, the city of Albuquerque has
the services, so you don't call
it APD, but um I've seen an
increase which is concerning,
Madam Chair, for those of us who
are older, um, as to what the
concerns are for that.
Um, I know that.
In, uh, I happen to serve as a
um an advisory board member on
Hope Works, which is there in
Albuquerque.
And we just about a year and a
half ago opened what we call
Hope Works Village.
And it takes, as you say,
players coming from all
different entities of
government, including the Feds,
um, working together to prove,
you know, to, to build a
facility.
And in this facility for those
who are looking for housing, you
don't have to be on a program uh
for addiction or anything, but
we will help you.
So if they do come in, um, we
provide home apartments and on
the bottom level of our
building, we do provide
addiction addiction, sorry,
services, counseling, and
others, um, and we have already
had Madam Chair some, um, I
think giving credit to our
staff, and we've had transition
from those who've been in the
facility with services who've
actually moved into some
housing.
Um, which is that, that, that's
the end goal, but Madam Chair,
this costs money when we talk
about homeless children, that's
the McKinney Vento program. It's
tittle $1 and if we know what
the feds are doing with some of
those dollars, it's a big
concern as to what the state
will do to help, especially
those children and their
families, um, and then Madam
Chair, we, we talked about
affordable housing, it's needed
again, I'll say this, but
What do we do and how can we
address the immediate
Need of people who are, right?
They, they, you know, rent has
gone up.
And it's happened in my district
in the South Valley where rent a
new owner came in, raised the
rent to $800 a month.
These are senior citizen women
who cannot afford it based on
their income.
Um, so, um, yeah, there's a lot
of concerns for the immediate.
Affordable housing is good,
Madam Chair, but that's still
long term.
We have to look as to what we
can do, but again, it costs
money.
Um, and then one more, just to
clarifying question, um, here in
Santa Fe.
Are there any of your programs
that will let the unhoused stay
all day.
Or is it night and then day
you're gone and then you come
back.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Lopez, um, uh,
Very quickly, 22 things to
confirm and affirm what you
said. It's one, what we see in
Santa Fe is, is not unique. This
is national, uh, these trends
are reflected nationally, um,
and, and there are many cities
that uh have similar challenges
to Santa Fe when it comes to
affordable housing and things
like that, uh, that are seeing
similar issues. Uh, you
mentioned Tucson, Arizona,
California, all across the
country.
Um, also, the, the, the trends
of this being an older
population are also uh true
nationally, um, and I believe
we've seen about a 20% increase
over the past 5 years nationally
of the number of homeless
individuals. Uh, with regard to,
um, are there any facilities
that don't ask people to leave,
uh, currently, the pilot
microcommunity does not ask
people to leave, um, uh, that
is, um, there, there's also
some kind of subspecialized, uh,
shelter services that we have
for victims of domestic violence
and for families, um, so there's
one that's called the Consuelo's
Place, which people have their
own rooms. It's on the Midtown
campus. Those individuals are
not asked to leave, they can
stay in their rooms all day
long, but, but by and large, we
wanna move away from models that
ask people to leave.
Thank you. And I'm just gonna
make a point that um that as a
nation, we do a point in time,
we do 1 December.
I believe January January 1
January night where we have
volunteers go out and count
people who are unhoused. If you
think about it, when are you
gonna be trying to be housed the
most when it's the coldest. So,
I mean, there's so many reasons
that we know we have a severe
undercount and it just
personally one night is kind of
ridiculous, I mean I'm just
gonna say it, it's, it's, it's
a, it's kind of a joke.
But thank you so much for your
time and we are uh 23 minutes
behind schedule, so we will call
up um
Zender and Rachel and Andrea,
and
And hopefully we'll try and
catch up a bit. The recap of
child welfare legislation passed
during the 2025 legislative
session, and for those of you
who are used to having some
graphics up there, we had
technical difficulties this
morning, which resulted in a
late start, and we, um, that was
the one thing we weren't able to
get back, but we decided we just
As the legislature does just go
with what we got, so.
Thank you.
I'm gonna ask members if you're
having side conversations,
please whisper, I know what's
going on on every end of the
table, and I really don't want
to.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. Um, uh,
this is a joint presentation
between council services staff
and LFC staff. My, my name is
Rachel Garcia. Um, I am the LFC
analyst currently for uh CYFD,
um, and with me at the table, do
you want to introduce
yourselves?
Um, I, I'm sure you guys are
tired of me introducing myself
at this point, Madam Chair, but
I'm Xander Dawson.
And Madam Chair, I'm Andrea
Lazaro.
Um, and, and Madam Chair, uh, we
typically do these presentations
for you all right after the
session. It will essentially be
a recap of the bills that you
all passed, as well as um budget
and appropriations made, uh, to
the child welfare, uh, system.
Tomorrow you will get a similar
presentation um for other areas
of health and human services
from LFC staff. So they're kind
of broken up into two parts.
Um, we're gonna be talking from
this presentation, uh, it's
titled 2025 Legislative Session
recap.
Um, what we will do here is I
will just give you some very
high level basic information
about the system, uh, the
state's child welfare system,
particularly protective
services, Xander and Andrea will
walk you through key bills you
all as a legislature passed, uh,
and then I will end with some
updates related to the budget
and what was in the general
appropriations Act. Um, so if
you turn with me to slide 3. I
just present it to you all kind
of a few key charts that kind of
ground you all in our state.
system, uh, the first being we
persistently have a child
maltreatment rate that is
considerably higher than the
national average. Uh, that's a
rate per 1000. So in New Mexico,
this is 2023 data. Our rate of
child maltreatment is 12.6 per
1000
again, the next chart kind of
breaks down what is that
maltreatment. This is data
pulled directly from federal
reporting, so it tends to lag a
little bit, but it kind of
breaks down what is
maltreatment.
Um, and this trend is very
similar to what we see in other
states, and that is neglect is
persistently, um, the most
prevalent form of maltreatment,
uh, while other things like
sexual abuse or physical abuse
then if you look at the third
chart, um, the key point here is
what we know is that the number
of children in foster care in
New Mexico has grown
particularly since the pandemic.
We were seeing a decline, um,
prior to the pandemic and the
number of children in foster
care in our.
State has increased, so that
number
is now around 2100 children, uh,
in any given month.
Uh, and if you flip with me to
the next slide. This is just
some key challenges I know, uh,
you all have a, have talked
about um in recent years, areas
that LFC has also tended to
focus and, and those are sort of
what are some of the root causes
of challenges in our child
welfare system. We have uh a
high repeat maltreatment rate,
uh, that is children who
experience substantiated abuse
or neglect and then have another
incident within 12 months. That
is a number that we track.
Uh, closely, it's one of CYFD's
performance measures, um, that
number in FY 24 was 15%. Uh, it
has come down a little bit to
about 14% at the start of this
fiscal year.
Um, second kind of key challenge
we often track as the state has
to do with workforce. It really
is a root cause when it, when
we, when it comes to challenges
within our state's child welfare
system. Um, we persistently see
very high rates of turnover in
the system and that particularly
contributes to challenges we
see. Uh, and then the third kind
of graph that you'll see there
is we also consistently have
insufficient community-based
placements, um, and behavioral
health services for children in
care and so that also
contributes to some.
of the challenges that we see. I
will note in this chart we have
seen a small increase in the
number of licensed resource
homes. That's another word for
foster homes in our state over
the last year. So that's just
some kind of grounding data
about the current state of our
system. I'm gonna turn it over
to Xander and Andrea, who are
going to talk you through the
key some key bills related to
child welfare that you all
passed during this session.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Rachel. So, um, the first
bill that we're gonna be talking
about is Senate Bill 42. Um,
this bill, uh, it aimed to
improve child welfare in the
state uh through really 3 broad
main objectives. The first is
updating and improving data
privacy and record retention
requirements related to child
welfare. We'll, uh, dive a
little deeper into that, but uh
it's addressing a lot of issues
you all have been hearing for
years about, um, sometimes the
data needs to be private when it
suits people and
Sometimes it's not when it
doesn't suit people. Uh, the
second, uh, is improving the way
the state responds to alleged
child abuse or neglect, um, that
falls into kind of two
categories. So there's uh there
was a big overhaul of the uh
so-called CAA program that we're
going to discuss. And then uh
there's also um an
implementation requirement of a
statewide multi-level response
system that had uh it's
currently in a pilot format
that's been really successful,
and I think Rachel can probably
talk a little bit more later
about the success of that uh.
Multi-level response system. And
then the third piece is
improving prevention and early
intervention services.
So we'll go to the next slide.
Um, we're starting, uh, looking
at the data privacy and record
retention changes in Senate Bill
42.
Um, so the, the first portion of
it is really, I, I, I think, you
know, trying to make sure that
when there's an investigation,
um, that all the information is
available to the investigators.
So it requires CYFD employees to
make all um communications that
are related to their job on
department-issued uh cell
phones. So, um, it'll make sure
all that uh communication is
easily accessible.
Because the um, the cell phones
are also going to be required to
be backed up. I think daily in
the bill. So, um, those records
will always be available for
investigators.
Then we have sections 10 and 11,
and those are more, I, I think
outward, uh, transparency of, of
investigations related to um
fatalities or near fatalities
specifically. And um it really
um, it broadens the types of
information that can or are
required to be uh
Provided when there's a near
fatality or fatality, um, and,
um, it also
Uh, broadens the type of people
who can receive that
information.
Um, moving on, we, uh, talk
about the CAA program uh
overhaul. So that's gonna be
sections 5 through 8 of the
bill. And um the, the main thing
that it does is it shifts
responsibility for the program
from CYFD to the HCA, um, and it
puts a lot of requirements on
the HCA to make sure that, um,
first of all, whenever there's
a, a child born addicted to a
substance in a hospital in the
state. They are required to have
a plan.
Safe care now. Um, they can't
leave the hospital without that
point of safe care. And then uh
the HCA is required to do a lot
of follow up and make sure that
that plan of safe care is being
followed and um and help connect
the families to resources that
they need and that are in their
plans of safe care.
Um
And then, uh, you know, there,
there's also a requirement that
I was working with the
healthcare authority, uh,
determined that a family's not
following the plan of safe care.
There has to be a report to
seeYFD and then CYFT will follow
up from there. So it, it, it
changes how before if someone
had a plan to safe care, they
kind of just were left out in
the wild on their own. There's a
lot more context that they're
going to be having, um,
throughout the process now.
And then the third uh big
portion is the uh Fas First Act.
So,
This is a really a big scheme of
trying to get more federal
funding. Um, and so it's um
Requiring CYFD to develop and
implement uh family first
strategic plans, um, that comply
with the uh the family first uh
Prevention Services Act. Um, it
will really, uh, just enable uh
CYFD to leverage a lot more
federal funds, especially for um
foster care prevention. Um, so,
moving on to the next slide, uh,
I put here some of the key dates
that you all uh might want to,
um, you know, check in with the
departments on that, make sure
they're uh
implementing the these uh.
Implementing the requirements by
these dates. So the first
requirement actually coming up
almost in a month from now is
see why if he's required to
finalize the family's first
strategic plan. And then a month
later, they're required to
submit that to the federal
government.
Um
Then January 1st, um.
CYFD is uh required to have that
um daily backup of all
electronic records that I talked
about earlier. That's, that has
to be implemented by uh the
first of next year, and then
July 1st, um, is the deadline
for the HTA to fully implement
the new Kara program
requirements. So that's July 1st
of 2026.
Um, June 30th of 2027, they have
the deadline to implement a
pilot program that um uses the
family first, uh, prevention
services funding and um
It, it's, it has to be a pilot
program that's compliant with
the requirements of that act.
And then um finally in 2032, um,
They're required to fully
statewide implement the um the
family first uh services. And
oh, I guess I skipped over the
multi, the statewide multilevel
response system is required to
be.
Um, so that's it for now on
Senate Bill 42. Uh, we'll go to
Centerville 283.
Which is called the Federal
Benefits for Children in State
Custody Act. Um, so this really
requires CYFD to make sure that,
um, any child who's um in uh
state custody or or going to the
uh child welfare system is
getting all the the federal
benefits that they have access
to. It's just making sure that
we're leveraging um all the
money that's available to the
state and, and to those children
and families. So it, uh, any
child that enters uh the child
welfare
system through CYFD as to have
an eligibility determination of
what benefits are they eligible
for?
And then the department has to
uh help help them apply and or
apply on behalf of the children.
And then if there's no one, no
guardian or custodian or parent
that is able to handle the
benefits for the child, the
department is required to handle
the benefits on behalf of the
child.
And then whenever the child is
released from CYFD custody. They
are entitled to any of the
benefits and and CYFD is
required to release all of those
benefits to the children.
Um, and so I think that's it for
Senate Bill 283, and I'll hand
it over to Andrea for hospital
5.
OK. Um, this, uh, bill, House
Bill 5, as you're probably all
well aware, creates the, um,
well, it's called the Office of
the Child Advocate Act, and it
creates this office, which will
be um administer
administratively attached to the
Attorney General's office, um,
and the beginning of the bill
has a lot to do with um how the
person who will be in that
position, um,
will be appointed, um, the
person shall be appointed by the
governor, but um it will be at
the advice of the Senate, and
there is a nominating committee
consisting of Senate members who
will provide that advice. Um,
and this nominating committee um
is going to be meeting no later
than September 1st of this year.
And um essentially in a
nutshell, this is very lengthy
bill, um, but in a nutshell,
what this office will do.
is provide independent oversight
of the CYFD um investigate
complaints against the
department, um, it will require
CYFD to provide notice to the
office of the Child Advocate
within 72 hours of a fatality or
near fatality, um, and then, um,
it will have the power to
investigate these incidents, and
then um the uh office
be required to report annually
to a number of legislative
committees, um, on the status of
the CYFD system and its
performance, um, and it will
provide recommendations for
improving the system and um one
of the things I don't know that
it's actually here, no, it's
not, um, but I, I need to bring
this up because it's rather
important. There are, I think,
at least 3 or 4.
of this bill that go to uh
protecting the confidentiality
of the child, uh, with respect
to these uh investigations, the
exchange of information, um,
and, um, other, other matters
related to turning over records,
um, and in fact this um statute
will amend the IPRA Act to
specifically mention.
The kinds of records that are
protected from being IRable, um,
With respect to enforcing.
Right. Um, so, Madam Chair, I'm
now gonna walk you through, um,
CYFD's budget and as well as
some funding that was
appropriated for the office of
the Child Advocate. Um, I have
some slides, but you also should
have distributed the LFC high
level for CYFD. That's the
document we often use, uh, on
the LFC to track the individual
funding changes. I recognize
some of the font is really
small, but there's some callouts
um in the PowerPoint. So this is
an additional resource for you.
Um, so I am now looking at the
slides, CFD's budget history.
I'm gonna walk you through a
little bit of um where CYFD
CYFD's budget was going into FY
25 and then I'm going to talk
through additional funding
appropriated through the general
appropriations Act. Um, so if
you look at that slide, the
first chart that gives you kind
of an operating budget history
for um the children, youth and
Families department from FY 21
to FY 25. 1 of
the, the key, um, takeaways from
the from this chart is that one,
The majority of the agency's
funding is general fund, but
they receive a large share of
federal funds that's primarily
in protective services.
To protective services does make
up the vast majority of CYFD's
budget. It's about 60%, um, but
there are other programs within
the child welfare agency. Those
include juvenile justice, uh,
behavioral health services for
children as well as um program
support.
In that second chart, because
protective services makes up the
biggest portion of the budget we
present to you all kind of
funding growth over time, um,
between FY 14 and FY 24, the
protective services budget had
grown by about $100 million and
that was at the same time that
we actually had fewer kids in
care and so you can see that in
the last chart.
The second thing to know in in
2024, so for FY 25, the
legislature had held CYFD's
operating budget relatively
flat, but had made some targeted
investments in the multi-year
kind of recurring special
appropriations we call those the
grow and so when you're looking
at see we have these operating
budget and FY 25 and 26, there's
not going to be a lot of growth
in the operating budget, but
there are big appropriations on
the non-recurring or.
the special side. So that note
in the bottom in 2024, the GAA
had included 24 million in
non-recurring special
appropriations, and that was
18.6 million through the
government results and
opportunity funder grow to pilot
and evaluate targeted programs
um to address systemic
challenges.
So then if you look at the next
slide, the budget in FY 26, the
legislature took a similar
approach and maintained a
relatively flat operating budget
for CYFD while making kind of
targeted investments in
non-recurring often multiyear
special appropriations. So in
that first chart, um, is the FY
26 operating budget. That's
section 4 of the GAA.
So for FY 26,
Um, the, the operating budget at
C CYFD will be 396.1 million,
um, that includes the
compensation package within uh
the general appropriations Act,
that's built in now to the
operating budget, and you can
see the breakdown, the vast
majority remains in protective
services.
And if you look at the 2nd
column, this is um.
Grow or multiyear appropriations
that you all actually
appropriated last year, but are
available in FY 26. Those are,
this will be the 2nd year of the
pilot funding and that list
there is what will be available.
So it's 562,000, the pilot
incentives for a master's level
social work, 1.4 million to
implement implement multilevel
response that's connected to
what Xander mentioned about
legislation that now codifies
that move, um, and
3, for evidence-based prevention
and early intervention programs
that's connected to some of that
family first prevention Services
Act. This is funding that can
support that work. So that
second column are actually
appropriations you made last
year, but they are for FY 26.
And so then in the last column,
those are new and additional
special appropriations that were
um in different sections of the
GAA or House Bill 2 this year,
those are sections 569, and 10,
um.
You don't need to know all the
details about what each of those
do, but I've given you kind of a
summary list of some of the big
ones, um, that's 30 million over
3 years to hire 101 case workers
annually, 10 million a year.
That should each fund about 101
additional case workers, 9.6
million over two years to hire
case aides, 5.6 million to
create a regional on-call
response team by 0.4 million
over three years to a pilot and
evaluate a child welfare
workforce training academy, uh,
5.2 million over two years for
operating costs related to
Senate Bill 42, so um that's the
bill Dander mentioned the FIR
identified some additional
operating costs and so.
there was funding in the GAA to
support some of that.
Uh, there's 1.8 million over two
years for personnel to meet
additional KevinS data
obligations and then 600,0002
CYFD over two years to respond
to inquiries from the Office of
the Child Advocate. Again, that
was identified by the agency as
a cost in the FIR and there is
funding in the GAA to support
that.
So in total, um, kind of the,
the big picture and what is
included in the GAA for this
year. Again, the legislature
maintained it relatively flat
operating budget, but made
pretty significant target
investments in non-recurring
through special appropriations
in both the general fund, uh, in
the, in the growth fund and
altogether the GAA included an
additional 111 million or CYFT,
um.
This is where that kind of handy
dandy chart uh may come in handy
if you want to see the
individual lines. The top of
this chart is CYFD's operating
budget. The way you read it is
um because the operating budget
always starts with the current
year and adds what you'll see
are additions in this first
section, and again, the key
takeaway was the legislature
didn't add a lot to the
recurring operating budget.
But if you go to the bottom.
And the spreadsheet label
non-recurring, that's where we
map out all of the additional
appropriations that were in
other sections of the GAA
specials Section 9, which is the
grow fund transfers and other
things, and then the very bottom
is a roll up by section of the
GAA. So that's kind of how you
read that chart.
Um, OK, so that's kind of the
overall summary of funding to
CYFD, um, what I'm now gonna
walk through on the last slide
is additional funding for the
office of the Child Advocate
Iander and Andrea mentioned that
office was created through
legislation this session, and so
the GAA did have some funding,
some of which was vetoed for the
establishment of that office. So
the very last page.
Have the slides, uh, is
everything that was related to
the office of the child
advocate. Um, there were
actually 5 line item
appropriations for that office,
some of which were vetoed, but
some of which were not. And so,
um, there was a million dollars
for startup costs to the
Attorney General to establish
that office, that was vetoed.
Um, there was and that was
primarily for things like IT, so
they need to create a case
management system and things
like that, some of those one.
time startup costs.
Vetoed, uh, the second line item
for the office of the Child
Advocate that 650,000 for FY 26,
that remained in the GAA. Those
are kind of operating costs for
the office, and then 300,000 to
CYFD for personnel to respond to
inquiries that appropriation was
made.
But then if you go down, um, an
appropriation to the Attorney
General's office for operating
costs in FY 27, that was vetoed
though uh the GAA maintained
300,000 to CYFD for personnel to
respond to inquiries in FY 27.
Uh, and I will know it's pretty
common in the GAA to kind of
find um
Uh, startup costs for new
organizations that are programs
as a special because
It's not clear if the bill is
going to make it and so there is
often that contingency language,
so I'll just note that.
And put that sort of concludes
our summary of both.
key legislation that was passed
as well as appropriation to the
GIA related to child welfare.
Um, I will note, um, in
preparation for this
presentation, um, we had planned
to kind of do a summary of the
bills and appropriations um and
invited cabinet secretaries uh
to have a panel to talk about
implementation. Um, I think
there are a variety of different
things going on around the state
this week and some of the
secretaries were unavailable,
but we are hoping as staff to
kind of coordinate for you all a
subsequent hearing where you can
learn more about the
Very much, and I think
Or
Ask questions and, and I think
we're gonna keep the questions
to the presentation. We're not
gonna um
Go off on to tangents because we
don't have a lot of time and we
only gave half an hour to this,
so questions are related
directly to the
Um
So I have
Um, OK, let's start with
Here we have a nayak case.
That
OK. We'll start with that and we
are, again, we are um already
overdue, so I will give you 3
minutes, but we're gonna really
stick with 3 minutes, so make
your questions and answers
briefly.
So
Representative Naya.
Centers, um, I'm 13 the um and
Centers, um, I'm 13, the term um
and really focus on the neglect
piece. I know this has been a
charge that Senator Lopez has
been leading for many years,
really looking at the definition
of neglect and what it means.
Right now it's um pretty
encompassing of
Poverty, quite honestly, and so
I think we really need to take
a, a look at that definition to
make sure that we are not, um,
We don't have it and so I really
want to talk about that, and
also in relation to like the
workforce issues we have, the
fact that we don't have enough
foster families cause I getting
the data on the actual that is
just poverty.
I really think just cases.
Um, and it would also alleviate
some of those numbers issues.
Um, I also, um, let's see,
social workers, I can't.
forgot the page right now.
But um what we're seeing is a
trend is, um,
Eliminating the test for social
workers, and I wanted to know if
there was any sort of
conversation around this. Um, I
have a friend who just graduated
with her masters. She's she's
the one we want to keep and
elevate, she knows and loves,
um, the families that she's
working with. She still has to
take her test, the actual test
itself, um, for the license
piece is a huge and these are
the types of folks that we want
to keep in New Mexico. And so,
um, I'm just wondering if there
is any
Uh, test
presented.
Um, so Madam Chair
Representative and I.
Be, um, part of the conversation
in the legislature and other
places, um, that wasn't specific
to any of the appropriations
that I mentioned or the bills
that actually passed, um, what
we'll note is that 562,000, the
language for the appropriation
was relatively broad. It was
simply to pilot incentives for
people to attain master's level
social work licensure. So
presumably it could be used for
a variety of purposes, things
like additional training or
support.
relates since you're testing,
things like that, but the
elimination of the test wasn't
um kind of specific to either
the appropriations or the bills
we discussed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And just a reminder
that these folks are talking
about the bills and the dollar,
so the, the weeds, um, we don't
expect them to know that, and we
don't, we didn't build in weeds
for a half hour presentation.
So, um,
Next, we will have
Representative Cates.
Thank you, madam chair. Yes,
there are lots of weeds and so I
will try to stick to it. Um, on
your slide for the budget for
the items that were not vetoed.
The,
it's just, you know, and I
understand with budget, it's a
very brief and uh uh.
Wide spectrum description of
what this is paying for. It
looks to me like this is paying
for administrative support, not
specialized legal or specialized
support within the AG's office.
Um, the, the bill, the parts
that had been.
Uh, signed by the governor. Is
there a legal.
Representation is there uh
specialized.
Um, Workforce FTEs in this
budget that has been approved?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
and so the language of the
appropriation is relatively
broad. It's, it's literally what
is in front of you, um, it came
from as House Bill 5 was moving
through the legislative process,
the FIR is identified potential
costs and so house bill to
essentially funded the
implementation of House Bill 5,
as identified in the FIR Again,
the language is relatively
broad.
So I don't believe I can speak
to how the AG is using those
appropriations. Thank you and
thank you, Madam Chair. We may
want somebody from the age's
office to ensure that these are
just not administrative fundings
that we have some specialized as
well, um, what is near fatality.
What is the definition that the
CYST must report on near
fatality.
Um,
so, Madam Chair, it, it's rather
broad, um, it's basically uh it
says if a doctor determines that
the child suffered a serious
health condition.
OK, so an MD must do that. And
which uh cabinet secretaries
were able to participate.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
are you asking in the
development of these bills? No,
I'm asking for the, the meeting
that you just had that you're
gonna report back to the
findings. Madam Chair
Representative, I'll clarify.
So, um, for this presentation
today as staff as we were
organizing hearings for you all.
Um, we reached out to the
secretaries and asked if they
would participate in a panel to
talk about the implementation of
these bills. They were
unavailable today.
But we as staff are continuing
to work with them to schedule
them for a hearing if you all
would like at a subsequent LHHS
meeting, so they can share with
you all about implementation of
these items. OK, thank you for
that clarification and thank
you. Thank you and that that
that that's why we did this
brief presentation. We wanted to
do a bigger one, but LFC and
LESC are both meeting this week
and so we couldn't pull together
the whole panel, but we didn't
want folks to, we didn't want to
get let folks know that we're
thinking about it and we're
working on it.
So, uh, next I have um
Represented block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys for the presentation.
Pardon me, I'm just gonna talk a
little bit about SB 42 and just
ask some questions about that. I
know that these we had care
coordinators that it changed
somehow in the bill. I don't
know what it, but I'm just
asking.
You know, since we had a recent
death of 44 month old.
Which is really unfortunate. I'm
wondering what changes do we
expect?
With this change with SB 42,
because I know we're still in
rulemaking till July 1st, but
the department should have been
doing their job.
Before that. So I'm just kind of
wondering, since the epic
failure of the department.
Since the rulemaking, what do we
expect? Because there's no real
mandates, except for a plan of
care. So I'm just trying to
figure out how we can prevent
something like this with SB 42
from your interpretation in your
presentation.
Um, so, Madam Chair
Representative Black, um, what
I'll note about, uh, Senate Bill
42, it did go through many
different iterations and
amendments during the process.
It does make much more
prescriptive what is required
related to plans of safe care.
So it does a variety of things.
One, it requires expert or
universal screening, um, for
substance exposure to it
articulates some required
referrals within the plans of
safe care 3.
it requires HCA to place care
coordinators in hospitals to
oversee the creation of plans of
safe care. It is quite
prescriptive about the form of
case management to the bill,
language specifically includes
um each day is required to
implement an intensive
evidence-based form of care
coordination and has some
specific monitoring and follow
up and things like that. Um,
Madam Chair Representative
Black, I think an open question
is then what the
rulemaking process looks like
and how it is then implemented.
I think that I can't speak to,
but is a real open question. The
bill is actually pretty
prescriptive about what needs to
happen when.
Thank you, Madam. And then, this
doesn't go into effect until
next July. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, yeah, the, the full
implementation of the new care
program is required July 1st of
next year, yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
unfortunate. That's all.
You.
Um, next I have a representative
Roebuck Caballero and just for
my own edification, I wrote down
a C as in senatoredil Lopez, so
who else was on the list that I
haven't called on.
00, Chavis, the, OK, OK, thank
you. Go ahead, um,
representative Robo Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
I'm referring to page um by Miss
Garcia, presentation on child
welfare performance challenges
in the data, it's all related to
the.
To the data. I think we've been
hearing data across the um.
Across all of our reports and I
wanna thank Representative Anaya
for bringing up um the important
neglect and actually associating
it with uh or distinguishing it
from the impacts of poverty, I
think that's really important.
We don't want to focus
necessarily on individuals or
families or.
Parents or uh those kinds of
things without taking into
consideration the impacts of
poverty poverty. So with that in
mind, my question has to do with
how can we correlate the data,
or is there a way to cross our
administrative, uh, adminis all
of our administration, uh,
administrative bodies that
are charged with addressing the
impacts of poverty. For example,
job creation, which is workforce
solution, you know, could be
under the arm of Workforce
Solutions, housing, social,
emotional responses support
services, and all of those types
of things because what we're
doing is we're
Um
Having we're throwing out money
for lack of a better way of
putting it.
A stopgap.
But we still don't break the
cycle of poverty.
So can data be correlated across
the board to assess, evaluate
performance and to uh give us
the ability to um
Hold, uh, or, or put in place
certain accountability measures.
So that we can begin to break.
The cycle of poverty and look at
the effectiveness of what works,
what doesn't work, so data is
really important.
Madam Chair representative, um,
I think that's probably beyond
the scope of this presentation,
I will note that many of the
programs you mentioned exist
outside of CYFD. So kind of
those.
Tier one prevention programs,
things like income support, the
Medicaid program, workforce
solutions, those are in other
state agencies, they're, they're
not housed within child
protection or the child welfare
agency, um, and this, uh,
maltreatment data that's, that
is the data that the child
welfare agency reports to the
federal government. I don't know
to what extent it can then be
matched um to some of those
other systems.
Uh
Madam Chair, so the challenge is
going to be, because I think
there is a way as Rio, um, the
challenge will be in my response
to that is, can let us find the
across the board. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So my
questions are on the page that's
titled Budget Available to CYC.
Um
So on the first column, um,
That talks about the.
Pilot incentives.
Um, and, and then all of those
other bullet points. Do you know
if CYFD.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, so that first column,
um, all of that funding was also
available in FY 25.
I think um CYFD has shared with
LFC there are kind of different
phases for each of those
bulleted items. Um, we know from
spending data, particularly for
that first appropriation CYFD
has had spending related to that
appropriation FY 25 because it
was available in FY 25, an
additional 562,000 is available
in FY 26. So they've had some
spending they have shared with
LFC that they have done things
like um an incentive, uh, a
temporary salary.
increase uh for social workers
at CYFD for some of the others,
they're at different phases of
implementation is my
understanding. But again, this
column will be what is available
in flight 26. OK. And, and then
my next question is the 30
million over 3 years to hire 100
and Lee.
The, the word caseworkers is
painful for me because I think
that one of the things that
The department needs to do is
hire social workers.
who are trained at the BSW or
MSW level, what's happening
right now, as we all know.
They're hiring whoever and
trying to make.
Social workers out of them, um,
the retention rate is planning.
So is there any effort that you
know of, um,
Uh bi CYFD to intentionally
hire.
Trained
BSWs and MSWs beyond.
Visiting
different universities and but
do you know of any?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm likely not best positioned
to speak to Suti's
implementation. Um, I am aware
of, uh, they, they received some
additional workforce money in
prior years, um, it was $3
million appropriated to
implement the Kevinness, uh,
workforce plan. Some of that
funding has been used for
advertising and marketing, um,
that was targeting social
workers licensed social workers,
so, uh, I'm aware of that
effort. I'm not.
aware of more. I think this is
one of the areas where a follow
up hearing might be helpful. OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Soilia Lopez. Thank you, Madam
Chair. My questions are about
that same page, um.
And you mentioned this already.
You mentioned the temporary 10%
salary increase, and I read in
the paper that the direct the
secretary is concerned about
people leaving when that salary
increase is uh expires, which
relates to my overall question,
um, your, one of your slides.
Or the, this, um, talks about
how much is recurring and then
how much is just um
An appropriation and I just
don't see how you run an agency
if you don't have the necessary
recurring funding to, you know,
to do some long term planning.
Sounds like these are really
short term plans, like a, a 10%
increase, a temporary 10%
increase is short term, um.
One time expenditures or
multi-year expenditures to
recruitment and retain foster
families retaining foster
families is a, is a commitment
because you have to keep
training them. You have to, you
know, provide respite. There's
so many expenses in retaining
foster families. So my question
is, is why, uh, how do you
balance the problem of needing
recurring funding for this
really critical agency.
Um, with these one time
appropriations, like what,
what's, why did we do that?
Or multi-year appropriations
versus recurring funding that.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, senator,
um.
Moving through the appropriation
process, one of the
considerations from LFC has
historically been CYFT or all
agency kind of funding patterns
and spending patterns,
particularly in prior years, um,
we have seen.
Appropriations uh on the
operating budget side that had,
had that spending had been below
budgeted levels. That was thing
one. Thing two, the committee
had been concerned about funding
kind of being put to work for
the intended purpose and having
some accountability there. So
for that reason, um, the
appropriators kind of
prioritized the non-recurring
appropriation strategy to
increase oversight and
accountability. I will note in
addition, those multi-year
appropriations.
are intended to be pilots to see
if they work, and so they're not
for the most part one year,
they're for the most part 3
years and the specific language
is around piloting different
strategies and evaluating if
they work before they're rolled
into the operating budget
related to the specific
appropriation you mentioned, the
562,000. It's available for 3
years, not a singular year. The
language again was relatively
broad, see what he chose to use
it for temporary salary
increases.
But the language was simply to
pilot incentives for master's
level attainment.
Me
Ma,
just, just to finish. I I read
in the paper also suggesting
that the HD and the auditor look
into spending it um for, for
what we said, but I am concerned
about um
You know, incentivizing pilots
where you can't guarantee a
social worker that they're going
to be able to work beyond the 3
years of the pilot or 2 years
left on the pilot, and it just
makes it a run a nonprofit
before. And, you know, kind of
hand to mouth is not the best
way. Thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, Vice Chair Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
I anticipate when we have a more
thorough hearing, Madam Chair, I
won't be a long hearing. So get
ready, um, a couple, just one
thing I wanted just to ask with
regards to the last.
A page on here and maybe I
missed the presentation, um.
The unprotective services
federal revenue.
And if I'm looking at this
correctly, Madam Chair.
Um, I know as we look at some
potential federal cuts.
Um, um.
Is there any idea that LFC has
at this point in time as to
what.
The state may need to do for a
backfill.
some dollars.
As with a good title for E and
some of the other monies that.
Traditionally come to us from
the feds.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, vice chair,
I, I should have acknowledged
this was sort of a bonus slide
for you all if if the question
came up, this tracks budgeted
federal revenue to actual
revenue collected over time. Um,
what you'll notice is that there
has been a drop. The agency
requested backfilling federal
funds in their operating budget
instead, um.
The legislature provided with
them with some technical
assistance to understand why the
decline at work level below the
budgeted before backfilling, so,
um, that's the context for the
slide, uh, to your question,
vice chair, um, at, at this
point, I, I think from the LFC's
perspective, it's a little bit
too early to tell what precisely
may happen. I think many of the
impacts are potentially unlikely
in programs like Medicaid or
SNAP, not directly, um, the fun.
that is, uh, the passes through
CYFD Title 4E in particular, um,
and so I think that's kind of
the, the answer right now. We
know potential impacts to
Medicaid and SNAP, which may
impact families, but right now
are not seeing kind of signaling
the same potential impact from
uh to Title 4E, but again, a
little bit too early to tell
there.
No, and I appreciate that, Madam
Chair, because I think as we
move forward in our committee,
that's still important for
because this is just a budget
reconciliation still to come
down the line, so um, because
the state, if there's any cuts,
the state has to come up with
some dollars to make sure that
these continued.
Um, so that's just that that
portion and then um one final
just a question, it was our
authority given.
Um, in the with regards for C
and CYFD for transfers, and do
we do budget in the bar
authority um with regards to the
Attorney General so that monies
can be moved around to support
especially House Bill 5.
Um, so, Madam Chair, vice chair,
there was not any unique bar
language for CYFD, um, they did
request more expansive bar
authority to be able to move
money between programs, but that
was not approved, so what that
will mean is CYFT has authority
to move between categories and
programs from personnel to
contracts to other, but they
are, they do not have our
authority to move from
protective services to juvenile
justice, for example.
Um, I would need to go back and
look if the AG's office had any
unique or authority, um,
certainly the appropriations
related to the creation of the
office or those individual line
items. I would need to go back
and look if there was anything
you. OK. No, I appreciate cause
um the bar authority budget
adjustment, whatever the rest of
it is, but and renew, um, with
regards to being able to move
moneys internally, um, and, uh,
if my memory serves me well,
Madam Chair, um, the department.
can move, they just let the LFC
know um um with regards to those
movements of, of dollars. Yeah,
so, uh, Madam Chair, vice chair,
um, in general, the blanket
authority allows agencies to
move between spending categories
between personnel contracts and
other. However, without
specialized bar authority, um,
an agency cannot move between
programs, so they cannot move
from protective services to
juvenile justice, for example,
and I appreciate just for
clarification.
for those who are in. Thank you,
thank you so much for your
presentation, and we will at
some point have try.
To get the, the whole panel and
it's like uh trying to trying to
herd legislators is trying to
get secretaries uh available at
the same time. So we will go
ahead and move along to um early
childhood education. Oh, I'm
sorry, Representative Jones. I
have a quick question. Thank
you. I'm sorry. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, just maybe a
clarification too. I, I think,
uh, Senator Sadh Lopez mentioned
it as well. I saw in the Santa
Fe, New Mexican this morning
that there's a formal.
To the AG and so could you
please tell me, you know,
clarify more about what that
was. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll clarify, I
think that the New Mexican may
have gotten some precise
details, um, not quite right,
uh, yesterday, the LFC
subcommittee voted to request a
letter be sent, um, and reviewed
a draft, but have not formally
yet sent a letter to the
Attorney General, the request
and conversation was around a
specific uh $20 million
appropriate.
creation, um, first appropriated
in the 2022 General
Appropriations Act that was
intended to fund startup costs
for community-based behavioral
health services that would be
eligible for Medicaid or Title
IVE funding, um, that
appropriation went unused for
several years and then was
reauthorized, um, over the last
interim LLC staff have flagged
concerns about the spending of
that $20 million appropriation,
um, based on our analysis.
and review of the state's
financial system. It looks like
about $5 million was spent for
the intended purpose, but there
was spending for things that are
clearly not eligible and will
never be eligible for Medicaid
and for refunding and so that,
that is the nature of the
conversation in the subcommittee
and again they uh reviewed and
discussed, uh, voting on sending
a letter but have not formally
sent a letter yet to the
Attorney General or to the state
auditor, that was also
discussed.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you and sorry
for forgetting you, uh, Madam
Vice Chair. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and just, um,
And I know
it's just this is just a
statement and um Rachel, we so
appreciate your work, um, and
I'll let you do, um, for this of
child welfare. Um, I learned a
lot dealing with the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force last
interim information sharing, but
Madam Chair, what I like to do,
um, I will mention this also to
the members of the subcommittee.
Is it the subcommittee for the
Legislative Finance, um, the
LFC, the subcommittee on Child.
welfare would work closely with
our uh
E L HHS because I know that
there's sometimes working on
parallel, but I think Madam
chair a lot of communication
issues, so that work and
legislation that we may come up
with.
And whatever that particular
subcommittee comes up with it,
there needs to be a
cross-sectional uh
communication, and I will
mention it also to the
subcommittee chair and others,
but I wanted just to you um.
To carry a message also.
And again, I will contact them
madam chair cause we need to
communicate and work together.
Thank you.
Thank you. So we will move now
to early childhood education and
care department, um, update
Secretary Gerginsky, and just a
reminder to members, we are um
almost 50 minutes behind, so.
So I'm not, I'm not asking the
secretary to rush, but um and
luckily we will have lunch here,
so we, it looks like we will
have a working lunch. So if you
had planned on something during
lunch.
If you can't unplanned.
Lovely, looking lovely,
especially the necklace. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it's been years since
I've been in front of you, so I
took the liberty of talking all
about early childhood education
and care.
Uh, so the slide deck is 80
slides, 20 of them are
transition slides, um, but I,
there's a lot to celebrate here
and I wanted to share.
Pieces of it, you let me know
where I'm, I'm trying to keep it
to 20 to 30 minutes so that I
can get amazing questions from
all of you.
We have our team here who I may
pull up if the questions get
deep and we need support, um,
but I do want to recognize uh
the early childhood education
and care department, uh, Sandy
Trujillo our division director
for early care education and
nutrition, our deputy secretary
Ariana Quinonas Miranda, bureau
chief for our family infant and
toddler, Leah Davidson, uh,
Family Foundations Bureau chief
Christy Romero.
General counsel, um, Shelly
Strong.
And uh Ali Hedrick, uh, division
director for family support
early and our Assistant
Secretary for Native American
Early Education and Care Doctor
Joni Swena.
Irie Vargas with our deputy
director for Family support
Early Intervention. Uh, there's
more, but really happy that
they're all here and wanted to
start by um just recognizing um
when I talked to Andrea, she
said there's new members and so
some people may uh be less
familiar with who we are and I
want to start now, OK.
OK, so I'll just, the agenda is
for me to talk just globally
about ECECD, then give specifics
about our three key divisions,
early care, education and
nutrition, family support, early
intervention, and our policy
research and quality
initiatives.
Um, and, as you all know, are
those of you who have been here
for a very long time, uh, you
know that in 2019, the governor
put her support in the
legislature unanimously
concurred in the creation of
monumental decision to create
the early childhood education
and care department.
We took hold on July 1, 2020, we
went live and at that time we
were only the 4th state in the
country to have created a
state-level early childhood
education and care department
and now 12, there's 12 states
and more on the way, Kansas just
created one, Missouri has done
it, so we're we're seeing more
of this movement, but New Mexico
was a key leader, and I think on
the next slide, we all know why
uh investments in the early
years prenatal to age 5.
are where we see the greatest
return on our investments in
public funding. 13% return. Why
is that? This is the course of
human development that is the
most impactful for our later
educational health, social, uh,
and social and um educational
outcomes. Uh, so we are very
proud and I hope you are as well
of the work that you all did in
making this monumental decision,
and then, of course, in the 2nd
year, supporting the early
childhood Trust Fund, which is
now slated to be over over.
A little over 9 billion at the
end of this year and in the 3rd
year, uh, you all through your
support will not everybody, but
it was, um, passed to give 0.60%
of the land grant permanent fund
to early childhood, recognizing
that education begins before
birth, um, but it definitely
begins at birth, and that now is
bringing and driving revenues
into the department.
We have a very strong and and
simple vision that all New
Mexico families and young
children are thriving, and to do
that every day, the department,
the people who work there now
almost 360 people come to work
every day to optimize the health
development and overall
well-being of babies, toddlers,
and preschoolers uh through high
quality community-based and
family-driven early childhood
services. The commitment has
been clear from day one. We know
what our job is to do, it is
definitely to.
Create this cohesive and
equitable system, it has to be
responsive to the unique and
diverse needs of New Mexico
communities and families, uh,
and we know that that's, that's
our job and we knew that we
needed a plan to make sure we
got there. So you'll see our
florists there is our 2022, 2027
strategic plan, we are doing
very well in making progress. We
do an annual progress report,
you should receive uh later this
year.
Uh, and, but you'll see there
our first goal. We were clear
the depart the legislature and
the governor created this
department to improve school
readiness. The numbers that we
see, we knew were not the
numbers that we wanted for our
children in New Mexico. So we
have these 6 bold goals, number
one, school readiness, 2, we
can't get children ready without
strong families and communities
that are supporting them, are
goal 3 is around our government
to government with our 23
sovereign nations in the state
borders.
And 4 is about the whole
ecosystem and this committee can
appreciate the ecosystem of
health and education and family
support, um, all of those things
working together in an alignment
or where we're gonna get our
best results. Goal 5 is about
our own agencies' organizational
excellence. If we don't have
strong, happy staff, uh, who
want to work there and good
policies and procedures and a
clear guidance, uh then it's
gonna be hard for this
organization to help all the
organizations.
we support be their best. And so
that's a core tenet of our work
and at the department, and then
6 always, always important,
especially to policymakers,
actionable data. We have to be
able to tell the story of what
we're doing, how are all the
investments that you're making
into this department actually
resulting in changes for
children and families and
communities they live in.
So we have these sports
strategic pillars that guide the
strategic plan, equity is our
first pillar, and that means
that everything we're doing has
to have that lens to the very
diverse and unique nature of New
Mexico, uh, and the staff and
the programs and the facilities
and families that we serve.
We cannot do any of this work
well without partners, and that
becomes key to our work in
making sure that it's authentic,
that we're not just creating
partnerships, but that they're
meaningful and intentional, and
that our early childhood
programs are getting the support
they need.
This is a field that as many of
you sitting up there who have
worked in the field know, has
been woefully underfunded in our
country since its inception,
whether that's because it's
mostly done by women and women
of color, when we brought all
these programs together, there's
capacity issues in these
programs. How do they deliver
what they want to deliver, uh
without having had the kind of
resources that we now are able
to provide, and so we continue
to work on that through a system
of continuous quality
improvement, and then, of
course.
we have to be accountable. We
have to be accountable to the
legislature, we have to be
accountable to the people of New
Mexico and make sure that we are
continually using data to ensure
that what we're investing in is
working. This is just ECCD at a
glance, you're gonna hear more
about each of these 4 core
programs and some of the work we
do in the workforce, you have a
lot to be proud of. I mean, look
at this family infant toddler,
uh, we're serving 29% of
children in that 0 to 3 for New
Mexico pre-K, we are
projected, and this is just 25
data, we're now over 20,000
you'll see for 26, but we're
serving of 3s and 4s, 64% of
eligible children.
Huge increases across the board
um in childcare assistance since
fiscal year 19 before the
department came, we've had a 54%
increase and we're meeting 66%
of the Medicaid enrolled
children, um, through, uh, home
visiting as a result of the
investments.
Um, I wanna show you here, um,
Alex, if you don't know Alex,
uh, he is our intergalactic
ambassador of care. Uh, we
created him a few years ago. He
won a regional Emmy, uh, our
show did. This is a fun way to
reach families. When we created
the department, people still
thought, oh, I go to the
Department of Health for early
intervention or OCYFD, you do
that, so we really had to focus
on our communication strategy,
and he has, uh, Alex has helped
us do that in a fun way. How do
tiny humans?
develop and so parents can ask
him questions. Uh, he has 20
million YouTube subscribers. I
don't know if people follow him,
uh, but families love him and
when they, Alex is talking, he's
talking to parents, but the
children want to watch too,
because I traveled the state in
2022, uh, the developing futures
came to mind because I was
meeting people who worked in
early intervention and we're
saying, you know, I didn't even
know about these careers until I
was midway through my college.
You know, how do you learn about
them? And so we came up with.
this campaign of developing
futures, build your future,
build the future. And we use
real life New Mexicans, and they
tell their story about how did
they become a developmental
specialist. How did they become
an infant toddler, uh, child,
family childcare, um, educator,
um, how did they become a pre-K
teacher and through this, we
then built a quiz, so people, if
they're maybe I want to do early
childhood, but I'm not exactly
sure which direction I should
go. They can take, take a quick
quiz and be directed, and then
they're directed to.
jobs, there's a job board, and
they're also directed to wage
scholarship and the professional
development career pathways, uh,
let's see, um, moments together
is just another way for us to
reach families. We know that
families are very busy, they're
trying to do their best for
their child, and so we want to
give them very easy hands on
ways to promote their child's
development in everyday moments
and what they do. So this has
been a great partnership and you
can see there we've.
Done tutorial videos through
moments together in English and
Spanish, and this helps early
childhood or helps parents
understand how to navigate,
applying for childcare, how to
do early intervention, how do I
become part of the home visiting
program.
Uh, the next slide just shows
two recent really phenomenal
articles that you should all be
proud of, this is your work.
New Mexico made childcare free,
it lifted 120,000 people above
the poverty line. If you haven't
read it, it's a phenomenal
article in The Guardian, uh, and
then the near the National
Institute for Early Education
Research, New Mexico leaps ahead
in national pre-K rankings.
Again, a testament to the
leadership in this state to put
families and children at the
well, we are having a milestone
birthday. We turned 5.
On Tuesday.
Exactly. Now we're all grown up.
Hopefully our trajectory
continues in this positive way,
uh, but we thought, how should
we celebrate? How should we
celebrate this milestone and we
said we should do family
resource centers. You're gonna
hear a little bit later in my
presentation about these amazing
local early childhood system
building coalitions we have, and
so we went to them and they, we
said, hey, do you want to
partner with us? Are you doing
something? And because it's a
milestone birthday, we feel like
you can celebrate all month,
even maybe into August, maybe
the whole year, uh, and so.
These local coalitions said yes,
we'll partner, we're gonna hold
these and they're all doing very
creative things, uh, and so I
just wanted to share that and
hopefully we'll have some of you
at uh some of our resource
fairs.
Uh, the next slide is a picture
of the live representation of uh
Doctor uh Joni Swena, uh, Monday
was her first day. We could not
be more thrilled to have um
attracted her to this and to
have the governor appoint her to
this very, very important
position for those of you who
don't know, we have an assistant
secretary for Native American
early education and care. We
have a deputy assistant
secretary. We have 11 tribal
liaisons in the department.
These are high-level bureau
chiefs throughout the.
The department that meet
regularly with the assistant
secretary to, to craft the
strategies to support uh through
tribal consultation, the
priorities of our tribal
leaders.
Uh, here's a very happy girl
wanting to show you our budget
overview because we are just uh
shy of.
a billion dollars, uh, and thank
you, thank you, thank you, um,
and thanks to the governor for
and the legislature for agreeing
to increase the trust here
because we are meeting the
moment. There is no time to stop
families and children's lives
are being transformed. So you
can see here, um, our budget is
primarily coming from the land
grant and other transfers, um,
uh, the general fund is also the
land grant, and so there's about
189 million of.
Um, the land grant and then the
trust fund uh is 500 million in
the other transfers line item
and federal revenue, as you can
see is um continuing to become
less, a lot of that is due to
the phasing out of some of the
COVID relief and some of um the
preschool development grant that
we've been spending down over
the last 2 years, and then we
still do have private sector
funding, which is reflected in
the other revenue along with
licensing fees, uh, from.
I think in depth um birth
certificates. Um, I just want to
point out um on the next slide,
this is very high level, we have
detail if any of you are
interested in how it breaks down
by division, uh, but you can see
we're pretty small in our
personnel and services. It's a
very tiny part of our billion
dollar budget, uh, just a little
shy of 37 million and the rest
is the other care and expenses.
Those are our grants, that's our
childcare assistance. Uh, that's
the funding that goes out to our
pre-K program.
And then our other financing
uses is the money that we send
to HCA for our Medicaid, um,
contribution, our state
contribution for family infant
toddler.
Uh, but I had a great, uh,
legislator asked me once, will
that 400 category looks pretty
darn big and what's in there? So
the next slide shows you the
breakdown because other is a
little too generic. And so you
can see there's 61% of that is
going to childcare assistance,
34% is going to pre-K, uh, 4% to
early intervention, most of
their funding comes through our
300 category contracts line
item.
And then a 1% is the program
support, that's travel,
equipment, other things within
the agent. We have a lot to
celebrate with childcare, but
this is an area that we're gonna
be coming to the legislature for
a big, big request in um 26
because for 27 because of the
need is so great, and you're
gonna see that in these slides.
We have done well, and I just
wanted to give you at a glance
on slide 21 and how our mixed
delivery system breaks down. You
can see we have, this is 24.
data. This is coming out of our
annual report.
769 childcare centers, 142
licensed group homes and 107 uh
licensed homes, so I, I should
say licensed group homes, sorry,
um, so one of the small, there
are only 6 children and the
others are um.
can serve up to 12.
We look at our license capacity
under 2/2, if any of you talk to
constituents in your community,
what do you hear most about when
it comes to childcare, I can't
find infant and toddler care,
um, this becomes the biggest
challenge, and that's the focus
of the department.
Um, I won't go over too much of
these slides. I think it's nice
to see that our quality is
improving, uh, it's, um, moving
up into the 34, and 5 star
centers. I also wanted to show
you because we have had expanded
eligibility now up to 400%. So
sometimes people say, well, is
it all the the higher income
people that are getting
childcare, and what you can see
her on slide 23 is it's across
the range and the majority of
families and children accessing
care are still at that 200.
250% and below. Um, but we are
able to serve families at those
higher income levels, but still,
the cost of childcare is truly
out of reach for most families,
so we're so happy and uh this is
what has put us in the lead in
the country, and I think most
importantly, families in your
community, I hope, are saying
thank you. I have relief. I can
now balance my budget, I can now
make those payments that I need
to make and invest in my family.
ley ' s future. The other here
is just to show you in the birth
to 5, most of our children are
in high quality centers. Uh, so
you see that the 34, most of
them are in 5 star centers, so
we have a lot to be proud of and
and grateful that our youngest
children are getting quality
care.
This next slide we used, we
received money from the Conrad
Hilton Foundation, and we
commissioned a study on New
Mexico's childcare supply and
demand. That work is wrapping
up. You'll have an interactive
map where you can zoom in on
your district, your
neighborhood. These are some
high level maps that we shared
with our advisory council last
month, uh, and you can see again
over trajectory how New Mexico's
supply has gone up and down, you
know, as you always hear in the
LFC our birth rate is declining,
so some of our capacity is.
Getting taken care of because we
don't have as many babies, but
with no know if that's a good
thing we wanna make sure we can
take care of them, but, uh, on
slide 12, I think it's like, oh,
maybe these, these numbers are
not right, um, uh, 13,942. If we
look at all ages and childcare
serves children up to age 12. So
you can see there in the darker
shaded gray, there could be
anywhere from 751 to 4750
shortfall.
Of needed care, uh, for
children, uh, 0 to 5.
I'm sorry, that's 0 to 5. So you
can see the areas the uh shades,
most of New Mexico have child
care deserts, but some areas are
in.
desperate need of investments.
Uh, here you'll see just for
that 0 to 24. This is the care
that you all hear about, I'm
sure every day is the hardest to
get, and so we're short about
12, a little over 12,000, and we
were down for our advisory
council meeting in Hobbs, we had
a great presentation from Mayor
Hobbs from Eunice who got some
capital from the governor, 2.5
million. He got a million.5
million from the Maddox
Foundation, and then Yrenko, the
private industry there that's
desperate.
for childcare for their
workforce is gonna give $100,000
a year of operating to support
the childcare center that's
gonna get built for 120
children, 0 to 5.
Those are the kind of exciting
things that are happening, we
got to hear from him. Uh, we've
seen this happening in other
parts, we're talking with people
all over the state, uh, you see,
this is our work, this is the
ask coming up in the 27, um,
because we know we wanna have
all types of care. We wanna have
family, friend and neighbor, we
want to have family childcare,
uh, but the gap is huge and this
affects our economy. People
can't go to work if they don't
have childcare. We're addressing
that.
New Mexico pre-K, uh, so
exciting. We are 84% of 4 year
olds.
For over, um, almost 60% of 3
year olds, uh, we're gonna be
serving over 20,000 children in
New Mexico pre-K and all of
these different types of
settings, and the other thing to
know is there's about 4500
additional children being served
in our high quality Head Start
programs across the state. So
New Mexico as that headline
said, we're, we're making
strides, we're we're rising up
and yesterday we were in Taos
for the legislative Finance
Committee, and they wanted, they
did a progress report.
On the evaluation of our pre-K
from 2020.
Great outcomes. Children are
doing well. They had made a
recommendation to us in that
report to introduce the
classroom assessment scoring
system, some way to go into
classrooms and say, what is the
level of quality? Do we know
that children are learning are
these environments high quality
and so this um classroom
assessment scoring system
measures emotional support.
Classroom organization and
instructional support. And this
is the child teacher
interactions. They measure this
through those interactions and
look at again, just to be proud,
I think, I mean, obviously we'd
love to see the instructional
support higher, but these are
right with industry standards,
they're actually higher and even
in our community-based and our
school-based, they're very even,
school-based or definitely
performing at a higher level,
and that's the work we continue
to do in helping our
community-based teachers.
get their degrees, help the
assistant teachers get their
associate's degree because we
know that that is a standard
requirement in our school-based
programs, uh, but great results
and a lot to celebrate the uh
report was very positive, of
course, great recommendations
for the department to take under
consideration. One of them is to
have the legislature actually
talk about and think about what
is our definition of school
readiness here in New Mexico,
uh, and you'll see some data
later that the department has
collected.
with the public education
department.
That I think will lend itself
well to that conversation.
Um, executive function. I know
our early childhood people up
there will know executive
function is uh uh something that
some of us operate at higher
levels with our executive
function, but that's our ability
to regulate our emotions, to
persist, to, um, it, it really
is core to not only our academic
outcomes, but our long term
well-being and the period of
time, it's you don't just.
aren't born with it, and you can
have it, you have to develop it
and have it be taught is that 3
to 5 and then again later in um
young adulthood and so we have
introduced um a assessment
called the executive function,
the Minnesota executive function
scale, go, and we did a pilot.
We're rolling it out fully this
year, but this is exciting data
that is gonna help our educators
help children maximize and
develop and build their self
regulation.
Persisting on tasks.
And making friends, uh, you
know, being, um, uh, having
positive relationships, and they
do it all through a very fun,
playful game that's very minimal
on a tablet, uh, for like 5
minutes, a couple times a year.
So nothing extensive, but it
allows the teacher to then
introduce interventions that
will help build those
children's, uh, so, um,
executive function, and we are.
Very excited about it. We did a
pilot with 19 programs, 50
classrooms, school-based,
community-based.
All the teachers loved it, easy
to implement all of our
teachers, we provided tablets to
them at these live webinars. I,
I sat in on a few people were
really having fun with it and
enjoying it. You can see there
our average score in the pilot
was 45th percentile and the
national is about 50th, uh, but
that those percentiles I looked
at some of the data ranged from
33 to 53. So this is could be a
very powerful tool for our
educators in the classroom
again, interactions.
Different ways of play and
things to build our children's
um.
Executive function, which is
going to serve them very well in
their transition to
kindergarten.
Uh, full implementation will
happen this year. Uh, you can
see there, I won't read it all
to you, but there's lots of
professional development. We're
working with our coaches to make
sure they're fully briefed on
it, uh, and I just want to give
a big shout out to Sandy and
then Shawna Ronk, our deputy
division director, who've been
leading this effort and uh I'm
excited to see and again open to
all of your questions.
Uh, you know, last year, early
childhood special ed, the 619
coordinator transitioned over to
ECECD. It's been a a really
wonderful process. It took us a
little longer to hire than we
wanted, but we brought Lucia
Garcia on in December of 24.
And I won't again read all this
to you, but this highlights
what's in that detailed memo of
understanding between myself,
between ECECD and Secretary
Padilla and PED and it is all
around advancing more positive
outcomes, uh, Lucia and the team
have been all over the state,
and they go with the public
education department, sometimes
with monitoring, but just
finding where our, how our
special education services being
delivered. We've instituted a
pilot in Roswell.
well with New Mexico pre-K and
the special education, so a lot
of excitement around what this
potential will bring as we have
better coordination inside the
agency, not just around the
children and the families around
the special needs, connecting
them to home visiting. Do they
need childcare? What's their
transition to kindergarten or
what's their transition to
pre-K. And so we see here, um,
on the roll of the 619
coordinator, I put Lucia's
information at the bottom, uh,
in case you have questions or
want to.
out or families in your
communities ask you about what's
happening or I'm not sure what's
going on, I need some support,
so we provide a lot of the
coordination and the
professional development, PED
still retains the responsibility
of the general supervision and
districts. Um, but we've, they,
you can see here on slide 41,
uh, they really have, um,
provided specific training to
coaches and these transition
teams, um, see to be guidance
document is being updated and
just having that opportunity
with.
Leah Davidson at the fitt
program and Lucia being together
in the same agency, uh, it helps
them with collaboration.
OK, that's one division.
And then we'll go on to our next
division's good. Uh, our family
support and early intervention
division has really are strong
prevention to intervention
continuum. I'm gonna talk about
our home visiting, our families
first.
And our family infant toddler
program. Um, it's a wonderful
division full of incredible
people and excited about and
most of you know about home
visiting, but maybe not all of
you, uh, so I wanted to just
provide a slide. We are working
here in New Mexico again, as
everything we're doing in this
prenatal to 5 is a comprehensive
universal continuum of
high-quality community-driven,
culturally and linguists.
The services we want to promote
maternal infant, and early
childhood health, safety,
development, school readiness,
and most importantly, strong
parent-child relationships. So
our home visiting programs are
using a multi-generational
approach, the home visiting is
for everyone. We don't want it
to think home visiting, oh, you
need home visiting, no.
Everyone needs home visiting.
Everyone can benefit from being
able to be connected to support
the resources to building a
social network to having a more
healthy relationships. You can
see they help with school
readiness, child development,
uh, it is phenomenal and on the
next side, I mean, look at this
incredible progress the state
has made since 2013. We were
serving, oh sorry, 1005 families
with 22 counties with 20
programs last this year.
5, we had 37 programs delivering
home visiting in all 33
counties, and we reached, we
introduced new thanks to our
partnership with the Healthcare
Authority, uh, new models, um,
you can see there in 2013, and
now we have child first, uh,
Healthy Families America.
Now it's first born and more.
Uh, and we have, um, safe care
augmented and family.
I mean, look at these numbers,
home visiting program since as
of May 31 it served almost
10,000 children.
Uh, and 1,659 were funded
through Medicaid. Yay, that's
been a performance measure that
we have not met for 2 years, but
planned to continue to exceed it
because we've been very clear
with the home visiting programs.
This is a must. This is dollars
that we're leaving on the table
if we're not claiming the child
is Medicaid eligible, they
should be.
Families First is a program that
was developed in New Mexico in
the late 80s, early 90s, and it
is for Medicaid eligible
families aged 0 to 3. It is
staffed by registered nurses.
And they really meet the
holistic needs of the whole
family.
What we are doing with um
Families First and um Christie
Romero is uh the bureau chief
for Family Foundations and was,
um, our family's first uh lead
for this and we're working to
because they're all registered
nurses, the model I want to talk
about is family connects,
because this is something the
state has been working to
implement.
It's the time I've got here and
maybe before, but this is
exciting because this is every
baby in New Mexico gets its.
And the connection with that
family is made an evidence-based
model, it is, we will be using,
you know, claiming Medicaid once
we become certified, it started
under the Department of Health
and Secretary de Blasio and I
agreed this year that it should
come to ECECD since we are the
holder of the home visiting
system, uh, and so you'll see
our model here, but uh this is
exciting stuff and our team, we
they've been through the family
can they walked away, the
family's first team.
Where can we go? How do we get
in? So we have to get into the
hospitals, we have to get floor
access, uh, and we're working
with Secretary de Blasi and, uh,
but we have to, um, you'll see
there the, the performance
indicators. This is a full
scale.
Approach
So we have to have community
alignment because when that
nurse goes into the home, they,
if the parent says I need help
with housing.
They have to know what all the
house and that's it, that's a
tenet of uh under the community
need that, um, and the community
capacity, I'm sorry, so that um
we have a community alignment
specialist who's part of our
team, and they're doing that
work. There's a program support
specialist who's following up
with that family. Did you get
the appointment? Are you coming?
So, and the nurse and we have a
uh medical director who consults
with the nurses. So this, this
is the work we we hope to reach
2,598, so we're
working with the National Family
Connect Service office, uh, to
get certified for the Bernal
Leo, uh, for the metro area, UNM
Metro, all babies born at UNM
coming from the metro area which
you see the 6 counties there on
the right. These are the number
of births on average that are
happening from those counties at
UNM.
There's a whole formula that we
have to meet uh to achieve
certification, um, but I believe
in this team, they are, they are
gung ho and they've got a plan,
a smart sheet, it's all worked
out, uh, they've got timelines,
uh, but isn't this exciting? So
you and I will be our first,
hopefully, um, we won't reach
2,598 cause you know, some
people have extended family,
they don't know, and, you know,
don't need the visit, but we
have to get at least 6 at a home
visit and having a home visit,
so, uh, look forward to
More updates on that, we are,
um, excited to, uh, really
expand this program again to
every birthing hospital in
Mexico.
Family infant toddler, I know is
a program near and dear to all
of our hearts, uh, and to the
chairwoman and others here, um,
I know, uh, for myself, it's,
it's one of the best programs
that we could ever have in this
country and we're, we're
fortunate in New Mexico because
we have a very high quality
delivery system and for those of
you who don't know what family
infant toddler is, these are
amazing individuals who can help
families with their child, any
concern.
self-refer call be referred by a
doctor, be referred by a home
visitor, by a childcare
provider, um, but it really does
provide family centered um.
Approach, we call it family
guided routines based
intervention. Uh, this is an, uh
a very uh uh.
I don't know if it's research
based evidence-based. I thought
it was evidence-based, yes. Uh,
and this is so great because
we've all been, I'm going to
physical therapy right now, and
they give you all these
exercises and they tell you to
do them and then you do it half
the time and you feel a lot of
guilt. But if you go into a
family's home with a baby and
you're saying, oh, when you're
feeding them, do this or talk
like that so it's everything
they do in their regular day.
Families are now like, oh, so
our interventionists are coming
in more as coaches, or as, hey,
you're already doing this, but
maybe just do this or when
you're walking to the bus or if
you're doing something, how do
you have that, uh, those
routines, um, really built in
development, so we have um
entered into a contract with
Florida State University, who
kind of developed the FGRB.
We're gonna be investing with
the money the legislature gave
us 2 million of one time money
in professional development to
go deep with.
The coaching and the cohorts and
and getting everybody on board.
Uh, we just had a um.
At RFP that went out to the
community, they responded to our
next 3 infant toddler. Uh, we
had 30 applicants and we ended
up awarding 25. Uh, it was a
much more rigorous um RFP
process because we are having,
uh, you know, we're moving
towards this model and we want
to understand that the providers
that are out there in our system
are on board, uh, but we saw
great expansion of new providers
in many counties, so we can
provide, you know.
More detail on that at a later
time, uh, but we're very excited
about 26 and those contracts
have been executed and we're on
our way to um providing great
services for families all over
the state. We've seen incredible
growth, which you'll see on the
next slide, but we also have
inclusion coaches. This came up
a lot as we traveled the state
talking to childcare providers,
listening to the interagency
coordinating Council for fit
parenting challenges they're
having with getting their child
in childcare, are eligibility
interviews.
who work in childcare saying
this family has to move again
because the people say they
can't help the child and so we
said we got, we have to invest
and thank you again, the
legislature invested in
inclusion coaches, uh, and they,
um, go between, they navigate
between the childcare and they
do trainings and they're a lot
more support. This is a growing
area. We've had them for about 2
years, and uh we're learning a
lot. They're also part of that
team with Lucia, uh, thinking
about how do we continue to
improve professional supports
and also technical assistance,
so that all children are
children with special needs, all
success.
And I would say that early
childhood professionals, it's
probably the number one thing
they ask for leads and children
who have a dysregulation
challenges, uh, but you'll see
here on slide, something I can't
read um.
Uh, we served almost over
1,500,500 children up through
May of this year, uh, total
enrolled uh in that were
Medicaid eligible, were almost
11,000, and you can see there
the breakdown of how much um we
pay out of ECECD general fund or
trust fund, and then Medicaid
services, and they pay that
directly to the providers.
Uh, the rates, um, I know this
has been a, a hot topic and then
when I was hasn't, it's been
years since I've been able to
come talk about many things, but
that's right. I was there last
year and that was a tough and um
a tough hearing as it should
have been because of what had to
happen, but very happy, and
again, thank you to the
legislature for giving us both
the supplemental funding to help
close our gap for 25 and also
give us that rate so we could go
back and do the rates for about
6.
5 months of 25, and now 26 is 7%
increase on top of that 25 with
the additional 10 million you
gave us, um, to do that, and,
and you'll just see here the
progression, very positive the
first year we received early
childhood trust money, which I
think we've received 30 million,
uh, we prioritized increasing
the rate to close and, and you
probably know this chair, um,
that 2017 fit study that kind of
never got the gap.
never got closed until then and
so we immediately set upon doing
a new uh cost study, and we've
just continued to learn and grow
and um know what the investment
actually is needed to have, uh,
that we know, I mean, this, this
is where we see children
transitioning, they don't
necessarily need an IEP, they
may get the support. All right,
my last division, now we're onto
our uh policy research and
quality initiatives division,
uh, we have the social emotional
early childhood mental health.
Initiative, we call it seed,
social, emotional early
development.
Collaborative relationship
focused approach that really
gives the caregiver. So this
goes to that question that I'm,
and the need that early
childhood professionals have
been asking how do I manage all
of these children in my class,
so these consultants come in and
build the capacity and the
competency of the educator to
handle, to do better transitions
to to self-regulate to to work
with the program director, with
the other classroom educators
and really build that capacity
so.
And we've helped a couple
educators. Now they're helping
every year they have new groups
of children, and they're able to
support them, uh, so again, I
won't, um, I'll just tell you
that this is a.
Very evidence-based approach. We
have 22 consultants now across
the state. Uh, we want to have
probably closer to 50 to 60 as
the program grows, but we're,
we're pausing, we're growing it
now and we have amazing support,
uh, from people like Deb Harris,
uh, Don Yazi, Khadija Johnson,
these are some of the top
national experts who are helping
us build this professional
development, um, support to help
the consultants do well when
they're out.
out there in communities. And so
we work at the program level at
the classroom and at the child
level.
Children need referral, we would
refer them to at the uh at CYFD.
But this is helping reduce
teacher stress.
It's been proven to reduce
turnover, uh, and to have that
better sense again, as I said,
of efficacy and ability to have
the skills and the knowledge and
the ways to intervene with
children to not let the children
kind of escalate us and then,
then we're just regulated and
then it becomes harder to help
the child through what they're
normally going through this
division also supports our early
childhood education and care
advisory Council. This was
established by Governor Lujan
Grisham.
December of 21, and this is our
annual report, you can find it
there. We have an incredible,
it's about 22 members, they sit
on subcommittees and then we
open up the subcommittees to
other community members, and I
just put in here for your
purview because you may know
some of these individuals, um,
who serve on the subcommittees
and.
tons of gratitude to us because
these individuals volunteer
their time, they spend, they
meet monthly, some of them, some
of them are meeting twice a
month to help advise the
department on these critical
focus areas, which you'll see
here by each committee. So the
data infrastructure and analysis
Committee helping us on the
childcare supply and demand and
the early development instrument
and the statewide community
assessment, which I'll share
with you a little bit.
And then, um, our early
childhood professionals have
been doing amazing work on the
wage scale and career lattice,
which will be sharing with the
advisory council next month in
Roswell and hopefully be able to
share with all of you as well,
it's exciting and the
professional development
information system, which is
going live next month. It's
already soft launching with the
providers across the ecosystem.
Program quality and
accountability, you'll see some
familiar names there, and
they're helping.
us to think about our home
visiting, we're going to be
updating our home visiting
standards, we're gonna want to
have a lot of engagement from
the community in that process
and these subcommittees then
send their recommendations to
the council, and this is a way
that the department can be held
accountable, uh, for the
priorities and the focus of our
work, and then public-private
partnership. Uh, this has been
great, the childcare facility
loan fund, they've helped advise
on our regulations, and they're
helping, uh, think about the
staffed family childcare network
that we've recently.
Um, launched through growing up
in Mexico, they're taking the
lead on that as part of our
system, um, supply building
efforts.
Um, finally, I wanna, uh, talk
about our local early childhood
system building coalitions.
Thank you to the legislature for
giving us a million. I come
every year and ask for like 2
million and I still just get my
million, but hoping to get 2
million, uh, because this is an
incredible endeavor, and it's,
it is really our state local
governance. You know, you know,
way better than I do how diverse
New Mexico is, and if I'm trying
to make policies and I don't
know what it's like in Raton.
Or in Roswell or down in Lee
County or Grant, uh, it's gonna
be harder to make good decisions
and so these coalitions have
family sitting at the table,
providers. The other thing is if
we're pushing things out of the
state or saying this is what we
need to do. How are those
communities going to have the
capacity to to deliver without
some level of coordinating at
the local level. So that's how
to think about these, these
entities.
Um, and we started with federal
relief money we've used
preschool development grant
money, which is more federal
money that ends at the end of
this year, and we've used the
funding from will be a continued
need. Um, one thing that you'll
be excited about, I hope, is
that we now have for we were the
only state in the country that
has uh this level of
population-based data, uh, on
all of our kindergarten
children, so this data was
collected in April of 24, 98% of
kindergarten.
were assessed by their teachers,
takes 10 minutes for the teacher
to do, and we see the breakdown
of this data in each area of
development. This is powerful
data. We map it to where the
children live.
So we know now in this census
track in this neighborhood, how
many days of development?
New Mexico looks really good, we
of course want to see those in
the 80 85%, but this is a
measure of how well the early
childhood system. So we're gonna
be doing another collection in
the spring of 206, uh, and this,
I hope that this state will
continue to do this every few
years to make sure we keep a
measure on how well the early
childhood system is actually
delivering for families and
children and schools because
this
Takes a a a a a a target of
schools, school readiness is
about what happens before
children arrive. And that is on
The early childhood, uh, side,
but you see here we had 116
school districts and charters
participate. 1380 classrooms
collected this in 6 weeks, we
collected this data. These are
interactive maps, you're gonna
have access to.
You can look at your area, but
we are using this with the
coalitions. So we had our
partners at UCLA who do this
come and show the coalition
coordinators how to hold data
chats. So they're bringing
families, they're bringing
community together and saying,
what do you think about this
data?
What do you know? What's your
data that you know, what
qualitative, what other
quantitative.
The great news for New Mexico,
we have all these places that if
you looked at the equity
barriers that children face, you
would see you're probably.
They are doing very well.
This is what this data allows us
to do. What's happening there?
What is that community have? The
assets that communities have,
and so very powerful, um, this
just gives you a very high-level
map of the state, to kind of see
the variability of young
children's readiness. This is on
at their um vulnerable on one or
more developmental domain. Uh,
you can see some of our
communities anywhere from 39% to
100%. Now that's a big range,
but as you zoom in on these
maps.
you can see at the census track
level, how many children were
assessed, what are other factors
about that census track, so real
gratitude to the public
education department and, and
Secretary Padilla and her team
for um helping us, uh, collect
this kind of data that we will
be using, schools get their own
confidential reports that show
them how are children in their
school doing compared to all the
children in their district
compared to the state as a
whole. So we'll, we'll be
continuing to develop
this map, the gray.
that no data?
The gray, OK, it may be that
there's not enough records or
something that were most or it
may be that there's.
No, you're right, it should be.
Uh, and then when you have the
interactive maps, it'll be um
it'll be more, more powerful,
but this data also has
predictive validity up to 5th
and 6th grade in math and
reading, so some powerful data
that we want to work to link it
to our longitudinal data system
and be able to see how this data
that we now know on very young
children, um, how they're doing
at a population level.
Population level change takes
longer to move, um, but it
happens through very strong
communities that support
families and then.
Yes. I will just close with we
are engaged in a very uh
extensive statewide community
assessment. Uh, this is being
funded by the preschool
Development grant when I arrived
here in 2019, we had just
completed one, and so that
community assessment guided a
lot of the state's strategic
plan around early childhood,
which included many of the
things you've heard about today,
uh, we have um engaged our
advisory council and our local
early childhood coalitions, uh,
and that's just
Kind of gives you a road map. So
for you to look forward to in
December, a new comprehensive
community assessment, uh, that
will give us uh a look at how
have things changed since 2019,
um, at the community level for
our early childhood workforce
for families, uh, and for
No, that was a lot, but um I
appreciate uh having opportunity
to talk about the work of the
department and
OK, so I'm gonna, who does not
have, OK, we're just gonna go.
So lunches are here and I will
thank our sponsors, um, Charlie
Marquez, Goldfinch Health,
Charles Goodmacher, uh, Julian
Koub and advocate advocate for
New Mexico, which is Marla
Schultz. So we'll start in the
front row, come this way, so
please go get your food, um,
when it's, when it's not your
time to ask questions and be
quick, uh, cause we don't want
the
questions asked over and over,
so we'll start with the front
row and then go from
representative Chandler to me
and then back this way. So go
ahead, uh, Senator Gallegos.
Your, your first on questions or
are you leaving?
No, no, on questions first, you
didn't have any que, OK, we'll
go to.
Then you can have lunch.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's a,
it's brief and um pretty um
narrow question. How will, um,
in terms of the family connect
program, you know, reaching out
to families who've just given
birth to a child. How will you
get information that that in the
family connect program, you
know, reaching out to families
who've just given birth to a
child. How will you get
information that that in
given that I'd like to think
when we go into the hospital,
things are confident. Um, I may
ask Christie, um, I think I will
ask.
to come up, but that that's part
of the model is that we get
floor access so that our um
family connects so that that
they're there and Christie, do
you wanna come explain how, how
that process.
Yes, that's correct. So with the
model itself, the nurses and the
program support specialists have
access to the floor, so they're
making rounds on the floor every
day.
Um, that's interesting. It will
be interesting to see whether
families appreciate the fact
that New Mexico State, ECECD.
Oaks are roaming the halls.
I, you know, I question the
privacy.
Thank you. And next we will go
to uh Representative Jones, and
like I said, if you folks wanna
go get your meal, I think it's
hot, so you might wanna
it's Greek food.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary for the
presentation and my questions
are related to rep Chandler's
question as well. Um, I want to
know, you mentioned both home
visiting.
Those are not nurses and
families first. Those are
nurses, correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Jones, the nurse Family
Partnership home visitors are
nurses. Um, but the other models
do not require you to be a
nurse, but family connects does.
Family connects and nurse family
partnership require nurses and
our family's first program uh is
staffed by registered nurses and
yes, Families First isn't the
home visiting program.
I don't know how much you're,
thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I don't know how much
you are.
Connected with CYFD well
actually, um, HCA now, and
they're um
reworking the Kara plan.
But it almost sounds like we
have too many nurses, which
never happens in I don't know if
you can have too much nursing
visitation.
But how are you working with
them in as they make rules.
That have to do with the care of
babies.
And the hospital, I, I'm so
concerned, having taken care of
these babies myself as a nurse,
that there are lots of places
where you can fall through the
cracks, and so I wanna make sure
that
That these babies, uh, even, you
know, prenatally with maybe a
home visit.
are being identified, the mom's
being identified. Maybe we can
avoid having a carra baby.
If we can identify through a
home visit. So can you explain
to me a little bit about how
petition works, and are you
working with people who are
rulemaking for Kara.
Yes, uh,
sorry, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Jones, excellent
questions and yeah, with the
secretaries as we're drafting
and and developing the arra
approach the car regulation, so
we, we meet regularly on that, I
think a couple distinctions of
nurse family partnership and
Families First as nurses, to
your point, they meet with
families prenatally, so they can
engage with them and to your,
you know, help with all the
supports and the, the prenatal
visits and all the supports.
families need. The family
connects is um a universal
because we, you know, some
families you just they don't,
they may not need it, um, but
you wanna make sure, and I
remember Representative
Armstrong, I think, um, at a be
great if every family could get
something, you know, when
they're in the hospital and know
that they have all these
supports, that really is what
the family connects is about.
It's a brief visit, check on mom
postpartum, anything and then.
Are there other supports? Do you
need to be in a longer, you
know, do you want home visiting
and would I can connect you to
that, or do you need childcare
or um is it housing or
transportation, and so it really
is only that one to maybe 2
visits, um, and it is to check
on the health and the well-being
of the baby and mom. Um, and
that's the family connects. Um,
so, and Families First will,
will fade out. It will become
family connect, so we won't have
families first also kind of our
transition inside the.
Department to this
evidence-based model that we can
then, you know, you got the
Medicaid dollars and it again.
OK. Thank you so much, and I
have other questions, so I'll
just have to get with you.
After the fact. So thank you so
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mrs.
Gorkinski.
According to
Most of the statistics that I'm
aware of over the last few
years, Mexico ranks.
Dead last in educational
outcomes.
And near the bottom with
respect.
child welfare.
And over this 10 year period
that I've served in public.
Public service
We have gone from spending about
$30 million a year.
On early childhood programs to
now.
$800 million.
Could you
Could you explain the
disconnect.
Between expenditures and
outcomes.
And more importantly,
How will your department go
forward.
Measure
Objectively.
With statistics.
Success.
Madam Chair, Senator Scott,
excellent, excellent and
important question. I think the,
um, I don't know if you saw the
Albuquerque Journal op ed by
Senator Scherer and Barbara Luna
Tedro on Sunday, but they kind
of laid out exactly how these
investments are changing the
lives of families, but also
changing our economy for the
better because families now can
go to work and businesses are
opening in Farmington because
they know they have access to
childcare, um, the early
instrument that data I showed at
the end, that is the objective
measure of how well these
investments are actually turning
the trajectory for whole
populations of New Mexico. When
we were investing 30 million, we
were probably most likely
reaching the most vulnerable at
100 to 130% of poverty, which is
wonderful, and we need to
continue to do that. Um, we
weren't necessarily reaching
them with the high quality care
because we weren't giving the
provider.
the resources they needed to pay
staff the value of the work they
were delivering. So people were
paid low wages. People may have
had a lot of turnover and so we
have to remain vigilant on the
investments in quality, which is
in the professionals. So we have
to invest in the professionals
and that's what New Mexico has
done over the last
4 years, I think we've, we've
been probably in the last 2 to
3, we've really gotten closer to
what it takes for you to pay a
staff person at least $15 an
hour, which is still not enough
to work with 48 babies every
day, 8 to 10 hours a day, uh,
so.
That I think is where the
difference is gonna come, and I
would say talking to families
and community leaders.
I'm hearing, I hope you're
hearing and that their lives
have been forever transformed.
They can now breathe, they can
create, they can think about a
future for themselves and their
family. So the early development
instrument will be the true
objective measure when teachers
are saying, what percent of
children are coming to school
with all these different
developmental areas on track,
not vulnerable, not at risk.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, man. I'm actually
really proud of these heavy
investments, um, but I also want
to commend, um,
Your communications like as a
communications person, I don't
know who's doing a
communications, but this is some
of the most State Department.
Like the fact that you were
meeting people where they're at
with Alex, with bizarre little
random online quizzes, I think
is great. And I think it's a
really creative way, I think,
um, because it's a new
department, you really have this
ability to just dream.
And I think that's hard when it
comes to departments that have
we've had because it's almost
like you inherit something and
you try to fix it, but it's
really hard. So I just want to
commend you on that. And, um,
I actually had the same question
as Representative, um, but the
last thing that I just wanted to
say, um, with you, thank you for
focusing on the educator support
piece, because as we've seen,
retention is really hard. And,
you know, as a young person
who's like, OK, how do I move up
in my career? How do I know
more? How do I get better at
what I do? Like this is what.
folks who are coming in. And so
with those investments, I just
really want to commend you on
those two.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary. I very
much appreciate that. I too and
so pleased that you are
recognizing the seed program and
the self-care element, we need
to do, not just with our uh
daycare workers, but with all
our providers for everyone in
early intervention, um, it is
essential, um, I would, I have a
bunch I um I I very much
appreciate also understanding
that.
building that foundation for
children in the social,
emotional community is really
essential for the academic
success, and I do believe that
we are seeing some of that
academic success under the 3rd
grade level, which is evident of
when um this endeavor started
and so to be able to see
outcomes so soon, it's been very
encouraging for me on on on
slide 9, you have
synergies. I don't understand
what percent eligible serve
means if you can answer that is
briefly as possible because I
have 5 more questions. Um, is, I
don't understand how in home
visiting you can serve 9300 and
have 66% eligible served and
serve over 16,000 in fits with
only 29% eligible serve. What is
that eligible serve mean?
Madam chair, Representative
Kate's, OK, so family infant
toddler, we use birth cohort as
our denominator, and so it's 0
to 3 and for uh home visiting,
they can serve up to 5. So
there's more in the denominator
and um
We only look at like Medicaid
66% of Medicaid births, so we're
not looking at the full, that
one's a little confusing, I
will, I will own on the 66%, but
we're not looking at all
children eligible for Medicaid,
0 to 5, but more.
That can get it to one question
to the 5 inclusive coaches are
they developmental specialists
or the OTs, PTs? What is their
educational background to be
able.
Madam Chair, can I bring Leah
Davidson up.
They
This buttons right there.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Kates, members of the committee,
thanks for that question. So we
have 2 right now inclusion
coaches whose qualifications
include no pun intended.
Uh, one, yes, was a
developmental specialist, um,
also ran multiple childcare
centers. The other is a, um,
Uh
Trainer of early childhood
inclusion efforts, so she has a
lot of experience with.
Really being both of them have
lots of experience being at the
intersection of um.
Early intervention and
interventional strategies and
childcare. The idea is that we
want to keep children together
in settings in regular settings,
regular childcare settings, and
so their job is to just like
secretary said, we'll liaison
between the early intervention
workforce in the childcare
workforce to help that happen.
Thank you, Representative, and
we'll start with representing.
Thank you, um, not sure.
And thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, for your um
except report very, very proud
as as you know, as a former
administrator of early childhood
Development centers and care
centers, um, I've seen your grow
this department in
Many ways that are providing
evidence-based delivery and
outcomes, positive outcomes, so
I'm very proud of that. So thank
you. Also, I want to point to um
the family infant toddler
program, which is particularly
of importance to me. My
grandsons are currently involved
in a family, uh, infant toddler
program out of state, out out of
New Mexico, but it's proven to
be highly successful. I've seen
their development and the
parents or my
son and his partner are
completely involved, and so the
children, um, really gravitate
towards all of.
Programs that were, how would
you say it, learning that they
are received, so I want to say
that it's, it's proven itself by
far. I have my question and it's
relevant and on page 69, I'm
also a uh been involved in fund
development all my life and so
I'm really uh interested in
knowing, has this partnership
Um, yield it, um.
You in any way being able to
leverage uh private funds.
Um
And if so, what is the
percentage of these private
funds and relevant to your
entire um budget. That's one
part of it, and the second part
is, do any of these council
members come with fun
development
representative Caballero, thank
you, um, well, um, Alan Sanchez
is on the SIC, so he has some uh
finance, um, but, uh, Teresa
Quintana, uh, comes from the
workforce development.
and uh Mya Lovas is from the
Maddox Foundation, so we have
philanthropy, we have workforce,
uh, Lula Mae Brown is an amazing
provider in Clovis, um, who run
program. And then Barbara Tedro
is uh owner of uh many operator
of 5 childcare centers, so we do
have, uh, and many of these
folks are coming from the field,
but their interest is in and a
lot of the conversations are
around capacity building. And so
the private sector
money that we have in the
agency, two big funders of
Hilton gave us a 3-year grant,
where at the end of the year,
but we're gonna have a no cost
of 6, a little over 6 million,
and the Pritzker Family
Foundation gave us about 1.5
over 3 years, they're very
interested in the prenatal to 3
capacity building.
Fritzker also given um over a
few couple million or more to a
community coalition that's led
by um voices for children and
Ole, which is about building
more capacity in our small
community-based programs, so
we're excited to see what comes
of that there, um, hopefully
will be um rolling some of that
work out because that's what we
keep hearing, shared services as
a concept we hear. People all,
everyone needs accountants,
everyone needs attorneys.
Everyone needs all these things
and we're thinking the doula
association, the breastfeeding
task force of New Mexico, the,
the small home visiting
operators, you know, how do they
get their capacity built, um,
and like the staff family
childcare network that is being.
So we, we see this as important
work that must be done, so that
as these dollars flow out used
very wisely and also be
accountable back to getting
outcomes for children and
families.
That's time. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Madam Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I have a couple of questions.
One of them is
And we get this broken down by
zip code in Bernao County. I
would love to see it.
And then my other question has
to do with kids who, you said
that that kids in your med
school are doing really well.
Um
Are any of the kids who may be
identified as continued high
risk. Are they being followed
once they age out, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Chavez, thank
you for that question, and I'm
definitely gonna get you the uh
interactive map so you can kind
of zoom in on the neighborhoods
that you're most interested in.
So this data is all population
based, so it's de-identified,
it's not used to determine
instruction or whether children
need special needs, and it is
really a measure of, um, the
health of the community um
through how well their children
are doing. Um, so I don't know.
OK. Can you repeat the second
part of your question, if I may
not in terms of kids.
Who may be identified as high
risk. Are they followed once so,
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, the, the data that the
schools get would be used more
to say, maybe I have, I'm
looking at my school and it 50%
of the children seem that
they're vulnerable on social
competence. Uh, I'm gonna look
at the professional development
that we're giving our teachers
in that building, um, are we
doing it well? Maybe what we're
doing isn't working, so it
wouldn't be driven by an
individual child, but it would
be more at the um system level,
so the school building or the
districtwide, if a district
looked at their data and said,
well, all of our children across
the district are struggling in
emotional maturity or language
and literacy, they could, they
could do more professional
development TA at a district
level or school level.
And so just a follow up question
to that, how do we know if they
are
Making some changes based on the
data.
Madam Chair, um Representative
Chavez, that is, that's a great
question. And that's the work
that Secretary Padilla and I
will be doing kind of together
as, as um the vistas and I think
it's new vistas that where they,
they display a lot of the uh.
They display all the public
school data. Uh, this can be an
opportunity maybe as they look
at some of their improvement
plans uh that we could have them
engage and talk about how
they're using.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary, for being
just want to thank you, and I
want to thank you about where
we're at, and I think this is
where
We're going to change, that's
not to say folks who
Already adults now, they didn't
get that. I think in essence, in
a lot of ways we have, um.
That are in a bad they're
raising kids and they didn't get
the support to take care of her
family, so I appreciate that,
and I think with the amounts
that we have,
Which are a lot, it also shows
that
We're going to continue
Appreciate that. My question is,
um, is there any legislation, is
there any type of policy changes
or things that you need in the
department. I know the last few
years we've talked about the
better, um, the department or
just in uh better.
out of a chair and the Senator
Pope, thank you and thank you
for your support and leadership
with us on that, um, bill last
year and and a few years before
that. Um, it is a 30 day session
and so we're we're mindful of
that. I, I do think this
childcare supply and demand
study is is top of mind uh for
the governor and for myself and
for hopefully all of you and
your constituents who are
wondering how am I gonna get
people back to work? How am I
gonna help support families who
want to go to school and further
their education.
Uh, they need access to quality
care. So I know that and any we
may be looking again at the bill
we brought last year to have an
exemption for um childcare
contracted slots, making it
easier like we have with pre-K
for small community-based
programs to apply for child care
slots instead of having to go
through the very rigorous um uh
state RFP process, it would
still be competitive, um, but we
would have some of the
flexibility we have with pre-K.
Uh, so those are some of the
things and then, um, better.
Coordination with them, children
with special needs, and New
Mexico pre-K advance in the
session.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and
just one more question and could
you talk a little bit about
maybe the some of our military
families on.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, Senator
Pope, our childcare team, um,
does work very closely with our
military bases, I know they've
had a closure down.
Not canon, it's uh
Allen thinking Allman, thank
you, thank you. I know I had
Kirtland and the other one, and
we've been, um, concerned about
that, but definitely we we
partner with them, we make all
of our programs accessible to
them, uh, and um they have
partnerships that we convene
with and talk with, um, as
needed and when they definitely
want want us, but that's another
huge reason to build the supply,
especially in the Albuquerque
region and in the Alamogordo,
um,
The military or are in desperate
need of access to. Thank you.
Thank you. I know um that's OK.
Thank you. And, and I will say
that I've read recently that
there's move on the federal um
level, and we all know that.
suspension and expulsion.
Happens most to brown and black
kids, and it even happens in
preschools and early childhood
centers and what the federal
move is to take away, um,
To basically say it's OK to
suspend or expel anybody. We're
gonna take color out of it, so
there have been some ways that
have been put in place to try
and keep it from being so
predominantly people of color,
and that is being rolled back
so, uh, senator Sid Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for an exciting um
report and all your leadership
in getting here. I just have a
couple of questions. One of them
is on page 72.
Uh, I just didn't understand
the, the
Uh, last, um, part of that chart
where it looks, you know, 1110,
1210, 12%.
Um, of people at risk.
Which I mean, we don't want
anybody risk, but, and then
The distribution across all
developmental domains is 27% at
risk. I didn't understand that.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you.
Excellent question. So, um, that
each of the other bars is just
looking at that area of
development, and then they're
saying if you look at the whole
population, um, and put all the
domains together. We actually
have 27% of children who are
vulnerable and at least one.
Um, or more of those domains,
and that's it, that means that
they're at 10% or less, um, on
the assessment. OK, I get it.
Now, now I understand it. Thank
you. And then, um, as you know,
we have, um,
Really situations with families
in crisis and children at really
high risk, uh, and you're out in
the community, um, especially
with the home visit, um,
program. And I was just
wondering how you deal with the
situation when you
During your home visit, realize
that oh my God, maybe we're
dealing, you know, what happens
next, um, because I think that
earlier intervention it's better
and you actually have a tool
there.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Siia Lopez, thank you, such a
great question, um, Secretary de
Blasio and I've just been
talking about this about a year
or so ago we trained all the
home visitors, and I think the
early interventionists as well
on the Kara and kind of things
to look for and and how to
respond. Um, she's um drafting a
letter right now to get to all
the home visit, providing that
professional development
training and support because
you're exactly right, and it's
one that you need to refresh,
you need to really have on a on
an annual basis because.
You know, it's not like you come
across it all the time, but then
when you do, it's fresh in your
mind of how to respond and what
to do and.
And what is that? I mean, do you
connect them with CYFD involved.
What, what's the process?
Madam Chair, Senator, it's,
it's, you know, it's going to
depend on what the situation,
the relationship, the
understanding of what the
context of the family is, but
that's the kind of professional
development that all of our home
visitors need. I mean, you all
should be so proud, I mean, our
home, some of the most amazing
people, as I'm sure you've met
them in your communities who
know exactly how to respond and
are so well connected to other
resources, um, but that's the
kind of professional development
we actually just finished
developing with NMSU.
uh trauma informed approaches
modules for all the ECECD staff,
and, and we're going to be
rolling that out, but, um, so I,
I don't think I could give you
like, this is how it happens
every time,
but, but it's good to know that
that training is out there and
that connection is out there
because this is a good place to
also have a
Have that knowledge and and
support. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And if you are on
Zoom and would like to speak um
on public comment, please raise
your hand. We're trying to get
that um organized uh after this,
so we will go to Senator
Stephanics. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, uh, Madam
Secretary. Um, my questions are
around uh disabilities.
Uh, how do you prepare?
Families and uh providers,
childcare, and then.
Any kind of education.
For managing disabilities if
It's beyond their capabilities
or they don't have enough staff
or they don't have enough
resources.
How just kind of walk me
through, what would you do with
the presented with a major
challenge.
With that child.
Madam Chair, Senator Stefaniks,
thank you for that good
question. I, I will bring uh
Leah Davidson of the bureau
chief for Family infant toddler
because she's.
Every other month we have the
interagency coordinating council
or 4 times a year, but we always
have a parent panel, and I
always enjoy that part of the
meeting because we hear exactly
this and I think she can give
more kind of specifics of how
even with our inclusion coaches
and.
Yes, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Stefaniks, thank you for
that question. That is part of
why I think we have, we now have
inclusion coaches, which were so
grateful to have, because if we
just think about it in terms of
the general population and
childcare, maybe we have a 2
year old who is exhibiting some
symptoms of developmental
differences, developmental
delay, and it's disruptive to
the classroom, right? The
teacher isn't sure how to.
um help that child and continue
to help all the other children
at once, that at its core is an
inclusion issue, right? And so
we from an inclusion coach
perspective, we would be want
our coaches to talk directly to
that childcare facility, either
the director or the teachers to
talk about principles of
universal design to sort of kind
of make small adaptations for
the whole classroom that all
kids could participate in, that
would actually just
support everybody, right,
including that child. And if the
child is eligible, which often
they, they are for early
intervention, the family infant
toddler program, the family and
infant toddler program will also
come and visit and directly help
the teacher figure out different
strategies that will work within
that classroom to support that
child. The child, if they're
eligible for early intervention
has a right under IDEA to
receive their services in their
natural environments.
Those are the two thoughts that
come to mind from a.
Oh, Madam Chair, I think my
question goes further. It's
When our children and family,
um, public.
I'm gonna call them experiences,
and I'm because I'm talking
about.
school, you know, it's like,
when are they, when is it too
complicated? And if you don't
want to hear the answer, that's
fine. Oh yeah,
um, Madam Chair
um.
Families cannot be denied
services, um, for childcare, um,
they're required to make
accommodations, oftentimes what
Lee is saying is that the
program, the family has chosen
because it works close to home,
it works her schedule. They
don't have the cap the the
competencies and so we, we need
to go in and work with them to
what are the professional
development learnings, um, we
sometimes have to find, as we
did with the bill that Senator
Pope brought is, you know, is
there a plan?
to another location that better
can meet the child's needs, but
it is required, um, my attorneys
here, so I think I she hasn't
tap me or texted me yet but um
that is our belief and that is
the way we approach all services
for families. If they come to
our eligibility interviewers at
childcare and say they won't
serve my child, they won't. I
mean, or they won't let the
early intervention team in. They
don't want them there, um, like
we, we, um, they have to
legally.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
like to discuss this offline
again. Thank you.
Thank you. So I have a couple of
things, um, and then a soapbox.
And so in the class and and the
MEFS if you have done like one
on ones for folks with the, I
think it would be, it would be
helpful for me and I think other
members to see what those look
like, to see what it is that
you're looking at. And just so
we can
Get a, get an idea of what,
what, what it is, um, I will
tell you, for example, when my
son was diagnosed with autism,
and he didn't have the classic,
and I wanted to see the protocol
and see what was it that made
him have autism. So that's kind
of that kind of thing. Um, so we
can look at the, the parts, so
that would be great if you could
get those to Xander and he can
get them out to the committee,
um, and then just curiosity, how
closely um do you do the 619?
programs work with the special
ed ombuds.
at all.
Madam Chair, uh, great question.
I, yeah, they did, I cause I was
on an email chain where they
were going back and forth and
setting up a meeting. I think
just recently as a month ago,
um, with the, um, DDCombu. OK,
and I would like to, that was my
bill. I'd like to strongly
encourage them. We need to use
any resource we have anywhere
and share and and and and cross
pollinate and then in terms of
one of the questions that was
asked, it it it 5 years.
That it's, it's a uh
A flash in time, so I, I mean, I
expect us to really see major in
a generation, 18 to 20 years,
and that's what those of us who
supported this for so long said,
you know, if we started 20 years
ago, we could have our first,
uh, you know, full, full
blossoming of this. So 5 years
is
is a short amount of time and
changing things that have been
going on for generations. So,
um, don't get discouraged,
folks, we're, we're moving in
the right direction, um, and
then
fit is, is like my baby. I
worked in fit for forever as a
PT and as a developmental
specialist, and I, I still, and
you hear this all the time,
Madam Secretary, the at risk.
I'm really back in the day, if
we decided to
was at risk for, let's say, mom
being, you know, um, alcoholic
or or dad being abusive or
whatever, we could just qualify
those kids and it made such a
difference to families, and we
could provide them the services
that we as professional as a
professional team thought that
they needed and it has been, I
think they
allowed to have an hour of
services a month. Is that what
at risk?
2 hours and, and that, I mean,
when, when the kid needs, um,
the kid in the family need um
kind of counseling stuff and
they may need some intervention
by therapists, and they need
some case management, 2 hours is
nothing, so I'm gonna beg again
to please look at opening up.
Fit for at-risk kids to be
determined by the professionals
who know the kids and families
to determine what they need,
rather than just an arbitrary 2
hours, you know, 2 hours might
be great if, you know, if the
kid has cleft lip and palate,
they just need help getting the
surgeries, etc. etc. as opposed
to a kid who who may have signs
of autism, who's gonna need
ongoing, you know, and, and we
all know it takes forever to get
a diagnosis, particularly with
autism, so just I'm
begging you to look at the fit
at risk and broaden it so that
we can catch some of those kids.
We don't want to miss anybody
and um and we all know that the
return on investment on catching
those kids early, supporting the
families and supporting the kids
is gonna pay for itself, so just
that's my, that's my soapbox.
I say Madam Chair, because I
always say this back to you when
you say that to me, which I
think it's a fair thing to open
up, but you have to look at the
array of programs and services
that we now have available.
to families that also could
support a family who back when
we had the at risk, we didn't
have this universal home
visiting with all these various
models, expansive childcare, um,
other, you know, supports, so I
agree. I think we should look at
it in terms of being like you
say, just 2 hours and that's it,
um, but also recognizing that we
want to be able to get families
into other, uh, you know, they
have to have both, so if they're
having their 2 hours, they're
also having a home visit every
week. They're also getting.
connected with some of the other
supports. So, but I, I hear you
and I appreciate you I think a
lot of it stems from the fact
that the fit programs have the
speech and language pathologists
and have the PTs and have the
OTs that I wish all the programs
had, they could all use, but um
that's not reality from a
workforce or a budget
standpoint. So, um, it, that's
my, that's my heel and someday
I'm gonna die on it.
So with that, um, I think we
will thank you so much and for
some reason.
and my phone is recording what
I'm saying, so
so that should be interesting.
So thank you so much and um
please be aware that I believe
many of our members will be
contacting you and for having
more questions and we look
forward to getting more
information from you on those
programs and again, thank you,
thank you all for the work that
you're doing and we need to
support our young families. So
thank you for thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members, it's
great to be here.
And in in person public comment,
we have Charles Goodmacher, I
don't know, do we have anybody
on Zoom.
000, I thought I did, but I will
do it again. So, so we will do
in person and then if you are on
Zoom and want to do public
comment, please raise your hand.
So
I got you, Charles, so thank
you, ladies so much.
Move on, move on.
You know, when you're sitting
there not checking your messages
for 2 hours things back up.
Whenever you're ready, Charles,
3 minutes.
Thank you Madam, members of the
committee.
I appreciate this opportunity,
so what I wanna share some
comments on behalf of Goldri
Health, a firm I represent as a
registered lobbyists and one of
the sponsors.
Opioid overdoses are in all-time
high.
Prescription drug monitoring
programs for PDMPs as they're
known, have helped, but not
solve the problems of too many
opioids being prescribed.
prescription opioid painkillers
do lead to addiction and illicit
fentanyl.
Still.
9 in 10 patients received
opioids after surgeries.
6 to 10% of those.
Become dependent on their first
prescription, 6 to 10%.
70 to 80% of those patients have
leftover opioids, they wind up.
Be left to too often in medicine
cabinets, etc. and wind up in
other people's hands, and 4 out
of 5 illegal opioid users began
with prescription opioids.
Either their own or someone
else's.
So goldfinch Health as a program
building i pledge, where it's
been implemented in other
states, it's led to enormous
success, reducing the addictions
before they start.
Um
They've had a 60% reduction in
opioids prescribed in other
states that have implemented the
program in 92% reduction in the
opioid refill rate.
So
Uh, it's a great honor to thank
you and your fellow legislators
for having during the last
session included some fun like
the Billion Pill pledge.
Um, that my client Goldfinch
Health is ready to provide our
state called finches.
Working with the Department of
Health to roll out the program
here in the future, and thereby
start saving lives and read too
much.
Thank you, Charles. Anyone on
Zoom?
No, no one on Zoom.
We caught up, so, so I'm gonna
give, give us a 10-minute break.
Oh,
as, as I said yesterday, don't
get used to it. Um.
But so please be back at one
o'clock even though we have
public comment, we'll check Zoom
again at one just to make sure
someone was waiting till one to,
to get back on, but then we'll
get started cause you can see
how quickly we get.
Behind schedule, so we're gonna
take a bio break for 10 minutes
and be back at 1.
