the agenda.
The opposition seeing none.
The agenda is accepted.
Anything else, director wanted
to
yes, and Superintendent, thank
you and your staff, wonderful
lunch, and I understand and uh
oh Senator Ael is not here, but
that that was the locally
sourced beef that we had, which
was excellent, uh, but thank
your culinary people and you in
the hospitalities, please go
ahead, sir. Yes, if I could, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I'd like to, to thank Eastern
Mexico Medical Center for, uh,
not only providing lunch for
say, but cooking and preparing
it for us. So, uh, our, our.
teams right over here. I just
wanted to publicly acknowledge
him and thank him.
Now, do your students get lunch
like that on a regular basis?
Uh, I defer on that one.
I felt like we were on LFC when
we get steak for lunch. I mean,
wow, that's, that's awesome.
Anything else? I mentioned
about.
Oh, if you wanted to mention
your.
Um
announce.
behind
OK,
yeah.
Tomorrow evening just for
members, uh, we do have a
reception at 5:30 at the Antigua
Cosina Mexicana.
Uh,
for in your binders in the
binder.
And the yellow yellow tab.
The yellowish announcements.
Any other announcements?
Nope. If not, then Jessica, if
you would please start with our
afternoon session.
Yes, good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Jessica
Hathaway. I'm your deputy
director for the legislative
Education Study Committee in
this interim, we are bringing
back a fan favorite of asking
local superintendents whenever
we're in their area to come and
answer a few questions, so
structure for this is there's no
slides, it's just a facilitated
conversation, um, I've got
prepared questions for them
aligned with committee
priorities around literacy,
math, um, instructional time
funding formula changes and just
more open-ended and ones will
take, um, we've got 90 minutes
total for this, so about half of
the time for that facilitated
conversation, and then we'll
turn it over to all of you to
ask any questions that you would
like to, um, so with that I will
actually just ask in the first
one, which is please introduce
yourselves and share more about
your experience of becoming a
school superintendent.
Hi, good afternoon again, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I've done this
already this morning, Brian like
superintendent Rosswell Schools,
um, and again, uh, I'm long in
the tooth, I'm on year 5 in the
superintendent business here,
