I think everybody else.
Um, good morning, everyone. I'm
Gail Chasey and my district, um,
actually has the University of
New Mexico, uh, main campus, and
within its boundaries, so that
gives you an idea of where I'm
from in Albuquerque.
Good to be here.
OK. Thank you, Representative,
and Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
name is Alan Martinez. I
represent District 23.
Which is the northern part of
Riorrancho and the western edge
of the town of Bernolio.
I'm Glad to be here.
Very good. So we'll go ahead and
get started then with the first
panel, and that's a report from
the Center for Excellence in
Social Work about the
The survey of social workers in
the state that they just
finished, so we have with us,
um uh Doctor uh Sriyashi
Chakravarti.
With the co-investigator and the
assistant professor at the
Facundo Valdez School of Social
Work.
At Highlands. Dr. Anna Nelson,
the principal investigator and
the director of the Center for
Excellence in Social Work at
Highlands.
And uh Monica.
Or Monica,
Ray Otero, uh, the researcher
and special projects coordinator
for the Center for Social Work
Excellence. So who's going to
lead us off, uh, Doctor Nelson,
welcome. Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, we are really
thrilled to be here with you all
today from the Center for
Excellence and Social Work and
New Mexico Highlands Fundo
Valdez School of Social Work.
It's an honor for us to come to
you today to bring the voices of
755 social workers statewide.
who responded to our 1st 2024,
New Mexico social workers
survey. So we're really excited
to share these findings from a
mixed method study and um and
are excited also to hear the
questions you may have after our
presentation.
So with that, I'll share just
briefly the Center for
Excellence in Social Work is
legislatively funded. We're one
of 6 centers for excellence in
the state champion by Governor
Lou Hong Grisham to bring
exemplary research to key
sectors, key, uh, sectors within
the workforce. So social work
being one of those. Uh, we are,
we have 4 core priorities that
the legislature helped to guide
us to develop that includes
child and adolescent well-being.
Public health social work, law
enforcement and community safety
and social work as well as
environmental justice and social
work and we're really grateful
that Representative Chavez
provided us with support to get
a certificate of recognition
during this last legislative
session to honor environmental
justice as a core principle for
social work. So we operate
under, uh, so in the development
over this past year, this is our
first year of existence. We
really wanted to
Root the the work that we do in
evidenced practices. So our six
pillars of the work are are
grounded in a public health
spectrum of prevention approach
and we've highlighted that
within this PowerPoint. And so
with that, I will turn it over
to Monica Otero, who is one of
the researchers on our team.
Thank you, Doctor Nelson. Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, as we start off this
presentation, I'm going to give
a quick, yeah, I'm going to give
a so it's a quick snapshot of
our busy yet successful year.
The Center for Excellence in
Social Work officially started
off its year's journey in July
2023.
When the director, the wonderful
doctor Anna Nelson was hired.
Since then, she's hit the road
running. In November 2023, she
completed her team with the
hiring of myself, the special
projects coordinator, our CEU
and workforce coordinator, Amber
Vlas and, um, our senior
administrative assistant Joey
Jimenez, who is joining joining
us virtually.
Also from July to November 2023,
we were successfully able to
expand our continuing education
program. Moving forward, during
the February to March 2024 time
frame, the center hosted a
student legislative day at the
New Mexico State Roundhouse, at
which time student social
workers were able to become more
familiar with the legislative
process.
We would also again like to
thank Representative Chavez, uh,
for her support and advocacy in
receiving the New Mexico House
of Representatives certificate
of recognition for environmental
justice as a core competency for
social workers practicing in New
Mexico during this 2024
legislative session. In April
2024, we hosted the first New
Mexico social work education
summit in Socorro, New Mexico on
New Mexico Tech campus. This
event
was a wonderful success and 52
social work educators,
practitioners, and students
attended. With participants
receiving 6 continuing education
units, 5 of which could have
been cultural. And thank you to
Senator Ortizipino for attending
and speaking at this event.
As we round out our first year,
we want to mention that in May
2024, the center was awarded a
$750,000 Department of Labor
limited action project grant
with the goal of promoting the
development of opportunity youth
and professional social workers.
Also, throughout this year, the
center provided continuing
education for 1,167 attendees.
And finally, during the month of
May, we conducted the 2024.
Social workers of New Mexico
survey.
Which we will be presenting on
today. And with that, I'm going
to let Doctor Nelson take the
floor and start discussing the
findings.
Thank you, morning.
Thank you, Monica, and we'll
turn out perfect, um, so I want
to contextualize this uh study
that we conducted. So, uh,
Monica had mentioned this really
is the first of its kind in um
to explore professional
well-being factors, as well as
major barriers facing social
workers across our state. We
really wanted to understand and
tell a story about what social
workers are experiencing and and
hopefully um.
Provide the information that you
all and other decision makers
across the state can utilize to
look at what is needed in a
strategic targeted way to both
support the workforce but to
address the resource drought
that we're experiencing in this
state. So as you've heard from
other presenters throughout the
interim committee, only 18.99%
of mental health need in New
Mexico is actually met and what
happens with that when there is
such a
you know, 80% of the mental
health need in New Mexico is
left unmet. What we start to see
is a strain on the existing
systems such as emergency rooms,
uh, PCPs and others who are
standing in this gap, right, of
resources and consequently, when
folks' needs are left unmet, uh,
they are more likely to utilize
substances to cope. They are
more likely to have a higher
Level of acuity over time
because their mental health
needs have not been immediately
addressed. So, so that leaves
the landscape of, of what we're
talking about today. It's both a
conversation about workforce and
a conversation about uh about
strategic resourcing.
Uh, one final point I wanted to
make before we move on from that
slide is in the development of
the report, we utilized hers a
workforce predictor tool. Uh,
they have several factors that
they look at that influence
supply needs and demand needs,
and it's, it's very accurate in
foreshadowing even up to a
decade forward, what the the
workforce landscape will look
like. Within that that workforce
predictor tool, there are 3
types of social work listed. We
actually
Ran the numbers with different
factors to see what the
workforce would look like up to
2034. And what we realized and
what what we learned from that
experience was that if something
major doesn't happen to change
the landscape of health care in
New Mexico. These shortages
we're looking at what we call a
resource drought. These this
resource drought will persist,
not just currently, but all the
way through 2034 and in fact
worsened. So
So, you know, that, that gives
us a sense of, of understanding
and urgency and you know, and I
know that you all are expert in
this, uh, but, but we were
startled to, uh, have that
finding. So, uh, with that,
Moni, I'm going to turn it back
to you.
Thank you, Doctor Nelson. Before
I start this portion of the
presentation, we want to give a
special thanks to the
superintendent Clay Bailey and
his team at the New Mexico
regulation and Licensing
Department board for providing
us with a list of social workers
licensed in New Mexico. Now, I
will discuss how we use this
information for the mapping of
our social work workforce in New
Mexico.
As of May 7, 2024, of the 5,404
listed licensed social workers,
4,0347 social workers listed
their address within New Mexico.
With this information, we were
able to geographically map the
social work landscape in New
Mexico and an interactive map
was created.
This map identifies social
workers by county of residents
and licensure type. For those of
you who may not be familiar,
these licensure types include
provisional license bachelor or
master social worker, licensed
bachelors, social worker,
licensed master social worker, a
licensed clinical social worker
and licensed independent social
workers.
This map also aids us in
indicating the gaps in workforce
distribution throughout the
state. This mapping gives us a
snapshot of the state and as we
might predict, Berna Leo, Donna
Ana, Santa Fe and Sandoval
County were most densely
populated with licensed social
workers. And with our most rural
counties and communities
representing fewer to no social
workers.
This type of mapping is vitally
important because it may assist
us in understanding the type of
services social workers can
provide based on their level of
licensure, especially in areas
where there might be more social
workers of different licensure
types. Of note, Doctor Nelson
provided public comment at the
last committee and the workforce
brief that names levels of
social work, and the services
that these social workers can
provide.
So if you're interested in this
interactive map, you can use the
link provided on this slide,
which is slide 7, and it's also
within the report we provided.
And now I'm gonna turn it over
to, uh, Doctor Chakravarti, um,
who is going to discuss the
methods, um, for the survey and
the participant demographics.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, uh, let's go
through a little bit about the
methodology that we use to
conduct this study.
So that the aim of this research
was to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of the factors
that influence the well-being.
Um, the significant practice
barriers and professional
development needs that the
social workers in New Mexico
face on a day to day basis. The
study was a mixed methodology
study where both qualitative and
quantitative data and, uh, data
collection techniques were used.
We used a convenience and a
snowball sampling to recruit
participants and respondents,
mainly through emails and
through social media outreach.
What are key recruitment
procedures. The findings were
developed through nested
analysis, more like a concurrent
nested analysis where the both
quantitative and qualitative
data were analyzed together
simultaneously and collected
together simultaneously yielding
a richer interpretation of the
data.
A a total of 755 social workers
responded to our survey and, uh,
the population size
approximately of social workers
in New Mexico is 6,729.
Uh, and the total percentage of
responses were 12%, so that was
the sample size and, um, uh,
which exceeded our expectation
and the completion rate of the
survey was 79%, so 79% of the
people who took the survey
completed the entire survey, um.
We had many interesting
findings, some of the most
interesting demographic findings
were, um, that 77% were females,
14% identified as male and 1%
identified as non-binary. Uh,
most survey participants were 35
years of age or older, and the
participants' ages, they range
from 25 years to 65 years. 40%
of our respondents made
somewhere between
$50,000 to $74,999,000 per year
and 30% made around $75,000 to,
uh, $99,999 per year, 53%
identified as white, 30% were
Latinx or Hispanics, 77%.
Only 7% identified as biracial,
4% were Native American. 22%
identified as black, and 1%
identified as Asian.
15% of our participants belonged
to the LGBTQIA2S+ community.
31% of the survey participants.
Communicated in more than 2
languages with 29% communicating
in Spanish 2% in American Sign
Language 2 in French and 1% in D
or Navajo.
Uh, with that, uh, I would like
to.
Go to Monica for the next slide.
Thank you, Doctor Chakrabarti.
Now we're going to take a look
at the survey participants based
on their workplace counties and
their degrees.
So on this slide, which is slide
10, T 3 reflects the county or
counties in which the survey
participants work. Uh, this
question was a multiple select,
so participants did have the
opportunity to select the county
or all counties in which they
provide their work.
Of the 648 participants who
elected to answer this question,
we are happy to report that all
New Mexico counties were
represented within this survey
sample.
Similar to the list of licensed
social workers. The survey
participants based on their
workplace or most densely
representative, represented in
Bernalio, Donna Ana, Santa Fe,
and Sandoval County I just
mentioned to the committee that
if you need a bigger copy of
these charts, the survey.
The report has them in full page
where it's easier to read, for
example, page 12 is the one
she's just talking about now.
Yeah, we really wanted to fit
this information on the slide,
but it's much better represented
within our report. Yes, sorry
about that.
Um, so like I was saying, the,
it's more the social workers are
more densely represented within
the counties that we all assume.
And, um, but most importantly,
we really want to uplift the
fact that every county is
represented here in our survey
and within our report. Moving
along to table 7. this shows
participants' level of social
work education. In this sample,
a strong majority of
participants, um, 98% to be, uh,
to add a percentage.
identified that they had a
master's of social work degree.
Further, 268 of the participants
had a bachelor's of social work
degree, 88.
Participants had a doctor of
social work degree and 7 had a
doctor of philosophy, um, sorry,
Doctor of philosophy in Social
Work. It's really important to
note that some of the
participants may hold 2 or more
of these social work degrees.
Um, that's more important when
you're looking at the graph and
may look at the sample number
and they might not match up. So
that's why it might be more. Um,
so, you know, this just adds a
bit of context when it comes to
the survey participants, um,
where they work and
Communities that they serve, and
of course, their educational
type.
Um, I'm going to once again pass
this presentation off to Dr.
Nelson, and she will start to
explain some of the other
pertinent findings of this
survey. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Monica. So,
so we're moving on to slide 11,
and I think, I think again,
telling this story, painting
this picture of social workers
currently in New Mexico. It's,
it's important to understand
this is a deeply committed
workforce, yet very overwhelmed
currently. And so I'll share
some of the barriers and factors
that influence that sense of
overwhelm. So first I want to
say that this profession, you
know, we looked at well-being
factors.
And two of the most frequently
mentioned well-being factors by
participants were a sense of
purpose and this commitment to
service that that really
motivated, uh, us to do this
work and stay in the work, where
9 participants in 10 in every 10
gained personal satisfaction and
believed they made a difference
through their work, and almost 9
in 10 said, I feel proud to be a
social worker.
While participants practice
self-care, which is one of our,
uh, which is one of our, uh,
ethical, um, mandates is to
practice professional self-care.
While, while participants
practice self-care and strive
for work-life balance.
Over a third felt overwhelmed by
their workloads, not only that,
but more than half of the
participants worked outside
their regular regularly
scheduled hours just to get the
work done in a day.
And so, and I'll share why um
why this is that that overwork
is so important to understand.
So experiences with overwork and
overwhelm contribute to a desire
to leave this profession. So our
next slide, slide 12 notes that
38% over a third have a survey
participants have considered
leaving the profession of social
work and an additional 40 or 14%
and my apologies, have
plans to leave the workforce.
And so a few quotations from our
participants. So when
participant shared, I only stay
because there really is no one
else to replace me. We've had
social work vacancies going on 2
years now.
Another participant speaks to
this fact. I am so burnt out. I
told myself I would take a year
off, but I'm so much happier I
might not ever return.
So that's, you know, really a
moving quote for me and of
further concerns is 15% of the
participants plan to relocate to
another state. In the next 1 to
5 years, and another 8% within
the next 6 to 10 years. So
we're, we're experiencing that
workforce, that expertise drain
uh that other states have
experienced as well and these
findings do foreshadow a
potential workforce attrition
over the next decade of 23% just
in that.
That one factor. And you know,
another factor and and myself
included, our workforce is aging
and we have about 19% of
participants plan to retire
within the next 1 to 5 years.
Um, and then a further 15%
within the next 10 to uh I'm
sorry, 6 to 10 years. That's
again a perspective workforce
loss of 34%. So, you know, this,
this helps to uplift the urgency
of
strategic measures to both
support this workforce and grow
the workforce. Doing the work of
social work, uh, so I'm going on
my 30th year of doing this, of
doing this work, of being in the
helping professions. Um, so I
can personally, um, I, when I
was, you know, pulling through
the findings and really doing
the analysis, I was very moved
personally with my own
experiences and seeing these
reflected in the responses. So,
you know, it really does take a
physical and an emotion
toll on the practitioner. So
where more than one in every 2
participants noted that they
experienced burnout or vicarious
trauma. And this term vicarious
trauma, it's, it's what happens
when we're exposed to human
suffering and listen to others'
experiences with trauma and
interestingly, our own
biological system, uh sometimes
produces the same traumatic
effect, even as if we, you know,
directly experience it just by
sitting there and listening.
That's what vicarious trauma is,
and so, um, 1 in 3 of our
participants also reported
experiencing depression,
anxiety, or trauma symptoms. In
addition to that, nearly 25%
have experienced health troubles
because of their work.
The single greatest barrier
social workers face in their
work is what we are calling the
resource drought, so we're using
this metaphor, you know, all 33
counties in New Mexico are
considered drought emergency
zones by NOAA, right? We're
we're utilizing that concept of
without water we can't grow, we
can't heal, we can't, you know,
thrive and similarly, without
the necessary resources within
community. Community members are
struggling and so, um, so this
research
drought has a significant impact
on our existing workforce. And
so where every where nearly 25%
of our participants, so 24%
reported they do not have the
resources necessary to provide
the the level and quality of
care that they would like to the
clients they're serving. Another
61% affirm that their
communities do not have the
necessary resources to to really
provide those robust services
and support. They, they, uh, um.
Clients and communities the way
they would like. So one
participant helped to elucidate
this a little bit more. They
said the patients are becoming
more acute, and there are no
resources in New Mexico. Another
said, people are suffering
greatly. They cannot afford to
live, and they're stressed
vicarious vicariously influences
social workers. So I'm just
gonna, because this was such a
significant finding. We had over
225 of the, let's see, 476
Participants who responded to
this one open-ended question.
225 listed barriers associated
with resources. So I'm going to
read a few key quotes here. One
participant says hands down the
most significant barrier are
lack of community resources to
refer to and social and lack of
social workers due to high
burnout and low pay. I cannot
overstate the the impact, the
lack of resources is having on
our profession, placing an
unimpo
burden on social workers. And
another quote says many agencies
I am aware of are seeming to be
trying to implement
interventions and supports
in-house regardless of their
focus, because relevant agencies
are they typically who could be
assisting are either
underfunded, overburdened, or
non-existent. So I thought that
was a powerful way to state this
resource drought. And the final,
the final quote is, is literally
a laundry list that a
participant.
had typed in and what they said
here, lack of resources for
clients, lack of programs, lack
of housing, lack of mental
health, um, lack of medical,
lack of dental, lack of legal
rights? So you, so you get the
feel for the sense of overwhelm
and and we, we understand that
this may be, you know, one of
the things that that
participants talked about was
the sense of professional
isolation in rural communities.
And so it's, it's really quite
possible that what they're
experiencing as well is this
concentrated
sense of lack of resources in
certain areas. So, so we
believe, you know, this is
A canary in the mine of of uh
spaces in which we can study
further to understand that
strategic need. So this leads us
to another significant barrier
our social workers are facing,
which is pay inequity, uh,
social workers are among the
lowest paid professions in the
entire nation and um and I and I
love this a dear calling and
social work friend of mine
recently told me, uh, we were
talking about, um, about
practicing social work in New
Mexico.
And this colleague says, we
don't ask engineers to build
bridges because they love
bridges. We should stop asking
social workers to do this work
without equitable compensation
because they care. And I, I
thought that was so profound.
So, um, so how does pay equity
shows up for our survey
participants.
You know, again, imagine the
social workers who you know and
this applying to them. So almost
half, 42% said they felt they
were not equitably compensated
for for the skills and expertise
that they possess as licensed
degreed professionals. More than
3, 36%, so 1 in 3 reported their
pay is not sufficient to meet
their financial needs.
Another, um, 3 or 37% work more
than one job to make ends meet.
And also we know they're working
beyond their regularly scheduled
work time just to get the work
done, right? So, so it's, it's
again, um, highlighting what's
happening for social workers and
over 1 in 10 in an open-ended
question, uh, mentioned pay
inequity as a significant
barrier they face in their
social work practice. Um, they
also are impacted by student
loan debt, so that was another
He that emerged. And with that,
I'll turn it over to Doctor
Chakravarti to explain a little
bit more about deeper analysis
that was connected.
Thank you, doctor.
Thank you, Doctor Nelson. Uh, so
further statistical analysis
showed racial and ethnic
disparities on some of the
factors, especially
discrimination and pay inequity,
uh, so the, uh, the agreement on
an item like I experienced
discrimination at my
organization was more or higher
among among the Native American
respondents than their white
counterparts. So it was around
39% for the Native American.
respondents, whereas their white
counterparts, uh, agreed on this
item only 10%.
Then, uh, the agreement on
student loans negatively
impacting my financial
well-being, the agreement of on
this item was more among the
biracial respondents at 73% and
when compared to their white
counterparts at 40%.
Then the uh agreement on the
item my pay is sufficient for my
financial needs the agreement of
white respondents was more on
this item, about 46% when
compared to their Hispanic or
Latinx, uh, uh, counterparts.
Additional statistical analysis,
um.
was also run and uh this is on
page 22 and 23 of the report,
those indicated that there were
significant differences between
different racial and ethnic
groups on their,
on their agreement on various
factors like uh like uh
discrimination in the
organization
student loans negatively
impacting them their pay being
fair and equitable, pay being
sufficient to meet their
Financial needs and lastly,
where they say, I am equitably
compensated for my skills and
expertise.
With that, uh, I move on to
Doctor Nelson for discussing the
next part.
Thank you so much. So, so we are
bringing to a close this
conversation and and we'd like
to end with 6 strategic
recommendations for the
legislators to to consider so um
one important note about these
recommendations is that they are
driven by our findings, and
they're also rooted in the
literature and science about
what may make a difference in
changing the healthcare
landscape and may benefit social
worker well-being over.
We also looked at recent studies
and recent reports from New
Mexico specific research and
committees and we found that
some of the, the recommendations
that we were proposing in this
report were also closely aligned
with, with other entities. So
that would include the, um,
well, nationally, a national
behavioral health workforce
survey, so some of our findings
and our subsequent
recommendations aligned. And
then the culturally appropriate
social services for New Mexico
students study, which was very
well done, and that was by Pier
in 2022. The New Mexico
Healthcare Workforce Committee
in 2023. The annual report, and
then the LGBTQ roundtable 2024
draft recommendations for a
behavioral health improvement in
New Mexico. And so, um, so, you
know, again, these are not
intended to be comprehensive,
but instead to incite dialogue
among
Policymakers, leaders, community
members, and the social work
profession as a whole. and what
are needed for the workforce to
to really, um, to really retain
this workforce. Finally, they
are driven by that her that
workforce predictor and drivers
for change in the landscape of
healthcare. We, we did consider
what would make an impact to
change the landscape. So
recommendation number one is to
begin with equitable pay for
social workers.
Including the elimination of
racial and ethnic pay
disparities. So a few, a few
pieces here, you know, it's well
researched, well noted that
social workers are again, uh,
not compensated equitably among
peers with similar licensure and
education levels. In addition to
that, um, it pay disparity
persists for women and for black
indigenous and social workers of
color in this profession, uh,
both, you know, it, it, it
appears in our study as well as
nationally.
So, you know, some of the
suggestions that we have, uh,
first, we, we do, uh, encourage
a stronger analysis of what's
happening with uh with regard to
the pass rates for the ASWB
exam, which is what allows us to
become licensed. There is, uh,
there are evidence racial
disparities with regard to pass
rates for that. And what that
does for let me just share what
that means for social workers.
Social workers cannot practice
under the title of social.
worker in New Mexico without a
license. If you are not able to
pass this exam, you are not able
to act as a social worker that
impacts your compensation and it
really impacts your lifetime,
uh, earning across time when
you're not able to gain that
licensure. It also means that
this resource drought continues
because qualified people who
have difficulty passing exams
are out in community, um, not
able to do the deeper level
work. So important.
To think about that and then um
fully resourced payments for
practicum placements. So, uh,
this pay equity doesn't only
exist within uh practicing
social workers. It starts when
we're students, right? We have
to complete 960 or more hours of
practical placement free work,
you know, that's a part-time job
in addition to um going to
school and you know, and many of
us work as or worked as well
through our education. So
So this sort of poverty
threshold happens when we, when
we enter the or the the schools
of social work and it persists
throughout our career, um,
potentially. So, so we really,
um, we, we want to honor and
appreciate the resourcing that
has happened for payments for
practicum placements. What were
we're noticing, and we believe
further research needs to
happen. What we're noticing is
schools appear to be applying
those as scholarships, which
sometimes are, which is
phenomenal, maybe needs space.
But it's not a, a, um, similar
to a wage that you might earn as
a practicum student. And often
our students are appear on paper
to be having an income because
they're working a job while
going to school, but you tack on
Practicum. A lot of those folks
have to quit their jobs in order
to complete the, you know, their
education. So then they're at
risk for being unhoused, etc.
So, so I think there's, there's
more, um, need to, to really
look at how these
Monies are being applied.
I would go on to recommendation
2, invests in the retention of
New Mexico social workers. Um,
there are a couple of things
that are actionable here. One is
resourcing, fully resourcing
organizations to allow them to
pay retention bonuses, hazard
pay, so many of the, the jobs
that I had were in the front
lines out in community, um,
often, you know, could have
qualified for hazard pay or
overtime. And then provide
funding to organizations for
tuition remission and
professional development
scholarships. Um, and, you know,
and we have this idea that
social work is such a diverse uh
profession that if we were able
to fund people to gain er
certification in different types
of social work, they could
transition when burnt out from
one organization to a different
type of of work or population
and still remain in the, in the
profession. So we thought that
that would be um a good
approach. Recommendation
3 is educating the behavioral
health workforce on the rules of
an increased funding for peer
support workers and community
health workers. So peer support
workers, because of their lived
expertise in community health
workers because of their public
public health approach, um, they
are uniquely qualified to
partner with us in this work in
the behavioral health workforce.
They also have a powerful skills
in bringing community to
behavioral health in a way that
builds that trust.
And so, um, so often there is a
stigma associated with accessing
behavioral health. These, these
folks do the work so excellent
and they do bring in people to
access care. So, um, they are
also out there on the front
lines and there are even, um,
more inequitably paid than
social workers, so we, we
recommend equitable payment for,
uh, peer support workers for
community health workers. And we
also as a profession need to
take responsibility to
To receive training and learn
about peer support and community
health workers' codes of ethics,
their supervision needs, and how
do we maximize their support and
collaboration within the
workforce without burning them
out. So I see them as the next
generation of, um, new entry
social workers, right? I see
them as coming in on the front
lines, doing the hard, uh, tough
work and maybe not getting
compensated so equitably. So
moving forward, recommendation
number
For identify and fund
innovations in reducing burnout
and vicarious trauma. And I
think this is one of the most
urgent things that we need to
attend to. Uh, and so, you know,
that's fully resourced in
communities and we're all
working toward that. In addition
to that, um, I, I did think that
organizations and funders could
consider providing funding for
social workers to take practice
sabbaticals so that they could
attend to their well-being
needs. In addition to that, a
standard, this is something that
I do believe is actionable.
for caseload sizes. Um, being
able to codify standards for
caseload sizes would help social
workers out in the community to
have a realistic workload.
And then, um, there, there is
science behind having really
high quality social work, uh,
supervision, and however, there
are so few of us that are at
that independent level licenser
across the state, um, and you
know, and I, I have always
provided supervision pro bono,
but it would be powerful to be
able to have a structure in
place for early career social
workers to receive that
supervision, thereby, um,
building their licenser.
Um, and also to prevent burnout,
so so it's actually evidence,
good supervision helps us to
stay well and stay grounded and
often persist in this
profession. So our final two
recommendations fully fund a
general operations for
community-based organizations. A
tremendous amount of our
participants noted that they
spend, uh, at a, a significant
amount of their time doing
administrative work because they
don't have the administrative
support in their organization.
So that's taking time away.
serving clients. So fully
funding positions to assist with
intake coordination, case
management, daily operations,
and billing tasks will not only
increase
um time for social workers to
serve their clients but reduce
that overall stress.
And then our final
recommendation before we turn it
back to you all for questions is
fund a policy and feasibility
research that addresses, so
there are two things that are
happening nationally that
influence our profession. One is
the, the movement to adopt the
interstate compact. Uh, that
would mean that there was
license or parity and acceptance
between and and across states.
Um, the other, the other, uh,
sort of hot topic, if you will,
in our profession right now.
is alternative pathways to
Leishenger, um, so given that we
do have racial and ethnic and
gender disparities with regard
to pass rates and, and we have
to have that licenser in order
to be able to practice,
you know, it, I think it would
behoove us to study and better
understand what other states are
doing to provide alternative
pathways to Leener. If, if
possible, and, and understand,
you know, the, um,
Whether that is something that
the profession both endorses and
thinks would be good. And if
not, what are some alternative
measures we can take and at this
this interstate compact and this
alternative pathways to
Leishenger, they are
interconnected because some
states will not accept parity
from states where alternative
licenser, uh, pathways are
defined. So we believe a robust
policy and feasibility study
over a period of year is
important to to provide
policymakers with
Information on the fiscal impact
and feasibility of these two
issues, specifically, we want to
note that the social work
interstate, uh, licenser
Compact, uh, should be assessed
for impact on culturally and
linguistically linguisticly
competent social work practice
in our state, um, and
particularly for people who are
Medicaid recipients in our
state. We want to understand if
this is a good sound option or
if there may be, um, you know,
abandonment of care.
Or other concerns that may
influence our communities even,
even further. So I, I can't um
express our appreciation enough
for the honor of being here
today, and being able to share
these findings, uh, and we did
leave our contact information
both in the report as well as
the PowerPoint. And with that, I
will turn it over to the
committee for questions.
Well, very good. Thank you.
Thank you for the report and for
the presentation about your
research. So we'll go to the
committee, Representative
Martinez, do you have a
question? 33 minutes. Yeah, we
have to do it kind of quick
because we got a late start due
to my absence. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um,
Great, great information, very
eye opening. I, I do have.
One quick question, you talked
about the ASWB exam.
So currently what's the, what's
the required score for passage.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez, that's that's a great
question. Um, is it 80%?
Um, 70% 70% is our, is the pass
rate it's dependent, it's
dependent based on the test you
get, so not everyone gets the
same test. So, um, different
tests will require a different
percentage of questions to be
correct, depending on the amount
of questions that they are
actually counting, if that makes
sense.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And what
is the recommendation? Are you
looking to lower the required
score.
Um, can you give me a kind of a.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez again an excellent
question. Uh, so, you know, this
is why we recommend a
feasibility study to really
understand what other states are
doing, whether that is lowering
the threshold of the recommended
percent of pass or if there are
other, um, other ways in which
we can measure confidence that
could be effective in
communities across New Mexico
so.
we would like to understand that
further and research that more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for the information.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez. Representative Chavez,
followed by Representative
Thompson and Senator Hickey and
Representative Cates.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. Thank you for the
presentation. Um, lots of great
information in here so I do have
some questions. Um, one of the
questions that I wanted to ask
about was you talked about, um,
you know, social workers needing
the state needing to increase
the pay of social workers. In
your study, did you find that
pay was higher in.
The private sector as opposed to
the public sector, and in terms
of the public sector, did you
look at
Um, for example, hospitals like
University of New Mexico
hospitals, those wages for
social workers are not too bad,
but when you compare it to CYFD,
it's a little bit different. So
did you look at any of that in
your, in your study.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Chavez, uh, thank you so much
and, and, uh, so, so these are
the descriptive analysis and um
and really frequency of
findings. So we have a lot of
data that we want to continue to
analyze, uh, so we did work
with, uh, Workforce Solutions to
try and get some baseline data
by, um, place of employment, you
know, sort of, you know,
from a hospital setting versus a
governmental setting versus
private.
and weren't able to really drill
down to that level, but we hope
through further analysis of
these data that we, that we may
find that.
OK. Thank you. Um, the other
question that I have is with
regard to the interstate
compacts. Do we have compacts
with some states already in Mr.
Chair Represent Chavez and
different professor professions
that uh
there are other states
nationally and I believe there
are 12 states nationally that
have entered into interstate
compact, and I do understand
that requires legislation, um,
and it is a state to state, uh,
So, um, I don't know if New
Mexico.
If we have by other professions
any compacts. But uh I do know
in other states, social work
compact do just nursing is the
only one we have, OK, I, I, I
don't know why, but I was
thinking that we had an
agreement with the state of
Washington, um, my daughter
recently came back and was able
to get her um license like
within 5 days. It was very
quick, but maybe that's
something different. So then the
other question we do have,
because the compact is one.
That would permit you to
practice here without having to
be re-licensed here. What we
have done RLD has been very uh
uh assertive in developing
streamlined licensing so that so
that it makes it fast, but, but
that still requires you to apply
for a license before you could
if you were in a compact, the
fact that you're licensed in
other compact state makes it
possible for you to practice
here. OK.
That's good. So we need, we have
more work to do then. Um, so
then the other question that I
have is.
Um,
do we have an idea and and we
probably don't, but I just want
to ask the question anyway. Do
we have an idea of how many of
our students have gone to other
states to get their degrees.
And in social work, um, and then
come back, um, was there any
thought given to reaching out to
those students to get them to
come back?
Mr. Terps represented Chavez at
another excellent question. I
think you know that that speaks
to something uh about alumni
engagement that I think is
important that all schools of
social work may be able to work
toward in understanding how we
connect with those who've
graduated, but I don't, we don't
have those data. These questions
help us to form to formulate
questions for our next survey.
So these are really important
nuanced questions that we can
ask moving forward. Uh, and I do
think, you know,
So one of the, the hopes that we
have in this robust
collaboration with other schools
of social work is um is finding
ways in which we can teach,
train, retain, you know, grow
our own, uh, really foster that
sense of, you know, we want to
stay here in New Mexico and
serve um and so we hope through
this collaborative work that
will continue to work toward
that end. OK, and just one last
comment, um,
he took some of my time.
Timer when he was speaking
No, I just wanted to make a
comment about, um, inserting
bilingual pay as a
recommendation in terms of, um,
social workers who are bilingual
because they and I experienced
this when I was working with,
um, as a CPS worker, um, those
are the workers that will get,
um, often all of the bilingual
cases or all of the monolingual
cases. So I just wanted to throw
that in.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez. Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, let
me make sure I start my timer.
Um 3 minutes.
So thank you so much for this.
Um, there's a lot of information
and a lot of holes. I'm sure
you, so the thing that struck me
right out was 18.99% of the, uh,
behavioral health in New Mexico
needs are met and then even more
shocking was the entire US was
only 26.74. So when we talk
about crime and substance use
and all those, it's like, here
we go, you know, this we need to
start addressing this stuff, not
locking people up.
providing them, preferably early
on in life, um, I'm a big fan
of, um, childhood mental health,
um, newborn infant, all that
kind of stuff, but, um,
On slide number 10.
It, it struck me that there's a
whole lot more, um, where can I,
I can't even find it.
Um, there's a whole lot more
social workers in New Mexico
than social workers working in
New Mexico. So do you have a
sense of, are they, are they
doing something kind of social
work adjacent, you know, I
maybe, um, care coordinate. I, I
don't know what it would look
like or are they not working or
are they working in other states
via that just, that's shocking
that, um, you know, we have 4
over 4300, but only a little
over.
1000 are actually
Uh practicing
So Mr. Chair, Representative
Thompson, and thank you so much
for that, um, observation and so
we, we weren't able, these,
these were uh you know these
were numbers that we collected,
uh, versus being able to ask an
open-ended question about what
they are doing out of state. Uh,
my sense, given the colleagues
who I know is that they're
providing telehealth out out of
the state. Um, so we did find
that notable as well, and that
could be a follow-up question in
the in another survey.
And thank you. I'd appreciate
that. It, it seems, uh,
Really out of whack. I mean, I
know we have.
Well, those are participants.
You know, in other words, people
had answered.
So that may explain a big
disparity, you know, because
only a certain percentage of all
answered so.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, exactly. So,
so this is a slide that
demonstrates that, um, these are
the participants within the
survey and they, they did have
the opportunity to select
multiple counties and the option
of out of state as well. So you
may see that disparity there in
comparison with the licenser
data we were able to obtain.
Thank you for that it's it's
it's still really concerning to
me that, I mean, if we've got
them, we should be able to use
them. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Under time.
Very, very good. You get a gold
star. That's very nice. Uh,
Sentator Hickey, uh, followed by
uh Representatives Kates and
Chasey.
I'm going to ask you to prepare
the answers because we, uh, in
order to get this in, uh, under
the premise that social work is
essential to healthcare as any
of the other professions in
healthcare, particularly getting
to the underlying, uh, social
determinants. Therefore, I would
like to I would like the
following. Uh, we have terrible
numbers in healthcare on how
many we have because they're
compared to stupid national
averages that are way out of
date. We need to know.
How many social workers to
address the healthcare and other
issues that you do we need in
the state. What the need is, not
what others say is an average.
Uh, 2, yeah, we'd love to grow
our own, it isn't going to
happen. Uh, I would like to know
how many of the people we
trained remained in the state.
Um, and I would like you to
change your thinking that having
our own is wonderful, yeah, but
it isn't gonna happen. So what
would we need to pay.
To attract other people from
states. We're looking at that in
medicine. We've got to pay above
other states because of the
national shortage you indicated,
so I need to know that, um, the,
uh, uh, on your exam, I suggest
you get tutoring for those
people. You got to have exams.
You got to be certified, um,
the, uh, 960 hours. Is there
something that we can do to
support you in that particularly
through Medicaid, uh.
Yesterday we learned that CHWs
and peers are $60 an hour. So
what I, I assume that would
probably be a good pay for a
social worker too, but how would
you structure that so that
you're actually getting the
money and then how would we do
it, make it to the state that
the privates would have to move
up to be able to get there. The,
um,
Uh
Oh, and then, uh, given your
burnout and so forth, absolutely
happening in the medical
professions. That's why they're
leaving that puts some uh more
of a load on those who stay. It
makes them miserable and then
they leave and it's just a
circle. It's going down the
drain. So are there any states
where social workers are
thriving and really engaged and
liking what they do. Will you
please find those states and
what is it that they're doing if
you put that into
Report and uh I'll talk to you
afterwards. There are a few
other things that I'd like to
get and have you do report back
to the committee so that we can
do specific things that aren't
just ideas, but are actual
actions. Thank you very much. My
time's up.
OK
Mr. T, Senator, thank you so
much for those observations and
things and and um and follow up
questions. We will get that
information to you and we can
always dream, right? We can
always dream that we can grow
our own, so, so we'll keep
hopeful I'm not dreaming. I'm
saying this is what we have to
do. OK, no, we, we, we're in
crisis. This is, this is not a
dream. This is to fundamentally
allow people to live and
survive, um, and it's not
happening in medical.
Uh representative Kates followed
by Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much for your report.
See, it wasn't so bad. We
weren't, we weren't that we our
our teeth aren't that sharp. And
so I, I it was a great, wow.
Uh, not a superficial survey, so
thank you, uh, some real data
here. Um, I do, uh, agree with
my colleague that you don't, uh,
stop credentialing and testing
those who are professionals as,
uh, I see doctorates sitting in
before me, um, what you may do
is learn how to accommodate and
to give other kinds of skills or
supports why they are able to
meet.
The same standards as everyone
else. Um, I, I do, I, I, I, I'm
looking at this data. I, um,
obviously see what everybody
else sees, of course, we're in
shortage, um, uh, social workers
are, are, are, are used, uh, a
tremendous amount whether or not
supporting our social services
with children or in behavioral
health explaining our behavioral
health program. why are not
social workers paid at the same
sort of professional level as of
medical providers. Um, I, I do,
um,
I do see a need for a
standardization, whether or not
you're a social worker in a
hospital or social worker with
children's services or social
worker, um, uh, in another in a
behavioral health setting or for
substance abuse that is there a
standard, uh, either pay range
and packet. Um, I just want to
make a comment that social
workers like teachers, like
nonprofit workers, like case
managers, we're all
- d ri ve n individuals. Um, we
live in a society that once
you're identified as a
mission-driven that we don't
feel the need to really pay you
adequately and you're not
creating revenue, you you're
protecting our social structure.
You're not creating revenue and
how our business is set, but I
do think that
creating an environment I have
supervised a lot of social
workers in my life and creating
an environment where they can
thrive with regular peer support
and, um, and having that
structure. I know that nurses
are are in need of that as well.
And in the that should be not
just uh uh.
A $5 phone call with an
employment.
Um,
uh, voice, uh, support, but to
have an actual structure of
behavioral help for our
mission-driven workers who are
frontline workers, social
workers or frontline workers.
And, and I think on a regular
basis, I feel that so many
people don't understand that,
uh, it doesn't even have to
happen to you as a social
worker, a certain news story can
occur and, um, and the wear and
tear that happens and why do you
stay
Believe and work so hard in the
mission is because you feel
supported. You will not feel
supported with overwhelming
caseloads. You will not feel
supported when, um, your support
system is blaming and, and, and
pushing responsibility rather
than holding and supporting up.
So I, I thank you very much
again for your report. I, I, I
look forward to further
conversations on how we can
create, um, a uniform.
Uh, requirement of support for
this, uh, very much needed, uh,
profession and, and definitely a
profession. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Did
you want to respond at all? I
did, Mr. Chair, if that's OK.
Representative Kate, very
quickly, um, I wanted to share
with you, so thank you so much
for for those guiding words and
I wanted to share with you one
of the most difficult things I
did as a social worker was to do
policy analysis and fiscal
analysis of the impact of loss
of life by suicide. Um, so where
we do not create money, we, we
do impact the economy. Our work
does influence
Impact the economy. We help the
workforce be healthy and to um
to address issues such as
substance use and other pieces.
We also prevent loss of life.
That means these workers are
able to contribute to our
economy across their lifespan.
There are many things that we do
that do influence the economy
and I think, you know, changing
that, shifting that narrative
of, of our work is important.
Um, and, and I will also say
with regard to mentorship, one
of the things the Center for
Excellence and Social Work is
striving to develop as is.
Professional development
institute where professional
mentorship is embedded in in
that work. So this is a growth,
a hope for growth for the
future, uh, and we believe this
is something that will benefit
our existing workforce and also
help to support early career
social workers and being able to
address that burnout
effectively. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Chasey, you're our last
questioner.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and, um, I'm, I'm
really happy to hear this. Uh, I
have been advocating vigorously
for more actual training
programs for social workers in
New Mexico.
Because,
um,
I worked in the field of special
education for many years and we
didn't use the social workers.
Very, um, widely, and they
weren't very available when I
was in the public schools, but
I, when I was at a, um, the
director of a
Uh, a private nonprofit that
eventually became Altamira
specialized family services on
which I co-founded with the
another late, um, director, but
We had a federal grant and we
did a survey.
Oh, no, actually this is when I
was at the university. We did a
survey trying to figure out how
to staff the ancillary services,
the PTs, OTs, SLPs. And we do
have a few of those in our
legislature now, which is
wonderful to have those
providers serving among us, but,
um,
And this was decades ago, but we
got a pretty good response from
rural areas and, and, um,
I, I guess I, I know that, um,
Senator Hickie said, you don't
grow your own, but sometimes
it's good if you can try if, if
you, because there are really
talented people who don't really
want to leave home, but you have
to find a way to train them. Um,
But what we did learn from that
survey, I think the
Only really, um, surprising
thing was it wasn't always
salary.
But what I, what I know having
been a teacher and, and then
look in listening to your
research and working with a lot
of social workers when I
practiced law in the um child
Protective Services system as a
court-appointed attorney.
Every
case that involves a social
worker.
is more successful.
And I, I just thought there and
and then I started realizing
that the public defenders and
the district attorneys want
social workers on their staffs
too, and we need them in the
schools. We need them in the
law. We need them in hospitals
and, and, uh,
I, I honestly think we, we, we
have to recognize that, uh, this
is, this is vital to everyone's
quality of life and community
safety, to be honest, because
when you have a case involving
Vulnerable children and it
resolves successfully, you're,
you're doing.
You're not only just doing a
good thing for people, you're
keeping everybody safer. So, um,
I, I just congratulate you and
I, I, I, whatever I, I'm
retiring, so whatever you can do
to get these people to help you.
No, but I'll be advocating for
social workers always. It's it's
just so helpful. And for those
of you who know Teresa Size.
She's with Rio Rancho Public
Schools. Um, Monica.
Is her niece.
And she texted me and I said,
well, she's very impressive.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative. I
just had two suggestions for
your next, the next study. One
is what Representative Thompson
was getting at is would be
critical. That is how many
social workers have we trained,
licensed, began their careers
and then stopped and got into
selling insurance or, uh, you
know, uh, working in uh uh as a
lifeguard or something else
because they could
that would be the key thing. So
the growing your own is
Right, but if we've already
grown them, let's resurrect them
and get them back into the field
would be another strategy that
that that we might follow. I
don't know how you do that, but
if you could dig it at that,
that would be really helpful
even if they've kept their
license but they're not
practicing, you know, the, the
early retirees or whatever, try
to get them back in, and I agree
with Representative Chasy that
the, the field of social or the
profession of social work is
expanding into all kinds of
fields. When I first came back
from graduate school in 6
There were no school social
workers in New Mexico and now
it's one of the largest areas
that social workers practice in
the public schools and, and, and
that's happening in courts and
corrections now and, and, and
with these public safety aids,
the, the community safety
program largely staffed with
social workers that are going
out and working with the
homeless in the streets. Now
those are largely social
workers, BSWs or MSWs. So it's
an, an aging and and nursing
homes.
Which gets me to my second
recommendation, I think you need
to break out the, the, the, uh,
occupations.
Much more distinctly. I mean, to
lump school social worker in
with child welfare and other
child and family doesn't help
us, it would be really good to
know how many school, how many
social workers are working in
the schools in child welfare
agencies, in private agencies
that are doing counseling with
families, that kind of much more
um refined distinctions would be
really useful in the next study.
But thank you. This is a great
and I think we'll view this as a
jumping off point and look for
more studies from you in the
future. Thank you so much and
thank you all for your
presentation.
With that, members will go now
to the 2nd
panel and our scheduled today,
and that is the topic of
medication assisted treatment.
In correctional facilities and
we have the Secretary of the
Health department here,
secretary of the Corrections
department here, uh, Grace
Phillips from the Association of
Counties and the program manager
from Roosevelt County's
detention center, Chris Paulis
is here.
So we may need more chairs up
there. Secretary Allen's gonna
go first, and we'll do questions
for him separately. OK.
And because Secretary Ellen
Has a hard stop. He has to be,
you have to be, you have to
leave here at 11 or be somewhere
to be in Las Vegas at 2 for a
meeting about helping them
launch a 24 bed crisis response
center which feels really
important at the moment. Yeah,
that's, that would be really
good. Is that the one right
across the street from the state
hospital? perfect.
The, the epidan facility. Yes,
exactly. Epi Duran was my
supervisor when I came back from
graduate school.
um.
Epiapiia Duran got it um so
we're gonna start with him and
then we'll have questions for
him and let him hit the road so
he doesn't have to go too much
over the speed limit to get to
Las Vegas. I'm in my own car, so
that'll help.
I think you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Patrick Allen, Secretary of the
Department of Health. Um, my
part of the presentation today
is give you an update on, uh,
medication-assisted treatment in
public health offices, um, uh,
I'm gonna give you just a little
bit of a quick update on some
background issues. Uh, you've
got a presentation, I think, in
front of you, um, uh, and then
I'll give you the update on
where we're at. Just quickly,
because I think it, it maybe is
sometimes confusing and at least
for people who maybe are
listening, I know you know some
of this, but slide two, just
quickly talks.
About the difference between MAT
and MOUD because we have a
tendency to use those things a
little bit interchangeably and
they're, they're actually
somewhat different medication
assisted treatment is kind of
the broad umbrella that includes
opioid use treatment but also
includes alcohol treatment, um,
uh, tobacco cessation, those
kinds of things and it's
incorporates not just the
medication but other things that
go with treatment, MOUD, which
is what we're offering through,
um, uh, public health offices is
the medication around opioid use
disorder and I'll talk about
those.
Medications and and a little bit
of how that works. I myself
will, will end up using those a
little bit interchangeably too,
uh, but I wanted to make sure
there was a little bit of a
baseline of what what those
terms mean.
Uh, the next slide, slide 3, is
an update of the information I
provided to you back in
November um that our drug
overdose deaths by drug class,
three things I want to make sure
you know about this slide first.
Um, uh, this is preliminary
data. Um my epidemiologists get
itchy every time I tell them I'm
gonna go talk about preliminary
data, what you see shaded is
that preliminary data over the
last two years. That means going
forward, we might add to it, we
might subtract to it, we might
make changes to it as we learn
more, see more.
Certificates, those, those kinds
of things. I think the further
to the right you are, the more
preliminary it is, the further
to the left in that shaded area,
probably pretty solid, but I
want to make sure I get that out
there. Second thing, uh, if you
look at, at, um, uh, areas that
are changing, the one that's
sort of interesting to me down
at the bottom, it's not a huge
change, but you'll see cocaine
rise from, from back in 2019,
uh, uh, to be the, um, uh, the
kind of at the top of the not
myth and not fentanyl category.
Um
The only reason I raised that is
because it was interesting as we
did our wastewater uh drug use
sampling. We would show the
results to school districts and
absolutely to a district the we
would show, well, there's not
that much fentanyl in the
schools, but there's a lot of
cocaine and to a person, the
superintendents will say, well,
that can't be true. Um, and if
you talk to the staff in the
schools that work with kids,
they would say, oh yeah, that's
true. Uh, well, in this, this
data shows that now I don't
think there's a big over overlap
between people dying of cocaine
overdose and the school
population.
I don't want to overinterpret
that, but I just thought it was
interesting that that that that
shows up. The more, the more
relevant piece to today is that
we continue to see what I think
I talked to you about back in
November, which is maybe a
plateau around fentanyl and uh
and meth that you see at the at
the top there, the again,
preliminary data, but it looks
like that's holding. Now, I
don't want to say that's good
news because those are, those
are frightfully high levels of
overdose deaths, but they are
not continuing to go up as they
had been and so if you want, we
can get into some of
What might be going on there.
Uh, next slide just quickly a
rundown on slide 4, of the
numbers we're spending just less
than $5.3 million in this area.
Some of that is general funds,
some of that is opioid
settlement dollars. There's a
1000 tribal set aside that comes
out of that 5. $5.3 million and
I'll talk a little bit about how
that money is landing.
Next slide, just to recap um
where we were back in November,
we talked about a um a fairly
stately rollout of this effort,
um, uh, uh, in terms of
establishing our clinics and
building our capacity and
collaborations and those kinds
of things and, um, you were all
not happy and you were right not
to be happy. Um, uh, uh, uh,
Chera Tipino, Senator Hickey,
others, um, were, were, were
pretty dissatisfied with that
rollout. And so what I want to
do
I update you on where we are on
that today. If you look at slide
7.
On the left hand side, what I
told you in November is that we
had 6 public health offices that
were offering MOUD uh that we
would have 3 more starting in
January and then 6 by July 1st
for a total of 15 offices by
right about now. On the right
hand side where we are today is
we are in 35 offices today. Um,
uh, with 7 more that will start
by the, by the end of this year.
Just a little bit of a level set
because there's, there are a
bunch of numbers kicking around
out there. People talk about
there being 52 public health
offices.
That's 52 places with a sign on
the door that says New Mexico
Department of Health, not
necessarily staffed or able to
accommodate these services. It's
really 42 of those offices, um,
that, that we could do this,
this effort. We're in 35 of
those 42 offices right now, um,
uh, and, and so we're able to
accept and see patients in those
offices and will be at the other
7 that we're able to be in by
the end of the year. So if you
look at slide 8, you'll see just
kind of what that looks like
geographically on the left hand
side, the
Darker colored counties were the
ones that we were in in
November. Um, the, the, the
three,
kind of medium shaded counties
where we were going and and then
where we thought we would be in
on the right-hand side, you can
see where we are now, which is
almost statewide. Uh, there are
a couple of those counties that
don't have a public health
office at all. Um, uh, uh, but I
think I think we heard you and
you were right to be unhappy
with that pace and so we have
significantly increased that
rollout and, and uh and our our
Pretty close to statewide as we
sit right now. The next slide
just lets you know exactly where
those offices are, um, uh, and
so you can see we're in a, a
huge variety of communities,
urban areas, rural areas, areas
that are in between, uh, areas
that are in tribal serving
communities. I think we've tried
to do a good job of making sure
the breadth of those, uh, of
those offices really tries to
capture the need. We've also
worked with the Department of
Corrections in terms of
identifying where are they, uh,
where are they releasing people
so that we know that we're able
to to
Catch people as they're coming
and maintain continuity, uh,
continuity of treatment. The
next slide just gives you a
sense of where we are from a
tribal standpoint. We're in 33
pueblos that are called out
there Santo Domingo Tao and uh
and Akama, and then a 4th, uh,
tribal serving organization, uh,
the Changing Women Initiative
were in active conversations at
Tesuke and Mescalero right now.
This is an area where there's
more demand and we could
certainly use more resource in
terms of
of tribal set aside dollars to
be able to continue to expand
there.
The next slide gives you the,
uh, a sense of uh patients that
are being treated, um, we've
increased that number by about
25% since May. That's still not
a huge number. Uh, this is going
to be an area where you've, I'm
sure heard kind of the notion
of, of economically a hockey
stick, where you go along for a
while increasing fairly slowly
and then you hit an inflection
point and, and you take off and
the nature of this work is
really, um, it, it's not so much
we're going to put up billboards
and, and, uh, and handbills.
It's, it's a lot of hard work on
the ground.
With the the people who are
working with the populations
that we're trying to get at for
these services, and it takes a
while to build the trust and
build the relationships and
begin to build those referrals.
And so I would say we're still
on the flat part of that hockey
stick, but I think we're now
with that 25% increase since
May, beginning to head toward
that inflection point and should
be able to see those numbers,
um, increased, increased
rapidly. Are those daily? That's
that's the total patient under
care right now. So there's a,
there's a cumulative number
that's larger.
Than this, obviously, but
that's, that's who we're serving
at at each of the points in time
along the, along the chart.
Um,
Uh, just a quick next slide just
quickly talks about the
relationship of um uh of MAT
MOUD to harm reduction. Of
course we have, we have one of
the oldest harm reduction
programs in the country. I think
one of the things we know now is
that when people are seeking
harm reduction, that's a, that's
a, that's a point of, um of
teachable moment comes to mind
that sounds a little weird as I
say it, but, uh, it's a, it's a
point where people are receptive
to uh to looking at treatment
and recovery. And so we're
linking those programs
together,
uh, and the on the right hand
side you can see the partners
that we work with in uh in harm
reduction who are now partners
that can be uh inbound referral
sources for, um, for, uh, for
treatment. On the next slide,
we've uh we've done a couple of
things now, uh, uh, on the
right-hand side, we've, we've
set up a landing page. This is
not so much oriented toward
people who are seeking
treatment. This is really
oriented toward our partners to
provide one-stop shopping for
information that they need and
connections to to treatment.
On the left-hand side, um, our
helpline now, uh, is, uh, is
able to take inbound calls
someone talks with a nurse is
able to have a preliminary
conversation, not quite to the
level of screening for services,
but then get matched up with an
actual public health office or
other provider who's able to, to
initiate services for them.
Uh, the next slide just gives
you just a quick rundown of
things I know you already know,
um, around the, the stages of
care screening intake,
induction, stabilization, which
is really titrating someone's uh
dosage to manage their to manage
their cravings, uh, and then
maintenance for ongoing, uh, for
ongoing therapy. Next slide, uh
just uh very briefly, the two
lines of products that we're
offering through public health
offices, buprenorphine and
naltrexone. Um, uh, um.
The, you know, kind of the
standard of care is be on the
left-hand side, um, but we're
also, uh, supporting naltrexone.
That's a preferred method of
delivery in a correctional
setting due to its its
injectable nature, um, uh, and,
and the Secretary can talk more
about that if you're interested,
but we're able to support both,
uh, and accommodate people who
are coming out on either and uh
uh and that's available through
our public, through our public
health offices.
Uh, next slide just quickly runs
through um our collaborations. I
don't want to talk about each
and every item there, but I do
want to talk about EMS on the
left hand side. We, we have been
working for the past several
months with uh EMS providers in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, um,
on, on what's called
pre-hospital buprenorphine or,
or curbside MAT if you will, the
idea that when, when EMTs show
up and revive you with naloxone,
um, that's a, that's a a moment
to begin induction into
medication assisted treat.
MOUD. There's a pilot project
that's now up and running in
Santa Fe, and we think we're
fairly close in Albuquerque to
to beginning to do that and so
we work with, what's the handoff
once they've done that, once
they hand off to a public health
office or other provider who can
maintain who can maintain that
treatment going forward.
Almost done just last couple of
things, um, we're now rolling
out, um, uh, public education
and outreach, uh, slides 17, uh,
uh, it gives you just a little
bit of an overview of of what
we're trying to do in terms of
of website video, digital media,
print media, those kinds of
things. And, and again, we, we
have to segment a little bit.
There's a wide range of people
that are in the target market
for this population, some of
whom are, are amenable to
catching messages through mass
communic.
some of whom aren't, and so
we're we're trying to use a
variety of channels and a and a
variety of of means to be able
to uh to do that, um, and, and
that'll be the kind of thing
that we'll continue to
collaborate or excuse me, to
calibrate over time as we go
forward. Slide 18 just kind of
gives you a rundown. We're
spending about $150,000 on that
campaign. Right now we're down
for 3 to 4 weeks. We're gonna,
we're gonna assess at that point
and see going forward, um, how
do we want to adjust.
what other resources might we
want to be able to put to that.
Um,
Last slide in in my portion, um,
a big piece of, of this round of
effort is around data gathering
and evaluation that's not
historically been done well in
this area. And so there are a
bunch of questions I'm sure you
have where the answer I'm going
to have sitting here today is I,
I don't, I don't know for sure.
Uh, so we have built that data
gathering in and periodic
evaluation going forward to be
able to answer those questions
better. Uh, as I mentioned
before, we expect to expand to
42 public health offices by the
end of the year, the last 7.
Um, we're looking at a couple,
um, a couple of, of things that
we think can help. I talked
about our, our, our nurse
hotline, uh, for linking people
to services. We're looking at
can we actually initiate
prescriptions through our nurse
hotline. Someone calls and says,
I want to get, I want to get
treatment. Can we do a bridge to
get them, uh, get them right
then and then get them to a
public health office or other
provider for, uh, longer term,
uh, uh, for longer term
assistance. That's pretty
complicated.
and involves some things that we
don't currently have like a
medical director for our
helpline and those sorts of
things, so that's not something
that I can, I can say, yeah,
we're doing it and we're going
to have it up in 30 days. It's
something that we're trying to
figure out. Does it make sense
and can we do it and what would
it take for us to do similarly,
um, uh, the, the helpline, uh,
being able to provide behavioral
health support. Right now the
helpline calls are answered by
public health nurses. Could we
have a licensed clinical social
workers, could we have
behavioral treatment providers
of other sorts who are also
answering those calls.
And there's, there's a lot of,
uh a lot of overlap with things
like 988 and and a bunch of
other things that again, this is
not something that we're on the,
uh, you know, on the verge of
doing, it's something that we
think we may have a role to play
that can be helpful, but we have
some work to do to figure that
out.
With that, I know I covered a
million things and talked really
fast, but I'd be happy to answer
any questions you might have,
and I've got some colleagues
here, Doctor Jose Costar, public
health director, Dr. Miranda
Durham, our chief medical
officer Josh Slok from our, um,
uh, harm reduction program, uh,
uh, who can either bail me out
if I get in trouble or answer
questions if I have to leave
before you have them.
Very
Very good. Thank you. uh,
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Secretary Allen. I
really appreciate this. It's
great information. I hope this
is a
A Simple question, but and and
maybe you've laid it out here.
It seems like we're on the right
track for some of our immediate
needs.
What do you need the most? Do
you need money, more workers,
um,
More locations and I mean, if we
had, you know, if we do this as
an emergency, how, how quickly
could this be implemented if the
2025 session addresses your
needs.
Yeah, thanks, Mr. Chair.
Representative, great, great
question. Um, I think, I think,
I think more money probably, um,
there's a super technical issue
having to do with the language
in House Bill 2 around this that
was awfully narrow to actual
treatment and, and it doesn't
provide a lot of round
treatment. Um, and, and we, we
had some back and forth with LFC
during session about could they
broaden that language a little
bit that would be helpful. More
money certainly for tribal
initiatives. I think
would be would be extremely
helpful. And then to what you've
all been talking about today and
yesterday and we seem like we've
all been talking about forever
is is the whole workforce issue
and the compensation issues.
Senator Hickey, I think, really
hit the nail on the head. We're
all really used to talking about
we need to be competitive, we
need to provide competitive
compensation, and that's whether
it's, it's, it's outside
healthcare providers or it's our
own employees. Um, and in the,
in the, in the current national
and global environment, we got
to be more than competitive and
so whether it's
Arguing with CMS about, you
know, what, what rates they're
willing to provide or arguing
with with LFC about what wages
we need for behavioral health
techs at BHI or those kinds of
things. Honestly,
representative, probably the,
the, the biggest thing is if the
folks around this table who
really understand these issues
could go talk to the folks
around the tables where I have
to go get money and make sure
they understand those issues,
that would be really helpful.
Mr. Chairman, that makes it
really even more imperative for
this committee to have the staff
at LFC and, and I know we have
the FTE but we don't have the
actual people and um it, it
would be nice to have, I want to
make sure that that message gets
to LFC because that just makes
us all smarter and, and, you
know, when you're just a
part-time volunteer legislator,
we're not as as smart as we need
to be with on return on
investment and so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
Nathan is here, so we have, we
have uh one.
A warm body, but we also have
people listening in at LFC. We
get texts from them. um
Representative Chavez, do you
have any questions? I just, just
a couple, and I'm looking at the
slide that talks about your um
harm rejection partners. Um, is
there
They're mostly located.
Well, they're not located all
over the state, so I guess
what's the plan in each county,
so, um, are you planning to
expand those as well.
Um, yeah, Mr. Chair,
Representative, that that list
of partners is a kind of a
constantly shifting list. There
are more or less at different
times and we're always
interested in working with
additional partners. They come
and go and so and so we're
absolutely working on trying to
trying to expand the reach of
those programs. And then my
other question is, and you may
not know this, this, um, the
answer to this question, but I
know that Albuquerque Healthcare
for the homeless does street
outreach, right? Do the
Others, do you know? Do they
also do street outreach, the
other um uh partners that are
listed here. If you wouldn't
mind, Mr. Chair Representative,
if I could have Josh Swatk come
up and help answer that
question. He's much more
familiar with that program than
uh than I am.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. Yeah, they
absolutely do do street
outreach. Um, some of it is very
sophisticated health care for
the homeless is one of our
partners. Um, some of it is very
unsophisticated. It's a couple
of people going out in a car
with a bag of supplies, um, and
a piece of paper, right? So we
have a wide variety that's
tailored to what the community
needs. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the, you gave us a lot.
So my first question is on your
helpline and I'm not saying
these are bankers' hours, but
these are not and I know funding
is a part of it, but is there
any research that shows that
these are the times people are
most likely to call and what
would we have to do to go 24
hours, 24/7. Yeah, thanks,
Chair and Representative, that's
a, that's a great question, um,
I think we've worked hard over
time to expand those to you
know, 13.
Hours on weekdays and some
pretty significant weekend
hours. But we do a lot of things
with that line, um, a Hunta
virus questions, vampire
facials, COVID questions still
vaccinations, those kinds of
things, and so we're a little
bit trying to figure out how we
calibrate the staffing to, to,
you know, maximize or, or, um,
be efficient with that use. I
don't think that there is great
research on this population,
particularly in terms of when,
uh when uh when call volume is.
Driven, but that's something
that we certainly can and need
to take a look at and we've now
got some experience with things
like 988 where I think we've got
a base of data that we can go to
to look at that and so we
certainly can. OK, thank you for
that. And then my other question
is, um,
Following Representative Chavez,
Albuquerque ACS Albuquerque
Community Services isn't, I
mean, that's an Albuquerque, of
course, is the biggest city and
it has there been discussion
with working with them is that
in the works is that, is there a
problem? Yeah, no, Mr. Chair
Representative, we had a, we had
a big meeting with the city of
Albuquerque, uh, time flies when
you're having fun, 6 or 8 months
ago that was ACS and the fire
department and the ambulance
service and and
That's where that EMS project
really came out of was that
broad conversation working with
all those partners across the
city. OK, thank you. I'd like if
you could keep us updated on how
that's going. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Secretary. um, is there
anyone here today who can answer
some medical rehab questions
about fentanyl?
Yeah, sure, I would invite Dr.
Durham to come up and see what
we can do.
Thank you.
My understanding is that
fentanyl is exploding in the
state in terms of its use. My
understanding, haven't practiced
in 15 years, but my
understanding is that fentanyl
is uh the
Uh, the bane of all existence
because it, it dulls so much the
judgmental center in the, in the
frontal lobe that I'm
understanding you need almost 6
months of just kind of.
Getting back to Earth before you
can actually do any interdiction
like we would do with other
rehab, uh, am I exaggerating
that?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I, I think you are right. It
really has.
It's made treatment more
difficult, um.
And I think it's also pushed us
all to, um, look at
Different models, how we dose
Suboxone is different, um, and I
think it is one of the issue,
you know, with the Department of
Health, we're lucky we do have
two, facilities that do
inpatient detox and so we are
also able to use that resource,
um, not everywhere, but, you
know, starting to connect that
into our system of care.
So even before we might approach
with medical therapy, we've got
this waiting period for, as I
say, uh, for them to
Actually, where, whereas an
alcoholic, uh, uh, you might be
able to lose some drugs, but
certainly just rehab, you can
begin right after detox, which
is only a matter of days, but
quote detox here is a matter of
months.
Um,
Mr.
Chair, representative, um, I, I
think again, there's lots of
different models and in some
ways, I think it's made us more
tolerant, so people will come in
and you can still get someone
started on Suboxone in an
outpatient setting, but you
probably are going to have to be
a little more patient, um, you
know, 10 years ago, it was like
you have to have all clean
urines. You have to be in
counseling, you have to, you
have to, you have to, and now
it's a little more, you know,
you're gonna
come in and you're going to work
with us and we know this is
going to be a struggle, um, but
we will get you started again.
There's sort of two different
models for prescribing Suboxone,
but you still can do it as an
outpatient.
With some sort of housing.
I mean that I mean doing stuff
as an outpatient alone is
worthless. Yeah, and I think, I
mean, one of the things until
they're grounded in the program
and one thing to remember, I, I
think is we often talk about um
the population that needs
housing, but there are lots of
people struggling with
addiction, as you well know, you
know, that are housed and I
think some of that, um, when
we're, when we're talking about
our campaign trying to get that
message.
The, um, to
To everyone who's struggling
that um outpatient treatments
available. OK, um, uh, is there
medical again. Any indication
that GOP ones, uh, which impact
the craving pathway and is being
investigated for alcohol abuse
that it may have a role, um.
And uh
Opioid and fentanyl, um,
And there was one well,
let me just yeah,
Mr.
Chair, representative, um, I, I
think it is really, I mean,
these medications are
amazingerging research. I don't
think it's solid yet, but there
is some indication that it, um,
decreases, uh, alcohol is the,
the literature I know, um, but
yes, I think it is.
It, it's fascinating these drugs
and it's too bad they're so
expensive Mr. Chairman, I'm just
trying to give us all a little
hope here for the future, um,
and, uh, psiloiddin, uh, which
is, which is effective in PTSD
and so forth. And I know that
we're looking forward to the
white paper on silicide and from
the Department of Health that we
met about a month ago in Santa
Fe and was commissioned, um, but
is there any role for
psiloiddin.
Uh, just in preliminary
literature.
I
Yeah, I think um
At UNM they specifically did
studies looking at um alcohol
use disorder and psilocybin, but
yes, I think it, it's coming but
for the opioid fentanyl, uh,
epidemic and, you know, and
maybe methamphetamine, which is
pretty much hopeless,
um, maybe we'll discover your
time is way up. Thank you.
I didn't realize we were on
time. My apologies,
Representative Kates, thank you,
Chair, and thank you, thank you
very much for your presentation.
Uh, thank you, Secretary. I am a
very, uh, appreciative of your
transparency and your details on
this of
of, of the, uh, especially on
slides 89, where you're saying,
well, here, here are numbers,
but this is what is actually
happening in these numbers. I
appreciate that. Um, I, I want
to talk to you about a couple.
Things. One is I see that you
are providing the mat, uh, by
county services in Sandoval, and
they're in Los Alamos in Cuba,
is, are, are we talking about
providing in Rio Rancho, I know
that you have several locations
in Bernlio but not in Rio
Rancho. It's just a highly
populated 112,000 people plus
another 8 in Corrali and there
doesn't seem to be any current
site, at least
this map, are you working
towards that or have you not
identified or is, are you not
getting the data from there to
say that it's needed there.
Yeah, if if the chair I'll
indulge, I'll call my third of
my 3 friends that I brought with
me, uh, Doctor Acosta, uh, from
the Public Health division to
talk about the next 7 offices
and where we have our public
health offices and how they
match up with that question.
Thank you so much and thank you,
chair, just because my time
won't run out, then I'm gonna
with my doctor because this gets
set up. My next question will be
about.
Tribal territories as well and
um and and I understand, you
know, sovereign nations it's uh
we have to find out whether or
not they, they want these
services, um, and I do see that
at least 3 of the tribal
territories we're in right now,
which are areas that have
casinos that serve alcohol on
the floor. So I hope that that
it might be a a a mirror or a
map for the other locations in
tribal territories because
there's a lot here that
obviously.
You mentioned you're underserved
in the tribal territories, and
it's probably a longer
identification process. Um, uh,
and so, but I would just, uh,
I'd like to see it, uh, follow,
uh, where, where we're having
other substances involved in
that. I'm sorry, Doctor Acosta.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Representative Kates, nice to
see you. Um, I, I, I have here
the list of offices. I mean we
go by region, so we have the
Northwest region and we have
Bernal Leo, um.
And then we have in Sandoval
County we have in in uh an
Italia street. We also have in
Cuba, um, and then in the
Northwest still pending another
uh uh public health office in
Bernallio and then in Torrance.
And and maybe let me add to that
just a little bit,
you said there's one on Idelia,
I in
in Rio Rancho, OK, you just
don't have a little green dot
here on that, that's all.
OK.
Yeah, that means we're not
there, we're not there yet, but
they're they're up and coming,
you know, you've identified
spots there that you are on the
list on I idea. That's great.
Thank you. I think Josh says
they are there.
Are they
No, the, the, the dot may not be
exactly placed,
so apologize.
but it's right, it's 1500
Italia. They're open 8 to 5, um,
Monday through Friday from from
uh from my helpersp there that
it's in the judicial complex
which actually raises an
interesting one. Well, it raises
an interesting point that you
all should be aware of. The, the
way state law works is counties
are responsible for providing us
a location for public health
offices.
And because county offices are
what county offices are. We
often find ourselves in the
parking lot of the district
attorney's office or at a
sheriff substation or in this
case in the justice center. And
you can imagine for some of
these kinds of services, that's
a little challenging. So that's
something that we do, we do
constantly need to work through.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, it
is not on a bus line, um, but it
is a central county location,
and I, and you're right, it's
near the sheriff's training
facility and the courts, but
it's also
Your WI and income support, so I
understand where why it would be
appropriate at that time.
Thanks.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I
have one.
Question, do you track the
success rate of the MAT program?
Uh, I think I might call back
to, uh, uh, Doctor Durham to
help me out with that.
Uh, in general, before she gets
up here, in general, I would say
that is the one I talked about
evaluation and the things where
there are questions that I might
not be able to answer for you
right now, but that are now
built into and funded with the
money that we're using now. I
suspect that may be one of them,
but I'll turn it to Doctor
Durham.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair, sorry, I
don't know who Representative
Martinez. Representative
Martinez, um,
So it, it, um, we are, we have,
um, someone funded by vital
strategies that will be um doing
the evaluation and so we're sort
of setting up that program now.
Right now it's really been about
getting it up off the ground.
Um, and we want to look at, we
also have our Epi department
that is going to be doing some,
um, especially around the
collaboration with corrections,
um, there's an incarcerated
populations Eppies that are
gonna be taking an active role
in in that.
Evaluation.
Could I ask you to repeat your
question? Was it are you
tracking the success rate, the
success rate of the map program
as the success rate. I'm sorry,
then, yeah, and, and we are
looking at different, um,
metrics. So, you know, one that
the the beginning metric here is
just how many patients are
coming, but I think the
interesting questions of
retention and care, how quick it
is to get a prescription like
from the time you call to when
you can walk out, you know, get
your prescription from the
pharm.
Um,
and then there are some
interesting metrics around just
what the clients themselves
consider success for them, um,
so anyway, we're, we're kind of
looking at the literature on
that and figuring out a set of
metrics that um will be able to
start.
Looking at that are a little
more sophisticated than what
we've got now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, you
bring up a good point.
Success rate to what I would
consider success.
is probably very different than
than what success is to somebody
in the program, and I, I hadn't
really thought about that.
Um, but that's, that's very
interesting. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Vincent, do you
have any questions? Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, uh, thank you,
Secretary Allen, for your
presentation. One question I had
is on your collaborations on
page 16.
The EMS working on pre
pre-hospitalburenorphine.
Does that mean, um, that drug
will be added to the scope?
Of pre, uh,
EMS and will it be limited to
paramedics or will it go all the
way down? How does that look?
Yeah, I might again rely on Dr.
Durham since she's been involved
in that program.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative Vincent, thank
you for the question. Um, the,
uh, it is a special skills that
the each EMS unit has to apply
for it, so Santa Fe was the
first one in our state, followed
by, um, a combination of Bern
Leo and Albuquerque working
together. Um, so it's
potentially and, and.
So it's potentially a slow
rollout in that each, um, unit
has to, has to do that
application. Um, I do believe
it's at the paramedic level now,
uh, but I, you know, that could
change. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and will it be, will it
be an injectable? Will it be a
patch? So the injectable's very
expensive, um, so not, they're
not starting with the
injectable. It really is going
to be, so the, the issue is you
throw.
Someone into withdrawal, which
does save their life, but feels
terrible. And then you want to,
um, instead of having someone
potentially seek the drugs to
get rid of the withdrawal. You
want to give the Suboxone, which
is a safer drug, and then
potentially, you know, a good
experience with Suboxone that
might, um, encourage people to
continue to get treatment. So
right now they're looking at the
strips um to carry on the rigs,
but I think the injectable is a
really
Interesting
Possibility.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
finally, so.
Depending on what the call
volume is, is it worth having
the the drug can, can, well,
what I'm saying is, can EMS can
the departments afford to have
it on there without it expiring.
And um how does that look? I'll
I'll go ahead and tackle that
one. I think we've we've been
talking about volume issues, but
it's actually been the exact
opposite problem. Do we have
enough crews that can respond to
these circumstances and stay
long enough to more than just
revive somebody, but then, but
then administer. I, I don't
think anyone's talking about
this is going to be so rare that
drugs are going to expire out,
yeah, I mean in a rural
community that could be a
challenge that would have to be
managed.
Thank you. And working with the
EMS, Mr. Chair, working with the
EMS folks, are they, do they
seem like they wanna do it?
I do absolutely Mr.
Chair, Representative,
especially in Albuquerque, I
mean, we just, um, were at a
meeting with them yesterday and
you know, a, a huge percentage
of the calls they get, they're
not all overdoses but are
substance use related and so I
think they really do feel like
trying to, to intervene in a
different way is um.
It's important, yeah. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent, and thank you for the
presentation. I had a couple of
questions of my own.
One very first point that you
made about the distinction
between medication assisted
treatment and medication for
opioid use disorder.
Um,
so at the county health offices,
you're using MOUD.
No counseling or any kind of
other therapy being offered or
suggestions for other ways of
dealing with it.
Yeah, so, uh, Mr. Sher, the, I
think you hit it on the, on the
your very last point. No, we're
not offering those other
comprehensive services in public
health offices, but part of the
program is building out the
network of what else happens,
what are the other referrals,
what are the other connections
and those kinds of things. There
is enough of an evidence base,
as I understand it, for MOUD
standalone that we, we think
it's we shouldn't stand around
and wait for the network to be
built out to to do what we're
doing now, but that is part of
that is part of a more
comprehensive.
Approach it's just not actually
delivered by public health staff
in the public health office.
And when we, when we first
found out about the public
health officers.
plans to offer MOUD around the
state that seemed to be the the
solution for the county jails
issue of how do they possibly
going to provide uh
But we were calling MAT at the
time to to people who are
inmates when in that county
there might be no existing uh uh
MOUD programs available. But
when the county offices were
identified, so is that how it's
playing out? Are you really the,
the provider of last resort in
those counties where there's no
other jail uh
resource available. Mr. Chair, I
would not try to characterize us
as the solution, but I think the
ideas for us to be a solution or
a part of the solution, and
yeah, uh, we offer safety net
service and so if someone's not
able to, uh, to afford
treatment, doesn't have
insurance, those kinds of
things, we are the, uh, we are
able to provide treatment, um,
without cost and, and be that
safety net.
And, and one last question then
the, the urban areas have a
number of existing uh methadone
and Suboxone providers. Are you
getting any static from them
that
you're cutting into their market
or anything of the sort? Mr.
Chair, no. I'm getting a little
static from my own staff
pointing that very thing out and
um and uh I think we're working
on the fact that there's plenty
of work for all of us to do and
that we've got
A role to play and can play that
role, but, you know, I do think
that probably the numbers will
be a little bit
disproportionate. You wouldn't
see as many patients in our
urban public health offices
because there are choices of
other of other providers.
Well, excellent. I really thank
you and I know you've got to hit
the road now. But uh it is 11,
so we'll we'll let you, we'll
let you get to Las Vegas in
time. Thank you very much. Thank
you. And now we'll go do we want
to go to you next, Madam
Secretary? Do you have a hard,
hard,
OK, you're just next on the, on
the.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you.
I, uh, do not have a PowerPoint
presentation, but I do have
people with me and, uh,
fortunately, I, I think I have
uh, also the, uh, gentleman who
runs the behavioral health
collaborative here in the
audience. Mr. Nick Bukis and my
own staff members. I have my
medical service administrator,
and they will be available to
answer questions, although it
looks like the health people
just said they were, they were
done after, after their portion
was completed. Um, so,
I really want to thank, uh, Pat
Allen and his, his team, their
work has been so incredible and
has has gotten things done in
the community so fast that it
has been able to alleviate some
of those fears that we talked
about the last time that we
presented to you. Um, and then
also, of course, uh, just, uh,
uh, also to thank Ms. Phillips
with the County Association,
because you'll see shortly here,
but they've done an awful lot of
work with county jails to make
sure that they're offering
services in key locations.
So when we last presented to
this committee, the rules had
not been established and a go
live had not yet been sent. And
since that time, we've been
working with the healthcare
authority. They are, they are
the lead agency, as you know, of
course, on the proposed rules
that were sent out to the for
public comment.
The public comment took place.
They were heard. We've been
working together with HCA DOH,
and our agency to finalize the
rules and to take into account
all of those, um, comments that
were made by the public to make
sure that the rules.
We prepared for, um, use of MAT
and MOUD in correctional
settings was universal and, uh,
of course the counties were
participating in that process as
well, giving public comment and
all of that took place over the
last few months. So even though
the rules hadn't been finalized
yet, and I believe that they
still have not yet been, that
hasn't stopped the work that
we've been doing internally to
prepare and make sure that we're
ready to move forward when that
publishing date does occur. So,
As, as I'm sure this committee
knows in 2023 through Senate
Bill 425, which of course was
championed by you, Mr. Chair,
um, that one requires that the
corrections department establish
and operate a Medicaid-assisted
treatment program to continue
treatment for people who are
incarcerated beginning at the
end of next year, so that date
would be December 31st of 2025
and with the promulgation of
those rules, we will be able to
begin these services well more
than a year in advance.
of what we're required to do so
by law.
So I'll tell you a little bit
about what our department does
right now and then I'll talk a
little bit about what we will be
doing and then some of the
things that we've done to
prepare as well. So right now,
our department, and, and we've
been doing it for a while now,
for for years. In fact, we've
been providing Medicaid for
opioid use disorder to pregnant
and lactating women. And through
this process we've gained a lot
of experience on how to work
with this medication, how to
work with it in our populations.
We've been very successful in
treating mothers with opioid use
disorders.
And ensuring their health and
the health of their babies.
And then also for more than a
year, our department has been
operating a pilot program for
individuals diagnosed with
opioid use disorder at the
Western New Mexico Correctional
Facility in Grants which houses
both
Options. And additionally, in,
uh, upon release when people are
are leaving our facilities, all
of our facilities, they do
receive medication that prevents
overdose and then in our field
services offices, probation and
parole across the state, 46
district offices. We're working
right now with the Department of
Health, their, their public
health offices as well as a
variety of providers that we
contract with to provide these
services and other substance use
disorder services across the
state.
Through probation and parole for
people that are on supervision.
Uh, so a little bit about what
we've done to prepare. Last year
in May, um, 2023, our department
was selected as one of 5 states
to participate in SASA's policy
administration or policy academy
rather, on advancing medication
for opioid use disorder in state
prisons. That selection
invitation outlined the
importance of assembling a
comprehensive team consisting of
correctional leadership,
healthcare representatives and
the state opioid Treatment
Authority, as well as other
critical
partners for the success of
implementation. Participating in
this academy has given our team
invaluable resources and has
allowed us to create important
connections with other
correctional systems that are
working towards implementation.
Part of our work with SASA
involves them providing to us
technical assistance, learning
materials, resources for our
staff, and then also ongoing
communication to ensure best
practices as we move through
implementation and beyond that
point. A big part
Of the project has been focusing
on re-entry planning, mental
health focused needs of our
population, uh, helping us
figure out how to deal with the
managing of the administrative
processes and integrating
medical service provision along
with the safety and security
needs of the populations that we
serve.
Now, identifying the influx of
patients will be complicated.
To estimate the number of uh
individuals in our system that
may need treatment. What we did
was we conducted a file audit of
all the medical files around our
state. And you may know, but we
have not fully gone live with
our um electronic health record
yet so this took a lot of effort
by our medical staff across the
state. We are, we are live with
the EHR for a female population,
but our male population will be
going live with the HR in
September. So we wanted to make
sure that we have those numbers
and, um, so we did the old
fashioned file.
audit to figure it out. And we
determined that about 36% of the
people that are incarcerated in
New Mexico Corrections
Department facilities have some
level of a diagnosed opioid use
disorder.
36, Mr. Chair. So this year, uh,
this year we will begin to
provide Medicaid, um, medication
for opioid use disorder to all
incoming inmates who have been
diagnosed as requiring such
treatment.
The MOUD treatment.
Our expectation is that we're
going to serve about 720 people
in the first year and, um, we
estimate that approximately 2300
people may be eligible for this
treatment as we move forward in
working with our partners in
other states though we think
that this number might be fairly
low. What, what they've seen and
what they've told us is that as
they have been able to expand
the medication offerings and the
types of medications that they
offer to their populations.
That they've seen a larger
percentage of their populations
come forward and say that they
have a substance use disorder or
that they were struggling with
opioid use disorder. And so what
they've told us is that the
numbers that they had initially
anticipated serving, uh, it's
been quite a bit higher than
what they expected and so we
will take that into account as
we move forward and seek funding
for expansion. So, um, to fund
the expansion, we are going to
seek additional dollars to be
appropriated for services from
The opioid settlement fund. Uh,
the cost will be varied as of
course, on these factors as to
how many participants we will
end up serving, um, but also
other factors like staffing and
the combination of the various
treatment options that we use
and some of that was talked
about by the folks from the, uh,
Department of Health. So I will
say your support in the coming
legislative session. Those of
you who are not retiring anyhow,
uh, that it would be, it would
be very critical.
for us to ensure that we're able
to expand services to all of the
folks that might need those
services. And you know, we do
know that there is substantial
funding in the opioid settlement
fund and we hope that we'll be
able to serve all of the
populations in our custody that
need that service.
Do you have any idea how much
you're gonna need?
You know, we're ballparking
numbers, but right now we have
that $1000 from the opioid
settlement fund, had been
appropriated the year
previously. We used a portion of
it, DOH reimbursed us for that,
so we have the full amount to
use this year. That much money
we do think we'll be able to get
us through the fiscal year since
we'll be treating only the
people that were receiving, uh,
but moving forward, we are
anticipating much higher
numbers. I'm not 100% sure what
that looks like yet.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, one of the
concerns, as I mentioned, um,
when we first talked to you was
to begin the program without the
ability to send people out into
communities where services were
available. We, we talked about
this last time at length and we
were very worried that when we
sent people out into
communities.
Oh, that's you.
OK, Mr. Chair, uh, sorry about
that interruption, but what we
were very worried that when we
sent people out into communities
if we put them on the medication
while they were in our custody,
and then we would be releasing
them into communities where they
were hundreds of miles away from
services, telehealth wasn't
available or local doctors
weren't prescribing it. We were
saying we need to put the brakes
on. But in working with the
Department of Health and the
Healthcare Authority, we've all
gotten together and said we need
to figure out how we're going to
do this and how we can do this
in a way that's not only respon
for our incarcerated
populations, but for the people
that live in the communities
where these folks are going to
go and we were worried that we
would be sending people out with
uh a dependency on a medication
and then they wouldn't be able
to receive those um services. I
just want to say again, I mean
really outstanding incredible
work done by the health
department and by the healthcare
authority, and, and we've been
working in partnership
throughout this process, but
it's now possible for us to
begin the program with the
confidence of knowing that
We release people, they will
have access to these services in
their own communities and um so
as we move forward through
implementation, we have the
support now of the expertise
from states that have done this.
Um, we're able to avoid their
pitfalls, the things that
they've experienced that didn't
go so well. And then we're also
able to learn from and duplicate
the successes while working to
make sure that our programs meet
the needs of New Mexicans and
not
throughout their incarceration,
but more importantly, really
when they're released out into
those communities and to ensure
that they can stay successful,
uh, so with that, Mr. Chair,
thank you. I will stand for
questions. I don't have anywhere
to go. I can wait until these
folks present whatever your
preference, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, let's do that, uh, Madam
Secretary, if it's all right
with you, we'll we'll hold the
questions until after all three
of our presenters. So Grace, do
you go next or does Chris?
OK.
You have a handout from Grace,
the medication assisted
treatment in county detention
facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and good
morning members of the
committee. I'm Grace Phillips. I
work for the New Mexico
Association of Counties and I'm
really delighted to be here. I
was super excited to see the
secretary's PowerPoint and to
see um the expansion of MOUD
services in, um, so many
district offices. Um, we
periodically, um,
Survey our counties for data and
I can tell you that 20 of 25 of
our detention facilities have
current relationships with their
local health office, mostly
that's around STD testing,
education, vaccination, I think
there's an incredible
opportunity here, um, to, to
address, um, the need to
transition people and continued
care in the community that has
been a real challenge for and
when you hear from Chris Paulis
writer, she can talk about it in
more detail, but it's a
challenge to, to, um, engaging
people in treatment when they're
in jail if when they go into the
into the community, they can't
access treatment. The other
thing I was really excited to
hear was the, the updated
timeline for corrections being
able to accept folks and
continue their care. That has
been a huge challenge for
counties as well. And, um, and
I'm also excited to be in this
part of the state because when I
think about the history, well,
for one, it gives us.
The opportunity to have
Roosevelt County right here,
which I'm, I'm really proud of
what this county has done with
the help of, of the rise folks
and other people, certainly, um,
I think when we collaborate
state and counties, the, um, the
outcomes are just better and the
efficiencies are better and we,
you know, we do really good
work, um,
but when I think about how long
my organization has been working
with counties on, um, the
importance of
medication-assisted.
Treatment and the correctional
setting. Um, it was, I think
back to 2019 when Next door in
Curry County, we had a big
workshop, invited the folks from
Rhode Island who were then a
little bit newer on the path and
um, and since then we've
certainly had, um,
Lots of training for our county
members and our detention
administrators. We've benefited
greatly from the generosity of,
of, um, the doctors in the
addiction program at UNM. Dr.
Snehal Batt has done full day
workshops for us. Um, we also,
um, very grateful to Dr. Nate
Birnbaum, who some of you know
well, um, and I'll I'll say a
little bit more about him as we
go forward. So Grace, can you
move the mic right up closer to
you to to your it'll pick it up
a lot better.
A little better. OK, thank you.
So turning to my handout, um, I
didn't want to, um, shout out
the, the rise program, that is
something that I think the money
goes to the health care
authority, formerly HSD, but we
have currently 14 counties that
have been awarded, um, grants
under that program to provide
behavioral health services. It's
not Matt specific. In fact, only
for the counties use those funds
for Matt type services.
Roosevelt County, um, and is
the, the principal example of
that, but, um, but the fact that
there are 14 counties that are
getting not just money but
technical assistance from the
very, very good people, um, I, I
have to, uh, compliment Anita
Mesa and Tamara Espinoza. They
have been, um, just real
champions. So it's not just
money, it's money plus technical
assistance and um someday I
would love to showcase what all
of these counties are doing with
that.
Um,
something that we have done to
push the ball forward as an
organization. I think some of
you may be aware that in 2009 we
created an accreditation program
for our adult detention, uh,
standards. We use it, um, as,
um, as a way and, and the
detention administrators wanted
it. They, they said, help us,
you know, advocate for
ourselves. We should have
standards, and that program is
very rigorous currently we have
8 counties who are accredited.
But we, um, the, the governance
council actually I'm no longer
on it, um, did update the
detention accreditation
standards in three ways to
ensure that if you are an
accredited facility in the state
that, um, that
medication-assisted detox is
provided and that medication
assisted, um, medication for
opioid use disorder that that
folks who are being booked into
our jails are being evaluated,
and if they qualify, um, for
that kind of.
Care they're getting it. I think
that is one way, um, very
effective way for us to
institutionalize the expectation
and to show that again an
accredited facility is meeting
those standards. Um, something
else we've done, this was also
in collaboration with the
Department of Health a couple of
years ago, um, on the heels of
the state requirement that
counties provide Narcan to
people who have been diagnosed
with an opioid use disorder.
Um, we do that in collaboration
with the Department of Health
that provides the Narcan kits
and so in a detention facility
and some facilities offer it to
everybody, you know, they don't,
you don't have to qualify for
it. Um, but as part of that
program, um, the facilities were
supposed to to provide
education. So we, um, produced a
video, um, actually more than
one, there's a juvenile one and
there's an adult one. I'd
encourage you there it's
actually, uh, I think they're
excellent.
Videos they feature, um,
detainees and, um, people in the
community whose lives have been
affected by opioid use disorder
and um.
Part of the the what happens
when people go to detention
facilities is hopefully they see
this video, it teaches them how
to save lives and the message is
really you can save a life, and
here's how to use Narcan, um,
but I'm, I'm very pleased with
that work. Again, that was, that
was something that the
Department of Health, um, funded
several years ago.
The newest thing that we're
doing, um, looking now to pages
2 and 3, I know this is a
committee that's well familiar
with Project Echo. Um, we now
have a New Mexico detention
facility medical provider, Echo.
Uh, we kicked it off on July
12th, um, the program is
designed to engage, um, medical
people and in my vision, I want
everybody who's in the medical,
um, services and every one of
our detention facilities.
To participate in this, what we
were hearing from our detention
administrators was, you're
telling us all this stuff about
medication-assisted treatment
and our medical providers are
saying now, like, you know,
there's problems with that. And
there really was a disconnect
between what we were learning
from the addiction experts at
UNMH and what we were hearing
from the, the medical providers
in our detention facilities and
so although.
The great majority of people
providing medical services in
our detention facilities, our
contract. They're on contract.
They're a private contractor
that is, um, that the, the
county contracts with, I think,
kind of like the state does, um,
to provide those services, we
decided that we really needed to
bring the information to that
population. And so, like I said,
we, it's just started a very
basic session initially a more
sophisticated session the next
time, um, we
Have, uh, so far, um, 59 active
participants, um, the one of the
cool things about Project Echo
is they keep data, um, you can
see on page 3 the courses that
are, that are, um,
You know, in the curriculum that
was developed for this, very
grateful to the medical
professionals and staff at
Project Echo for, for doing
this, um, we're not paying them.
We're, we're collaborating with
them and they have uh expended
an incredible amount of time and
expertise and, um, and, um,
enthusiasm, I think, to reach
this new category of medical
providers, um, the, I, I, we've
only had
2 sessions and you can kind of
see the data on the bottom. This
was notable to me that even
though the target audience is
medical providers, we have a lot
of a detention administrators
who are signing on to these
sessions because they continue
to be interested in really
understanding how this works,
um, we are going to be able to
um evaluate the participation
levels of our various medical
providers and I'm really
interested in that too. I think
this is super important.
And it's an opportunity for, um,
for people to get free CMEs.
That's the other thing that
these courses qualify for. And
so, um, I'll report more on that
someday, but I'm just excited to
say we've, we've started it, um.
Turning to page 4, just some
data we recently collected from
counties I thought you might be
interested in 20 of 25 have an
electronic medical record. I
think there's an opportunity
there. I'd like to get to 25 of
25. I know the state is making
that transition, but I do think
if we were all on an electronic
medical record, there would be
some, some opportunity for um
streamlining, you know, sharing
of really critical information
that needs to happen, um.
I asked them how many of them in
their contracts require their
contractors to comply with the
accreditation standards. Um, I
think that's really important.
Our accreditation standards are
a way to put out a lot of
requirements that might be
difficult to do, um, in a, in a
RFP, um, and I think, frankly,
there's an opportunity for us to
do better there to, to put it in
all of, all of our county
contracts. Um, I already
mentioned that, uh, 22 actually
of our
Uh, detention facilities have
active collaboration with their
local health office. Um, all of
them provide for Narcan
distribution, um, 18 report
providing Suboxone, um,
currently, um, one on site that
would be Bernalio County for
many years now and and 3 others
provide methadone. The, the
other three are doing that
through local clinics and I
guess one thing I did hear today
was that the the.
Health offices are providing
MOUD but not methadone. That,
that is a that that is an, let's
call it an opportunity to to do
better. It's it's a challenge
for our counties because some
counties don't have methadone
clinics in it, in them. Um, it
would be wonderful if that was
a, a medication that was made
available at some point. I know
they're doing great work, but I
just think we always have to
look at what the next step is,
but it's also, um, it's also a
challenge for us in our
detention facility.
to make that available and, um,
I have been persuaded that it is
an important medication option.
If it can be done. Um,
Only one county reports billing
Medicaid for MOUD medication. I
think there's an opportunity
there and if I can catch Nick
before he leaves because I know,
I, I know that we're joined in
the goal. He's still, yeah, um,
I, I wanna, I wanna do that
because I think um we do need to
tap in. We have a new Medicaid
waiver, um, and we need to tap
in the state and, and counties
for how we can best use that
resource. Nick Bucas is not he's
He agrees with you.
Yeah definitely.
Don't let him get away get away.
I want to say hi to all of you,
but I definitely don't want to
lose him. So, um, so that's, you
know, again, an opportunity. And
then the last thing I really
want to talk about is something
you've probably heard me talk
about before, and that is the
incredible cost to counties to
run detention facilities. And,
um, on page 4,
we're, we're not, we haven't got
our current uh, the fiscal year
that just ended that data
complete, but a year ago, um, in
20.
3 counties spent 336.8 million
on the 25 jails that we operate.
Um, the expectation that that
was that that would be over 380
million this year. I'll report
when I get that number, um,
that's continues to be about 1
out of every 3 general fund
dollars. So you think of all the
things that we need to do for
our communities, jails occupy a
very large chunk of that and the
state contributes very, very.
Very little.
When you think about detention
and the cost of detention, um,
the state does not pay for
counties to house individuals
who are arrested by state
police. The state has a legal
obligation. The Court of Appeals
we actually sued, um, Secretary,
uh,
Well before you, I can't
remember his name.
Before Mercantile, uh, Williams.
Um, and, uh, the Court of
Appeals said, you know, when
the, when the county's house
people who are released on
parole. They're still in state
custody and they're picked up
the the
The state has an obligation to
pay for that, whether they've
Appropriated money or not,
right? This has been, and if you
look at the graph, the state
contributed, um, last year 4.6
million to housing, um, on the,
on page 5, the graph shows you
the difference between what the
Sentencing Commission calculates
the cost to be and what the
state has appropriated. And just
for the last 5 years, um,
There's a huge gap over
26.5 million shortfall in just
the last 5 years.
We're going to ask you again.
Next year to please pay for that
cost, um, and, uh, you know, I
would like you to pay the full
cost, but, um, I think what
we're going to look at again is
a five year average since it
does fluctuate, but 8.2 million
is going to be the ask, um, it's
really
It's at a certain point it's on
us. Do we sue the state to
collect it, or do, do, does the
state just appropriate it? But
it is a tremendous burden on
local government. It is a
service and, um, we would really
like the state to appropriate
the money that's owed.
That's the that's just for
parole violation. It's actually
it's 3 categories. It's someone
who's on parole, someone who's
on parole and probation
combined, and somebody who's
sentenced to state prison but
hasn't been transferred.
on the list. Yeah, um, so what,
what could you do? Well, we'd
really like you to, you know,
fully fund the inmate
reimbursement fund, um,
We'd like you to expand rise
funding, or at least maintain
it. I think that's wonderful.
Again, the money doesn't come
directly to us, it goes to HSD
or the Healthcare Authority now,
um, but it's, I think, been a
gem of a program, um, we do need
help accessing Medicaid funds
and it's, you know, it's the
help's already been offered, but
we still, we need to get to the
table and do that. And then the
last um suggestion that I was
asked to raise was, um, allowing
people in recovery to work in
healthcare.
Professions that, you know,
everybody observes that we are a
state that doesn't have enough
healthcare providers and, um,
this is not my area of
expertise, but something that's
been raised with me is if
somebody's in recovery or
somebody's, you know, completed,
are we tapping into a resource
of a workforce resource for
people who could be very
valuable and so that
You are excellent. OK,
excellent.
That's. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Grace. Oh, go ahead
and I just want to introduce
Chris because she's delighted to
be here.
I told her you guys are real
nice and not to worry about it,
but she's um she um, she has
been the director of the MAT
program and it is a map program.
It's not just medication, um,
they do, she'll tell you all
about it at the Roosevelt County
Detention Facility, which is a
small facility, um, but for
since the beginning, have you
been there? Yeah, and, um,
Andrea, I don't know if it's
teed up, but the county created
for us, um, to help educate
other uh
um,
Counties, a very, very short
video that features a couple
people who are in their program
that we wanted to show you, um,
I don't think the video part is
available, but the audio might
be.
Is, is it?
OK, so maybe if you wouldn't
mind, we could listen to that
and then um Chris will tell you
about the program. Thank you.
My name's uh uh
Uh
Nice to meet you, Mr. Luce. to
meet you. Can you tell me a
little bit about yourself?
There.
I'm.
T.
Your graphs would have been
totally blown out of the water
by the governor's special
session request incidentally.
Because all those people that
were being mandated treatment
would have been sitting in jail
until there was treatment
available.
Of which there is none.
51 year old.
And 6,
OK.
Uh
Mr. Chair, I think we can
arrange to have the video sent
to the committee.
Thank you. Although this has
been really
That's very good. All right. So
Chris, go ahead.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Chris Paulis, as
Grace said, and I am a licensed
clinical social worker who works
as the medication assisted
treatment program manager at the
Roosevelt County Detention
Center.
How's that?
OK, so I'm just gonna give you a
brief snapshot of our program.
Um, our program works with
detainees to address substance
use disorders by providing a
holistic approach to recovery.
So we're talking about that, um,
the program offers individual
and group counseling. We have
peer support services, we have a
peer support worker that is
funded um through RS as well.
We have life skills, mindfulness
training, exercise, art
activities, yoga, meditation,
and we also have recovery groups
like AA and NA within the
facility as well as smart
recovery and celerate recovery.
Uh, we also have the opportunity
for participants to get their
GED and parenting classes. Uh,
we've had two successfully
obtain their GEDs while they
were incarcerated within the
facility.
Many of our participants are
able to obtain their New Mexico
food handler's certificate,
which allows them to go out into
the community and work in some
sort of a food service industry,
um, upon release, they develop
skills in gardening and yard
work and um we're a little
different because ours have the
opportunity to learn to care for
chickens, so.
They're getting some hands on
skills.
Participants are assisted in
obtaining documents such as IDs
and birth certificates during
their incarceration, and when
they leave, they can receive
ongoing case management services
through myself and the peer
support worker, and they can
also continue counseling
services with us for up to 6
months, um, once they're
released. Individual discharge
plans are super important and
they're developed for everyone
to assist with warm handoffs to
services and providers within
the community upon re-entry.
So our program officially
launched in the fall of 21, and
it was initially funded by two
grants. The first one was the
federal sore grant, the state
opioid response and the second
one was the state's reach
intervene, support, and engage,
which is the rice grant. And
right now rise is our sole
funding source.
So, as Miss Phillips said, it's
really important that we
continue to be able to fund the
grant because that's what funds
our programs.
And since our program started in
September of 21, we've had 80
male participants, 67 of them
were unduplicated, so 13 had
come back and re-entered the
program and 44 females, 37 of
those were unduplicated. So of
the males, 36 were released to
the community, and 11 have since
been re-arrested with new
charges. So we do have a 31%
recidivism rate, but we have a
69% of people that have not come
back as far as our males.
Um, of the females, 23 were
released to the community, and 8
have been re-arrested. So 35 of
our 35% of our females have come
back, but 65% have not.
Our program, um, as you know,
there's 3 FDA approved
medications used to treat opioid
dis opioid use disorder, those
being methadone, buprenorphine,
and naltrexone.
Our program offers the pill form
of buprenorphine, and we also
offer naltrexone within the
facility.
Uh, those are both a tablet
form, however, with naltrexone
when people are getting ready to
release to the community, we do
have the ability to give them
the injectable naltrexone, which
gives them basically a safety
net for 28 days. So it gives
them a little bit longer time to
get in with the community
provider.
Um, the number of Munt
participants who have been on
buprenorphine since the program
began is 32.
And the number of Munt
participants who've been on
naltrexone tablets is 94 of
those 9 have received the
injection prior to release.
We also have people in there and
we use the same distinction that
other people have used between
Matt and Mood. Um, we have
people with medications that
they come into the facility
with. And so when we talk about
mood, we use that as a
standalone. It doesn't include
the counseling and education
piece and the behavioral health
services that our MAT program
does.
So within our facility, 7
detainees have received mood
buprenorphine. I'm sorry, 7 have
received naltrexone and 10 have
received buprenorphine. So
typically in those cases, those
are people that come in, they're
on medication in the community
and we continue those
prescriptions while they're in
the facility, but they don't
tend to stay long enough to
engage in the services. So we're
just maintaining continuity of
care while they're within the
facility and then they get
referred right back to their
community provider upon release.
The most common misperception,
um, about this type of program
is that using that medications
is using one substance to treat
another. So you're switching
from one drug to another. Uh,
the fact is that MA medications
bridge the biological and
behavioral components of
addiction
and MAT programs are effective
when they're combined with the
comprehensive individual
treatment. So that's why we come
from the holistic approach.
We're treating the whole person.
We're looking at all of the, the
biological.
and the social needs as well.
And these are used to reduce the
risk of relapse and promote
long-term recovery.
So with our program challenges
of primarily been in the area of
discharge. Um, 31 of our 104
participants were sentenced to
prison.
And of those two are on
medications that they had to be
tapered off prior to their
release.
Um, 16 appropriate candidates
were never started
because they we knew going in
that they had the potential to
go to prison, so we give them
the opportunity to make a
decision as to whether or not
they want to be on this
medication, knowing that if they
get sentenced to DOC, they're
going to have to come off. So
58% of those sentenced to the
Department of Corrections were
unable to receive medication
that they needed to address
their substance use disorder.
Additionally, we had 4 patients
who had to be tapered off to go
to a court-ordered rehab because
a lot of the rehab facilities at
this point still do not allow
that medications.
So you're sending people to a 28
day or a 60 day or a 90 day
rehab and then they're coming
back home without the
medications that they need
because they weren't allowed to
have those while they were in
the program.
Um, for patients returning to
the community, challenges are
varied, but they include things
like limited community programs
and providers. I know we are all
beating this horse of we need
resources in the community, and
we do, um, we have to be able to
provide for continuity of care.
There's places that MOUD is
being offered. I know Department
of Health is going to be a
wonderful resource, but they
don't have the counseling
component.
So you have to look at the whole
package to increase
effectiveness of treatment. Um,
the DEX waiver was a big reason
why a lot of providers didn't
want to do the ma medications.
That's no longer an obstacle,
but there's still a lot of
primary care providers that are
not open to providing these
medications.
Um, I've had a couple of
conversations with two different
doctors' offices between Curry
and Roosevelt County and two of
them have said, we don't want
those type of people in our
office.
So stigma is still real. It's a
big thing and it's a challenge
to people with substance use
disorders, um.
And the last challenges we have
again are lack of affordable
housing and minimal employers
being willing to hire employees
who are involved with the
criminal justice system or who
have substance use disorders. So
when we're talking about funding
needs and needs within our
communities, we need places for
people to go when they get out.
We don't have transitional
living. We don't have recovery
services like that here, um, and
it's hard to be successful when
you, you know, it's sad that you
go to jail to get your life
together, and then you released
to the community and
If you don't have family
support, you don't have someone
in your corner, you're likely to
come back to us pretty quickly.
So I encourage you if you look
at the video when if when it's
sent to you, both of those
gentlemen on the video, um, had
family support to go home to. So
one of them is off probation. I
talked to probation yesterday.
One of them is off probation,
the other one still has 4.5
years of probation to do, but he
hasn't had any problems since
he's got out of detention.
But that would be a really a
high potential for a different
story if they didn't have the
support of their family coming
back into the community. So for
those that don't have those, we
have to come together and find a
way to develop that.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, Chris. It's
really an impressive program,
uh, very, very glad to hear
about it. Um, let's go to the
committee for questions. We'll
start over there with the
Representative Vincent this time
will come around.
Counterclockwise. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I guess my question
would go to Grace.
Um,
I know that my county suffers
for the, the facility that we
have there and they, they pay
out a lot of money and I'm just,
this is more of a comment than
anything, but with everything
that has happened in Redoso
Lincoln County, uh, Mescalero,
we have a lot of project work
and back in the early 90s, there
was a facility at Fort Stanton,
and we used to teach the inmates
how to fight fire and we would
put them on.
Jet cruise.
And with what's going on now in
Ridoso, Lincoln County, Oarroll
County, there's lots of project
work and I'm just wondering if
we could put project crews
together.
And I remember back in the early
90s, a lot of the inmates wanted
to get out and they wanted to go
to work. And if we could put 25
person crews together.
What I was what I was thinking
is we could teach them.
For example, give them a um a
saw class, teach them how to run
a crew and whenever they get
out.
Of being incarcerated, then, you
know, they would have the
ability to start uh a crew and
you know, they could start their
own business cause there's no
shortage of work for the next 3
to 5 years on the rehab that's
going on in Lincoln County and I
was just wondering, is that,
would that be doable?
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, Vincent, I think that's a
great idea, um, and the, you
know, because having work for
people is key to their success.
There's a my daughter actually
works for a national
organization that that's focus
is, um, training.
Placement and ongoing mentorship
for people leaving prison, um,
and it, it is a better fit for
prison because um when
somebody's, uh, in the custody
of the corrections department,
they're going to be there for at
least a year. And so you can do
training. jails are trickier
because we don't know how long
people are going to be there and
a lot of people are only around
for a few days, but when I hear
you talk about, um, you know,
project, you know, doing
training, that's also another
activity.
that someone can do while
they're in custody, um, which is
a useful thing. So I, um, I
think it's trickier with the
jail population, but um, I would
encourage and maybe we can talk
offline a conversation with the
um administrators in Lincoln
County and um Otaro County
specifically to see if they they
could identify enough people to
enroll in that kind of program
because some people do stay in
for a long time. It's just you
don't know who they are, what
their interests are.
Let's, let's hear from the
corrections secretary about that
too. Thank you, Mr.
Chapresentative Vincent, yeah,
as you were, uh, as you were
speaking, I was thinking, uh, we
have a level 2 facility in
Roswell and right now we are,
uh, I mean, we make just a
tremendous amount of sandbags to
be sent over to the Riodoso area
in light of all of the flooding
that's been happening and so
we've been working with the
National Guard. They bring us
the equipment, and the sand, we
fill up the, the bags, then they
deliver them into the community.
But at level 2,
population is allowed to leave
the fence, not necessarily all
of them, but certainly a portion
of them, and I do think, as
Grace mentioned, because our
populations do tend to stay with
us a little while, um, that that
would be a great thing. Maybe we
can talk about that and figure
out a way to do it between us
and uh and the county.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I know
my buzzer just went off just one
little final comment.
If we teach them meaningful
jobs.
To show them how to make money.
When they get out, they hit the
road running. I think that that
would be one of the best things
to keep the recidivism down and
and I'm just saying Sauls and,
and rehab work as one thing,
there's plenty of other things
that we could do.
Mr. Char if I may just real
quick in the Roswell facility we
have the CDL program, and he
just got the news yesterday. It
was so, I mean, it's exciting
because we've been doing it, but
we had our first person graduate
this week. We have 3 scheduled
to go to MVD to get the to take
the test.
MVD and then get their license.
And then we have 2 more that
completed the program, but they
released. And so now we're
working with their uh their
people out there to get them
appointments at MVD. So CDLs,
can you imagine in Roswell? So
it's very exciting. We do have a
lot of that work going on, so we
should talk more offline. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. It's always good
to hear something positive.
I absolutely agree. Uh, also,
the Fort Stanton facility, is
that still in the state's
authority?
who, who, who owns it now? Who
is he given to? Healing
America's heroes is out there
now.
The whole facility, not the
whole facility, but the back
part where they had the minimal
security at.
Inmates down there if we're
cultural affairs or something or
like a museum, living museum or
something, or what do they do
with the rest? All the old uh uh
uh parade grounds and all of
that. A lot of the buildings
really aren't not in use. And I
think a lot of the paranormal
people like to go out there
because it's supposedly haunted.
I don't go out there after dark,
so I wouldn't know.
Uh
Well, all right, uh,
Representative Martinez, do you
have a question?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
Horrified at the amount of money
that the counties are losing.
To the state
Is there a trigger?
Or is it just if state police
arrest somebody or is there?
364 days, the state now owes.
How, how does that work?
So for arrestees, there's never
a trigger that would require the
state to pay counties. So, so
the graph that I showed you,
these are simply people who are
in state custody because they've
been sentenced but are sitting
in a county jail. This doesn't
include, um, although I can show
you those graphs to the the the
proportion of people who are in
jail who have been arrested by
state police. So what I think of
is our, our customers, um.
And it frankly, it doesn't show
who's been arrested by cities
and cities, uh, pay even less or
or a comparable amount and they
frankly generate the majority of
people who sit in county jail.
Are you, Mr. Chair, um, and who,
who would owe this money?
Is it Department of Corrections?
Is it?
DPS
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
for purposes of the inmate
reimbursement fund and that,
that actually just for
additional context, that fund
was created the session
following the Court of Appeals
decision saying you, you have to
do this. Um, the bills would go
to the Department of
Corrections, but since the,
since the fund was created, we
have, um.
You know, been getting um
distributions directly from the
state, um, there is the
opportunity to build, um,
corrections for the difference,
and I don't think very many
counties do that, but, um, but
the numbers are calculated by
the New Mexico Sentencing
Commission based on a single day
census, so June 30th of every
year, they look at how many
people are in county custody
that fall into these buckets
parole.
Doual sentenced and, and based
on that they extrapolate the
amount.
O.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Secretary, is it, is it an
additional
Um, appropriation to you that's
needed to.
To take care of this?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, well, so when we get
bills from the county, we
obviously look into them and and
uh and we, we pay those bills,
right? So I mean additional
appropriations never hurt, of
course, but um like as, as Grace
mentioned, there is that, uh,
that reimbursement fund that
they, they use. I think what the
big issue has been is that the
counties don't use the same
accounting systems and so
they'll send us bills for
people. We look in our system,
they're not our people. They,
they don't make sense like.
As an example, there's people
that are on different types of
supervision through different
areas and then we might get
bills for people like that or we
get billed for double triple
days for the same person. And so
there's been those type of like
accounting issues that we've
been dealing with with some of
the counties. We, of course, are
in communication with um with,
with Grace about that and we are
always looking for ways to
untangle it. Um, but the way
that we're viewing that is like
the the categories that were
mentioned, anybody on parole, we
will absolutely pay that bill.
we get the bill, that's a person
that we, we will certainly pay
the bill for, um, unless the
person is incarcerated in jail
for committing a new crime.
Because then in that situation
they're not there as a parole
violator, they're there as a
person who's committing an
offense in the community, um,
in, in cases where it's
possible, we encourage the
counties to send people on
parole who are being arrested
for parole violations to us
right away and we will deal with
all of that stuff so that they
don't even have to hold them in
their area and that would go.
As well for the people that you
mentioned that were on dual
supervision, um, but there are a
lot of people that are on
probation, which is not
something that we would pay for,
and I believe that that is what
you think that maybe uh should
be counted there, but I'm not,
I'm not 100%.
So you're not OK, so, um, just,
just to be clear, like we
absolutely will pay the bills of
any of our people who are on a
probation or a parole violation,
uh, as long as it's not somebody
who's being arrested for a new
crime. So it's just a matter of,
I think untangling the billing
and then at that point we could
figure out would that be an
appropriation to us, to the
counties, and, and I think we
could probably untangle it like
that.
Representative, we, we at the
state, we don't refer to that as
money the county's losing we we
referred to it as help the
county is offering to the
cash-strapped state.
But, but as it turns out, we've
got so much more cash than the
counties do that it doesn't make
any sense for us to be chiseling
them like this. So I think
you're absolutely right, we need
to, and that would be something
that we could recommend to the
LFC that they fill up that fund.
I mean we got the money.
Yeah.
Yeah, Representative Chasey, you
have a comment on that the LFC
has been looking at this for a
long time because it's, it's
related to the recommendations
of the LFC for us to do
probation parole reform.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. If, if
possible, I'd like to maybe.
Set up a meeting
Uh, between the three of us,
cause I'd like to figure out how
to take care of this because.
I hear from my county also, so.
You know, if we could set
something up, um.
I'd appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Representative Kate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you again for your presentation.
I, uh, I wholeheartedly um
support the comments of my
colleagues earlier, and yes, I
would like to be a part of that
conversation as well, even
something is basically because
is understanding how are you
training the, the, the, what
kind of technical assistance and
training are you providing for
the counties to make sure that
their billing is accurate. So
once we know what their billing
is accurate, we'll know what
they're asked.
needs to be to be able to fill
that uh those gaps, um,
uh, I want to.
Um, I wanted to go back to um
just to sitting out in the
universe. Um, uh, I, we heard
from several comments about, you
know, individuals who are coming
out of corrections and what kind
of services such as employment
training and placement, um,
apprenticeships, uh, earn. I, I,
I too share uh my colleague
representative uh Vincent's
feeling that, you know, that,
that hope is the great uh mental
health.
Um, support, and I can't think
of um more hope or independence
than uh employment. Um, I have
an employment background where
I've trained individuals with
disabilities and for many years
they were individuals who were
coming out of corrections, both
male and female.
And do employment placements and
training, um, so back then, and
I don't know if anybody's old
enough on the panel to know, um,
DVR was instrumental in this
state, which is not anymore.
So, um, DVR was a state agency
that actually was robustly
funded and provided anywhere
from 30 days to 6 months worth
of paid training. That's where
our individuals at a corrections
were getting CDL license, um,
and other types of training that
um I know that I was personally
providing for individuals so
that they can reintegrate, um,
uh, so how
Are you just completely relying
on the nonprofits in the area to
be able to provide these
services of employment and the
relationships building with
private employers to be if
you're not using the full if
you're not using DVR.
All right. um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Cates, I'll speak
for the corrections department,
um, so no, we, we don't rely on
just volunteers and we have a
re-entry division within our
agency and in that area, we
contract with private um
entities, and we've also been
able to expand by.
Getting uh the it it took a
minute, but to get to hire
people on a part-time basis. So
what you find in like a small
community is that there might be
a person who wants to come and
teach automotive or whatever the
subject matter is, but they work
and they don't want to come and
and change their life and and do
a different job. So what we're
able to do now is hire those
people on a part-time basis to
come into our facility, um,
after hours or whatever flexible
schedule works for their life
and then provide those types of
trainings in our facilities, so
we're doing a lot.
to work with, um, the Department
of Workforce Solutions in Wyoa
and those areas to get funding
to pay for those types of
resources. Uh, so like that's
part of what we're able to do
the CDL program in Roswell. We
have heavy equipment, um,
operation, certifications taking
place in Las Cruces, and
Springer, and uh the
penitentiary in Santa Fe, where
regulation licensing won't come
out and they'll do the testing
before a person gets out so they
can get a real, a real cert
before they leave. We do
welding.
Uh, in Las Cruces in Roswell.
So we have a lot of different
vocational programs and a lot of
it has been funded through those
federal partnerships, but
through our work with the
Department of, um, of, uh,
workforce solutions. We are
aware of the DVR resource
though, and I, I agree with you
very much. It's certainly
underutilized. It's, it's
definitely not being used in the
same way that it once was, but
um our probation and parole
officers are making referrals. I
don't know that we're doing as
much follow through as we should
be. And
I will definitely take that
comment moving forward and and
use it when we're talking with
our probation officers about
those resources that exist in
the community. Thank you. I know
my time is out. I have one quick
comment, I promise, is, uh,
there was a comment here of
asking for the state to consider
that uh opening employment up
for individuals uh who were
receiving treatment, I think it
was receiving treatment and
Healthcare professionals. So I
am not aware of any barrier to
people getting treatment, um,
in, in any kind of profession,
um, it is people who've
committed crimes that are have
the barrier for some
professions. I will say for um
the Department of Health, it
used to be you couldn't contract
for any kind of services with
the elderly or the disabled, the
vulnerable.
Um, if you had a DWI, and I do
believe in the last maybe 7
years, they, they have a time
period now. So it used to be any
DUI you got ever and now it's
like in the last 10 years or 7
years, something like that, but
um I will see that that is the
barrier. It's not the treatment.
So thank you.
I think for nursing and medicine
there is a a a procedure they
have to go through the, they
apply to the medical board or to
the nursing board.
For a special, uh,
Treatment protocol and they have
a place they send them to and
then if they complete the
treatment, they can come and
reapply, but then they do it
under. So there are some
protocols in place, not
barriers, but protocols they
have to follow in order to get
re-licensed.
Uh, Senator Hickey.
Representative Chasey, let's go
this back this way.
Representative Chasey.
Uh, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, and I, I won't
take too long, but, um, I wanted
to, I couldn't find this quote,
but I have, I've written it down
somewhere and it's probably in
my car. There was an addiction
psychiatrist I read about, uh,
in the New York Times, uh, from
San Francisco, and she said the
most powerful prescription she
could ever give um a person
who's addicted is a home.
A place to to live. So, um, it
really resonated with me when
you were talking about Roosevelt
County and, and the people
you're working with. So, I mean,
that's something we really need
to keep in mind as we're, we're
striving to deal with our, our
various crises. Um,
I know that um my concern, and
I'm glad Representative Martinez
raised it, is also for the
counties bearing the cost of, of
housing state prisoners, and I
know nobody wants to do a
better, well, it's not that you
don't want to do a better job of
it, it's just like an
overwhelming challenge for the
counties and um for the whole
state to have a data system
where people are entering the
data we're in real time, the
state gets billed for these
prisoners.
So that they show up.
the county start collecting. I
mean, that's gonna, we, we had a
long presentation about the
intricacies of, of the um
All of the needs of the um
evaluation and data systems of
the state and, and, uh, in this
committee and it, it would be no
small challenge, but it would
be.
Ultimately, I think it would pay
off and it would certainly show
us what the true cost is of not
reforming probation parole, and
I'm so disappointed that our
bill, uh, Senator O'Neill's bill
that, then I had had to debate
on the floor of the House for 3
hours, um, was vetoed because
this is something that we've
been working on really for a
very, very long time. And a lot
of it has come to our attention
through the LFC reports. So, uh,
we're we're
I, I, I'm sure that as I pass
the torch that others will be
interested in this, but, but we
do need to make sure the
counties are getting what they
need. And, um,
One of the things I would
encourage us to try to collect
the data on because the more we
can be scientific in our
approach to crime and safety is
to keep data on for those who
are engaging in medication
assisted treatment or the, the
other one, is it, is it called
MOU?
All right, so, but see, I think
that is a memorandum of
understanding, so I get, um,
is to keep data on whether they
any of those folks are
re-engaging.
And um illegal activity because
that provides another index of
how successful we are. And uh
that's it. I don't have
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chavez. Thank
you. um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, um, on the
Handout from uh Roosevelt
County. Um, there's on the at
the at the end of the first page
and you talked about this a
little bit in terms of, um,
having to taper off the
medication for those who are
going to be entering the, um, I
guess the state pen.
Um, I remember us having this
conversation last year and there
was a question about when um
corrections was actually going
to start a program in the state
pen. What's the
Where's the progress on that?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez, yeah, so that's what we
were going over today when I was
talking about the promulgation
of the rules with the healthcare
authority. So they were the lead
agency in going through the
process of establishing rules in
order for the process of the
treatment to be provided in
state correctional institutions.
And so, um, I spoke with Mr.
Bucas a little earlier and he
tells me that the date that the
rules will be published formally
is August 13th of uh of this
year and I haven't seen the
final
rules yet. So I, but I think
that what they do is they
provide a 90 day window from
time of publishing to, uh, time
of implementation, but we will
be able to move forward before
that 90 day period is up, so we,
we do expect to be live with,
uh, the services by somewhere in
the last quarter of this year,
but towards the, the, the early
part of the quarter. So this
year.
OK. All right, it's, it's just
taken a really long time, I
think.
Um, and then my other question
has to do with um the medication
assisted treatment in county
detention facilities, um, I, my
question is specific to the
youth in custody. Are they also
receiving these services?
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
my understanding is that in
Bernalio County, yes, although
they run into some of the same
um obstacles if a youth is going
to be transitioned to the
Custody of the Children, Youth
and Families Department. In
other words, go into the deep
end, you know, if they're
sentenced, that their medication
is not, would not be continued
by the um in the state facility
for sentenced youth. They also
have issues with um, um, going
into treatment in the community
and I think
Mr. Chair, you had a bill last
year that would have required
community providers to
essentially accept youth who
were in treatment into their
programs, um.
But that didn't happen.
It, it would have made it.
Illegal for a treatment
organization to say
We provide treatment for
substance abuse, but you cannot
use Suboxone to come here. You
can,
you, we only treat you with uh
with uh not illegal, I can't, we
can't make it illegal, but, but
you couldn't receive medi uh
Medicaid funding payment,
reimbursement. Uh if you had a
rule that said, but we're a
drug-free, totally drug free,
including Suboxone or methadone,
and that bill didn't pass, but I
would hope somebody would pick
it up this year. Dr. Byrne.
I was the one that brought that
to me last year again, and we
tried, uh, I think there's a
good, a good case that could be
made for it on the same grounds
that that we we're doing it with
adults. I mean just because
you're under 18 doesn't mean.
You can't have the same problem.
And, and Mr. Chair, just to
complete the answer, there are 4
juvenile detention facilities in
the state, um, Donana County and
Lee County report that it would
be available to a youth. I mean
duringana County's been doing
MOUD for years, um, there San
Juan County reported that they
had not had the experience of a
youth, um, on, um, medication
for opioid use disorder, but
they are actively participating.
And all the education that
we're, that we're providing on
that. The other issue, the other
obstacle with youth, um, I'm
told his parents, parental, um,
consent that some parents are
not um supportive of this form
of treatment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sounds
like we have a lot of work to
do.
Representative Thompson, thank
you, uh, Representative Chavis,
we always have a lot of work to
do.
It just piles deeper and deeper.
So first off, I want to say,
Madam Secretary, we are asking
that folks bring us something on
paper. It's really hard to
listen and to try and remember
the important facts, so just for
future reference and anybody
else who's listening, um, it's,
it, it makes a lot more sense.
We can take it home, we can
digest it, we can work on
questions, so I'm asking folks
to please provide some sort of,
uh, it doesn't have to be a
PowerPoint, but whatever you
decided
And then, um.
So Madam Secretary, did you say
that if they come in without a
diagnosis of substance use, they
cannot get a diagnosis while in
your custody.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Thompson, that will be the case
when in the beginning with
implementation, yes. Um, so
looking at Senate Bill 425,
there is a requirement that we
are able to provide to the
entire population. I believe the
year after and I have the bill
with me, but um, what we'll do
is, is we'll work through the
process, see what it looks like,
you know, as we move forward,
we'll have to figure out which
facilities we're able to offer
it at uh.
levels and all of the various
things that go in that are part
of the conversation when you're
figuring out where to house a
person, but as we're able to
expand, as we're able to receive
the funding that we need to
support purchasing the
medication, expanding our
medical services, uh, offerings,
nurses and the various things
that you need and behavioral
health services, then we'll be
able to expand treatment to the
wider population, but in the
beginning, yes, it's correct
that we will only be providing a
continuum of care for people.
are currently receiving
medication for opioid use
disorder. That's really
disappointing, Mr. Chair. Um, I
mean, maybe this is when they,
you know, hit rock bottom when
they get incarcerated, that's
the time to approach them about
medication MOUD or MAT and to
lose that window, it really
seems very counterintuitive and
very counterproductive, so and
as Representative Chavez says
this has been going, we have
been.
asking for this for years and
the slowness is, is, um, getting
beyond ridiculous. So I'm just
throwing that out there, um, and
then, um, Chris and Roosevelt,
thank you so much for being
here. We aren't scary for the
most part, um, and I'm impressed
with what you all are doing and,
and maybe you need to have a a a
group, uh, an echo project, uh,
about what you're doing and have
other folks, uh, you know, I
mean, I can't
I imagine anything more
depressing than sitting in a
jail cell or, uh, you know,
with nothing to look forward to,
nothing, you know, so thank you
for what you're doing and then
um I'm again I'm really
disappointed that we are
tapering people off something
that's working for them. To me
that feels like cruel and
unusual punishment, that we get
them started, they're doing
well, and we say, oh, you can't
have it at the next place.
Sorry, you're SOL. That, that
does not work for me.
And um we need to do so as, as
Representative Chavez said,
We have a lot of work to do and
this is one area that I think we
need to really push hard on and
not take excuses anymore. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
just had a couple of quick
things. First, uh uh that Samsa
training sounds terrific. I'm
really glad that the staff is
going through. Are you finding
that your staff
are resistant to the idea of
starting this program that had
always been one of my fears that
no matter how committed you
might personally be to, to the
idea of offering Matt in the
prisons that that there would be
a resistance from because we run
into that from.
Well, physicians in the
community, uh, uh, here in, in
Portales, but also correctional
officers, wardens, whatever are
you running into that?
Mr. Chair, well, certainly there
has been some of that, but part
of our work with SASA has been
to figure out what other states
have done to overcome some of
those barriers, right? So, um,
we definitely thought that there
would be a lot more, uh,
resistance among our security
staff, but just like these guys
have seen what we've actually
seen is that we there the
resistance has come largely from
the providers, the
professionals, uh, the medical
providers who have
Uh, felt like maybe this isn't
the, the right method. And so
with the, with their technical
assistance, they've given us a
lot of materials and things that
we're able to do to not just
share with our correctional
staff about why this is, uh, the
standard of care in, in the
community, but also with those
practitioners. So I do believe
that we're, you know, it's
coming along, and I do think
that part of us being able to
start with this continuum of
care helps to ease all of those
people.
In the process, so they start to
see why it makes an impact and
how it changes people's lives
and how it helps them move
forward. Um, but yeah, of
course, for years, um, the
medication Suboxone, I'm sure
everybody knows, but it's been
treated like contraband in
facilities and it sure, it still
will be if it's brought in in in
uh and and used in improper
ways. Um, so there definitely
has been a stigma about it, but
as we move forward, what we've
learned is that as you start to
treat more and more.
People, you bring more and more
staff on board and we've been
doing trainings with our staff
to share with them the the
positives of the medication and
why it's a helpful thing and how
it can change a person's life,
um, so fair amount, honestly,
not quite as much as I expected
to see. Uh, so that's been a
really, a really refreshing
thing to see. It might be that
that some of those providers who
have contracts to work in your
facilities or in the county
jails could
Can they jump onto the uh
Project Echo training that
that's going on that that might
be a really valuable way of, of
helping them come along. Mr.
Chair, thanks for the
suggestion. We, we do as
everybody knows we do a ton of
work with ECO, uh, from our work
inside the facilities to our
work outside the facilities with
pair mentors and peer educators,
um, but yeah, we're we're doing
that work already where the more
voices that are saying the same
message, the more likely that
that message is to be received.
and accepted.
OK. And then my last question
has to do with the electronic
health records.
That,
that the counties are gearing up
for, or you are is it's the
corrections that's gearing up
for it. You already have them
largely.
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, we do,
we've been working on it. It
took forever for our agency to
get funding. I'm sure you all
know, but we did finally receive
the funding for it and then
we've been working with the
contractor after, after RFP
process, of course, to get all
of the requirements and and
everything. We did go live with
our female population this year
in July and the male population
will go live in, in September.
It just takes time for us to get
those paper files turned into
electronic files, but I believe
that
Ms. Phillips said, 20 of 25?
Do they, will they talk to each
other? Because we've, we've had
that experience in the past
where a hospital system has one
type of electronic health record
and the providers in the
community or the MCOs in the
community have a different and
they didn't talk to each other.
Will yours be, whatever the word
is compatible, Mr. Chair, we,
we, I couldn't speak for what
systems the counties use, but
when we were going through the
process and as we've been going
through the process, one of our
main requirements for our, our
vendor was that
has to talk to community systems
and so as I understand it, it's
built on um a platform that's
friendly with the the the the
systems that are widely used out
in the community. But if you
want more elaboration, I can
bring Mr. Assanhai up to to to
elaborate on that.
Uh,
as long as, yeah, why, why is he
here? Yeah, good, good.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, synchronous
is, is what the state is
supporting in terms of, um,
electronic medical records as
the, so I would encourage folks,
um.
Counties whatever to to think
about to work towards getting on
the synchronous platform cause
that's, that's what's happening
now. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
actually that that was part of
our planning we are currently
hooked onto HIE synchronous, and
so we currently receive all
records from the hospital for
for female offenders and as well
any other person in the
community that's connected to
HIE will be able to see what we
provide within our walls.
That's great. That's very
reassuring. Thank you. And with
that, I want to thank you all
for your presentations. It's
been very enlightening and um uh
invite you to stay for lunch
with us, uh, uh, several people
in the audience had lunch here
yesterday.
And so they'll have to go to the
end of the line in case there's
not quite enough for the whole
audience. We have your names and
we will keep track of that, so
don't try to get a second free
lunch until everybody else is
eating,
uh
we won't go to lunch until we
finish uh a public comment, but
thank you all for your
presentations and thank you,
Chris, and, and Grace as well.
Madam Secretary, thank you.
So before we go to the public
comment, there's one,
Representative Kates, we have a
great bit of news for you. The
speaker has appointed you a
voting member of the committee
for this hearing. So now we have
a quorum and as a result we can
vote on the minutes which are in
your packet. The minutes of our
TAS meeting July 1st through
3rd.
Everybody has those. We will
entertain a motion to accept the
minutes.
Some of
Representative Kates, the newest
member of the voting member made
the motion seconded by
Representative Chavez. Any, any
discussion or any corrections
that you want to make to those
minutes?
Singing Nun will consider the
minutes to have been adopted as
presented without correction.
Now we'll go to the public
comment and we have
In the audience,
I think Ribo no,
Gary Josian.
Gary was here, there he is. He's
hiding. Disability rights in New
Mexico, and he'll be followed by
Justin Nut.
3 minutes.
Got it? All right. G.
Good afternoon, Gary Alian, CEO
of Disability Rights in New
Mexico, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I'm gonna try
to go as quick as I can, but I
have to provide some comments
from yesterday afternoon's
presentation because I didn't
have a chance, so I'm gonna
first go back to the future on
that real quick. We talked a lot
about the behavior health
services Network. You saw lots
of slides and everything, but
there are irreconcilable
differences between that and the
experience out there. You have
the.
See secret shopper that is shown
that the behavioral services
network uh is, is not.
As what is being reported as. So
that's the first point I would
make is that look at those
reports. We've got to get, we
got to get to the bottom of this
of what the network really is
accessible and available to
individuals and then address the
monitoring of that and holding
them accountable because
Ultimately, you, you have to
have now HCA have the appetite
to enforce. There are great
provisions in the contracts have
always been great provisions in
the contracts. But as they laid
out in page 44, there are
opportunities to monitor and
ultimately whether it's for kids
in custody or children and
families outside of custody. We
need to have one system that's
gonna really be available and
accessible for families. So
that's my first point. And
that's one of the reasons.
Why Kevin S sued both CYFD and
HST HST he held the keys to the
kingdom through the MCOs and now
HCA has it. So will they enforce
it?
Secondly, this, uh, director,
uh, director spoke yesterday,
Director Flannery talked about
the collaborative efforts.
That's what's needed here.
HCA.
And and CYFD need to work
closely together. The final
point I would just make was
about the Wells child visits of
30 days.
We can have court settlements,
we can have corrective action
plans. We could even have letter
of directions that say this is
to be done then. The truth is,
will they be done? Will they be
implemented. We do not know what
the 2023 annual report yet is
from CYFD as to their
accomplishments, but we know
that they're not even close to
this, this, uh, aspiration of 30
all visits being done within 30
days.
So we have begun discussions
with Presbyterian we're working
with with them and trying to
enhance and make sure services
are available and accessible to
kids in custody and the
treatment foster care issue is a
huge item that representative
Chavez focused on.
Now, let's go to this last
presentation regarding
medication assisted treatment.
First of all, I want to thank Ms
Pauls. Paulus and Miss Phillips
for raising the issue and
elevating the voices of
individuals who are suffering
right now.
In a dilemma that counties are
facing.
I wish we could have heard the
stories of people who lived
experiences. But the fact of the
matter is, the gold line has not
been established, it has been
established here. It was
established through a lawsuit.
So here's a written
presentation. We sued the
Department of Corrections and we
achieved a settlement and they
were to promulgate rules by
December 1, 2023 and then 90
days after that.
Pilot programs were to begin.
Delay
Means suffering, delay means
death for these individuals.
So I would just say to you that
there continues to be a, as I've
said before, a fierce urgency of
now to get this program going
and the service is delivered.
You mentioned about cru and
unusual. That was one of the
provisions of our lawsuit, an
Eighth Amendment violation. It
is cruel and inhuman to not
continue this treatment for
individuals and, and be able to
provide the support that's
needed.
So the final point is, is, as
Mr.
Philip Paul expressed, um,
housing is important too. I've
sat in on a lot of the Project
Echo for their meetings with
individuals who have been
formally incarcerated and it's
one of the huge issues for their
well-being is having adequate
housing. So the project echo
that they're doing with this is
gonna be really helpful in
trying to provide the support
and bring that expertise
throughout the state.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Gary. So
then we'll go to Justin Nutt.
From Nurtad Consulting.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, my
name's Justin, uh, I'm the CEO
of Nurse Dead Mental Health and
Consulting Services. Um, we're
based in Clovis, providing a
number of specialized services,
um, Morisis, IOP, uh, we have a
drop-in center.
Where slated to open
transitional living and sober
living, um, and then are working
on a rehab as well. Um, I share
all that because I, I come not
just for myself but for several
other providers that
Know that this is a location all
of you probably had to drive 3
or 4 hours to, and they weren't
willing to. Um, so they asked me
if I would kind of talk on some
of these items, but um,
Yesterday Philip brought up
something that really resonated
with several of us, which is
about reimbursement.
The delays that happen, um, the
fact that, you know, we can go
through the proper credentialing
process and paperwork gets lost.
Conduit loses something, the
MCOs lose something, they don't
have the letter, they ask for
the letter again, whatever that
might look like, and then get
denials, even though we've got
contracts, we've got
credentialing, um, and be out
quite some time. Um, for us
personally, I can say drop-in
center has been open for 7
months and IOP is about.
and we're over 100,000.
Back that we're owed still.
Um, and a total of about 5,
between 5 and 7 months depending
on the program and it's all in
specialized services, um, and.
We've gone through some of the
channels and it's just one of
those that sometimes you hurry
up and wait.
Um, and so I just wanted to
thank everybody here for the
fact that you guys are so
supportive of making sure that
Medicaid makes sure the MCOs do.
With their contract essentially
says they're required to do, um,
which at present, like Philip
said as well, that's not always
the case.
Um.
Uh, the other thing is the, um,
Several organizations.
are having an issue with is we
talk about expanded services, we
talk about the amount of money
Santa Fe has to help expand
services, but the biggest cost a
lot of times for that is that
capital outlay.
Um, you know, Philip was talking
about his project and how long.
It's taken because it's been
about funding, um, I know MHs
are here locally is looking at
trying to replace their Portali
office, um, and that comes down
to funding.
Uh, for us, we, we did a cost
projection,
uh, Philip again kind of shared
what those steps look like to
open, uh, rehab and a detox. So
we're looking at probably a year
to 18 months where, you know,
we're going to build.
It's going to be around 8000
square foot building we're gonna
to staff it, we're gonna train
them, and we have to start
seeing people, then we go
through the car process which
Then once that's in there, then
we can apply to the state, then
we sent to the MCO, so we're
looking at probably 1 to 2
million that will be into a
project before we're ever able
to say, hey, you know, we're
waiting to get paid now. Um, and
so one of the things that
Several of the behavioral
providers and probably primary
care or, you know, physical
health as well is
The building part is obviously
going to be a huge chunk of
that, right? We're probably
looking at.
Anywhere from 8 to 800 to 1000
for our building alone. That's
something we put out ahead of
time and a lot of times that's
something that's not allowed,
um, and I know that, you know,
Philip was talking about their
transitional living. I know that
there's other programs
throughout the state that the
whole reason they haven't
expanded, they haven't grown or
they haven't created new
programs is literally tied to
We can get the money to help
with.
Things like staffing or training
or that kind of startup costs,
but it can't ever be tied to
physical buildings other than
rents. We can't even pay for
upgrades to buildings. So like
when we did the drop-in center,
all of those remodels were
something that we footed, which
is totally understandable, but
at the same time, I think that's
preventing care.
Um, you know, we're
Like all of you have said, we're
in a crisis state. I can say
I've done crisis work for 12
years and the things that are me
the most are the ones I've seen
here. And I've seen a six year
old that tried to kill
themselves. I've seen a 10 year
old that's overdosed.
You know, as a father of an 8
year old, I think we have to try
harder. I think we have to use
the money we have in a way that
expands those services and draws
people to.
You know, to look at New Mexico
not as where there's a lack of
care and a lack of
opportunities, but a place that
providers want to come work
because it's building new
projects.
Justin, a couple of thoughts
about the facility, um.
The state finance authority has
a fund.
For expanding healthcare
resources in rural communities
you might, you, I don't know if
they, if you've explored that. I
have not. What I don't know, and
I, and I know if it's a loan, it
would be a very low interest
loan, but it may have grant
components as well, so it's
worth exploring and, and we
could put you in touch with um.
What's your name? Russell
Marquita Russell is the, is the
director of the finance
authority in Santa Fe. It's
worth exploring that. The other
thing that some clinics have
used, and I think you'd be
eligible for it here in Porteli.
Our Department of Agriculture
Rural Development Funds, they'll
pay for construction of a
facility.
And so that might be something
else in your congressional
delegation would be really
helpful in that.
It's an election year they might
be particularly responsive. I
like that.
But thank you for bringing the
issue. It's, it's a crucial one.
All right, thank you. Thank you
so much.
Um,
We have 2 online, 2 public
comment online.
And uh I think this is today's
sign up sheet, not yesterday's.
These are both familiar names.
Nat Dean and Mike McMillan. Nat,
what do you have to say today?
If you.
Thank you, Net. Um, then we'll
go to Mike McMillan.
Thank you, Mike, and actually,
uh, Senator Hickey has a comment
on that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mike, for your
observations. Uh, it is
definitely true, um, that New
Mexico cannot compete with other
states and specialties and uh
because there are fewer
specialties getting an a point
with the specialist is now
almost more difficult than
finding a primary care
physician. So that's a piece of
reality that we have to deal
with, um, I think in this next
session will be looking at that
in terms of specialties.
The other piece is that all E&M
codes for any specialty in uh
medical care have been raised to
100%. And so hopefully in your,
well, that it doesn't cover
procedures that will cover your
office practice to get some
bump, uh, and then I am using a
group to study what we, what we
will need to do
Statewide for commercial in
raising it to some minimum of
Medicare, uh, which should be
Uh
Again, for some practices it may
not make a whole lot of
difference, but for others, uh,
particularly for uh medical
specialties, uh, it will be
helpful, but we'll be looking
well above 100, 150%, maybe even
up to 200 and beyond as a
commercial floor and that only
applies to commercial fully
insured in New Mexico, but it
sets a tone and it also allows
us, uh we.
You can only raise the Medicaid
up to a certain
Uh, number and that's that there
is a, a Medicaid maximum out of
Washington, but that depends
upon the commercial and so uh we
do need to increase the Medicaid
Max, uh, the, the Medicaid
maximum for primary care and
behavioral health, but to get
there we're gonna have to raise
commercial that's part of the
formula. So complex, but I just
want you to know we're looking
at it and understand that
specialties are as difficult to
get into.
virtually anywhere in the state
and almost impossible in the
rural areas, um, but we've got
to solve that problem as well.
Thank you.
the information about that.
Reception tonight.
Thank you, Mike. Uh,
we're gonna break for lunch now,
um,
uh, everybody can eat. I was
kidding, even if you ate
yesterday, feel free to have it.
We chased away enough health
department people that there's
plenty of food for the rest of
us. Um, I wanted to mention to
the committee, I don't know if
we're going to get a formal
invitation. I think she's gonna
bring him later. Maybe she's
going to bring him later, but
there is a reception tonight for
the committee at La Casa
Federally qualified Health
Center on
And it's going to be held at the
Los Avelito Senior Center
directly behind their Porteli
clinic, and I, I think I passed
it on the way in coming in from
Melrose the other night. You, if
you came in that way, you may
see it, you may have seen it.
It's a it's from 5 to 8, but
they think as soon as we finish
you're welcome to go on over and
they have um barbecue for us,
they they have smoked meats and
barbecue and uh.
So, so feel free to go uh right
after we finish, as soon as we
finish this afternoon they'll be
available over there.
some of the health people are
filtering back in.
OK. With that, we'll break for
lunch.
