10 different things in one day
with 300 hit your bullet points
in your highlights and tell us
what you can tell us on your
budget and we.
I'll go home early cause you
have an announcement today.
I
Good afternoon.
schoolers and their families.
Thank you. Now you can hear me.
OK, little loud.
ECECD's 26 requests builds on
this great partnership and takes
us further in building a
high-quality, cohesive and
equitable universal early
childhood system. It provides
New Mexico families and children
with the supports they need to
thrive and leverages all
available funding to do so. Last
week I was in Las Cruces with 50
early childhood professionals,
and they shared a deep
appreciation and gratitude for
what they described as
transformational change that's
happening in their in the state
with families and in their
communities.
Because of your deep and
intentional investments in early
childhood, so I want to share
this gratitude cause it really
belongs to all of you, uh, and
echo their thanks for the vision
and leadership and commitment
that you've made to improving
the lives of New Mexico children
and families.
Just so you know, this budget
has received input from our
early childhood education and
care advisory councils, the New
Mexico Early Childhood Tribal
Advisory Coalition and input
from hundreds of providers and
families across the state.
The Department's $995 million.26
budget request wisely uses our
state resources to invest in our
human capital and build on our
historical and successful and
historical efforts to positively
impact the trajectory of
children's school readiness,
family stability, and our
state's economy for years to
come. These investments will
provide quality opportunities
for families in rural, urban and
tribal communities, and those
opportunities will improve
maternal and.
health outcomes, reduce the need
for special education and
remediation in K-12 and will
improve the overall economic
future of our state through
improved labor force
participation and productivity.
72% of parents receiving
childcare assistance in New
Mexico report greater job
stability, allowing them to
pursue their career
opportunities and support their
household. Maternal workforce
participation in New Mexico is
10% higher than the national
average, and we see this is
directly attributed to your.
investments in childcare. As a
state, we've invested more
resources than ever before, and
as a result, we're making gains
each year towards improved
school readiness, deeper and
enhanced child and parent
relationships and positive
government to government
relationships and stronger and
more connected communities,
together with the investments
you've made in working families
tax credit, the state childcare
tax credit, school meals, summer
EBT, and expanded Medicaid
coverage and early childhood
education, we are so proud in
this.
state to have moved from 50th in
child poverty to 17th because of
these strategic and incredible
investments. We have so much
more to do and this request
really meets the moment and
builds towards a brighter future
for all New Mexicans.
The next slide shows you just at
a glance, some members know us
very well. Other members know
some parts of us, so we just
wanted to have a chance to show
you not only our 4 core
programs, but also what we're
doing in terms of workforce
compensation, with the financial
resources that the legislature
and the voters of New Mexico
have provided for early
childhood, our state is making
investments that are making a
difference in every single
county. We now have home
visiting in every single county
in our state, thanks to these
investments. Together, we have
changed the
lives of literally thousands of
New Mexico families, up to
65,000 children will be
supported with the funding in
our current fiscal year 25
budget.
We've created universal high
quality pre-K for 4 year olds.
We're well on our way for 3 year
olds. We're also providing
coaching and measuring quality
in all of our pre-K programs,
and the great news is we are far
above the national average in
our classroom assessment scores
in emotional support, and we're
well on our way to improving
instructional support. This is a
measure that tells us children
in those classrooms are
learning. Children in those
classrooms are being supported
in their social and emotional
development. We've made
significant progress on ensuring
families have access to home
visiting to support their
families in their best and
hardest moments of parenting
through high quality evidence
based and promising models,
focusing on outreach to families
covered by Medicaid. We're also
supporting educators to be paid
in accordance with their
knowledge, skills, and the value
of the work they do every day.
These numbers represent families
like Lisette in Las Cruces, who
became a mother as a teen and
was supported by the her
developmental specialist speech
language pathologist and
physical therapist through our
infant family infant toddler
program. She learned how to
support her son and address his
muscle issues that impacted his
walking and talking, and now she
considers this a support system
in her family, or Francesca in
Tahala, whose daughter Kayley
was a pandemic baby who despite
support for her learning at home
was not progressing.
not at pace, the pace her mom
expected, especially in social
and emotional skills. Now Cayley
is thriving, expressive and
reading after participating in
New Mexico pre-K.
We also cannot forget our early
childhood education and care
professionals who are the
linchpin of our work. Thanks to
the pay parity programs you've
invested in for pre-K, Head
Start an infant toddler
educators, they are on average
receiving about $13,000 more a
year in their compensation. And
over 2000 early childhood
educators are pursuing a
certificate or degree in early
education. This includes
Tabitha, who works at Eastgate
Children's Childcare Center in
Albuquerque and is pursuing a
child development certificate
while
Continuing to work with young
children.
We've also continued to build
the infrastructure that our
communities need to support the
quality programs by making
business supports available to
early childhood programs to
ensure they're using money
efficiently and effectively, as
well as coaching and other
professional development to
improve their quality.
So we've successfully increased
the quality and reach of
programs and services across the
state. There is still an urgent
need to reach more families and
children who with these quality
programs and expand our
workforce supports to include
all early childhood
professionals. There are many
communities, families, and young
children who need access to
programs that are making this
generational impact, and we must
reach every corner of our state,
rural, frontier, urban and
suburban.
Your next slide talks about our
budget priorities. So as we
crafted this budget, we were
very thoughtful in thinking
about building capacity across
all programs. Again, as you saw
on that slide, um, of our.
Yes, of our all at a glance, all
of those programs need support
around building capacity and
advancing a diverse,
well-compensated, and
credentialed workforce. This
will help us close that gap in
services and support families
with the programs and services
they want and they deserve.
Our second priority is to
improve the quality of services.
We know that families need to
have access to the quality
supports to achieve school
readiness and to reach their
full potential and thrive. The
investments in our early
childhood workforce are directly
related to our efforts to
improve quality.
Our 3rd priority is focused on
shared accountability to
improving child outcomes in all
levels of the system by using
research-based measures that are
valid and reliable for
understanding child outcomes.
We also take seriously the
strategic plan, our 5 year
strategic plan, which we submit
with our budget and so this next
slide, these next two slides
show how our FY 26 budget ask is
aligned to that strategic plan.
The first thing I want to point
out here is that 188 million of
our overall increase is aimed at
improving school readiness. We
know that that was what the
legislature had in mind when
they created the department and
they thought about this funding,
that quality is coming in the
terms of
direct services, expanding wage
programs to early educators
through a wage scale and career
lattice that we are designing
with providers and advocates.
These investments in fit home
visiting, childcare, pre-K, and
the workforce are essential to
continue our state's progress to
improve school readiness, are $2
million request to support
family engagement allows us to
grow our local early childhood
system building coalitions.
They are located in rural
eastern counties in the state,
and they, oh, this is to allow
us to engage to build coalitions
in the eastern counties in the
state and engage families in
designing the system that we
want, uh, for families. It's
gonna look different in
different parts of the state,
and that's why these coalitions
are so important, our increased
requests for the tribal
investment strategy builds on
our successful government to
government relationships to
advance culturally appropriate
and language immersion programs
through intergovernmental.
agreements with our 23 tribes,
pueblos, and nations in the
state. We have leveraged federal
and private sector funding as
well for a total investment in
tribal communities between 24
and 25 of more than $13 million.
These investments include
capital, language and culture,
pre-K, capacity building, home
visiting and early intervention
services.
Or
Mexico, oh, early childhood
ecosystem alignment, uh, with
this request, we will also have
the resources to build more
statewide awareness of the
amazing free high quality
programs that are available to
families with young children. In
addition, we are asking for 39
full-time employees, over 80% of
our FTE request is for direct
service programs. These include
17 positions to meet the demands
we've experienced in childcare
assistance and the growing
supply of childcare centers and
homes.
positions to sort support
programs and fit home visiting
and pre-K to be the best quality
possible.
We're also requesting additional
capacity for government to
government work with tribal
communities, as well as 7
positions to improve our
internal capacity to conduct
regular audits, grants
management, and improve the
overall management of
large-scale projects in the
department.
What I want to show you next
because of this huge investment
in school readiness.
We are the first state in the
country to collect statewide in
one year population measured
data of how our youngest
children are doing. So I first
have to start by thanking and
giving my deep appreciation to
the public education department,
Secretary Padilla and her team
as well as the assessment team
at public education department
and the districtest uh
assessment coordinators. Most
importantly, are over 800
kindergarten teachers across the
state who collected data on.
98% of our kindergartners. The
first time we've had this view
into the data of how our young
children are doing. We consider
this baseline for the
department because this
population that measure is
really saying how well did the
birth to 5 system set those
children up for success. So this
is great baseline for us and we
plan to do this measure every
couple years, but what we can
show here is that 47% of New
Mexico kindergartners are on
track on all 5 areas of.
development. You can see there
that over 74% of our
kindergartners are on track in
their physical health and
well-being. The other strong
area is an emotional maturity.
So this measure allows us to
really understand the readiness
of our young children, and
there's variability. So in some
parts, in some counties that on
track is as low as 33%. And
another counties, it's as high
as 67%. So we're able to do
this, but I just want you to
know that this is an investment
that we.
think is so important for you
all to know, how are these
investments making a difference?
Where are they making a
difference? And we are taking
this data, it's highly
actionable. So we're taking it
to those local coalitions.
They're learning how to use that
data with parents and other
providers to say, how can we do
better?
What is happening in our
community? Is it that children
need more support around social
competence, or is it language
and literacy? And so they can
work together. So this is an
exciting building and we'd love
to do a more in-depth hearing on
this, maybe with the LESC to
really give you the opportunity
to ask more questions and for us
to share this knowledge.
So now we'll get to the slides
that Chairman Munoz is only
wanted me to share maybe was the
sources, uh, and you see here
that our total increase, of
course, is around $200,210
million dollar increase that
does include 15.2 million that's
coming into the agency through
the land grant permanent fund,
and 37.7 million from the Early
Childhood Trust Fund.
Our budget request also includes
additional general fund to build
on the progress we've made again
to close the gap around quality
services, and again, as I've
pointed out, the revenue so that
we reach all parts of our state
with this comprehensive
cohesive, equitable prenatal to
5 system.
The uses um outline again how
we, how we do it and how it
changed from 25 to 26, um,
things to note here is, um, that
we are asking for a significant
increase in the 200 categories,
but overall, our agency budget
is um very lean in terms of
operational. It's less than 5%
that we used to actually run and
administer, these funds are
going right out into your
communities. They're going in to
support our amazing programs and
providers across the state.
Senator Sheer's not here, but he
always asked me, what about this
400 category? It's mostly your
budget. What is going on in
there? I need to understand that
budget more, so we've given you
a breakdown and here again you
can see that 78% of our budget
is going directly out into
communities. Uh, they are, um,
for, um, we have the funding has
reached over 1000 programs in
every area of our state.
And the less than 1% of that 400
category is actually for
internal ECECD travel equipment
program support, so I just
wanted to make that point
because it sometimes is
overwhelming like, wow, your
whole budget's in this other
category.
What is that other and here is a
breakdown of that.
Next I'll go to our special
appropriations that department
is seeking 122.6 million in
special appropriations, this
will allow us to make key
improvements in childcare
quality, such as increasing the
number of adults to children in
the classroom, especially for
infants and toddlers, increasing
the compensation over all of um
childcare professionals and
increasing the reimbursement for
children who are identified
either with an individual family
service plan or an individual
education program, which are
Children with special needs.
These reimbursements would be
able to be used to hire
additional staff related
service, maybe even further
reduce the ratio, uh, and adult
group size so that we're hearing
increasingly from childcare
programs, um, and early care and
education programs, the needs of
our children are greater than
they have seen in the past, and
we want to make sure we're
acknowledging that like we do in
our K-12 system as well.
An increase in childcare supply
building will allow us to meet
the demand to address the
childcare deserts we have in the
state through our federal
childcare supply building grant,
we have since been able to
license 1000 new slots, over 300
of those being infant and
toddler slots, more investments
are needed. We have many
childcare deserts, but we're
seeing success and we have
incredible providers here in the
room today who've received some
of these grants and have
expanded their businesses, not
just with our dollars, but they
leverage their own dollars and
they
leverage dollars in their
community.
Finally, we're asking for a
one-time investment to improve
the efficiency of our childcare
assistance enrollment and
provide investments, um, to
support our family infant
toddler early childhood
professionals with um very
promising practice and high
quality professional
development. I also have a
supplemental request. This is
the first year the agency has
asked for a supplemental request
and I wanna um just acknowledge
a couple things. One is related
to, I think what we're seeing
coming out of the pandemic, more
and more children are being
referred to early.
prevention when we set our 25
budget, it was based on a set of
we've had a significant increase
both in 24 and 25.
And so we do have a shortfall in
our 25 budget just to meet the
demand, um, that we're seeing,
uh, and provide services to
nearly 17,000 children, so that
will be a 7.6 million requests
that we're asking just to shore
up our, our shortfall, um, as
you know, fit is a federal
entitlement program and our
responsibility is to serve all
infants and toddlers with
developmental delays and
disabilities.
I'm proud to share with you that
New Mexico has quickly climbed
to number one in the nation for
identifying developmental delays
and disabilities in children 0
to age 2. This is a testament to
the efficacy of the fit program
and the providers working across
the state and in your
communities.
I think you all know, but just
to emphasize the research shows
that early intervention is a
strong and worthwhile
investment. It greatly improves
developmental outcomes for
children, which stand to have
lifelong benefits, and it saves
taxpayers in the end in lower
special education.
On the rate increase, we are
also requesting $1 million to
support 1/4 quarter rate
increase for our fit providers,
and that FY 25 that staff did
execute a rate increase for
providers and communicated this
to them. Um, but when I was made
aware of this and I've
communicated this to the LFC and
and the LHHS legislators and
staff, uh, we, uh, we, we did
not have the budget. We did not
request it and we did not
receive it and so I had to
rescind that rate. So we're
coming here now to ask for a
supplemental to at least
the 4th quarter, we're in deep
partnership with HCA. We have a
timeline. Medicaid will only
reimburse for the services
offered within the quarter that
a state plan is approved, and so
it's a little in the weeds in
the wok, but we just want you to
know that in addition to this
state plan amendment, we will be
doing another state plan
amendment if we get the budget
for our 26 As for fit because
the increases that we need to
make in our early intervention
program are significant. This is
a vital and critical program.
And the results are tremendous.
Um, so we want to just share
that with you and just in
closing, let you know that we
are well on our way as a state
to meeting universal access for
children. The department is
serving 50,000 more children now
than we were in 2020. And if the
FY 26 appropriation request is
approved, we will be reaching
nearly 87,000 children across
the state, an increase of 12,000
children from this year.
These investments you've made
are working. We can't stop now,
we're leading the nation, we're
building the future, not only
positioning ourselves for a
brighter and stronger future,
but as a leader in developing
high delivering high quality,
inclusive services for New
Mexico families and children.
Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members. Oh, you have
more?
Oh
Well, I didn't recognize her.
She has control of slice, not
me. I know I go back one slide.
I just think this blaming that
on me right away, Mr. Chairman,
um, thank you, um, but I just
wanted to end with this slide
cause I think both the words and
the picture capture everything
that you all have done so
brilliantly, and we have done it
with you. We've been the leader,
but the monumental decisions
that you made.
With the return thinking about
your Monday hearing that I
listened into and how positive
the returns are and how much the
returns will continue with this
human capital investment, and I
couldn't do it without this
incredible team, which you'll
see on the final slide, the
assistant secretary, Cotillian
Snetti, uh, who has led the
tribal uh work and on top of the
work that a former assistant
secretary Giovanna Archuleta,
who's there also with us led in
her, her predecessor. Uh, we
have been fortunate to have such
a talented team um in our.
administrative services our CIO
all across the board. So we're
all here to answer any questions
you have.
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, Secretary and Staff,
I agree. Thank you very much to
all your staff for the work that
you do. I do have a quick
question, just clarification
again, I know you and I met
about the fit program before we
were in Riodoso, I think during
a committee meeting and we were
talking about why they were left
out and it was an accident
apparently that happened in
their races for the providers
and increased provider
increases. And so, uh, let me
ask you to clarify just a little
so make sure we're on
same page secretary, you said
you have requested a
supplemental for $1 million. Did
I understand you correctly, and
that would be for the 4th
quarter, um, now, what happens
with the 1st 3 quarters.
Uh, of that, where are they
gonna fall? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Rodriguez,
thank you and thank you for your
leadership. We're gonna miss you
here. Um, really appreciate all
your guidance. Um, so we paid um
out of our general fund for July
and um up to August 18th, uh,
and then, so it would be that
part of the 2nd and the 3rd
quarter, um, because 71% of the
children served are Medicaid
eligible and really Medicaid,
um.
is the payer of first resort for
those children and so working
with the healthcare authority,
the ability of us to get the
Medicaid funds to support those
services, we would have to have
a state plan amendment in place.
So it would, I don't know if
that answers your question, so
you covered it, Mr. Chair. You
covered it out of the general
fund then for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator Rodriguez, only
for July and part of August, so
there would be a gap. I see. OK,
so they're really not made whole
completely then at this point,
like everyone else was, they
were left out by this accident
we talked about before that you
mentioned, but now they're
getting the 4th quarter and
they're getting part of the of
the is a 3rd.
order at this point would be
August or July, and, and the
other two or the other months
that were there, that's the gap
we're talking about. Help me
understand.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Senator,
um, Rodriguez, I think the, the
one thing I want to point out is
that we have a very significant
budget asked for 26, and so that
rate increase, you're correct.
July and August was 1.
Of this year, and then this will
be asked for 44 so that we can
use the Medicaid funding, uh, to
support that, and then we will
ask, we will do a state plan
amendment depending on the
budget to increase in 26 going
forward, um, that.
It's a little sorry. Yes, thank
you. I, I do get what you're
saying. Thank you very much for
that for fisco 26, uh, but I
guess it's still what I had in
mind here still stands that
they're not fully restored for
the year, the full year here
that passed, so like half of the
year, it's a quarter, 4th
quarter if it's approved for
supplemental, and then you have
the first quarter that was
covered, but we have 2nd and
3rd.
Or that are lacking funding for
it to make them whole. And so in
fiscal year 26, just curious,
are you requesting any or is
there any way that um that you
could go that you would request
an amount that's large enough to
cover the 2nd and 3rd quarter
that we're missing here in a gap
to go back and and make them
whole or it doesn't, it's not
gonna be able to work that way.
I'm just trying to make sure
that they're not that that we're
giving them a level playing
field here and that we're not
just forgetting that there are
half of the year they didn't get
what everybody else did because
of a mistake.
So thank you.
Yes, Kelly, help me. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, um,
yeah, so there was a rate
increase as the secretary said,
it had to be pulled back given
that um the executive actually
didn't ask for that revenue, the
general fund portion of it, or
other revenue portions of it, so
it had to be
back through providers received
it for 1 quarter and then they
went back to their old rate. And
so, um, I think the secretary
and many support um doing a
special appropriation to kind of
move that rate sooner in the
current fiscal year. We can't do
it now because we don't have the
matching rate, um, but do it
sooner once the session is over
and then do the recurring
portion of it in FY 26.
And Mr. Chairmanson if I can add
this, the rate that had to be
rescinded was around 11%. The
projected one that we're
looking at in um 26 if the
funding, you know, if the if the
budget is approved to be closer
to 35%. So we will not only be
what they were going to get, and
that was part of.
The miscommunication because we
we were going, looking at a more
Model that we've been using for
child care and home visiting and
pre-K to how to establish rates
and so, um, we do, I do
apologize um for.
Everything for the whole, it was
my, it's my error and so.
Well, thank you. Thank you for
explaining that and thank you,
Kelly, for your help. At least
we know that in 206, um, the
school year 26, hopefully
they'll be able to come out
ahead here. Uh, thank you very
much. The, the need is so great
that we, I know, I, I, we
understand people do make
mistakes, but, but, you know,
this was huge and that's why
we're all together trying to fix
it so we can make sure they they
they have to make a living and
they have to continue with the
services, so thank you so much
for all that and Mr. Chair and
Senator, if I could just one
thing, um, we have in
increase of the fit rate twice
in this administration, so I
should have said that, and they
have not been nearly to the
level and that's why we were
going with a different modeling
cause it still wasn't
stabilizing the fit. And so, um,
I do appreciate that we, we have
increased the fit rate twice,
um, during this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, good to see you.
First of all, I'd like to thank
you for the outreach you showed
prior.
In New Mexico tor New Mexico. I
really appreciate that. Both
secretaries, uh, I got a
question on, on this first
flyer.
You're serving now 10,078
toddlers with uh 35 uh
providers. How are you doing
that because that's over almost
$290 per provider. How, how are
you doing that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative Garcia, thank you
for that question and thank you
for, for your support in helping
us reach rural America, rural
America, rural America and rural
New Mexico, um, so we, you know,
the funding for fit is.
Yeah
It's heavily Medicaid is again
71% of our children are, are,
are Medicaid eligible, how they
do it is they bill us every
month for the services they
deliver, um, and then they
either goes to Medicaid if
they're Medicaid eligible, and
if they're not, we also build
private insurance. So I'm not
sure if I'm answering your
question though.
German Madam Secretary, no
actually the question was, you,
it says here you got 35
providers.
And you got 10,000 kids, that's
almost 2890 kids per provider.
How are you handling that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garcia, I
understand. So those are
agencies. Those are 35 agencies,
so some of them have 50 to 70
that we have a few of our fit
providers here, uh, and some of
them are smaller, so, for
instance, we were just had a
presentation from Mecca
yesterday and they served almost
150 or 1600 of the children, and
they're one of the 35 providers.
Is that some are and they
contract they have full-time
staff, some of them contract for
staff.
Thank you for clarification,
Madam Secretary, Mr. Chairman,
uh, uh, one last question I
have, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, you're asking for $6
million for 39 FTEs, full-time
employees.
Uh, that, that comes out in my
math about $153,000 per
employee. What, what are these
people gonna do for that kind of
salary?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garcia, that is a
great question. That is um all
total, so that's not just their
salary, but that is all their
compensation. So that's all
their benefits, that's all their
leave, it's everything that is
rolled into that, so it's a,
it's an average, it's a
midpoint. It doesn't mean that
all those positions um come in
at that, so it is, it is a um an
ad.
Sure, Mr. Just for the record,
I'm Sarah Michaelson, deputy
secretary at ECECD. I, I would
um add for you to and, and
Representative Garcia that on
average again is the secretary
said in her presentation of the
vast majority, 80% are either
childcare assistant staff or
folks that work with those 36
fit providers or home visiting
providers and make between
probably 60 and $80,000 per
year.
Uh, Mr. German and secretary,
thanks for clarification, uh,
and once again, I'd, I'd like to
reach out and, and tell you
thank you very, very much, both
of you for what you've done for
rural New Mexico. You know,
these ladies were out here, I
don't know if most of you know
where it's at or not, but Alamo,
New Mexico, you know, Lake
Valleys between here and
nowhere, and then these two
ladies were out there trying to
promote people or educate people
on how, what's available to
them, and that's very, very
important for that.
Ma'am. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Sherman.
Represented Blue home.
Mr. Chair, a couple of
questions. Um,
Regarding first the home
visiting, um.
And you know that I'm a big
supporter of that having.
Uh, background, um, with that,
I, and I just need to ask, um,
it's been noted many times that
the that the home visiting is um
underutilized despite.
You know, the increase that
we're giving to revenues, what
is your, how are you going to
address that.
And get more um
More home visiting um done
throughout our state.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Lujan, so this
year was the first year now we
are reaching every county in the
state, we expanded to 3 new
programs and our data on
the data.
It was that data point, um, how
many that we've funded and um we
are we are um our enrollment
level for.
One moment.
Home visiting
Um, so we have, um, funded by
Funded slots 5800 and
38. We have funded some new
programs, so they're getting up
and running, so we don't
necessarily we funded them, but
they're, they can't serve
families till they have all the
training and everything in
place. We're at 97% of those
slots are being. OK, so, so you
see a more of an efficiency now,
is that what you're reporting
today, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan,
I think some good things that
again you all invested in was
having us create the um
coordinated intake and referral,
you funded us to do that, our
team, um, under the leadership
of Sandeep Patel and our home
visiting team.
Stood that up in August and
we've seen I get over 1000 or
more referrals just in the first
few months, so we are getting
some efficiency. We do need to
expand capacity, and that's why
we have the $10 million ask for
home visiting, but we also need
to draw down more Medicaid
funding. Yesterday at our
advisory council meeting, one of
our providers said he now has
180 more that are going to be
funded by Medicaid and not by
state general fund dollars on
top of the 730 that we reported
in our first quarter, 7:30. So
we're getting
closer to our performance
measure metric, um, more work
has to be done, and, but we're
working closely with the home
visiting providers to expand
their capacity through using
Medicaid funding and then being
able to bring in more home
visitors to expand access with
our state general fund dollars,
so.
That, so yeah, that, that does
answer my question to your
point. Um, I might have an, uh,
a follow-up later but um next
question uh is your expand as
you're expanding the seed
initiative. Thank you for that.
The social-emotional early.
Development initiative.
Um
This is really important, then
you're gonna get a question for
me and just from other um
Hearings that we've had.
We, uh, and there's gonna be
legislation and there's been an
article in the paper regarding
what happens in our courts.
And with our kids and their
their needs, and I just brought
that up because I want to say
thank you for that and focusing
on the social emotional needs of
our, of our children.
Um, but are you, are you looking
anywhere or is it reflected in
your budget anywhere, any, any
kind of policy initiative to
address uh specifically with our
family courts, the children's
needs or when they have.
They have some, uh, there's some
intersection, uh, connection
there with ECECD and, you know,
they're reporting um that I've
read about too is that there's a
lot of missed opportunities, if
you will, to really um
Help our families in that time
when they're going through
either divorce or other type of
uh family court issues, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Luhan, I think
that's reflected both in our um
home visiting and in our early
intervention budget, as well as
our childcare budget and also I
sit on the children's court
Improvement commission. Um, so
I'm sitting there with some of
the judges. I work very closely
with Secretary Casados and
deputy secretary and her team,
um, and the OH with the
comprehensive addiction
recovery. So I think it's
reflected in you supporting us
and in supporting these
programs, getting them connected
to families who are going.
through the court system and are
involved, we saw some very
promising data, um, I, I report
to a private sector funder about
children experiencing child
abuse or or in the foster system
under the age of 2, and we just
presented from 23, I think it
was at 35% and in uh 24, it went
down to 21%. That's still a lot,
but we're seeing the impact of
the programs and the services
and the coordination that we're
doing with, um, the Child, Youth
and Families department.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, so
just quickly to follow up with
that. So if a family that is
Um, experience any kind of um.
Issues or problems as they're
going through that process
through the courts.
They can, they can ask for a
family home visiting.
And so they can have some kind
of intervention, Mr. Chair.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair,
Representative Lujan, and um,
you know, thanks to the work of
Kelly and the legislative
finance, they encouraged us to
have safe care as one of our
evidence-based models. Um, so I
think it's bringing in those
evidence-based models that are
actually geared towards a child
first, um, which we now have one
provider implementing for
families experiencing substance
use and mental health
challenges, the nine-month home
visiting program, so I think
it's having a variety and array
of home visiting, um, and then,
of course, strong referrals to
our early intervention program
and.
connections there. Thank you so
much. I just wanted to expand on
that conversation and you just
did, and I really appreciate
that because those are where
we're going to catch those
issues in a lot of time and in
having those investments are
really important. And lastly, I
just want to thank this room
full of people providers that
are here and their families for
visiting us here today. Thank
you so much.
Thank you represent Brown.
That's the last one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam
Secretary. I, I see that you
have a special appropriation
request for $10 million for a
childcare revolving loan fund.
And so I have a couple of
questions about that.
Is this loan money for building
or remodeling daycare facilities
by needy.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown,
it is absolutely for that. Maybe
not as much building, but
definitely re remodeling and
renovating. Absolutely. And I
know we've been working with Ms.
Gomez down in
there you go Carol's.
There you go. So for my
edification, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, uh, do you, have you
said yet what the interest rate
would be. I'm gonna give you
some
Questions in a row here.
Interest rate, maximum loan
amount perhaps, um, and then I
have a question and follow up.
Mr. Cha.
Sure, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, I've been uh leading the
partnership with NMFA who
administers the loan portion of
the program, um, and we are so
lucky this year to get it up and
running for the first time, and
I think well over a decade, um,
this has been on the books for a
while, so we just passed rule
changes. Um, the interest rate
is actually set by the New
Mexico Finance Authority, the
only requirement in statute is
that it's greater than 0%, so it
is typically set not very high
above that.
0%, um, as well, your question
around the maximum loan amount
per statute, the maximum loan
amount can only be 1/3 of the
balance of what's in the fund.
So that is what people are
limited to. OK, and then Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, um
Is $10 million sufficient to
meet to meet demand.
For these loans and uh if so,
how do you know?
That's a great question, Mr.
Chair, and Representative Brown,
we actually with private sector
funding through the Hilton
Foundation, I have a, uh, fully
comprehensive childcare supply
and demand study underway, and
those results will be released
probably mid next year, but
it'll have an interactive map of
the whole state and we'll be
able to see exactly where we
need more supply for what age
group of children, um, and how
to build capacity. Uh, so I
think 10 million, we did about
12 million with the federal
dollars, it went pretty far.
saw a lot of development, um, we
saw providers opening, opening
facilities, we were able to help
uh Representative Chatfield, uh,
with a, uh, a program out in
Toam Carry, they were the only
childcare program there and
families were leaving, they
were, they were leaving the town
because they couldn't work, they
couldn't do anything and so we
were able to work and get her
one of these low interest loans,
and she finished, she finished
the project and is a really
great provider out there. So I,
I, I think a 10 million because
last year you gave us 1.7.
million. So it would add to
that. So last year we did ask
for 10 and maybe for 5 and we
got 1.7 and so we, we, we did
see the great success and we
just finished the rulemaking on
it. Uh, so we expect people are
knocking on our door all the
time. When is the application
ready? So I think we're going to
see a lot of shovel-ready
projects, um, coming online.
Yeah, I think so too. Uh, Mr.
Chair and secretary, um, the
other, another special
appropriation request is for 6
million, and that's for
improving.
childcare eligibility processes.
Could you tell us what about the
processes is either not working
or too slow. Uh, why are we
making this effort, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
the
Try not to get too wonky with
the, the technology part, um,
that will be changing. So we are
uh very fortunate to have a, a
really good data system kind of
on the back end for childcare
where we can track and providers
can track how many children
they're serving, uh, where we
don't utilize technology as
effectively, although we've done
a lot over the past few years,
is in the application process
for families. Many families are
able to provide everything that
they need, but there's still
some ineffi.
en c ies in our process in a lot
of manual checking of those
documents. So similar to work
that um the income support
division has done and and that
HCA has done, we're looking at a
systems which are really new in
childcare, but no touch
eligibility system so that we
can take those families right
off the top who can just
navigate a system online and get
access to childcare assistance
and leave more of the human, the
one on one, capacity that we
have within our department and
that we frankly.
need more of, um, to work
directly with families in in
crisis or families who may be
less technologically savvy or in
areas of the state where
broadband is, is a difficult um
thing to manage. So that's $6
million will truly be a one-time
investment in building that
software and then connecting it
back to our existing, um,
databases so that those are,
those are all connected, what
families will see then instead
of potentially, they have
everything they need, they have
their pay stub and their, you
know.
Whatever the the small amount
we've done a lot to make our
application process more
efficient, and that they can go
right on through that they'll
get their contract um executed.
I know many of the providers in
the room are very supportive,
um, it is something we hear a
lot is that at peak seasons of
the year, especially the end of
school and the beginning of
school. We have so many either
changes people now just need
part-time childcare because
their child's going back to
school or in the summer, they
need to switch to.
full-time childcare and so we
have these peaks and valleys in
the way that families apply this
system would help us smooth out
the year so that families
experience what is our goal,
which is that within 2 weeks of
application, you have your
childcare assistance and you're
able to bring your child to
childcare so you can go to work.
So this is an effort to really
modernized the way that we do
the process. All right. Well,
thank you so much.
Represents small.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, and to your team, um,
I always appreciate your urgency
and your forthrightness and a
lot of the success that we've
created together. Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, um, first on
the childcare, which makes up
half of a, of a, an
extraordinary general fund
increase, perhaps one of the
largest that we'll see both in
terms of actual number and
percent.
Um, how, how do we ensure that
that does not supplant private
pay.
And how do we ensure that this
creates an overall uh new
additional number of slots,
particularly when it comes to uh
infant and toddlers.
Mr. Chair, always good
questions, um, the, so the goal
is universal.
We're not there, we're at 400%,
you know, when we think about
our state and our commitment to
free college and free childcare
and free access, so when you say
supplant
right I think thank you Mr.
Chairman Secretary. I think sort
of what I'm imagining, uh, or
envisioning is um the slots
being sort of funded publicly
that were funded privately by
private pay.
And sort of a one for one,
right? It's a better deal, uh,
to use the public pay, the, the
money from the state, better for
that family.
That's a one for one on that
slot as opposed to 2 or 3 or 4
slots created with new money, so
that particularly around infant
and toddlers where there is a
really a dearth of, of slots
that there are more slots
available.
I'll say just something then
I'll turn it to the deputy
secretary because I may be
getting at what you're saying
last year you in this year's
budget, you gave us money to do
contracted slots for infants and
toddlers. I don't know, I might
not be getting it, but we have
um uh the deputy secretary and
her team have done some good
work too. I, I think maybe
address this, um, but I'm, I'm,
and Kelly, if you want to help
me out.
Um, but you want to give it a
shot? Yeah, sure.
um
Mr. Chair, um, representatives,
do you want Kelly to help you?
I'm,
you're fine, Kelly. And
you're fine.
Um, Mr. Chair members committee,
I, I think what the
representative is talking about
is, um, you know, focusing on
expanding because we don't have
enough infant and toddler slots
to serve what we need in the
state, um, most of our capacity
right now is for the older ages
and most people in this room
know that are infants are the
most in need population, highest
risk for um neglect or abuse and
so providing safe spaces and
affordable spaces where families
can work or go to school. It's
kind of been the focus.
of this committee, because
that's kind of the most in need
policy wise.
chair and representative Smalley
also heard you say, you know,
and it is true that with the um
The movement towards universal
as the secretary mentioned that
we are trying to have less
tuition-based slots in the
system and uh and we can tell
you why, and I'll let the
secretary added in addition to
what Kelly said that we've seen
um the 83% of all licensed
childcare programs in our state
except childcare assistance.
Many of those enroll 50% or more
uh children in the childcare
assistance program that has been
absolutely game-changing for
what we used to rely on a
market-based system to
you know, really serve our
youngest children when their
brains are developing the most
to to just let families pay,
well, I don't think most
families would say they were
paying what they would could
afford. It's that what they
could.
could manage even though it
wasn't affordable, and what that
resulted really in is a system
where we have had two low of
supply because it's not a
business folks want to get into
cause there's no actual margin,
you know, to make it, uh,
teachers, we were really
subsidizing uh the, the service
to those families on the, on the
backs of teachers who are making
minimum wage, and that's how
we're keeping tuition a little
bit lower than what we do, which
is pay at the cost of care, um,
and so a tuition-based system
really
Hasn't worked in, in early
childhood, um, we
And we, that is why we are, I
think moving the, the way we are
and what we've seen is, um, just
the last thing to highlight for
you, Representative Small, as
someone who is relatively new to
New Mexico. It's amazing what is
happening in the childcare
system here that we have local
providers, many of whom are in
the audience who have been able
to open 123 more centers. You
don't see that anywhere else in
the country, and that's because
of the way that we've chosen to
finance early childhood to think
of it more as an early childhood
system or universal childcare
system in
childcare rather than um
available to those who can, who
can find a slot and, and maybe
make the monthly payment for it.
No, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, uh, Madam Secretary, Madam
Deputy Secretary, and, and
celebrating the progress.
Another way to ask it is sort of
a breakdown of the share of the
recent childcare budget and the
proposed childcare budget that
is 0 to 5 and then 5 and above.
Uh, and I know Mr. Chair, from a
dear friend back.
home, um, you know, a young
kiddo, uh, at home, and there
are
There are sort of core
limitations to um what this
family can do in terms of
chooses to do in terms of
employment and other things that
are bound entirely by the
limitations on childcare for
that really young kiddo who is
definitely below 5. And so we're
beginning to work quickly
reaching limits of sort of
funding across.
Across a number of different
areas, or at least beginning to
see where those ceilings are.
And if we're, if we acknowledge,
if we sort of agree that 0 to 5
is, is the core is a big, big
priority. How do we get more of
the funding there, Mr. Chair,
um, Representative Small, thank
you for that additional
clarification. I actually have a
nice chart here that shows that
we've actually reduced the
number of school age, uh,
children being served with
childcare assistance increased
infant by almost 17% toddlers by
15% and preschool.
coolers down too because of the
great investments we've made in
pre-K. Um, so our focus is
absolutely on that 0 to 2, and
we've increased by more than
1000 infants that were
supporting from 23 now to 25.
Got it. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, and I think as we
move forward for the additional
investments that are possible.
Um,
Focusing it in that area and
focusing it in ways that um you
know, that, yeah, that make it
more affordable. OK, I'll go
through some additional
questions, um, briefly, this is
something I raised, uh, in a
previous hearing, um, you know,
as we have very robustly funded
ECCB under sustained and really
strong leadership.
Maybe it's time that ECCD sort
of exits the philanthropic
world.
for asking for grants, and
because those, that
philanthropic world may support
sort of folks who are, have
access to a lot less capital,
and as part agree or disagree,
and then as part of that just
sort of an update on sort of the
grant space, uh, the
philanthropic space with DC EC
ECD now.
is if you have that, that would
be great. And if you want to
transmit it electronically,
that's OK too. Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Small, you know, the investments
that the Hilton Foundation have
been most substantial, but they
haven't just made it in ECECD
when I was down in Las Cruces,
it was there to celebrate the
great investment they made in
the community foundation of
Southern New Mexico for direct
services. They've invested in um
advocacy across the state, but
also as they call civil society.
So I think that the thing that
has happened.
helped having the private sector
funding has helped us leverage
other funding and has also
helped us work more inclusively
with the broader early childhood
community. So I think that
funding, you know, the 6 million
over 3 years, we're coming, you
know, to the end of that, but
it's leveraged with the other
investments they're making
directly in New Mexico,
community-based organizations
similar with the Kellogg
Foundation, and then the
Pritzker, um, Children's
initiative, uh, the majority of
the money that we were eligible
for, we.
back to the community, and we
said, here, they were gonna give
us a million a year. We said
just give us 400, give 600,000
to the Community Voice
Coalition. So I think we, we, we
do both, but part of the money
they gave us was to develop more
local early childhood coalitions
and support our statewide family
leadership council. So I think
there's, there's room for
discussion about that, but I
just want you to know that we
leverage those dollars with the
community.
Mr. Chairman, so that, that's
super helpful. Thank you for
that detail. Um,
And maybe that's sort of, uh,
you know, looking backward,
looking backwards and where we
are now in this current cycle
celebrating that.
Moving forward, maybe that that
it is a sort of
Moving away from that space or
perhaps being engaged enough
there to guide.
All those investments into
communities. So, yeah, not
critiquing what's gotten to the
ECCD to this point, but asking
about moving forward if that's,
and Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Small, I would
say that the Hilton Foundation
has been spent to get programs
up to speed with the home
visiting models, so we've spent
it to support family connects,
Healthy Families America Child
First, helping those programs
who were trying to come online
to an evidence-based model, but
we didn't have money in our
budget.
From here to give them the
startup money. It's also helped
us support the infant early
childhood mental health
consultation initiative. It's
funded us to develop the
professional development
institute, train the
consultants, get them out in the
field so.
I, I hear what you're saying and
I, I understand what you're
saying. I just want to know that
the dollars that come into us
often go right back out into
community in a strategic and
aligned way with our overall
vision, um, for an improved New
Mexico.
Prenatal to 5 system. Awesome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Uh, within that
space, uh, really
appreciatehan's questions about
home visiting as we go into the
session in HAFC uh the
leveraging Medicaid home
visiting, that has to be our
focus. I appreciate you mention
it. Looking forward to, um, the
detail and implementation there.
Um, so, uh, yeah, excited for
that, um, the,
Uh, the wage and career ladder
and sort of working with the
grow. Do you have additional
sort of detail for that?
Mr. Chair Representative Small,
some of these things are pointed
in the wrong direction, so now
it's upside, um, yes, so with
infant um toddler pay parody, we
have reached over 100
professionals, so the growth
funding was 5 million
specifically directed for those
of you who um aren't as deep
into that part of the growth
fund as $5 million per year for
3 years focused on professionals
who educate infants and toddlers
in the childcare assistance
program and so we opened.
application very, very close to
the beginning of the fiscal year
and have seen so much growth,
and again, really wanna
emphasize that for participants
um for the over 100 participants
in that program, 144. 0 wow,
that grew a lot in the last
month. So again, we're seeing,
uh, you know, 150, 60 new
professionals every month coming
on board. We're trying, you
know, big, uh big issue when
you're starting the program.
It's just people knowing about
the program and so we're, we're
focused on, on outreach.
And again, those professionals
are seeing increases of about
$12,000 annually, so it's it's a
big difference, which is awesome
and uh Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, for the 10 million
proposal that you all are
proposing. Do we suppose that
that sort of follows that same
grow model.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Small, uh, it will be similar,
but it it is the it is the full
wage scale and career lattice
implementation that was in our
enabling statute that we're
charged with doing and so that
will not just, that will be for
all early childhood
professionals that home visiting
childcare and pre-K. OK. Uh, got
it. Thank you for that. Um, the,
on, on New Mexico first born for
the home visiting. Uh, how are
you all working to support that?
Mr. Chair, Representative Small,
um, I think what I'm hearing
from our home visiting team is
that many programs are looking
at first born as the model, um,
that they want to adopt cuz we
have providers who are offering
the Medicaid funded and then
those who are doing evidence
based who are eligible to do
Medicaid, and so we put in their
contract, you know, you need to
be claiming Medicaid, and if
you're, um, not in an evidence
base, then you can either choose
a promising practice, which in
our state is first born or an
evidence-based model, and we're
seeing a lot of those providers.
gravitating towards first born,
and we continue to support um
all of the providers and work
with the state office, um, and,
and just support it. So it's,
yeah, I think you're gonna see a
lot of growth in first born.
That, that's great. And Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, again
appreciate on the particular
around Medicaid leveraged, um,
home visiting. It's been, it's
such a high priority. Um, OK,
uh, I'll wrap up, Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary.
Uh really exciting growth.
Positive results.
The scale of this increase.
And its sustainability in not
only one year, but in 3 and 4
and 5 years is a, is a very,
very tough challenge. And so how
we work, I think we'll work
through that together as we've
done, but I, I want very much
sort of
Appreciate the work that's been
done, celebrate the folks who
are here know that this is as
big of a budget increase, um, it
is an extraordinary large budget
increase and to do those sorts
of investments, even at some of
that scale, there has to be a
lot of confidence that we're not
just sort of cutting salaries,
closing slots in 3 and 4 years'
time, which I know you fully
share, so that'll be the
challenges.
go forward. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, um, Senator Rogers is
not here, but I'm gonna say it
again. I think we said it before
me.
You can be a jack of all trades,
but not good at any.
And, and so as we formed that
toddler stuff, right? Before we
go to universal childcare.
We need to fix that problem and
make sure those slots are
filled, and then move on to the
next section, and that should
happen before we even begin the
conversation of universal
childcare, uh, how we handle
those first and how they get
served.
Let me ask you some
question on your
slide show for tribal.
You said you gave $98 million to
the Navajo Nation. Do we know
where those centers are?
Mr. Chair, yes, we do.
And what they're offering
you know over there.
Mr. Cherry I believe there's
over 20 different sites, so.
Um, but our pre-K team, I can
send that to you and follow up
and and by, by how many children
at each of the sites. And, and
yeah, that's interesting to me,
but then I noticed that Zuni's
not on here.
Did Zuni not want to participate
or
They have forgotten Pueblo.
Chair, I, I.
They do.
You want, I could have the
assistant secretary come.
In the 98 million was actually
the expansion across the state.
So a tribal communities there
was um
An expansion of 4 programs in
the initial rollout. It was
Navajo Nation Mescalero, the
hole Nambe Tsuke. So Zuni has a
Head Start program. They don't
have capacity to run a pre-K
program. So this was done
looking at the saturation of the
uni pueblo, the number of
students that they had children
served, so they were aware of
it. We do have um Francine
Chima, who is on our tribal
advisory coalition, she was
aware, they said when they get
capacity meaning teachers and
more children, they will look
into um applying for the pre-K
funding.
OK. And they're trying to at
least I have the opportunity if
they don't take the opportunity,
you can't force them to.
And then on number 16.
says University of New Mexico,
Native American budget and
Policy Institute.
400,000 for supporting.
A lot of acronyms there
in TC TAC supporting the, the
legislative session.
What would we be paying 400,000
for support during the
legislative session a policy
analyst, so the Native American
budget Policy Institute does a
number of things. Um, it's led
by Doctor um Carmel Roybon, so
they gather gather a lot of data
and tribal communities. They do
a lot of research, so we
actually have um Mark Hume who's
actually here in the in the um
audience. He overseas in New
Mexico Early Childhood Travel
Advisory.
coalition, he works with all the
23 representatives from each of
the pueblo tribes and nations,
they do the planning, they do
the um
Everything, like the logistics,
um, the advisory, the agendas,
um, we're making um lodging.
We're also making um tribal
profile so from each of the 23
tribes and nations, and when we
say policy and supporting the
legislature, that means um we
actually train our coalition
members to
Learned about when a bill is
first introduced to if and when
it reaches or when it reaches
the governor's desk, so we're
building capacity for our travel
advisory coalition members to
take this information back to
their own travel communities to
educate their community of what
happens here. So we're building
capacity and tribal communities
so that they know what is
happening here and what your job
is, Senator. Uh, so that's what
we're doing the lobby.
No, no, and they advised the
department with um policy
legislative session or
legislative um bills that are
coming up, so we always include
them in all of our advisements,
they provide us guidance.
OK.
Um,
Thank you, Madam Secretary. You
know, uh, a 6 year age, we're 6
years into this, right?
But
We're still we're barely PK
kindergarten.
Yeah, and, and we've grown from,
we had 330 million, I think
before you guys started in and
then it moved up and then we're,
we're almost tipping the tipping
point of a billion dollars, we
created a $10 billion fund by
accident and good processing
some good thought, but the
market saved us and, and created
a great fund for that. Um.
How do you feel about taking
baby bonds out.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I don't have a
position on that, um, but um I
think what I wanna say about the
um.
I want to say about the
investment is you're so right,
um, it's been huge. It's been
significant. And I just, I hope
that we can all just celebrate
the amazing work that you all
have led because this 13% return
on investment from what we heard
on Monday with the returns. It's
just exciting to think about
what's possible for New Mexicans
when those children are entering
kindergarten classrooms.
ready to take up that experience
with their health development,
education on track and family
supported. I mean, I wish I
could take you with me and and
hear some of these. I hope
you're hearing it when you're
out in community about how
families' lives have markedly
changed because of these
investments over the last 5
years. Um, but, um, I think I
know that that's something it's
a a priority of the treasure,
um, and I think maybe as the
speaker as well, um, something
we're interested to keep hearing
more about and learning as you
as we go.
OK. No, no, we're, we're on this
journey and Kelly, I think the
first cohort of early childhood
should be like seniors now,
right? When we first started
this, or in that er they were
tracking pretty high compared to
their counterparts when they
started this, right?
Uh, Mr. Chair, depending on the
um program we started childcare
assistants really started under
President Clinton, when that
first started in pre-K, we have
Claire Dudley Travis in the
room. She was some of the first
big work on pre-K starting in,
what was it? 0504, so quite a
long history of investment.
And and one of the outcome has
been a wet track those children.
You get an answer if you know
it.
Oh, Mr. Chair, um, the
legislative Finance Committee
did, they did a report.
3 years ago, we're in the middle
of a progress update to that
report, but they showed a
nominal returns, about a $6
every $1 invested return, uh,
and that was on the cohort and
better high school outcomes,
especially for children who are
low income and children with
special needs had better
outcomes. So it's, it's truly a,
I mean, I traveled the state all
the time and.
People can't believe.
What's going on here? And I
think to your point about
focusing, I just want to
emphasize we are building the
prenatal to 5 system for New
Mexico. So it is, it is the
thing and it is exciting to
think about a K-12 system, a
higher ed system, and a prenatal
to 5 system that are all aligned
in service of, um,
You know, it's just an improved
outcome of a better future for
New Mexico.
It'll be slow in and people
saying that early childhood,
right? And I tell them those,
the first corehorts remember 05,
they're probably they're
graduating and gone we probably
didn't track them, but the ones
we're tracking now are they're
they outcomes are better, their
grades are higher, they're
staying in school, so it's
working and slowly gonna change
the system and change to Mexico.
On Monday, we had a report which
is is very interesting. You may
go watch it, but it was a
demographics about
In New Mexico.
Um, but women are in the
workplace even more than men.
And in childcare is one of the
most important things that we
can do for women in the
workforce, right?
Because
The they're outpacing men in the
workforce in college and
everything. And so are we
targeting that correctly, right?
And the and let me ask you this
cause I heard that if you drop
your kid off early at some
places, they charge you.
And if you don't pick them up on
time, then they charge you for
staying late.
Is that happening?
Cause that's not really
childcare for a working mother.
Mr. Chair, that um many places,
you know, open it 7, even 6:30
and stay open till 6:30. I think
that is an area for us to
continue to focus on as we look
at that childcare supply and
demand study, what, what are,
how our providers staying open.
I know many of the providers in
here.
probably 7 to 7, uh working some
of them non-traditional hours on
the weekends, but you know, I
agree with you, we have to meet
the working family our need and
a lot of our families who are
working are nontraditional,
they're not nontraditionally, we
call it, but you know, weekends,
evenings, the hospitality
industry, the tourism, so we do
have to be looking at that as we
build out our supply. So are
they charging them if they
parent goes to work at 8, right,
and probably has to drop the kid
at 7:30, depending where they
live.
Are they charging for early drop
off. And if they don't get off
till 5 or 6.
Are they charging them to, to, I
want to know that.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you,
it's a good question. It is a
business decision. I mean it is
something that we don't um we
don't regulate, um, but that's a
business and I believe in our
childcare assistance, um.
Uh, they are not allowed to
charge any fees outside of what
we pay if they receive our
childcare assistance. So they
could not do that for a family
with a childcare assistance
contract, or we would have
follow upro's dying to tell me
something. You won't tell me.
You can,
yes.
So they aren't allowed to with
their receiving it, it's a child
who has a childcare assistance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
to clarify, so there are two
different areas that I think
you're, you, you might be
talking about is New Mexico
Pre-K is free, and those are
ours, there are two different
types that you can get into New
Mexico pre-K, a 6 hour program
or an extended plus program. It
varies by provider. Anytime
outside of those hours, then a
parent, we would guide them to
go get a childcare assistance
contract, and they are not
charged anything besides what
the state pays for that
contract?
Um, and that includes zero
copays, 0 taxes, so in essence
they can go free. My centers are
open at 6:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
They are not charged for any
time outside of those hours,
except if they do come after 6
o'clock, and that is, I will
tell you it's because of a
liability issue, my insurance
tells me I'm not covered and
they need to be there by 6.
Well, there's a time for kids to
go home.
Yes.
OK. That's what I wanted to
clarify. Thank you.
OK, thank you, Madam Secretary.
Well, we'll be looking
cautiously and see what happens
today.
Um pardon?
We all are.
Yeah
If we weren't cautiously
optimistic we would buy lottery
tickets every day.
Mhm
Hope Senor Gonzalez, she had a
question. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
No, no, she's at right there.
All right, everyone come back
and sit down.
Oh, first of all, uh, just two
things, and uh I'll just take it
a little step further than our
children.
But uh that was on Monday at
1:30 when we have that
presentation on economic
development and effects of the
demographic changes in the
workplace. And if you go online
to.
Mexical legislature.
You can pull it out. That was
the one that uh and it was with
um.
Um, James Johnson, Junior
Professor.
And from uh urban investments
from the University of North
Carolina.
But it is quite something. It's
one hour long, but it is really
worth for everyone to really see
that.
The second part that I was gonna
ask is, um,
Uh, I had to step out, but when
you mentioned about.
The things positive that we're
gonna be going into
kindergarten.
When will we see that for first,
Senator Gonzalez, um.
I, um,
I need, can you further I'm
looking at I guess where we are
now, it's already going into the
face of
Kindergarten that you're seeing
the positive results and
Everything that's happening.
So is that this coming year that
we will see first grade? Oh, Mr.
Chair, Senator, are you talking
about the early development
instrument and the data on that,
so the the schools have that
data about those that cohort of
kindergartners.
The the data actually has
predictive validity up to 5th
grade. So we're working with the
public education department and
our and our partners to really
help understand how that data
could be used by principles, by
superintendents to drive change
within a school building, uh, to
really look at their population
of kindergartners, so they
could, um, address it either
through professional development
or other intervention
strategies, but I, I think it
would be great maybe to have, I
don't know if that's possible to
have a a full.
You know, committee discussion
on this with LESC what this data
is and and and really dive into
that very excellent question,
um.
Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman,
what I'm seeing is uh
We're doing really great, and
we're really taking it more like
on a sequential.
You know, scope and sequence.
And uh I would hate to.
All some throw a lot into it.
You know, it'd be a lot to
really see the really great
results of kindergarten and
first grade, then 2nd, then 3rd,
and then we could feel solid
about.
problem.
When something killing. Yeah, I
mean, I think we have some LC
research that's historical er is
is in the audience, um, that has
shown we are seeing a year of
growth, um, every year, so
that's good where we're
struggling with is um our
children previously were
starting at a point where they
were below kindergarten
readiness, so even if you have
that year of growth, you're
still behind when you're going
forward, so we're focusing on
entering kindergarten ready and
that's some of the work that
actually we have some evaluators
in the audience who are gonna
do.
pre-care assessment coming up
and hopefully give you some good
data on that entrance point to
make sure that we
Or hitting those goals.
Very well. Thank you.
Thank you.
Now you can go.
All right, Megan Maggie.
I mean, we are seeing really
good, we're seeing growth from
our teachers. If you start,
they'll stay quiet, so louder
you get right now, they'll move
out quietly. I.
What time are we gonna be behind
Maggie?
Will be the
maybe you guys could just kind
of move out quietly so we can
still what tab are we behind
Maggie,
we'll be behind Ta chair.
Have I?
OK.
All right. Good afternoon, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Maggie Klug, and I'm on
the program evaluation team. I'm
here today to present the next
quarterly report on
non-recurring appropriations.
This can be found in tab I of
your binders.
This report is divided into 3
parts. Part A includes an update
on Section 5 special
appropriations from the 2024
GAA.
Junior appropriations from 2023
and Section 9 governmentsults
and Opportunity Fund or grow
appropriations from the 2024
GAA.
The next two parts include
explored two key case studies,
chosen based on committee
interest and large dollar
amounts flowing into these
areas.
Part B discusses grants for
local fire and police to the
Department of Finance
Administration and Part C
discusses water projects to the
Office of the State Engineer.
You will also find behind the
brief tables with the individual
status of Section 5 special
appropriations from the last two
years, as well as Section 9 grow
appropriations from the 2024
GAA.
The data was collected for this
report and the tables at
mid-November, and while the
appropriations to higher
education institutions are
included in the tables. They are
not included in the analysis of
the brief, as these
appropriations are not tracked
in the state's accounting
system.
Starting with Part A on page one
of the brief, again in tab I, as
seen in chart 1, almost 61% of
Section 5 special appropriation
funds from the 2024 GAA have
been encumbered or expended.
Agencies have made significant
progress in encumbering
expending funds, with almost 30%
of the 149 appropriations,
almost fully expended and
encumbered.
About 45 appropriations or 30%
have not encumbered or expended
any funds, but 7 of these were
appropriated for more than 1
year and thus have additional
time.
On page 2, moving to government
results and opportunity fund or
grow appropriations from Section
9 of the 2024 GAA?
In previous years, junior
appropriations were funded
through a separate bill.
From the general Appropriations
Act in DFA was responsible for
distributing these funds.
This year, these kinds of
appropriations were put in
section 9 of the GAA and funded
through the newly created Growth
Fund.
This funding fell into two
primary groups.
The first is the local
legislatively directed or junior
appropriations to councils of
government or cogs through DFA
and other state agencies.
funneling the money through the
cogs allows for increased
oversight and technical
assistance for local entities.
The second group of funding went
to 163-year pilot projects.
Starting with the junior
appropriations to cogs or
councils of government. Cogs
have encumbered all local growth
funding, meaning the grant
agreements are all in place.
Of the 156 appropriations of
this kind cogs have expended
funds from 14 of these
appropriations. Given that these
appropriations are for 2 years,
this progress indicates that
there are likely to be few
reversions.
Last year, 6.9 million, or about
7% reverted from the 2023 junior
bow.
As you can see in table one on
page 2.
DFA was a large contributor to
the subversion amount. However,
it's important to note the
junior bill appropriations to
state agencies are not based on
their own requests, and DFA
receives a large number of
junior bill appropriations to
distribute to local governments
and entities. Therefore,
allocating junior appropriations
to cogs could decrease the
chance of reversions by reducing
DFA's workload and the number of
local entities that they must
oversee.
Should the legislature continue
to fund junior appropriations
through cogs, a flat
administrative cost percentage
of 10% modeled after federal
standard should be considered.
As for the junior appropriations
to state agencies, agencies have
encumbered or expanded around
22% of total appropriations thus
far.
Lastly, the 3-year grow pilot
projects have also made
significant progress, with 8 out
of 14, not including higher
education institutions,
progressing and encumbering and
expending funds. A total of
about 49 million or 69% of the
first year pilot project
funding, excluding again, higher
ed funding has been encumbered
or expended.
Let's now move to Part B on
local fire and police grants to
DFA on page 3.
In the past 2 years, the
legislature appropriated
multiple Section 5 special
appropriations to the Department
of Finance Administration and
Department of Public Safety for
local fire and police efforts
and recruitment.
Through these appropriations,
the state has embarked on a new
path of providing significant
subsidies for core local
government services.
These appropriations have been
successful in recruiting almost
810 firefighter, emergency
medical technician, police
officer, and correctional
positions. However, some of
these public safety special
appropriations to DFA have
reverted or seen few
expenditures.
Table 2 on page 3 shows a list
of these appropriations along
with their balance and status.
For special appropriations for
recruitment, DFA used a
three-year phased approach to
give local entities time to
build room in their budget for
new positions.
This, however, is contingent on
the reauthorization of the
appropriations as each were only
for one year.
In this approach, as seen in
Figure 1 on page 4, grants cover
100% of salaries and benefits in
the first year.
50% in the second year and 25%
in the third.
These positions are all funded
at a flat rate of 75,000.
Three appropriations studied in
this report use this method.
1st, 57 million was earmarked
for state and local law
enforcement out of a $106.5
million special appropriation to
DFA from the 2023 GAA for law
enforcement programs.
Of this 57 million DFA has
distributed around 33 million
for the first year, funding a
total of 432 positions.
In the 2024 GAA DFA received 2
$25 million special
appropriations for the
recruitment of firefighters and
EMTs and law enforcement and
correctional officers.
In both cases, a little over 14
million was granted to local and
state uh local and state
agencies for first year
distributions, funding a total
of 190 firefighters and EMT
positions and 189 law
enforcement and correctional
positions.
Tables 3 through 5 on pages 4
and 5, show the entities
receiving the largest
distributions from these three
appropriations and a full list
of the recipients of the
first-year distributions from
these appropriations can be
found in Appendix A.
As seen in table 6 on page 5,
special appropriations have also
supported the arrest of over
2400 individuals with felony
warrants.
However, some appropriations to
DFA for public safety has seen
limited movement or will revert.
For instance, of the 32.5
million earmarked for the law
enforcement workforce capacity
fund out of the 106.5 special
appropriation from the 2023 GAA
for law enforcement programs,
only 4000 of the 3.32.5 million
dedicated amount for the law
enforcement workforce capacity
fund has been spent.
This is due to DFA's commitment
to having tribal representation
on the council that the funds
must flow through.
However, the bill creating the
fund is seemingly seemingly does
not create language explicitly
including tribal police.
Moving now to Part C on page 6.
Special appropriations to the
Office of the State Engineer
support important water projects
statewide, but often take more
than one year.
A full list of the special
appropriations to the Office of
the State Engineer, or OSE
studied in this report, along
with their status and balance
can be found in Table 7 on page
6.
In general, water projects tend
to have a longer timeline than
other special appropriations due
to their seasonal, complex, and
often capital nature.
Thus, special appropriations to
the Office of State Engineer
often require reauthorization.
5 out of the 8 appropriations to
OSC from the 2023 GAA studied in
this report were reauthorized.
These reauthorizations are
typically a result of 3 primary
factors.
First, special appropriations to
OSC are often capital in nature.
Traditional capital
appropriations are made for 4
years, while special
appropriations are typically
made for one year, unless
otherwise specified.
Secondly, there's a seasonality
to the work though, as he does
work related to irrigation,
dams, and seass is typically
completed at the end of the
irrigation season at the end of
the year, limiting the time
frame in which work can be
completed.
Lastly, the limited capacity of
local entities such as Asakia
and ditch communities often
creates a delay.
Thus in the future, the
legislature may want to consider
making future special
appropriations to OSC multi-year
to account for the often time
intensive nature of water
projects.
Turning to page 7.
Another key point about special
appropriations to OSC is that
OSE does not own any dams in the
state, creating barriers to
completing work on the dams. The
Interstate stream Commission
only owns the Ute Dam.
Overall, special appropriations
have supported OSE in improving
water infrastructure, repairing
the dam, updating the 50-year
water plan and leasing water
rights.
Moving back to page one for the
key takeaways of this brief.
The majority of section 5
special appropriation funds from
the 2024 GAA have been
encumbered or expended.
Both the local junior and money
through cogs and state agencies,
as well as the three-year pilot
project to grow funding have
made significant progress.
Special appropriations have
supported the recruitment of
over 810 public safety positions
across the state, and over 2400
individuals have been arrested
with the support of a 2024
special appropriation to DFA for
felony warrant enforcement.
And lastly, while special
appropriations to the office of
the State Engineer often take
more than one year and require
reauthorization. This funding is
supporting important water
projects statewide. I thank you
all for your time and I'll now
answer any questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can we
go to page 5 and you actually
quoted this, it's on the uh
The last bolded paragraphs some
public safety special
appropriations
and it's the next paragraph that
talks about DFA has only
expended about $4000 of the
$32.5 million for law
enforcement.
Workforce capacity building fund
position portion of the 2023 GAA
$106.5 million special
appropriation.
Due to the due to DFA's
commitment to having tribal
representation on the council as
established by laws in 2020.
Do they not have travel
representation? Is that why they
can't spend that money? Uh, the
bill established 4 members of
this committee, and these were
outlined in the bill and it does
not explicitly state tribal
representation. The DFA has a
commitment to including tribal
representation on this council
and thus is not expended the
majority of this fund.
So, so the hang up then is, we
have to redraft legislation to
put it in legislation.
I'm not sure of the exact
solution, but I believe, I
believe that would be one
potential approach um if there's
anyone from DFA in the audience,
they may be able to expand on
that. OK, it just seems like
that's a lot of money out there,
only 4000 of it being spent and
it's because of maybe some
hiccup in in language. Uh, so,
yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
In the other oh center woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Under these state engineer.
Uh, on page 6.
On that table.
You recommend there that we
should put it under the uh
multi-year account.
Um
Is there a particular reason we
didn't do that, that we didn't
direct it that way to start
with.
Uh, Chair members of the
committee, uh, that is the
prerogative of the legislature.
I can't speak to specifically
why these were not capital
appropriations, but given the
research that we did, I would
recommend moving forward that
these are multi-year
appropriations. But this, this,
uh,
These didn't come through. These
were special appropriations and
they didn't come to the Water
Trust board or anything else.
These, these were direct
appropriations from the
legislature to these projects.
Uh, chair, Senator, that is
correct.
And these are
I guess this is what I'm
wondering.
No one legislator has this kind
of money, so
I mean, here's 10 million, 35
million.
Uh, 20 million.
Was the district combined
several legislators got together
and
With this kind of money towards
a project.
Chair senator, I'm not sure, uh,
exactly the process that
occurred during the GAA process.
So this is probably not capital
outlay.
Runny
Uh, chair senator is not capital
outlay money, it is just special
appropriation money. OK. It's
under special appropriation.
I'm sorry I'm asleep.
Please excuse me. Thank you very
much. Thank you, could you do us
a favor? Everything in the Ade
line item strike in language and
like give me page 25 line item.
3:33.
we wanted the money out by July
2023.
It was $3 million and she struck
the language for the date.
Could you gather a list of all
those that have language strikes
that have zero balances and
let's, let's take those back and
send them back a different way.
to center I can absolutely do
that for you. OK.
Any other questions?
You know, thank you.
Do next.
do
action.
Yeah, we can do this right now.
We're gonna go to tab.
Cat Taha, Mr. Chairman, TaK and
we're gonna do the action items
so we can just make sure. So
these are 3 of our contractors
that we would like to bring in
for uh session FIR work.
Who are they?
Uh, and Hannacorti, Lance
Chilton, and Kathleen, uh, Gigi.
All have worked for us and uh
some capacity and, and for many
years. OK,
the second compos any objection.
Excited Charles.
The next item is uh the
subcommittee report.
Uh, and recommendations for the
child welfare subcommittee, um,
And the sunset subcommittee.
If you'd like to adopt the
subcommittee reports and then
take up
The actual recommendations when
we do committee sponsored
legislation that would be a good
idea. We would do past Mr.
Chairman, because we have those
committee reports.
Uh, motion by Senator Rodriguez,
second by representative Cruz.
And we were adopted both.
Both subcommittee on Childcare
and fire, uh, the subcommittee
on Sunset and,
and I would encourage committee
members to look at the child
welfare and take that with you,
um, because that's gonna, that
would be part of a recommended
action, um, for possible
legislation.
That's it for approval, Mr.
Chairman. OK, anything else I
would, uh, encourage members to
look at tabs as well, uh, for
potential committee-sponsored
legislation, uh, when we come
back in January.
OK.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh.
I believe we have a handout for
you with uh special
appropriations on them, uh, I
will, uh, talk for a moment, uh,
while that's being handed out,
but, uh, on the cover of that
you'll see some bullets there
that shows you uh a couple of
trends that we've been seeing
over time for special
appropriations. So this year,
uh, agencies requested $3.129
billion in special, um, uh,
special appropriate special
supplemental and
efficiency appropriations, uh,
that compares with about 2.8
billion. That was requested last
year, um, you'll notice also on
the chart on page one of your
packet, the, the number, the
overall number of appropriations
has gone down slightly, but the
overall dollar amount's gone up.
That's because a number of
agencies requested some pretty
uh sizable uh uh appropriations,
notably, uh, the Environment
Department asked for 250
million. We went over all these
uh
Specials back in October, um,
the issue with, with that though
was supplemental in deficiency
appropriations. We're not due
until November 15th, and also
the public education department
uh made special, uh, some, uh,
requests for special
appropriations beginning in or
yeah, at the end of November,
those were received. So, um,
You have attached to those
bullets, Mr. Chair, a complete
list of every special
supplemental and deficiency
request that we received from
agencies, um, as I mentioned, we
went through uh most of Section
5. I was going to skip down to
the the 1st 25 pages,
essentially we've already done.
So I was gonna skip down to the
public education department, Mr.
Chairman, and, and go over
special requests from PED.
OK, so we're on page 26 in your
packet, actually at the very
bottom line there, you'll see
the public education department
requested $30 million for summer
reading, uh, or so for reading
intervention programs, uh, that
is consistent with the level,
uh, that was funded by you all
last year, um, for this, this
same program.
And I, and I have to go
neglected to mention, Mr. Chair,
I didn't know you all know
Andrew, Doctor Andrew Miner with
the Department of Finance and
Administration, who's also here
to, uh, you know, to make any
notes about uh a appropriations.
Uh, so, as I said, the $30
million for summer reading
initiatives was on page 26 at
the bottom, uh,
The, there are a couple of
small, smaller items, um, on,
well, one not so small item
there on on page 27, line 231
PED requested $9.5 million for
attendance and improvement
interventions, um,
So, uh, there's a, there's a
number of different ways you
could consider uh funding uh
programs for attendance, uh,
improvements, uh, we've
recommended in the past that you
all consider, uh, including
language in there about how are
we going to measure the
effectiveness of those
interventions and determine
which interventions we're
getting the best uh return on
our investment for.
Andrew, did you have anything on
page 27?
Moving on to page 28, Mr. Chair.
Uh, online number 240 at the
top, you see a request for $41.5
million for career technical
education, uh, that includes
both a portion of general fund
and uh some other state funds
from the uh uh public education
reform fund, uh,
That again was a was a similar,
uh, there was a similar
appropriation last year. This
would continue, would allow PD
to continue that work.
Uh, moving further down on page
on line 28 PD requested $20
million for, to allow for the
continued uh recruitment of uh
educator fellows and uh that
again, another one where PD is
mostly looking to continue
programs that are already
underway.
Um, finally, uh, line 246 down
at the bottom, you see a request
for $5 million to support uh the
uh healthy uh hunger-free
Students Bill of Rights Act. So,
uh, that's funding, uh,
funding
school meals for those who
don't, who aren't eligible for,
for free lunch in uh our public
schools. Andrew?
On page 29. There's a couple of
items, uh, for the public
education department before we
get into higher education, um.
Uh
I don't necessarily have
anything to say on any, any of
these, Mr. Chair, but I would
just stand for any questions on
PED, uh, appropriations if
there's any members of the
committee.
Senator Gonzalez, we're just
gonna stop when you injure
somebody.
OK. Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman
of Jo on page 27.
For
31, the album.
One.
So then districts would have to
apply for the funding or? Yeah,
so, um,
Mr. Chair and and Senator, uh, I
don't, I don't have any
specifics on how uh PED would
intend to use this
appropriation, uh, one of the,
one of the ways that they would,
uh, they have done this in the
past, is for districts to to
propose a program that
This seems promising and for PED
to fund it. Uh, again, you know,
especially, you know, given the
importance of, of attendance in
student success, we would, we
would, uh, recommend.
Embedding this in in sort of an
evaluation framework so that
we're learning what are the most
effective ways to promote
attendance, uh, in our schools.
Uh, just the last part of Mr.
Chairman so it seemed to me like
uh
A higher priority could be given
to the ones that have the
highest.
You know, showing the.
With a attendance.
Uh, very well. Thank you.
Representative.
Mr. Chair, uh, page 28, uh, line
240. With that, that.
Recommendation the staff
scenario for the the 40
How much of the original or the
last appropriation was either
reverted or or moved to other uh
finding, Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I might ask my
colleague, um, Maggie to look up
how much has been uh encumbered
over the, the current year
appropriation, so the current
appropriation for CT is is
active, so I'm not sure how much
has been committed, um, but we
can get you information on, on
how that's been used. Sure, and
we also had a report of some of
the funding being moved to it
for other funding for.
Other, um, initiatives for the,
for PED for the charter schools.
So yeah, if you can get me a.
Information. Thank you.
OK.
Any other questions? OK, Joey,
go ahead.
OK, Mr. Chair, as I said, we did
go over the higher education one
so we can skip that portion of
section 5 and move on to section
6, and that begins at the bottom
of page 36 in your packet.
Um, we were really good about
getting one item on the bottom
of every, every page as we
start, uh, you see the Supreme
Court's asking for a
supplemental appropriation to uh
finish some uh,
A capital project uh that was
funded uh previously in special
appropriations.
Um
Turning to the next page, you
see, uh, some, some more items
for the courts. I will note on
line number 317, uh, you see,
uh, a combined request from
several district courts and and
AOC related to judicial salary
increases that you all approved
uh at the session last year. Um,
they, there was a request for
additional uh compensation
appropriation to fully fund
those salary, uh, increases.
Um, additionally, so another
area we saw a couple of
different requests, uh, was
online 318 and 320 related to
security at courts, and um,
If there were any questions on
the courts, Mr. Chairman, or,
uh, Doctor Miner had any
comments on any of the court
items?
I mean
I guess they can use their
warrant fees and if we don't
give them this.
So, um, so, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh, so
to the extent that they have
balances in those funds, yes.
Yeah, they've been staying at
time all with.
Garcia.
Johnny Menzel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the
line uh let me see here.
I just lost it.
If any anyway on the, on the
office of uh of the courts,
you're asking for money for
security, it am I not correct
that the counties.
Provide security for all these
courts. So, um, Mr. Chair and uh
and representative on line 320.
So yeah, my understanding is the
uh Donana County Sheriff has not
been able to, there was a
contract between the magistrate
courts and um the Donana County
sheriff that they were not able
to continue. Uh, they, uh, went
out, uh,
Looking for a new contract and
the cheapest one they could find
was um this amount over what the
other contract was.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Go ahead. So, OK. Um,
moving on to the next page, Mr.
Chairman and members on page 38,
um, you, I'm gonna jump all the
way down to line 334, you see, a
couple of items for the
Secretary of State, uh, related
to the election fund, those, uh,
balances, Secretary of State has
indicated to us are needed to
avoid, uh, end of the year, uh,
deficit in the election fund.
Andrew, did you have any
comments on this page?
Um, state racing commission.
OK.
Uh, next page, Mr. Chair, um, we
have, uh, the, uh, early
childhood department. Um,
there's a couple of, uh,
requests related to the family,
infant and toddler programs. So,
uh, online 340, 3, you see a
rate increase, um, in fiscal
year 2025 and then on line
number 344, that's for some
expanded services in that
program, that would be in the in
the current year.
Also on this page, Mr. Chairman,
you see a big one. This is
really the bulk of the uh
supplemental and deficiency
requests, line 346. You see a
shortfall in the the state
health benefits fund, the
agencies is requesting $124.2
million to make sure that uh
there's sufficient uh
Dollars in that in that account
to continue paying for uh health
benefits claims for state
employees and local governments
that participate in the state
plan.
Finally, on, on the, at the very
bottom of that page, Mr. Chair,
you'll see on on line 352. Uh,
so there's a, there's an
outstanding deficiency at the,
at the veterans Services
department related to, uh, long
term, long, long ago transfer of
the veteran's home in Truth or
Consequences to the veterans
services department, the
The homes got transferred back
to DOH, uh, and that left a
deficit in in one of the funds.
Uh, this deficiency request
would resolve that deficit.
Several years after it occurred.
Andrew?
Yeah, thank you, Joey. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, uh, just a
couple other things, so the, the
supplemental request that you
see the free CCD that Joey went
over, those were, of course,
described to you by Secretary
Gerginsky and the previous
presentation and also just uh
call your attention to the
couple supplemental requests for
the Department of Health that
you see on this page.
So, moving on, Mr. Chairman, to
page number 40, uh, so, uh, you
can see online 350 354 and 355,
some large requests from the
children, youth and Families
department. So, um, in this,
this has come up, one of the
things that the department has,
has not uh been uh has not been
able to pull down all of the
federal funds, uh, that they,
uh, that they
That they could, um, I'm not the
expert on that. You all, you all
heard, have heard from Rachel on
that, um, but so there's some
large, uh, supplemental
requests, uh, for that
department there. Uh,
additionally, you can see some,
uh some large supplemental
requests from from the
corrections department on line
357 and 358.
Um, before I go into PED, do
you, do you have anything on
those departments? Uh, just to,
Mr. Chairman, just to, just to
make it clear for everyone, so
on CYFD the about 12.3 million
requests you see there, that's
the deficiency for FY 24 and the
20 million is the supplemental
for FY 25.
Is that supplemental related to
the lawsuits is that why that
supplementals are.
Andrew.
Sorry, I'll go back.
I'm
If not, they'll blow me up on
the phone saying we can't hear
what they're saying.
Oh, there you go. The secretary
is here can answer it for you,
um, yes.
Part of that money is the for
related to Kevinness for some of
the hiring of the positions that
we need about $7 million. The 20
million though, that's not
related to the, to the lawsuit
settlements, so we have to do
it.
How much of it is, do you know
about 7 million is related to
direct hiring of positions and
then
13 million of that is to replace
um funding that's
Not being realized. That's where
you guys didn't get the federal
dollars, didn't apply for the
federal dollars, correct? It's
not a matter of not applying,
it's that the drawdowns that
were budgeted were at a higher
rate than what we typically do
draw down. So we drew down
everything that we were eligible
for.
OK.
That
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, I guess it's
line 356. I, I want people to
take their time. I mean, if we
got to spend another hour here
doing this. If you look at this
total number, it's $3 billion.
So take your time and, and know,
ask the question you want to ask
him, we got to stay, the sun
goes down, the sun comes up, and
we spend $3 billion and we think
we rushed it and thank you, Mr.
Chair.
So
line 356 of the Department of
Military Affairs for
groundwater.
Remediation and monitoring
projects in Berlin, New Mexico,
$29 million. I'm not saying I'm
for it or against it. I just
don't know what it is. I have no
clue, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's $29,000. 0.
Big difference. Yes. What's it
for? What's it for still? So,
um, Mr. Chair, I might need to,
uh, representative, I might need
to follow up on that. I don't
have, oh, you know, Scott might
have some information on that.
Mr. Representative Chatfield, my
understanding and discussions
with the agency is because of
the use of things like uh
certain chemicals for fire
suppression in that area, led to
groundwater contamination,
they're concerned about making
sure it as clean as they
remediate the area.
Thank you very much. And like I
say, there's a lot of difference
between 29 million, 29,000 for
those of you in the audience, we
sometimes get them expressed one
way and sometimes the other, so.
OK
So, Mr. Chair, continuing on the
very bottom of that page. So you
see two requests for the healthy
hunger, again, the healthy
hunger free students Bill of
Rights. So on line 360, you see
a $3 million request for a prior
year shortfall and then online
359, you've got $7.8 million for
uh expected fiscal year 2025
shortfall for that program.
And so you could uh continuing
on, um, with PED on the next
page on line 363, you see a um
See a $40 million request to
maintain uh the current uh
preliminary unit value PD is
currently projecting that they
will have insufficient funds to
uh to to do that, uh, to
maintain the current unit value
and would need to to cut that. I
just say there are a couple of
different ways that, that, uh,
you can, you could fund this and
uh
Uh, including through a fund
transfer. So, uh, Andrew.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I've
finished up all of the, of the
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations, that's
essentially everything, uh, that
we didn't go over in October.
And I would just, uh, stand for
any questions.
Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, I did
have one more thing beginning
on.
Beginning on page number 55.
The, sorry.
51 in your packet.
You see uh language only and
reauthorization requests. So
this was, uh, some of the, uh,
what Maggie was talking about,
uh, a short time ago about, uh,
Um, various requests that will
expire, uh, at the end of 25, or
sorry, yeah, at the end of 25
and the agency is seeking
reauthorization for those
requests. Uh, some of these are,
um,
You, you, you'll you'll notice
that some of these were also
requested uh as additional
special appropriations. So for
example, on page 50 on uh
Line, uh, number 420.
Uh, you see a, a request from
the administrative office of the
courts to extend a $16 million
appropriation that you all made
in 2023, uh, for, uh, for, for
technology projects, and then
you can see on that page as well
how much as the agency expended?
How much is have they committed,
uh, currently and the, and the
remaining balance on that
appropriation. So, um,
Uh
We have those items for you as
well. Um,
I don't really have any of
these. I, I want to particularly
highlight, Mr. Chair, but I will
stand for any questions.
Represented Lujan.
Um
Same section, um, there are line
421.
Uh,
So
They are asking for the the
original appropriation was $3
million. They've expended 98,000
and encumbered 15.9000 and so
that remaining balance, is it,
what was the reason for them to
have they given us a reason why
they haven't expended that, Mr.
Chair.
So, Mr. Chair and, and
representatives, so that was the
appropriation you all made
during the special the recent
special session, um, for
assisted outpatient treatment at
AOC. Again, that they're,
they're, they're different ways
that you could fund this,
whether it's through um through,
through grow or recurring
budget, and they're just asking
for reauthorization of this, um,
of this funding. And Mr. Chair,
the recommendation is no after
we passed it during the special
session. So, um, Mr. Chair and
and represent
so the
Recommendations currently under
development and, and we'll, um,
we'll have, we'll be happy to
answerstood. So are we looking,
so, uh, just for the
conversation last part of this
for me is, so we're looking for
other ways to better this is
that what you're saying. Thank
you.
OK, Joey, walk us through, um,
Walk us through again on the.
Rios, but the extensions that
they're doing, right? So I'm
gonna tell you one on,
on page just kind of.
Page 53, 4:30, right?
They need to expand that within
one year, they're they're going
bankrupt, so they can't get it
done one year and they're going
bankrupt, that's.
That's an issue.
Then I wanna look at, let's look
at
Uh, page 57 line.
443.
Do it has had this, and they
haven't spent 25 million at all.
And we want to extend that, then
the
PRC, I mean, some of these
recommendations.
Yeah, um, we just can't extend
it anymore. If the agency can't
get their work done.
That's not our problem. If they
had in 2023, if they were given
funding, and they haven't got it
done in in that amount of time.
Tell me, tell me why I should do
that.
So, um, Mr. Chair and uh and
members of the committee. So,
some of these projects are, are
longer term and so we've
recommended, we've recommended
in some cases extending those
dollars in some cases, the
agencies come back to you with a
large request and, and we've
recommended that you should
extend the pro the prior dollars
um that would have been
appropriated for that purpose
and not fund, uh, the, uh, the
new request, um, but, you know,
ultimately, uh,
The fact that the money is still
sitting there is, is concerning
and agencies need to be getting
that out better. That's why,
that's one of the reasons we're
doing these uh quarterly reports
on these special appropriations.
So to, to shine a light on.
On spending.
those dollars. Yeah, and, and
then I'm gonna go to
supplementals.
In this budget year, 24, right?
This this current budget year is
20 FY 2525, they're already
asking for 241 million in
supplementals. I mean, I mean
they're.
Right, 241 supplements. That
tells me they didn't budget it
very well. Why, what's the
reason these agencies are
supplementals or they're
overspending, this is 25. The
deficiencies are 18 million from
the, from 24, correct? Uh,
deficiencies, Mr. Chair, are 18
million. I, yeah, I, I believe
your number. I don't have have
it directly in front of me
there. Um, yeah, you're right,
deficiencies are $19 million. I
would say, um,
The supplemental number of 240
million, about half of that is,
um,
For for one program for the
employee health benefits fund.
Um, I think, you know, in some
other cases, we've seen, um,
Personnel spending go up more
heavily than anticipated through
both agencies being able to fill
vacant positions as well as
agencies giving raises that were
more than 3% you all
appropriated. Um, that's one of
the reasons agencies are coming
to you for, for supplementals,
and then sometimes agencies come
for supplementals that
ultimately are not needed. I, we
saw that last year where we had
agencies request supplemental
funding from you that ended up
reverting funds back to the um
back to the general.
fun. So, in some cases they
simply aren't needed. I don't
know um if Doctor Miner wants to
talk, they, there was um some,
some guidance from DFA on, on
information that should be
submitted for supplementin
deficiencies, um, some agencies
did that, some agencies did not.
Yeah, thanks, Joey. Good
afternoon again, uh, Mr.
Chairman. We did ask that, uh,
agencies submit budget
projections for, uh, fiscal year
25 along with their supplemental
requests to show us, you know,
what is going on with their
budget and uh why is this, you
know, why is this shortfall
needed, um, so we, we did try to
get uh more information this
year and we, we, we believe, we
understand that this is an issue
and, you know, we don't, we want
to acknowledge needs where they
are and not, uh
excessively so, um, so that's,
that's what we are trying to do,
um, like Joey mentioned, you
know, like two of the
supplementals are basically take
up 165 million of the request. A
lot of them are pretty small,
um, and some of them are for
like,
Uh, for shortfalls that they are
the agencies are projecting.
And the I, I understand the
healthcare benefits, that's exe
did that to us years ago and
we're not, we're gonna have to
figure out how to catch that up.
But how are we going to get
these agencies where they're not
submitting supplementals, or 6
months, 4 months into this
budget year.
4 months into the budget here, I
think there was an agency that
submitted a supplement.
15 days after the new budget
year.
How, how are we gonna get the, I
mean, how's the execut and get
these agencies not to, to tell
us the correct budget number and
then not to overspend cause my
choice is, I can go to court and
say you overspent your budget
and you violate the statute.
Right, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
think, you know, one of the
things I think uh secretary
Props mentioned last time he was
up before here uh before you was
that uh we are implementing
quarterly reports and meetings
with uh cabinet level agencies,
possibly to be extended to more
agencies and certainly
recommending these as practices
to all agencies where they will
need to provide us, uh, their,
their projections, their
spending plans for non-recurring
issues because we also believe
that these agencies should be
spending their money and they
should be spending it on time.
So we are stepping up our
oversight role. We're
encouraging agencies to do the
same within their own
organization. So, uh, it's
definitely we share that concern
and we are, we are doing what we
can to try to work that out as
well.
Uh, I mean, then why have a
budget if we're gonna do
supplementals.
They'll just overspend and then
come back and say, well, we'll
fix it in the supplemental.
I mean, that's the problem. We
don't calculate supplementals on
the backside, right?
Maybe we should take the
supplemental cost minus the
healthcare costs and take it out
of this year's budget for those
agencies that didn't budget it
correctly and say, well, we're
gonna fix this supplemental, but
we're gonna reduce your budget
by that in order for you guys to
stay in, in, in place. I mean,
the 18 million in deficiencies,
so you take the 160 out.
You're at $90 million in
supplementals, six months into
the year.
And then you're 18 million in
deficiencies from the prior
year.
I mean
$100 million.
How are we gonna, how's DFA
gonna get them under control?
Mr. Chairman, we share the
concern certainly, and we are,
we are trying to improve that.
OK.
Any other questions?
I, I just encourage members, I
mean, this is a 3.1 billion
package.
3.1 billion if you have a
question because tomorrow we're
gonna run the executive, we need
to spend more time in executive,
but now is the time that we need
to look at that. Sonny, you want
to say something?
Oh, right
I don't mind sitting here
quietly for a few minutes in our
wood. I think people need to see
what's in here because.
Vincent Rodgers.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
462, you've got uh 5 million
with
For 4646 left.
463.
What's the difference in those
two.
What
You got, is it just uh
You got
So
yeah, so, um, Mr. Chair, so just
to confirm, you're talking about
on page 61, line 462, the rural
areas, the Essential Air Service
item and then on page 62, uh, 0,
so also for the essential Air
Servant, so the line 462 was
appropriated by you all in 2022.
Uh, line 463 was appropriated by
you all in 2021. Uh, the 2021
appropriation had a longer time
frame, so they both are expiring
at the end of the current fiscal
year. So, uh, the agencies, uh,
ask for reauthorization of those
funds. On top of, I, I'll, I'll
know this is another area where
um the agency also submitted a
special appropriation request
for $15 million on top of
Reauthorization of unspent
dollars in this area.
So you
You recommending to extend these
funds.
So, um, mister, Mr. Chair, um,
not speaking to, to the LFC rec,
the agency does have this, this
program is in, in progress and
they're seeking new funding for
that, for that program, one of
the strategies you could
consider would be to extend the
unspent dollars here, um, to
allow them to continue the
program.
OK.
OK, thank you.
Thank you. Uh, on that one,
since 2021, right?
On the expansion of for air
services.
Isn't there a comment by the
agency hasn't spent that since
2021.
So Mr. Chair, um,
My, my understanding of these
grants is they get drawn down by
the local airports as, as time
goes on, and so they, they
awarded all of the funding early
on. It's just the drawdowns have
been slower, um, have been less
than the full amount of that
award. So they, they committed
all of the money relatively
early, and then are spending
that down over time.
Uh,
We give money away if I gave you
a winning lottery ticket and
said here's a million dollars
winning lottery ticket, and you
can go buy an airplane.
Would you go cash that ticket?
So, Mr. Chairman, if there was,
if, if there were severe
restrictions on how I could, uh,
could cash that check no
restriction. It's just you can
use a prayer service.
So I, I do, I do believe there
are some, some limitations to
how, and we can review that
statute and, and get back to
you, but um,
Yeah, as uh the, the agency has
been slow to draw down this
money. I note that.
Representative for.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
It,
maybe we have a scenario as we
go into HAFC where any agency
sort of with unspent specials.
Like
The, the new special is just, is
No, it's sort of a choice
between one or the other.
Um
Are there other ways to help
understand this either through
narrative or additional
information.
To that, that we can sort of
help unpack for members, for
stakeholders for New Mexicans,
so that money isn't sitting, we
actually increase the flow of
money to important projects and
we stop over the final 2 years
of this administration
dedicating new money to programs
that have a lot of unspent old
money.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think one of
the things, like agencies have
been put on notice by some of
what Doctor Minors explaining to
you is DFA is going to want to
be seeing, you know, spending
plans for those, um,
For those non-recurring
appropriations, you could extend
that to, you know, your HFC HAFC
hearings if you wanted to where,
you know, there's an expectation
that when agencies come before
you to, to talk about their
budget, they're going to be
presenting you with a spending
plan for those non-recurring
appropriations so that they're
drawing that down on a timely
basis. Thank you, Mr. Sharon,
thank you and also as we go into
those hearings.
particularly for special
appropriations, can we have in
advance and written, transmitted
from LFC sort of a question
about
What special appropriations
exist.
What you've used them for
because they, uh, we can get so
caught up in the hearings on all
of the plans, ideas, the back
and forth, and lose sight of
some of that and not spend as
much time as we should, just
going through dollars that are
already out there. Is that, is
that too much responsibility for
LFC or is that doable? So Mr.
Chair and Representative, I
don't think that's too much. We
can work with DFA to add that to
different sheets. I think that's
something we would both be
amenable to Mr. Chair, and just
final thing.
Doctor Minor. Is that something
from DFA where we can, uh, in
advance of hearings, so it's not
just us as members we're in the
spur of the moment, but have a
regular flow of questions from
the committee and LFC that are
answered by the executive, you
know, a fair number, not an
overwhelming number, but just
getting to the heart of some of
these financial challenges that
we both share.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, represent a
small, absolutely be happy to
filter out any questions that
you have about any of these and
be happy to work with uh Joe
Elsie to put together kind of a
comprehensive report of the
special status as we head into
the session, but thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
You know, when we do that, we
want to make sure that
that if they're doing it
in-house appropriation or we're
hearing in finance. I want to
make sure that we're hearing
that because we'll get two
different stories.
And, and that needs to track,
and they'll say, well, I need it
for this, and I need it for
that, and I'll give you an
example of the, the judicial
branch took an excess of capital
and used it to build a gym.
That wasn't the intended
purpose.
Um, a couple of years ago, the
treasure took headshots for
$3000 apiece, I mean.
The intended purpose of of what
the appropriations for should be
the intended purpose. And we're
not gonna let balances lie and
then use them in other places
that, that we shouldn't be using
them.
Um
I mean, for me, I mean, morally.
To look at the $3 billion
package in, in 40 minutes and
say, yes, no, yes, no, I mean.
But that'll come to session and
we're gonna have to take a a a
lot harder.
Um
This is part of the problem. He
got $6 billion in capital
unspent.
That's the next thing we're
gonna go through the state
agencies and unspent capital.
And we're gonna pull it back.
In the legislature may be the
worst, but we're trying to build
an executive office building for
10 years, we've had 100 million
civilian capital, but we can't
get approval from the city to
build the thing. And so,
We gotta figure this out cause
We're at a point where it's time
to change this and and get some
efficiencies and we don't mind
giving you money, but if you're
going to get the money, use it.
And use it within the time frame
a lot and sometimes something
will happen. COVID will be
extended everything. We gave
what another year and a half
during COVID.
Andrew, do you remember that
extended capital for another
year and a half during COVID.
Something like that.
Yeah, and it's still get gets
spent. We're still sitting there
with 2018, 2019 capital, so I
mean
I.
Representative De la Cruz. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
What's troubling to me, Sherman,
is that when you look at this
historical trend, five-year
period goes from 6.
100,000
620 million to 3 billion, it's,
it's, it's just troubling.
In addition, Joey, I think it
would be good to have.
A bar chart that showed us
supplemental and efficiency
separated out. I, I think that
would help a lot for
appropriations committee as
well. It's, it's just a really
large number. I can see how the
chairman is troubled and wanting
everybody to take their time.
It's just a leap, it's huge.
And so
I would like to see that,
because I think it matters
particularly when you look at
that 5 year trend. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair, I'm
looking at page 38, um.
334 and 335, uh, Secretary of
State is
I just want to make sure that
this isn't a duplicative because
it's both going to the election
fund.
So, um, Mr. Chair and, and a
representative, so those are
both for the election fund, uh,
the line 335 is for a
deficiency. So for 2024 money
that's already been spent, uh,
line 334 is a supplemental for
the current year to make sure
that that fund is um is not in a
deficit. And I'll just echo what
Mr. Chair, what Rep Dela Cruz,
what don't they have bar
authority and haven't they been
using it? So, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative
Our authority does not authorize
agencies to take money from the
general fund that you have not
appropriated.
So you have to appropriate
general fund dollars to the
agency. OK, so
We, I just like to see it side
by side which you have done, we
can get you that
additional funds and not against
it. I just, I just need to see
the full picture. I don't, I'm
not, I'm trying to get captions
of everything that we've been
over and looking at, you know.
High level
Budget and specials and
everything, so how this is
covered and now with the growth
fund, right? So we have a new
process, so all these things are
in my head and I just want to
make sure that we're being
efficient and effective. Thank
you.
We passed a bill for the
Secretary of State a couple of
years ago to put it in a fund,
and she could draw down her
expenses and then they would
pull from the general fund and
fill it back up. I don't know
why that supplementals there.
She should be able to draw back
from that fund staff or no. So,
yeah, Mr. Chair, I think we, uh,
Emily can, can talk to this
issue.
I don't know why they're not
using that.
Method that we gave them.
He, uh, that bill you're talking
about Senate Bill 108 was just
passed this session in 2024 went
into effect July 1st, and so
what you're seeing for the $2.1
million the deficiency, what
ended up happening is that the
election in June for the primary
ended up costing way more than
what was in the Secretary of
State's budget, and so what
happened was that DFA authorized
the Secretary of State to use
their FY 25 budget to pay for FY
24 expenses, so that's what that
$2.1 million.
And sport.
For the 5.5 million deficiency
to the election fund since
That they went into effect when
the budget um wasn't inclusive
of the 15 million fully being
funded, that 5.5 million is to
load the funds fully so that way
the Secretary of State doesn't
have to.
Have another deficiency spending
into their budget prior year,
um, it's so that allows them to
use the full 15 million.
Um, for the November election.
OK. Representerana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want
to look at, do it. I apologize I
was out with the director
earlier, so I'm not sure how
much you got to do it. So cyber
is fully funded, right? The one
we're looking at, um, on line
73, it um to to evaluate and
adopt transformational products
to minimize technology friction
and she optimal IT performance
statewide, says it's unsure of
what it means. How do we find
out what it means? We can.
We find out what it means.
The do it secretary is right
there. You want to come up and
tell her what it means, man.
Oh, I didn't see Raj.
There are members of the
committee. My name is Rade. I'm
here to answer that question.
Uh, if you could give me some
more um information on which
line item that is.
I don't know, we're
cybersecurity.
73 is a specific one, the ones
look like they're funded.
Oh, the $1.5 million. Um, all
the fundings that we receive are
pretty much associated with
specific projects, um, line
item. So we do not have the
ability to engage any
independent third party subject
matter experts to come in and
give us the direction on which
product to choose, um, which are
the latest and greatest for us
to select and make it available
for agency. Case in point, there
is a concept of software defined
networking.
We don't have the mechanism to
bring in
The subject matter expertise to
take a look at our current
environment and see which
direction we need to go.
So everything is tied to some
kind of a fund or a project
fund, and we cannot deviate from
that. So that is why we are
requesting that to be more like
an innovation fund of some sort
so that we can be on the
forefront rather than being
reactive after the fact.
OK, Mr. Chairman, does that,
does that help with us getting
attacked or have we been
attacked this year?
Um, that has been multiple
things, uh, that we have seen,
um, so, um, uh, a couple of
things comes to mind, um, these
are more and more judiciary
related but not attached to AC.
So, uh, Yellow PDA ODA things of
that nature, and there are a
couple of school incidences. So
this is important for because
we're constantly in threat,
this will improve us
um in gaining some network
efficiencies so that when there
is a fiber cat, we can reroute.
The traffic through some other
mechanism.
Um, definitely we, it will put
us a little bit ahead of the
curve rather than being.
Does that help, Mr. Chairman,
for funding or no?
Is that the 1.5 if if it's for
fiber plans to get people or
contractors to give them advice
on fiber, right?
I mean, on cyber.
Then why do we not have that
plan in place when you're asking
for cyber money if we're giving
you money, we think you have a
plan, but you're saying this 1.5
is, is for
For a cyber contractor to give
you the best advice to do cyber
contracting.
So why isn't that already in
place. I don't know what we gave
him in 23.
The new cyber.
But we should have that in
place, and this cyber thing is,
is dragging out like
Dinosaur bones and, and so it
needs to get done. And, and if
it doesn't get done, and you
don't have a contractor to give
you a plan. Why would we give
you cyber money? Uh, Chad and
members of the committee, thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to clarify some of
this, uh, um, concerned, um,
this one is specific more
towards IT rather than cyber.
The cyber plan has been
submitted to um both the
legislative body and to the
executive and we are following
it to the T.
And we have provided the updated
cybersecurity plan as well for
this year. So we are following
that roadmap, uh, without any
deviation, but this is more for
the enterprise-wide information
technology to be on the
forefront.
Because without information
technology, there is no cyber.
Uh, cyber rights on top of
information right now.
Sounds like a wedding cake.
It's layered and layered.
Well, I, I, I'm, this is a big
deal. I mean, I, I mean, I want
people to feel comfortable.
I.
Mr. Chairman, um, like you said,
we're constantly in threat mode,
so, and, and we're dealing with
IT information IT updates
software, all these things that
deal with IT we have to stay at
the forefront of it. We have to
be ready for whatever's coming,
and if this funds that to help
them do that, then that's
important.
Just a reauthor, I mean, is this
a deficiency or I didn't turn
the page to
Mr. Chair, it's a special
appropriation. So it's, it's a
new appropriation they're asking
for, so that that's what
they're.
OK.
All right. Thank you. Senator
Woods.
3
On page 13, page uh number 1.
112.
Um
I know the big deal about having
mortgage insurance is
replacement cost.
Are we talking about trying to
put that in the
Is the fair plan or fair access
or so Mr. Chair, that item was
not requested by the agency.
That was a that was a, uh, in
the, in the staff scenario, um.
OK. Yeah, we're, we're covering
the agency requests here today.
I'm sorry.
The, the other thing.
I, uh
On
Page 15.
128.
It says that this should be a
cap, this is for the smoking
Bear Museum upgras and
remodeling. It said that should
be put under capital request.
And
Oh, it's not mirrored in a ICIP.
OK.
That's what the problem is right
there. Yeah, so, um, Mr. Chair,
one of the things, uh, you know,
for, for projects like this, it
could be funded through Capital
Outlay and, you know, that's a
pretty rigorous process and we
would recommend that.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm still looking though.
sun's still up and we unbeat
that dead horse yet.
Any other questions?
Oh, Representative Garcia.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And uh, on page 9, line 74,
Department of Technology assist
to support and implementation of
each stateroadway plan.
You know, I've been here since
2016 and I've never seen a plan
yet.
You know, it's always an issue
of, of what's happening with
broadband, you know, I'd like,
I, I'd like to know what the
plan is.
They have a plan, I think, uh,
when Danny's mom was there.
Correct me if I, you tell him,
Drew.
Sure. Thank you. Uh,
representative, so the broadband
plan is built on our website and
I send it to the legislature,
uh, on a yearly basis, January
1st, uh, this last year I sent
it to Senator Munoz, amongst
other committees as well,
committee chairs. Uh, so it's
available. I'd be happy to email
you a copy.
Uh thank you, thank you,
Richard, but you know what?
I've been here for 9 years.
And I have not seen broadband at
that very much.
It might be advanced in, in, in
uh urban New Mexico, but rural
New Mexico has been completely
left out, and there is no plan
to address that, I don't think.
I haven't seen it anyway.
A chair representative, uh,
we've actually awarded, uh, a
couple of projects in your area.
I'll also send that along with
the plan for you and
construction does take time, so,
you know, most of those projects
take multiple years to be built.
German, I know you're a water
one to to act I mean to laguna
here a while back. But you know,
that's just a little.
Part of my district, you know, I
got 6 counties. How about the
rest of these people?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, there's a
lot of work being done right
now. Uh, I'll be glad to send
you what, what we're working on
for your area.
Um, during, uh,
You know, with that being said,
I've heard the same song and
dance over and over and over,
and people are just getting left
out, you know, and with all due
respect, I know it's hard to do,
but I'm telling you what I'm
looking at out there and what
you're saying is two different
things. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And that, that was
prior to Drew, because I can
tell you Drew from Raymond Pine
Hill South, right? They run that
redundancy that line and got
that complete. I don't remember
the lady's name, but we're gonna
run that.
Line and give redundancy to
gallop, so if they cut that
line, we'll have.
We'll have service, so don't
forget to do that, Drew. They're
called the state police on me,
so they must want me to quit
talking. Representative
Armstrong.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
on page 20 line 180.
Um
I, I see that it's recommended.
But is there a registered
apprenticeship program in
science, technology, engineering
or math industries.
Who come on up.
Rachel.
Yeah, so, Mr. Chair
Representative Armstrong, that
one is for pre-apprenticeship
programs, and that is probably
um a misnomer. The department
workforce solutions calls an
apprenticeship programs uh
pre-apprenticeships. They're
more like internships, paid
internships, the majority of the
participants are currently high
school students, but the agency
requested is um $600,000 to
maintain the level of funding
that they currently have in the
program in the
year, they have a combination of
600,000 and growth funding as
well as some ARPA funding, um,
so, um, in response to your
specific question about STEM
focused apprenticeships, I'd
have to check with the
department and come back to you,
but for that light item, it's
not really apprenticeships, it's
pre-apprenticeships, which are
really more like internships.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well,
there's all that language in
there that probably needs to be
taken out and because I know.
99.9% sure there are no
registered.
Apprenticeship programs in
those.
areas.
Oh, and, and so, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I think the
language right now is an and.
Uh, so either
pre-apprenticeships, which are
religious internships in STEM or
Um, registered apprenticeships.
OK. Thank you.
Anybody have any issues with
stuff that's in there, I mean,
cause I, I, I, she made a note
on the 4031 for me cause
They're in bankruptcy if they
can't spend their money in a
year, then.
See no other questions.
I think we're gonna adopt this
tomorrow, so everybody's.
It's like a 2 day thing.
I think we're good then, right?
Everybody's good. Thank you.
Thank you. We're, that was our
last hearing. See everybody
tomorrow.
We are adjourned.
