Then we thought it would be 4
days is a big, is a big
commitment for a facility and so
it's been very nice to have
that. We're gonna start this
morning with introduction of the
committee members who are here.
Others have already notified us
they're running a little late or
they had another meeting,
they'll be joining us in
progress, but I wanted to start
by saying, uh, just a few uh
logistical announcements. First,
there's a sign up sheet and we
put it on the back table. If you
haven't signed in at some.
Point this morning, make your
way back there and sign in, uh,
particularly if you want to make
public comment.
Usually we've been having public
comment in the middle of the
meeting, middle of the day right
before lunch. Today we've moved
it to the end of the agenda, so
it'll be probably around 4 or
4:30.
Uh, but if you want to make
public comment, make sure you
sign in, uh, on the sign-in
sheet and, and mark that down.
Um,
Second, lunch is being provided
today by um uh some lobbyists
when the lead of whom is Richard
Romero. He's taken the lead in
providing lunch for us today. So
that'll be brought in here, um,
at the Lynch hour.
Just be a little different we're
having lunch at the lunch hour.
And, uh, uh, with that, we'll,
we'll go ahead and get started.
We don't have a social event
tonight, but tomorrow night NM
Kan has invited us to a
reception and dinner at their,
uh, offices in Albuquerque and
on Wednesday.
The Darla Lus birthing center
has invited us to tour their new
facility and, and for a
reception there on North 4th
Street in Albuquerque in Ranchos
the Albuquerque I guess I'm not
sure exactly where we'll, we'll
figure that out.
So we'll start this morning with
um introduction of committee
members and, and representative
Kate, why don't we start with
you. Good morning.
Thank you, chair, um, for I am a
representative Kathleen Cates
from District 44. Um, this
specific building is not in my
district, but you could throw a
rock over to where my district
is from here. Welcome to the
City of Rio Rancho. We are the
3rd largest city in the state,
soon to be the 2nd largest city
in the state.
Um, I know that we have a lot
of, uh, I know there's fighting
words down there with
Representative Ferrari, but um
uh, and, um, and I, I welcome
you all. Um, we have a lot of
subject matter that we're
discussing these next 4 days.
Um,
Know that if uh you're asking
how Rio Rancho is
addressing who our service
provider is for disabilities who
are service provider is for food
insecurity for domestic violence
for behavioral health. I know
that they're not currently.
Um, on this agenda, but I'd be
glad to answer those questions
and let you know how the city
is, is uh addressing that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Case.
Now we'll go over to
Representative Martinez, and
we'll move this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name
is Alan Martinez this building
sits right in the middle of my
district, um.
So I welcome the committee and
everybody, uh.
Joining us this morning.
To the wonderful district house
District 23.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chavez.
Good morning, everyone. Um, I'm
Eleanor Chavez. I represent
House District 26 on the west
side of Albuquerque and that
also includes the Pato Mesa in
the South Valley.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Joanne Ferrari, the 2nd largest
state is a city in the state,
sorry, I forgot in the city, um,
in the state, um, Las Cruces,
and, um, but we used to come up
here a lot, um, to Balloon and
um it it's just beautiful and
it's grown up so much there's
hardly any place to land a
balloon anymore in this area. We
used to go out 19th Street.
And uh anyway, thank you for
hosting us.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee.
I am Representative Liz
Thompson, House District 24,
which is the northeast heights
of Albuquerque. I have Win Rock
and Uptown and disabilities are
the reason that I'm here in the
legislature. I have an adult son
with significant disabilities
and I'm a retired pediatric
physical therapist who worked
with kids with special needs,
so, so that's why I ran for this
office and so I'm, I'm here to
make things better. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair. Uh, as you said, my name
is Andrew Dawson. I'm a staff
attorney with the LCS, um, and
joining me to staff the
committee is Andrea Lazaro. She
is another staff attorney with
LCS. We also have uh Grace
Balder Ramos. She is online
right now. She's gonna be
handling the Zoom public comment
and then we have Leo Gonzalez.
He's handling the webcasts and
all making sure all the
microphones work. And then our
colleague Ruben Esquibel is here
from LFC.
back in the room.
Hm.
at the back of the room.
Thank you, Xander and I'm the
chairman of the committee for
this interim. I'm a state
senator Jerry Ortizipino. I
represent Senate District 12,
which is basically downtown
Albuquerque and a few uh
precincts west of the river, I
think 12 precincts west of the
river. It also is a district
that in 2 months we'll move in
its entirety the number uh for a
brand new district here, half in
Rio Rancho, half in Bernlio
County, uh, I think.
I guess uh
I'm not sure exactly where
Taylor Ranch and, uh,
Vintana ranch too I suppose is
part of it that they, that's
where all the growth has been,
so they had to find a a a new
number for a new district and
they chopped District 12 up into
6 slivers and passed them out to
6 other senators and move the
number up here. I'm retiring at
the end of the year, so I didn't
object in the least,
um.
So with that, we'll get started
and our first item this morning
our colleague Senator Leo
Jaramillo has asked to make a
presentation on
Uh, issues that affect people
with disabilities.
Good morning, Senator. Welcome.
Moyanos Dias singing to. Good
morning. Thank you for allowing
us to join you today. Joining me
to the right of me is Jim
Copeland, the executive
director, Mr. Chair of the
Association of Development
Disability, Community providers,
and to my left is my former high
school cheer coach and the city
counselor, Nanette Martinez,
Adult Services Division director
and a member of the executive
leadership team. And behind me
are some of my favorite.
Constituents from my district,
which is Senate District 5,
which includes Rio Riba, Santa
Fe, Sandoval, and Los Alamos
counties. These are members who
have asked me to be their voice,
them and their parents. They're
part of the intellectual and
developmentally distressed
community and members of Los
Cumbres and Los Cumbres is an
amazing beacon in the Espanilla
Valley and in Los Alamos and
Santa Fe, where their mission is
to provide quality services,
public awareness.
And integrated community support
for children, adults, and
families facing social,
emotional, and or
developmentally challenges. And
so I take my role very seriously
as a senator, and I want to just
call out one thing about my
former coach and her mother
Rosita Rodriguez, who is helping
our residents get their blue
t-shirts on. Um, I couldn't
afford being a cheerleader in
high school and this is just a
side note. And so I had to quit
the team.
They then purchased the uniform
and shoes that I needed. They
put it under the bleachers at
the end of one practice, which
was supposed to be my last
practice and asked that I take
it and not have my parents call
him that I could stay on the
team, but their ask was that
when I could then give back, I
would give back and not ask
students to give me anything in
return, and so this job as a
senator coach is me giving up my
time, energy, and commitment
100% on a.
that I lived up to and so I'm
thankful to be sitting next to
you today.
Mr. President, we've come up
with a major issue that is
happening with so many people
across New Mexico who have
developmentally uh development
disabilities, and so it's
insufficient funding and we hear
that a lot as legislators that
there's not enough funding and
so this is really one that that
we can act on and come together
to solve.
There's insufficient funding for
service rates and putting the
well-being of New Mexican
children and adults with
intellectual disabilities and
their families at risk. The
situation is unacceptable and
could have catastrophic
consequences and we want to see
a positive outcome to this,
which is why we have so many
families behind me and the two
sitting to the left and right of
me.
Now the fee for service rate
have not been adjusted since
2019. There were some temporary
adjustments to those rates
available utilizing the American
rescue Plan Act funds, and there
was a 5.32% cost of living
adjustment implemented in on
July 1st of 2023. There's a
current amendment supported by a
2023 cost study submitted by the
Center's Medicare and Medicaid
or CMS.
September 30th, 2024. Over the
same time period since 2019, we
have seen a record 40-year high
inflation. The COVID pandemic,
the great resignation, and
increase in the state minimum
wage and the passage of the
Healthy New Mexico Workplace
Act. None of these impacts were
covered by fee for service rate
increases. The minimum wage rate
increase and the healthy New
Mexico Workplace Act were good
for New Mexican workers.
put unfunded mandates on our
providers. The pressure to
provide quality services, is
dependent on the ability to
hire, train, and retain a
qualified workforce providers
are competing with local fast
foods and retail establishments
in our local communities for
staff to provide care and
support to some of New Mexico's
most vulnerable citizens. And so
when you think that you could
make more money working at your
local Starbucks or at your
Walmart Super Center.
Then this critical role of
caring for New Mexicans who need
the services. We've got to act.
The president's committee for
people with intellectual
disabilities 2024 report, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, list as a top
focus area of the direct support
professional labor shortage. The
decision to end the 14-year wait
lists for services. Well, it was
good for so many people with IDD
and their families further
executed the problem for
providers and so although it was
a major win, it put a strain on
those who care for those who are
sitting behind.
adding more recipients to a
system that is already stressed
and unfunded could be a recipe
for disaster. We haven't asked
for this committee, and so I'm
hopeful that you can join me and
what I'm thinking of when it
becomes draft legislation in
order to continue serving this
population who deserve quality
care and services. We need to
act responsively and quit it and
quickly to adequately fund fee
for service rate increases. Rate
studies are always retrospective
and never perspective.
Of
For FY 26, we need to add a
7.39% cost of living adjustment
or CLA to the free service rates
that will affect at that time.
This is the document inflation
factor of 2025 from the 2023
study. This will ensure that
providers in New Mexico, many of
them local community non for
profit organizations will be
better able to recruit, train,
and retain qualified staff to
provide a safe
Setting for those participants
under their care. We'll work
with the healthcare authority
department to finalize the
amount, the funding allocation
needed to implement this caller.
The funding would begin reducing
the risk of a catastrophic event
associated with a possible
increased abuse, neglect, and
exploitation because of
insufficient rates, which is not
a risk we can accept as New
Mexicans, and I'm gonna, if you
don't mind, Mr. Chair, I'd like
to yield.
To Mrs. Martinez, who will then
make a few brief comments, and
then again to Jim, who will also
make a few comments.
Honorable committee chair.
And committee members.
As Senator Jadeo said, my name
is Nanette Martinez and I'm here
representing Las Cumbres
Community Services. Before I
continue, I just want to say to
Senator Haramil that we are so
proud of him and how he
represents our districts and now
as a champion for the
intellectually and
developmentally disabled
community, thank you.
So I want to give you a little
history las Cumbres Community
Services, a nonprofit started
over 50 years ago in White Rock,
New Mexico.
Adult services is where our
story began.
Today we are going strong with
our mission.
Providing service.
To the most vulnerable
populations.
In communities.
Across 6 counties.
Our purpose in adult services is
to provide these exceptional
people behind me.
The same opportunities afforded
to you and I.
To live a meaningful life.
To be included in their
communities.
To work and contribute to their
communities.
To live in a safe environment.
And to receive quality health
care.
You might ask how do we
accomplish this?
Again,
With well trained, dedicated.
Compassionate, caring direct
support professionals as of
those sitting behind me in blue.
These are husbands, wives.
Father's mothers.
Wanting to provide for their
families, all of the same
opportunities we just spoke
about.
And those chair joining that.
Mr. Chair, joining us is
Representative Susan Herrera.
She and I overlap districts and
she would like to help champion
the cause in the house.
Thank you.
Despite substandard fee for
service rates?
Unfunded state and federal
mandates.
Pro provider agencies across the
state.
realize that in order to
recruit, retain qualified staff.
And to build capacity.
We needed to give increases.
Las Cumbre Community Services
has increased their rates 3
times and enhanced our benefit
package.
In spite
Of a loss of revenue.
As Senator Jaamillo mentioned
additionally.
Although with good intentions to
decrease the waiting list, the
mass allocation has compounded
challenges for provider
agencies.
I implore you today to support
Senator Hou's ask so that las
cumbres can continue its mission
for another 50 years.
Thank you for having us.
And Mr. Chair, I'd like to then
ask that Mr. Jim Copeland also
uh yield, I'll yield the mic to
him.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Jim Copeland,
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community Providers
and I certainly appreciate the
Las Crumbres folks being here
today. I know I've spoken to you
folks multiple times and it's
always good to have the wheels
on the, the.
Feet on the ground to come and
tell you about the impacts that
that we're creating. The, the,
the
Cola adjustment for FY 26,
things are changing in services
for people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities in
our early intervention system
faster than I've seen things
change in a while in terms of
the communication and stuff
we're, we're actually meeting
with Secretary Armijo on
Halloween to talk about what's
going on in the healthcare
authority. Uh, there is a, a
special appropriation in the
healthcare authority's budget
request for FY 26 for $46
million to fund
Didi waiver, uh, rating
community-based waivers, uh,
increases for our providers.
So there's some support there.
We don't know what that special
appropriation will be used for
if it's granted, but we
certainly want to meet with the
secretary and talk about those
sorts of issues and how we can
continue to strengthen the
services that are available, uh,
as we've talked about, we've
ended the 14 year wait list for
services and people are being
allocated.
About 2 times a year, uh, the
ending the wait list is sort of
a misnomer because we will never
end the wait list, uh, as
everybody that's on the current
wait list is allocated. If there
is a child born with Down
syndrome somewhere in in in New
Mexico, uh, then that wait list
starts over again, so there will
continually be people, uh,
applying for and being eligible
for our DD waiver services. We
just need to create a mechanism
to be able to appropriately
allocate the.
folks without having that.
14 year wait for services. So
there's just a lot of stuff
going on. We, we, uh.
Appreciate your time here. We
appreciate the senator's support
in getting us to where we think
we need to be, um.
And if I could just for a couple
of minutes to talk about the,
the fit program and then to
answer questions or, or whatever
needs to happen, um.
We're still dealing with some
issues around our early
intervention system, uh, 13 of,
of our association members
provide for uh family infantizer
services as well. And so they're
doubly impacted by DD waiver
rates that may or may not cover
the cost and, and fit, uh,
service rates that
That may not cover the cost.
There's a lot of information
coming out of the early
childhood education and care
department related to the FY 26
budget request, but we still,
this is still FY 25. We had some
rate increases that were
published and, and proposed that
were paid from July 1 to August
18, but they were retracted by
the secretary because there was
no money in the budget to fund
those rate increases and that's
had an impact on our fit
providers. Uh, they were
promised.
Those rate increases and they
base their budgets on for FY 25
on those rate increases, and
they've had some impacts from
losing staff, from losing
therapists who they were
promised to, to have a rate
increase, uh, and then the, the
rate increases were retracted
and so folks had to go back and
say gee, we're sorry, but we
can't pay you those rates. So
there's just a lot of stuff
going on we're, we're excited
about the cooperation and
collaboration that we're
getting, uh, from healthcare
authority and the comic.
with the early childhood
education and care department,
but we still have a long way to
go to get our services on
appropriate funding to maintain
us uh as Senator Jaramillo
stated the rate increase the
cost studies are retrospective.
They're never prospective and so
you do a cost study, the 2023
cost study that we're basing
our, we sent the amendment to
CMS to fund some rate increases
in in waiver services.
Those cost studies were done
based on 2022 and 2021.
Cost reports. So then by the
time the cost study is done and
it's realized and by the time
funds are appropriated to fund
those rates, we're 3 or 4 years
behind.
And so the longer it takes to
get a cost study done, the
longer it takes to get the money
allocated to fund those cost
studies, the further and further
behind we get. So we want to
work with the legislature and
with all of our state
departments to try to get
funding approved to put us on
stable.
Financial funding
Jim, just to clarify and and to
Differs my thinking this
morning, the, the fit program,
did that move over to
Where where is that house now?
It's not, it used to be at the
health department. It's not
there anymore, it's it's with
the early childhood Education
and Care Department. And, and
Was it that they didn't, I mean
it's still funded by Medicaid,
right? Yes sir.
So
So why didn't, I mean, I don't
understand that there was no
money for a rate increase,
didn't they ask for one or what
happened?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it's my understanding
that, that.
The communication, there was a
communication breakdown in the
early early childhood education
and care department. I think the
secretary sent you folks, a
memorandum back in August to try
to explain that situation, uh,
and, and, you know, there's just
been no action taken to get us
from FY 25 to FY 26 with the,
the new.
Cost modeling program that
they're implementing. I'm just
flummoxed that the most heavily
financed department and state
government, one that's sitting
on a $10 billion trust fund
couldn't find the matching
money.
For the Medicaid
I mean, this is, this is just
incredible all they would have
had to do is ask for a
supplemental. I mean that they
would put off a rate increase
because of that. Usually I'm
very praise. I have a lot of
praise for the secretary because
she runs that department so
well, but this is an incredible
screw up.
And, and they got the money.
It's sitting there. All they
have to do is ask for uh
uh bar authority to move it from
one pot into this, uh this is
just ridiculous, but
Let's not go on anymore, you go
ahead and conclude your remarks.
Or could just not only did they
not give them, they gave him the
raise for basically a month and
so people had come to expect it
and then all of a sudden it's,
oh, we don't have the money so
yeah crazy that's the right
word.
So, Mr. Chair, that concludes my
remarks. I, I do have a, a
couple of other things I would
like to mention if, if we can
just for your information, uh,
we worry a lot about the funding
and stuff that the state puts
into these programs, but we've
got
Some federal and outside
external issues and impacts on
where we are and what we're
doing, um.
One of the things, and I, I
talked about this, I think in a
previous presentation, the
Federal Department of Labor has
increased the overtime
exemption.
For, for salaried employees. Uh,
so.
Increase the amount of money you
have to pay somebody that's
salaried so that they can be
they can maintain their salary
classification.
Does that, that make sense?
You mean increased that that
they can earn a higher amount
and, and be considered for
overtime or the base salary for
what you, what an employer pays
that person to maintain their
salaried classification.
So
Yeah, as an example, the, the
salary increased from $35,568.
In July 1 of this year, it went
to $43,888.
In January 1, if the federal
injunctions that have been filed
against the Department of Labor
aren't successful. That will
increase from 43,000 to 558,000.
So what that does, people say,
well, what does that do? Well,
if, if I run a supported living
agency and I have salaried my
house managers that are
maintaining a house for 2 or 3
or 4 people on the DD waiver.
And up until July 1, I could
have paid them $35,568 in their
salary, so they don't have to
turn in a time sheet. They work
40 or 50 or 60 hours a week or
whatever it takes, but they get
the same pay.
Well, in July that went to
$43,00888.
And then January, it goes to
58,000. And the problem with
that is none of those salary
increases are included in the
current rate study.
So if an agency, if I decide I
can't pay you 43,000, now I've
got to pay you time and a half
at an hourly rate for any hours
you work over 40 in a week.
And so
You know, if you work 45 hours a
week, I got to pay you time and
a half for 5 of those hours, but
that's not included in my rates.
So where do I get the money to
do that? So that's just an
outside impact that that has the
potential to really be a
problem.
One of the more serious things
is liability insurance, um.
I did an unofficial survey of
our 31 provider agencies, 23 of
them reported through their
liability insurance carrier
carrier was 13 of them, it was
Philadelphia Insurance.
That's a big liability insurance
company, but what we're finding
now is that liability insurers
are closing down in states.
Uh, as a result of the
hurricanes in Florida, Farmers
Insurance has left the state of
Florida.
So if you had Farmers'
insurance, you don't anymore
because they're gone. And so
what that's done to our
providers, we're getting
providers that are getting.
Memos from their liability
carriers to say, hey, we're
canceling your insurance or hey
we're increasing your premiums
to the point that the providers,
that's not included in their
rate studies.
So where's that money come from?
And it's a requirement to be a
licensed provider in New Mexico
that you've got to carry $1000
single case liability insurance.
I've had providers to contact me
to say, yeah, we had a vehicle
accident with our one of our
vehicles and our insurer told us
not to file a claim because
they'll cancel our insurance.
So what's the use of having
insurance if you can't file a
claim? So that's another outside
impact that, that could
potentially impact our ability
to provide.
Services
The Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, you've
probably all heard past the
access rule.
You know, that's going to
increase access to Medicaid
services for people and there's
a lot of federal legalese in
there one of the things that
that's included in that rule is
a payment adequacy provision.
And that payment adequacy
provision says that if you
provide and currently it's in
effect for 3 services, homemaker
services, personal care
services.
And
Home health aid
80% of the money that you get
from Medicaid to provide those
services has to go to your
direct support providers.
Fortunately that's a bigger
definition than what we have in
New Mexico around direct
support.
So
And, and waiver services are
currently exempt from that rule.
The first couple of years of the
rule, they take collecting data.
So the state's going to have to
provide data on what percentage
of that money goes and we're
going to have to include our
home and community-based waiver
services. At some point,
That adequacy provision could
apply to our home and
community-based waivers if CMS
decides that it needs to be that
way.
But our last rate study showed a
31% administrative overhead in
running our waiver programs.
So if this payment adequacy goes
into effect and they say 80% of
your money has to go to your
direct support folks, then you
got 20% to run your agency.
Cover the administrative costs
and all that.
Well, if it's 31%, then
providers are gonna have to make
up 11% of that.
Operating costs. So that's just
another outside influence, and I
will stop there and Mr.
Chairman, just finally, if
representative Susan Hereta
would like to make a few
comments, then we can entertain
questions.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
apologize for being late this
morning. Um, there was a big
power outage and uh with big
huge storm last night in the
north, so, uh, I forgot to reset
my clock, so excuse me, um,
anyhow, it's great to see
everybody this morning and I
just want to say that 34 years
ago when I came to Espanolen, I
was working at Northern's campus
doing uh a nursing program, a
long distance nursing program.
Word got out in the nursing
grapevine that
I knew how to write grants and
Los Cumbers came to me and at
the time they were writing a
mejita mejito program this
organization has always been
ahead of its time. That's what
I, before the brain science,
before we know what we know now
about early childhood
development, they knew that that
some families needed a little
more. They needed a little more
intervention, and we wrote that
grant, we got it and um and over
the years, 34 years I've had a
relationship with Les Cumbres as
as.
Has the whole north.
This is a fundamental service in
the North and and frankly, what
happened is they just made a
mistake. I don't know why people
can't say we just made a mistake
and we need to, we need to, you
know, fix the budget because
that's really all it was.
And people make mistakes, and I
think people in state agencies
need to be able to say they made
a mistake, come to the
legislature and say, hey, we did
this and can we, can we make it
up to him so I think it's a
pretty simple solution, and yes,
we do have the money and for
God's sakes, what could be more
important for our money than
helping babies with their
developmentally dis disabilities
really is there a more important
thing in our state budget than
that, I doubt it.
And I think most voters in New
Mexico most citizens in New
Mexico would agree with that, so
that's, that's really the story
this another problem as long as
I'm talking about it is, is,
it's a rural issue too in
funding. They pay the same
physical therapist, the same
rate in Albuquerque as they pay
in uh the north and here's the
problem, you have 5 hours of,
of, you know, windshield time to
get to
That appointment 2.5 hours one
way, 2.5 hours back sometimes
things happen.
And guess what, the wheels fall
off, they get to that
appointment, the person's not
there. That's a whole day and
you have this 4 week deadline
and then you have this 5 week
deadline, and God help you if
you don't make those deadlines,
but you know what, you can't
expect rural providers to get
the same.
The same um payment as you do
for uh uh uh payment provider in
Albuquerque with kind of a 3
mile radius that's another thing
we need to look at and um I
could talk all about insurance
problems too, but I, I think
I'll stop there and let you
answer the questions that you
have. Thank you so much for this
opportunity.
And Mr. Chair, the issues that
we outlined with Mr. Copeland on
those that could have a
catastrophic effect to us will
be sent to all of you to be
uploaded on the website that
we'll talk about both the focus
on both state and federal
impacts that can affect the DD
services in New Mexico.
Representative Susan Herrera and
I represent rural New Mexicans
and so it's not only the issues
she outlined, but it's also
ensuring that they're paid for
the services that they that they
provide and with that, Mr.
Chairman, we'll entertain.
Any questions from you or the
committee?
Well, very good, thank you for
bringing this to our attention.
Um, let's start with
Representative Martinez and just
work right around the table. How
many seconds do we give each
person 3 minutes. 3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Vice
Chair, I will speak quickly.
Um, I'm, I'm just, I'm going
back to the issue of the.
The payments in July and August.
How, how did that, how does that
happen?
Was it offered as a 2 month
bonus.
The ECECD come back and say oh.
We didn't have the budget.
How are those decisions made
because those decisions should
be made way before July 1st.
That budget should, you should
know what your budget is going
into.
Into the new uh fiscal year.
And why can't they just draw
down from the fund?
I mean they're sitting on a $9
billion fund.
Just to cover the other 10
months and then come back and
say we made a mistake.
This is how much money we're
actually gonna need.
Could you explain to me how that
whole thing happened.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, that, that's a great
question, and we've been looking
for that answer ourselves. Uh, I
think the, the memorandum that
the Secretary submitted to, to
both the LFC and Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee back in August
outlined the whole program, the
whole problem of how we got to
publicizing the rates and, and
changing standards and that sort
of thing, uh, and then Secretary
discovered that the money that
the rates had been published
and, you know.
She
allowed to honor those rates
from July 1 till August 18th
when she discovered that the
money wasn't in the budget
request to fund those rates and
then they were retracted. Uh,
and other than that, that, that
would be a question that that
secretary would have to answer
because we don't, we don't have
those answers.
That's, that's just very
disturbing because this, this
affects real people.
It's not a
This lofty policy decision.
This is affecting real people,
boots on the ground, direct
services.
And it just seems to me like
that type of mistake.
Shouldn't shouldn't happen,
especially when they're sitting
on such a huge amount of money.
It's, it
It bothers me.
That these decisions are being
made.
That are affecting direct care.
Real people.
And they're just they come back
and say well.
Sorry.
Um, it's just very, it's very
concerning.
Thank you Mr. Chair. And Mr.
Chair, Representative, on that
point to try to explain that to
providers and to parents who are
asking questions and there's no
answers. It's hard to do to go
back into your communities and
do that because they're looking
at your leadership. They're
looking at ways that you can
help solve and answer questions,
and we just don't have the
answers. And so that's become a
major issue for us who are are
representing, representing our,
our districts and, and the
questions come up and there's no
answers.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Tollman, do you have any
uh questions?
Oh, not at this point, but
thanks for asking.
OK, how about you, Senator
Servio Lopez? Thank you,
um, I really appreciate the
presentation, but I also think
that the problem is even bigger
than than than the focus on
rural communities, um, it has to
do with the allocations for um
people who work in the area
period we should guarantee
people who work in the area of,
of living wage.
A living wage, we should pay uh
travel time.
I mean, we should have a budget,
you know, a budget for these
services that work because
you're focusing on the rural
area, but I know in Albuquerque,
um,
people can't afford to, you
know, just the, the, the amount
is so little given the cost of
living in Albuquerque, um, that
it's, it's outrageous, so I, I
just think that the submission
of the budget should have all of
the contract workers making a
living wage. I, I think that's
just.
Crucial, um, and then I think it
should also include travel, um,
per diem if necessary. It needs
to be has has a representative
Martinez said we have the money.
We are not a poor state anymore.
We do not need to balance it on
the backs of our workers.
Thank you for that. And Mr.
Chair, Senator, we agree that
this is a statewide problem and
in talking about rural New
Mexico are the voices we
represent, but absolutely when
we carry the draft legislation
forward, it will be for the
entire state of New Mexico, just
not rural New Mexicans, and
you're right, traveling for DM
need to be built in and thank
you for your comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Mr. Chair. I do have a
couple of questions and so one
of them kind of piggybacks off
of what um the senator just
said. So the proposal that
you're making,
um, will it also.
Look at sort of restructuring
how payment is made to consider
um to consider um you know,
travel and all of those kinds of
things, the, the things that
that representative Herera
mentioned.
So we would have, Mr. Chair,
representative, we would have to
work with the secretary on that
because there could be a number
of issues that happen when we
start playing with rates in that
way. And so that's a discussion
we're open to having with the
cabinet secretary and then
bringing providers in to get
their feedback as well.
And and then the other question
that I have is do you know off
the top of your head, and if you
don't, that's OK. You know how
many providers around the state
are we talking about that, that
this would impact.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, there are 34 contracted
providers in the early
intervention system.
But this same problem would
would transfer over to the
developmental disability waivers
as well.
You know, it's all fee for
service and and the process is
pretty much the same so.
You know, but for early
intervention, there are 34
contracted providers uh under
the DD waiver side, there's 94
contracted core service
providers that do the supported
living, the residential
services, and then there's case
management and therapies and all
of those other entities that
that provide the developmental
disability waiver services as
well.
And then the other question that
I have is how many.
Clis
Will this affect? Does this
impact?
Around the state in the fit
program, there's an estimated
16,000 and this is kid's birth
to 3.
One of the other issues that
impacts this though is that this
is done under the Part C of the
Federal individuals with
disabilities Education Act and
because it's an education
program, there can be no waiting
lists. So every kid that is
brought into their local fit
provider agency either by the
family or by a doctor's
referral, the family brings them
in. They have to be evaluated
within 45 days. If they're
eligible for services, they have
to be in service within 30 days.
And so,
You know, you can't, if you, if
you're struggling, you don't
have enough staff to serve the
people that you've got, and you
get 5 or 6 or 7 more than that,
you know, it creates a, a, an
additional.
Burden on the provider to be
able to fund those services, but
the federal law says you got to
serve them. There is no waiting
list in education.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and um
My question, um, is regarding
the shocking statement that 31%
of administration fee by CMS.
Mr. Copeland, did you mention
that and did I get that right?
The the current access rule for
CMS for, for Medicaid services.
Contains an adequacy provision
of payment adequacy provision
that says 80% of the money that
a provider receives for
providing those services.
Has to be paid out to their
direct providers and that
includes nurses and the federal
definition is a little wider.
But that limits those agencies
to a 20% overhead, you know, if
you got to pay out 80% of your
funds, you've only got 20% left,
but in the, in the developmental
disability waiver rate study
that was conducted in 2023.
That rate study established a
31% provider overhead.
Based on the cost reports that
the providers.
Submitted to for to comply with
the cost report.
And Mr. Chair and Mr. Copeland,
that was basically because of
COVID and the different things
that had to be overcome, is that
it, Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrari, it was just the whole
operating cost for those
provider agencies for fiscal
years 21 and 22, so it, it would
have included some COVID cost as
well.
OK, OK, thank you, Mr. Chair,
that's all I had.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, thank you all for joining
in the fight. Much appreciated.
Um, so I'm just gonna say I'm
really disappointed that CMS
didn't submit the to, I mean
that the department didn't
submit to CMS until September
30th of 2024. Um,
that's unacceptable.
You know what's coming, uh,
that's just really disappointing
disappointing to me and then to
talk a little bit about the cost
studies, they're ridiculous.
Bottom line we're, I mean, we do
them.
And they're looking back at old
data and then we wait 2 years
until we put them in place and
then it's really old data and in
the whole world is or the whole
country is on fire about
increasing costs and inflation
and all this, and we, you know,
we start ourselves 4 years
behind the starting line, just,
just off the gate we're 4 years
behind and I have asked many
times why do we have to do cost
studies? Well, CMS likes them.
What do we do?
Cost studies for everything else
for every other um work group
that that is in the uh in in the
state, no, we don't and so it
feels very punitive. It feels
very backward, um.
And very, very frustrating. I'll
just say that, um, and then in
terms of um paying fit
providers, I was a fit provider
for a lot of years, and it got
worse and worse. I mean, I went
to, I went as far west as Blue
Water, which is, you know, close
to 100 miles and uh not a cent
for mileage.
Not a cent for driving time and
if the family wasn't home or the
baby was asleep or sick or
whatever I could charge $10.
Um,
It's, it's pretty ridiculous
when I, I mean, I love the work.
I did the work for a lot of
years and it used to be much
better, but when I did my taxes,
I realized I was losing money by
working. It was costing me money
and it's like well maybe I
should just do it as a
volunteer, at least then I could
take it off my taxes, but um, I
didn't I so COVID came and and I
stopped doing that, um, and then
in terms of overhead when we
think of overhead, there's more
than just managerial staff and
things.
Like that you've all heard my
son Eric is very destructive,
um, when he pulls the toilet out
of the floor.
They have to cover that.
Last week he broke 3 windows in
the van. They have to cover
that. He breaks a window at the
house probably once a month they
have to cover that and it's,
it's I mean we, oh, these people
are getting rich. I'm pretty
sure that most, most provider
agencies are not getting rich
when they have to cover someone
like my son, so we, we need to
start looking at those things
and stop saying, oh, it's the
greedy, the greedy providers.
It is not, um, and then just
finally, Mr. Chair, the waiting
list.
Has ended
On paper
The waiting list because there
are no spaces for anything, I
mean for supported living for
supported employment for any of
the therapists there, none of
that is there, so, oh, you're,
you you your name is off the
waiting list into services, but
when there's no services, you
may as well be on the waiting
list, so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, on that point, if you
look at the net as a member of
the executive leadership team,
she can't do her role as an
executive leader because there's
not enough providers that she
has to step back to provide care
and so her mother has been with
Los Cumbres for 32 years and a
woman who could have retired
years ago still shows up every
day including weekends to ensure
that things are running with Los
Cumbres and that's becoming a
major issue because people just
can't afford to work as provide.
writers.
Um, good morning, Senator Lopez.
We'll go to you if you have any
questions or we could come back
to you after a couple of others.
Mr. Chair, if I would like to
just
Garner a little bit more
information because I have a
list already.
Thank you.
Representative case, why don't
we go to you?
I, I thank you, chair, and, and
I want especially think Senator
Harrao and Representative, um,
Herrera for this very heavy
lift, um, and disclosure I have
run fit early intervention
programs and waiver programs,
and for many years and the only
reason why we were able to run
them is because we ran other
programs that created profit
that we'd have to move over to
the waiver program and I'd have
to tell my board, this is the
mission.
Um, I don't know why the state
does not pay for these services,
so, um, for I know that you're
excited, you're sitting at the
table, but you also brought in a
lot of stuff in this more than
just this spill. So let's go
through it. We're talking about
um early childhood we're talking
about um uh that department for
fit to not being paid correctly,
and not being paid the, the,
the, the uh raise in which, uh,
the, the rate increase.
Which was part of their own rate
study and that was uh told to
them in January and it is not
being paid, so that's that
department um we have uh HCA
who's the waiver department
which has never paid appropriate
uh rate studies, and now we have
the superintendent of insurance,
which we're talking about, uh,
those issues so let's just,
let's try to take these because
uh now I'm down to one minute so
um uh so let's talk about
workforce we
As legislators are working at
LA's right now and we're asking
individuals to come in and sit
in a clean office and work in
our computers and answer emails.
At $27 an hour.
And our rate studies are at $17
an hour. Is that correct, John?
Mr. Chair, Representative Cates,
it's, it's the, the rates that
he was based on $18 an hour. $18
an hour. I'm just saying we're
asking, I want to make sure that
our audience understands these
direct care providers, they're
just not, I mean this is
wonderful that they're
bighearted people and they're
hard workers, but they take
extensive amount of education,
they do as from the Department
of Health provides them their
mandated to take an extensive
of ongoing education and then
they get individual education
they are working in somewhere
between a CNA and an LPN, and
they are caring for our most
vulnerable and we are figuring
out how to pay the minimum wage.
This is shameful, and, uh, and,
and I am here to ask my one
question to the senator so in
your increase your, your request
for increase is this are we
working.
To a $30 minimum wage for our
direct care providers, which is
really where we need to be to be
able to professionalize them,
which is what they have been
doing from day one. Thank you,
Mr. Chair Representative, we
don't have a dollar amount sent,
but that is the goal is to
ensure that we increase the
amount of money they get because
of the care that they provide to
show them that we truly care of
them as providers to the most
vulnerable and that we're not
only thanking them for having a
big heart, but paying them.
Fairly for the job that they're
doing for the care that they're
providing.
On that point, I'd like to add
that Las Cumbres.
To run a fit program costs them
$100,000 a year and that's been
over a series of like the last,
I don't know, 5, 10 years where
they've had to take, like you
said, money from their profit
paying um programs and
supplement at a tune of $100,000
a year, and that is not easy and
that.
If they didn't have to do that,
that could go towards giving
people reasonable wages. That's
how much it costs, and this is
just one provider.
Honorable chair, um,
Representative Thompson
representative Ferrari.
You talked about rural
communities.
Las Congres Community Services
provides transportation to every
individual to attend our
services. We go as far as the
Colorado border.
To ensure
That this community is able to
engage with other individuals.
At a cost to Las Cumbres.
Transportation is not
reimbursed.
We cover fuel and we cover
maintenance costs for our fleet.
We currently have a fleet of 9.
That is a huge part of our
budget.
Thank you.
Senator Rodriguez and
Representative Chasey will give
you a chance to ask questions. I
know you just got here, but you
may have something that
anything, anything you, you
would like to ask, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning to everyone. Thank
you to the panelists and of
course, good to see our senator
and representative also thanks
for your work. Um, I just have a
little point to elaborate on the
situation with the fit program,
Mr. Chairman, in Riodoso, we
were there, um, recently.
With the I think it was the LFC
committee at the time and uh I
met with Secretary Girkinski. I
don't know if she's here, uh,
today, but anyhow, maybe she
isn't in the audience, but we
discussed the fact that the
provider rate increases um
happen for most areas as
intended and approved by the
legislature, but when it came to
the fit program they were quote
forgotten, um, it was admitted
that it was an error and they
had forgotten.
Those somehow through the whole
scenario, they were working on,
it didn't happen.
So the question I had was how is
it going to be corrected, um,
and, um.
She indicated she was going to
request a supplemental
appropriation from the
legislature to see if she could
make up the difference, um, I
met with LFC and the director of
LSC to discuss that and um they
didn't think that that may be
possible in recommending to the
full LFC committee, um, to get
this approved, however, the
question that I had ultimately
was even though they.
Requested they would request a
supplemental appropriation and
then we will deal with it then.
Um, it's only going to take care
of next year, but it leaves a
gap for the year that they were
forgotten and so I asked if
there was any possibility that
they could increase the amount
that they were requesting for
the fit program, uh, even higher
than everyone else because if
everyone else already got some
race, certainly it's still
underpaid. I mean, we know that.
Riders are underpaid, but for
this particular program because
there there's a gap in there
perhaps they could increase or
double the uh the amount uh that
they are requesting, so she was
gonna work on that. I don't know
where they are. It was just
recent when we discussed that,
so um we'll just go from there,
but it is unfortunate that
something like this so
important, uh, could be
forgotten, uh, even though we
understand airs happen, but this
is like no room for error at
there.
So much work to be done and the
providers as we know are already
quite underpaid, so Mr.
Chairman, I just wanted to to
say that um it has been noted
the LFC knows about it, um, and
we will, I will bring it up
again this next meeting. In
fact, tomorrow we will be at LSC
starting for this week, most of
the week, in fact, so I'll bring
it up again and see if there's
anything that we can do either
through supplemental specials I
didn't think was gonna work, but
we're gonna.
See if there's anything that can
be done to uh.
To rectify the problem that
happened.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chair and Senator, thank you so
much for championing for us even
working before we even knew we
were working together. You've
been a strong ally of mine and a
strong ally of New Mexicans.
You're definitely gonna be
missed, but I'm thankful that
one of the last things you'll
take on is ensuring that you'll
try to make this wrong, right?
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you panel
members, and I apologize for
being late. I had physical
therapy this morning and um I'm
wondering, I have one quick
question before I make my
comments. Are you talking about
the um salaries for all of the
um professionals like the
physical therapists and speech
pathologists and, and, um.
And occupational therapists.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chasey, that's, that's the
Federal Department of Labor
requirement that they've
increased in most of those if,
if they're, and I, I don't want
to throw this word out there
lightly. A lot of those
professionals, the therapists
and stuff, are independent
contractors. They're not
employees of those agencies. So
it would not apply to them.
Thank goodness, you know, I
would say thank goodness because
um those people are scarce as
possible. I mean, we have our,
our coach, our vice chairs,
physical therapist, but I was
telling somebody just the other
day, go to physical therapy and
I'm, and same with speech
pathology or occupational
therapy because you're needed
everywhere in the world in every
setting, and, um, everyone will
be happy to hire you, but um.
This was 38 years ago that the
federal early intervention
program was enacted.
I was, um,
Just the pot, it was the past
director of um Albuquerque
Special Preschool and co-founder
with Pat McMahon of Altamira
Specialized Family Services.
It's incomprehensible to me that
we haven't gotten this right in
38 years. Um, and
There's nothing that has been
proven more effective.
An early intervention. So it
it's just like we're not paying
attention to the science.
Of how we spend our money and we
need to, this needs to.
And
But it needs to, what needs to
happen is the beginning of
proper funding. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you all for
being here today.
We'll let uh Senator Lopez and
Senator Tollman asked questions
as well. Senator, may I just say
I think I was trying to find out
if Tom Senator Tom Harkin was
the sponsor of the federal
program. I think he may have
been or the late Senator Lowell
Wicker of Connecticut, but, um,
Senator Harkin sponsored the
ADA, so anyway, I wanted to give
credit, but I couldn't find it
fast enough on my phone.
Senator Lopez, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you, Senator
Jaramil Representative Herrera
and the team sitting here in
front of us. I apologize for
being late also. Um, but Mr.
Chair, it it's.
It's like we're always back
again talking about this
particular issue for as long as
I've been here too.
It's sad
Uh, what I would want to ask,
um, is how much money?
In the budget
Are we needing
So we don't have the number and
so we need to definitely go back
and look at that, but we wanted
to ensure that 7.39 cost of
living adjustment and cola for
sure is added in there, but
we'll have to, we're gonna have
to look closer at numbers,
Senator.
OK, um,
Mr. Chair, and the reason why I
think that number is important
because it also will help us to
advocate um a session comes up.
And to bring it to the attention
of quote unquote the
authorities, the secretaries,
um.
And of course the governor's
office, but, um, and I
appreciate Senator Rodriguez,
um, she's and it's true we will
miss her advocacy on the
legislative Finance Committee,
um, for what she's done as well
as on Senate Finance. She's
been.
A person who's been uh.
Doggedly just on them, right, uh
with regards to what needs to be
happening, especially for our
families who um have a member
who has a disability of some
sort.
Um,
Mr. Chair, I think as soon as
you're able to get some money
and at a.
A dollar amount, I think that
will help us in in many ways
sooner rather than later, as we
know, Mr. Chair, budget is
already being proposed and
presented in front of the LFC,
so it'd be interesting to see um
what the secretary.
Secretaries are proposing.
Um, so I, I would anticipate
that, um.
And also, Mr. Chair, I know that
we've done this for a couple of
other um organizations if
there's even um.
For the money amount you're
looking at the big ticket, you
know, if it's 70, 50, whatever
it was, but is there what I
would call Mr. Chair like a stop
gap that we need at least if
monies were provided for a
certain point up to a certain
point, if I understand, and now
it's stopped. How much more
money would it be, um, needed to
fill in from when the payments
were stopped until the end of
this year, because then we also
have the state board of Finance,
Mr. Chair.
Where you can also make an
approach and ask those uh
learned people with some a few
extra dollars that maybe can
divert some monies into uh maybe
help where some of these
shortcomings do come up, and I
know, Mr. Chair, a suggestion
was made for one of a a
commission uh the Ofra, where
they did approach the State
Board of Finance and State Board
of Finance graciously approved
some monies that were needed by
the commission to kind of make
ends meet.
So I would suggest that be on
the list also, but we need a
dollar amount to kind of do that
stopgap.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great ideas. Thank you, Senator.
Did you want to come in?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez,
we will work with the Early
Childhood Education and Care
Department to get the number for
the fit rates that were
retracted and we'll also work
with the healthcare authority to
figure the 7.39% cost of living
adjustment for the developmental
disability waivers rates because
we're talking about two
different.
Lots of money, uh, but we will,
we'll do that research and get
the, the money, the funding for
those legis for the pieces of
legislation.
And if I may, Mr. Chair,
sometimes you can run a bill
separate has an emergency clause
on it and if there's money, etc.
I mean, that's a lot of
negotiations, Mr. Chair, but
sometimes we can get that done
during the 60 day session and
it's been done before, Mr.
Chair, so it's not like it
hasn't been done before. Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I may need a
senior senator to guide me and
join with me as a co-sponsor on
legislation like that.
Thank you. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
If I may, Mr. Chair, and Senator
Lopez,
other sources, it's in the range
of 11 million for that stop gap.
I don't, I don't think we know
that for sure, but I think, I
think that's the range you're
looking at somewhere and
probably to the north of that,
but, but it's certainly not 5
million. I just want people to
understand that. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, if I may, just what
I'm looking at though is like um
just between now and the end of
the year, not the full amount of
the program which we do need
that also, but I'm looking maybe
at least from where what was
paid up from that when it was
stopped if it was August or
whatever. I, I missed that time
frame but between there and the
end of this this year calendar
year, at least that may help at
least for that and then that
gives, I think, more urgency for
us to petition, um, others above
my pay grade, but we can
To work it and see if we can get
the state board of Finance to
help with a little bit of that
too.
Just looking to for an emergency
opportunity.
That's all.
And, and, uh, Mr. Chair, and,
and, uh, Senator Lopez, it that
was a stopgap number from that
from the September to the end of
the fiscal year. So that's what
they were talking about, um, Mr.
Chair, I'm not looking at the
fiscal year. I'm looking at the
calendar year. That's for, yeah,
thank you.
Um, and
Just point out that Xander just
got a text message or email
message from Kelly Klundt at the
LFC. She's following the
meeting, uh, remotely and she
indicated that it looks like it
we should be looking at
something like $10,000 is uh
that's what it would take.
Um, is that right? 10 million,
10 million, um,
senator.
For
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh I
just have a rhetorical question.
You know,
Is there any state program
that's being adequately
administered in a timely manner?
Um, it just seems to be a theme
throughout every department, you
know, CYFD is a mess, is a
crisis. Everyone's well aware of
that.
Medicare payments. There's been
a screw up with that because to
switch over from the loss of
funds from the, uh, COVID
pandemic.
Cannabis. I just heard a report
last week at the
In the economic Development
Committee.
Uh, that we only have 9
inspectors.
Inspecting the cannabis outlets.
Colorado has 60 and they have
less outlets than we do. They
only have around 2000 and we
have over 3000.
And some of these
Outlets have been open for 2
years and they've never been
inspected.
We well-known shortage of
doctors and medical providers.
I read recently that 42%, only
42% of people who want
behavioral health care are who
either want it or need it are
getting it. Behavioral health is
never recovered from the mess
that Governor Martinez created.
We've had 10 years to to deal
with that.
There was a recent report from
LFC that said that
Even though we're throwing money
at behavioral health. There's
been no improvements.
We have the 2nd worst capital
outlay system in the country. I
tried to reform it for 7 years
and got nowhere. We have $6.2
billion sitting there unspent
and most of it should have been
spent by now because we won't
reform the system. It goes on
and on and on. Environment
department just released a
report takes 6.5 years to
inspect every water permit down
in the oil patch. It takes 2.5
years to inspect air quality
permits.
The reason the chairman of the
Sierra Club was all excited
because the rules and
regulations have been, been, um,
upgraded and I said I don't know
what you're so excited about
because we don't have a.
They're not being enforced. We
don't have enough inspectors for
two reasons one,
We don't pay enough
To hire the best.
We don't have and we have.
Even if we filled all our
vacancies, we still wouldn't
have enough in the environmental
department to inspect all the
air quality and water permits in
the oil patch. The oil industry
is getting away with murder down
there. I mean this.
In our procurement system.
I tried to reform that got
nowhere. It's ridiculous. The
good news is UNM has a very
professional procurement system.
It is so sophisticated that
during the pandemic they didn't
have to go out to bid on
anything because they already
anticipated what they would need
during a pandemic. New Mexico,
this was in the newspaper.
They didn't receive some of the
goods.
That they
Um
That they tried to purchase
during during the pandemic and
this goes on and on and on. Is
there a department that's doing
anything right in this state
that's, you don't, that's a
rhetorical question. Nobody has
to answer that. Thank you.
Thank you for making that
rhetorical, Senator.
Representative Thompson wanted
to respond.
Actually, it's not a response,
it's just my anger boiling up,
um, you know, for my son is 33
years old. I've been working in
the field for 40 years and
nothing has changed, uh, I mean,
things have changed, but not,
not enough for 40 years. I think
we have.
Dealt with the people with
intellectual.
developmental disabilities as
second-class citizens for
decades and we still are and
it's.
Shameful and disgusting and.
Makes me very angry, um, Bruce
Weatherby with the candle is
doing a series of newspaper
articles on this, and I
encourage you all to read them,
you know, I'm not saying he gets
everything 100% right, but I,
he's, I think his heart's in the
right spot, and I want to
apologize to families and to
folks with intellectual and
developmental disabilities that
we have failed you so miserably.
Well, thank you, thank you all
for the presentation for
bringing this before us
hopefully some things can be
done to rectify it, uh, there's
certainly not a lack of money. I
mean, it's not like we're short
money. This is just a question
of figuring out how to move it
from the wherever it is now into
the right pots we can spend it,
uh.
But thank you for bringing this
forward and Senator and
Representative Ms. Martinez and
Jim, thank you so much for
coming before us. Any final
comments? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I just have a few, and
if you want to go first and I'll
just for your information, our
association has two member
agencies in Roswell. I contacted
both of them this morning and
they are both doing relatively
well. They had some leaky roofs
and that sort of thing, but.
Apparently our folks are.
Doing OK in Rosville.
Well, Mr. Chairman, we want to
thank you for the opportunity to
present in front of you and the
committee and we look forward to
gaining your support when we
bring forth our draft
legislation on how we can help
resolve these issues and then
just two more comments, Mr.
Chairman, behind me, the Los
Cumbres members will be staying
behind to our intellectual and
developmental delay with
disabilities so that you can
mingle with them during lunch or
their families, and then.
After lunch they'll be leaving
and then finally, Mr. Chairman,
I'm going to be missing you and
I'm gonna be missing senators
Rodriguez and Talmen and so know
that I will continue the good
fight, but you're gonna stay on
speed dial with me and
Representative Chasey, your
leadership will also be missed,
and I want to thank all of you
for the commitment and time you
made for New Mexicans, the
strong work you did to move us
forward and it's not gonna end
with you leaving. I will
champion the causes for you.
What I'm gonna look for you for
historical knowledge and for
your guidance, even though
you're no longer in the
roundhouse, but know that you're
respected and loved and you will
be missed.
Absolutely.
And with that we'll then turn to
the health care authority and
the secretary, Kerry Armijo, the
secretary of the authority is
here to make a presentation on
developmental disability
supports division and and
updating us on what's going on
there.
When I see the division
director, Ms. Rodriguez is here
as well. Thank you.
Thank you
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and
also with your permission, we
have, uh, the division of a
Health Improvement Director Dan
Lenori as well.
And good morning. Uh, good
morning, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
I thank you for the opportunity
to be here today. I know there's
been a lot of interest in the
developmental disability
supports division, particularly
as it has transitioned to the
healthcare authority from the
Department of Health, so I'm
here to talk today a little bit
about the commitments that we're
making to improve the program
and um what's going on sort of
uh front and center.
In our world here. So, um,
before I do that, I want to
introduce um Jen Rodriguez, uh,
she's the director of the
Developmental Disability
Supports division. We also have
with us Dan Lenari, the director
of the Division of Health
Improvement, both new leaders
were really fortunate to have
them at the agency, uh, both
coming with years of experience,
uh, including Ms. Rodriguez's
experience as a direct care
provider for people with
disabilities, um.
I'd also like to mention that
there are other people in the
audience who are here today,
including the team from Medicaid
or Medicaid director Dina
Flannery, and deputy secretary
Kathy Slater Huff. So thank you
to them for being here today.
And I
Before Mr. Chair, uh, before I
start, I just want to thank the
Rio Rancho Public Schools for
helping us make copies this
morning. I, the team left me in
charge of bringing the copies
and that was a very big mistake.
Rio Rancho Public Schools made
our copies today, so I want to
say thank you to them and to the
team for scrambling to get those
in front of you, and I'm sorry,
they're not stapled. Um, but
before we start, um, I do want
to just acknowledge that on
behalf of our colleagues at the
Healthcare Authority, we humbly
acknowledge that we are on the
unseeded ancestral land
of the original peoples of the
pueblo, Apache,
and Denee past, present, and
future, and with gratitude we
pair respects to the land, the
people and the communities that
that contribute to what today is
known as the state of New
Mexico, and we really love this
state. I'm a New Mexican born
and bred here, uh, and every day
I feel very grateful to live in
our wonderful community.
On slide 3, I just want to make
sure that we're always anchored
to our mission, the healthcare
authority's mission is to ensure
that New Mexicans attain their
highest level of health by
providing whole person,
cost-effective, accessible, and
high-quality health care and
safety net services. It's really
important to me that we connect
not just healthcare, but also
that safety net, um, including
food, um, social determinants of
health supports income
assistance, and other supports
that New Mexicans need to.
and be healthy. Our, our vision
is that every New Mexican will
have access to affordable health
care coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system, and all the
work that we do really directly
ties to the four goals that
articulated on the slide below.
Moving on to slide 4. today
we're going to give some
important updates about where
we're headed with improving
services for individuals with
disabilities through the
Medicaid waiver programs, um,
and oversight and update you on
oversight to ensure that
individuals on the waivers are
receiving high quality care that
assures their safety, dignity
and choice. Um, and I'll give an
update on, I'll start by giving
an update on the recent um DD
provider summit that was held in
August. We'll talk a little bit
about what the agency is doing
to improve provider capacity.
as an agency, many of which were
discussed, I think in the
previous presentation, we'll
talk about the health and
wellness visits. We'll give an
update on our incident
management system, will give
some additional updates and um
in terms of what we are doing to
support individuals with complex
needs, particularly um in the
behavioral health realm, where
we're hearing that there's an
additional need for more robust
services and coordination. Um,
and then we'll talk a little bit
about what we're doing to
improve the waiver eligibility
and allocation process, and then
we can talk about the.
Budget and those rates that you
all were discussing earlier
today.
On slide 5, we always like to
start with a real life example
of a healthcare authority
customer. Um, so I'd like to
introduce you to Andrea. Andrea
is a woman with an intellectual
disability, intellectual and
developmental disability
receiving services through the
MVet uh self-directed waiver.
During a health and wellness
visit that was conducted by the
agency. It was discovered that
Andrea's equipment needs were
not being properly addressed by
her direct support
professionals. So DDSD reported
suspected
neglect
Um, additionally, Andrea's
support professionals reported
that she was struggling with
substance abuse. This is
something that has become a more
common issue, uh, since the
super waiver super allocation,
something that we really need to
address in the waiver programs.
Andrea feared that she would not
be able to find a behavioral
support consultant who would
work with her in her home in
Taos due to talk about provider
shortages, something we know is
a very real issue issue here in
New Mexico.
And Andreas Miva consultant was
concerned that those services
would take months to begin due
to processing delays at the
Medicaid third party assessor, a
real issue that has recently
been a focus of the agency. As
we talk about where the agency
is headed today,
remember Andrea and the issues
and we're going to try and
connect back to those issues as
we close out today's session.
OK, um, so I'm gonna start out,
uh, we can go to slide 7. I'm
going to give you an update on
the developmental disabilities
provider summit that was held in
August. Um, that was not just
with myself, but uh the governor
actually was there as well, as
well as a number of other
critical leaders. We had more
than 50 guests ranging from
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities
providers, family members,
advocates, and including some
legislators, some of which are
in this room today.
I want to thank you for your
time that day. It was very
important for me to hear
directly from stakeholders and
the community about the biggest
concerns that were facing in the
waiver program, particularly as
the program has transitioned to
a new agency and is under new
leadership and what we really
need to be focusing on. We heard
a lot of the main themes, so
I'll just cover those at a broad
strokes and then we'll get into
them a little bit more. Uh, but
concerns about provider
capacity, um, real concerns
about agency communication and
how we need to do better.
Um, behavioral health, as I
mentioned, uh, becoming a new
issue, the behavioral health
issues, substance use disorder,
and then also the availability
of crisis supports for the
providers that are serving um
individuals with disabilities.
Um, there were a lot of, there
was a lot of discussion about
the wellness visits that we've
been performing the quality of
care and abuse, neglect and
exploitation, lots of feedback
about the agency's eligibility
process and customer service,
um, funding and
It's always a big topic, um, and
the administrative burden to our
providers.
On slide 8, I'm gonna cue these
up based on the theme and the
commitments that the agency is
making in response to that
provider summit. We're going to
get into the details on some of
these further in today's
presentation, but really kind of
want to give you a high level
sort of what those commitments
are looking like. So first, we
are committed to supporting
provider capacity. We want to
make sure that we try to utilize
the rural healthcare delivery
fund to expand services in rural
communities for individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities.
Currently in the 2nd round of
funding, uh, you all may know
that we issued 80 million in
funding, um,
Currently in the 2nd round of
funding, uh, you all may know
that we issued 80 million in
funding
um,
in this fiscal year, the last
fiscal year, I'm sorry, um, to
providers all over the state to
build up capacity, gave them
startup funds. We have another
$46 million in the budget for FY
25, so we're in the process of
reviewing grant applications
now, but really hoping to see um
that we'll get some support for
individuals with developmental
disabilities uh through that
process.
We are expanding telemedicine
support to media and medically
fragile waiver populations, and
then we're really focused on
provider capacity and supporting
choice for our waiver clients
and I'm I'm going to allow a
director Rodriguez to talk in
greater detail about what we're
doing in specific initiatives um
in that area. I also want to
articulate to you my commitment
to improve agency communication.
Um, I think.
You all talked about this this
morning during the previous
presentation and I just want to
acknowledge that we do need to
do a better job of coordinating
an intern internally within the
healthcare authority. There are
4 key divisions, uh, that have
something to do with individuals
with disabilities, um, and the
coordination of those four
divisions is really critical and
I think part of what you've seen
is a failure of organization, of
those divisions to talk to each
other, to collaborate with each
other. So we will be doing
better.
On that, all of those four
divisions, some of them were at
the Department of Health before.
Now they are all within the
healthcare authority, and we
will make sure that we are doing
a better job to communicate and
collaborate, um, not something
that you should have to see
visibly our struggles with that,
but I do think that has been
apparent and that's something
that we need to work on.
Uh, we are also going to be
utilizing a better distribution
process for jointly and
consistently sharing information
with providers and stakeholders,
and then we want to make sure
that we ensure greater access to
agency leadership through
provider and stakeholder forums
with open dialogue and
constructive solutions. We
already have another follow-up
stakeholder meeting that I will
be attending in November. I'm
committed to making sure that I
hear more from the stakeholder
community about the ways that we
need to improve.
Um, 3rd, I just want to
articulate our commitment to
ensuring additional behavioral
health support and coordination.
We really need to advance a
better partnership between um
the DED programs and the
behavioral health services
division at the agency to make
sure that we are providing
additional resources to people
with disabilities, including
housing assistance, crisis
support, substance abuse
treatment, and suicide
prevention resources. Um, and
then we want to provide
additional behavioral health.
and training for direct support
workers, um, with a focus on
that crisis support.
Um, I also want to articulate
our commitment to improving the
wellness visits, focusing on
quality of care and reducing the
risk of abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. We really feel, I
really believe that we need to
improve our communication with
the public on the process for
addressing allegations of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation, and
what happens after a report of
abuse, neglect and exploitation
is substantiated so that you all
have better information about
that. We want to provide better
training for the case
management.
Agencies and the provider
network on immediate action and
safety plans and then we want to
ensure that there is a high
quality wellness visit training
for all staff who are visiting,
doing the conducting the visits,
including their preparation and
what to do during the visits and
reporting and follow up
expectations. I heard loud and
clear that we need to work on.
On slide 9, we just in the
continuation of those
commitments, we know we need to
streamline the eligibility
process and improve agency
customer service, uh, we have
been focused very much on
improving and I'll talk about
this a little bit later today,
improving our consolidated
customer service center wait
times for waiver participants,
um, and making sure that we run
down that backlog of
eligibility, um, cases, and the
eligibility application and
waiver renewal processing time
for waiver.
Participants, we will be
uncoupling the level of care
from the eligibility renewal
process that will start in
December, so no longer will that
level of care be tied to the
eligibility, um, at renewal,
starting next in December, not
quite next month. Um, we also
know, this is again a theme that
we need to ensure updated rates
and timely payments. We are
conducting, we are on a schedule
where we're conducting the
comprehensive rate studies every
2 years we're scheduled to do
that in FY 26.
That would be the next one, but
I also want to acknowledge that
we need to improve the health
care authority's internal
planning process and
organization to ensure earlier
submission of those rate
approval documents to federal
regulators and faster
implementation for our
providers.
And lastly, um, we know we need
to reduce provider burden, um,
administrative burden. So we
will be working with providers
to address issues more
expediently and reduce redundant
meetings. We heard a lot of
feedback about that.
Um, oh, I'm sorry, and I had a
mistake. I was, I was FY 25 for
our next-rate study, not FY 26.
Um, and then I got a lot of
feedback about some provider
integrity audits that are being
conducted and the burden on
providers. I have been really
digging in on this to make sure
that we understand that those
auditors who are doing those
program integrity audits
understand the program, and so
we've been working directly with
providers, gotten a lot of
feedback from the provider
community, including some very
specific examples that have gone
back to the auditor, um, that's
doing that, that works for the
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. I will not
I assume those audits will not
resume until I'm satisfied that
those issues have been
addressed.
Um, with that, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, I'm going to turn things
over to Ms. Rodriguez, uh, to
talk about provider capacity.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, um, just wanted to
share with you this morning some
of the strategies that DDSD and
the entire healthcare authority
are involved with related to
ensuring we have a provider
capacity, um, that is able to
meet the needs of everybody who
is needing services across our
state. Um, so one of the things
that we've already implemented
our allowances for parents of
minors, as well as legal
spouses.
Certain family members and
certain types of guardians to be
paid supports for the folks on
our waiver programs. This was
something that can help mitigate
provider shortages, but also as
a direct result of families
really wanting to be um able to
be reimbursed to care for their
loved ones and not have to work
on top of trying to do that. So
this was a direct response to
something we heard from our
stakeholder and parent
community. Um, we also are
actively engaged in what we call
call for providers.
So DDSD does monitor our
provider capacity per waiver,
per service, per county on a
regular basis. So when we know
that there are provider needs
for certain areas or like I said
uh specific services, we do
something called a call for
providers, which is uh outreach
letting folks know through our
various channels that we have a
need for certain provider types,
um, the HCA is also one of the
state agencies that have been
Collaborating on a direct care
workforce, federal grant to look
at how to better address the
workforce crisis by way of
recruitment, retention and
compensation strategies. DDSD is
also engaged with New Mexico's
higher education institutions by
way of outreach as well as doing
presentations to these various
institutions who offer
curriculum um for some of our
waiver provider types. So in
hopes that they won, uh,
about our programs and then of
course have an interest and when
they graduate they can come work
for us and be a part of our
wonderful provider community.
Preparations are underway to
launch a social media campaign
to entice providers to not just
work in this field with people
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, but
also maybe recruit and ask
people come to our beautiful
state and and really try to
entice them to come here and and
work in this field, um.
Telehealth allowances are
something that we really learned
from during COVID and realized
that this was a very effective
way of providing supports to
people and quite honestly, it
has been a request from
families, from people with IDD
to be allowed to have services
provided remotely in some
instances. There are
requirements and and criteria
around that in our service
standards, but that has been,
um, thus far a very successful
strategy, not only to meet the
needs of the people who we
directly from, but also help
mitigate the workforce crisis
and then as as our secretary
mentioned a minute ago, the
rural healthcare delivery fund.
We've had to date 3 provider
applications that DDSD has
reviewed
for existing providers asking
for additional funding to be
able to expand capacity in some
of our more rural areas of the
state.
On slide 12, I wanted to share
some of our provider enrollment
data with you on the right, you
will see as as much as we do
have concerns about different
services, um, and different
counties needing more providers
um compared to last October,
October of 2023, um, to date, we
have um more providers today
than we did last year at this
time, so, um, like I said, we do
monitor this on a regular basis.
The left, um.
column demonstrates to you that
new, these are not existing
providers but rather brand new
provider types that have entered
our system within the last year
and so you'll see the variety of
services and variety of provider
types. Does this mean we have
met all of the needs? No, it
does not, but I just wanted to
share the current data with you
um to demonstrate that we are
aware of what's happening across
the state. We do monitor that
and we are also very actively
engaged in trying to increase
our provider capacity.
For all service types.
OK. uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
um, we're going to move to slide
14, um, I want to talk a little
bit about what the healthcare
authority is doing to improve
operational efficiencies to
support waiver clients and our
providers, um, we went through a
very historic time uh with the
Medicaid unwinding.
Unfortunately, I don't think
that it was smooth and I don't
think that it went well, and I
think that there were a lot of
issues.
That needed to be addressed. Um,
we had, um, you can see in the
table on the right, you can see
what our backlog looks like for
institutional care and waiver
eligibility, um,
we
Or now we have reduced that
backlog. We are now within a
two-week processing time for
eligibility. Um it took a lot of
real focused work and new
leadership, so we instituted a
new leadership at the Income
support division to make sure
folks are really paying
attention to that. Um, we have
also been very focused on the
Medicaid third party assessor.
exceeding what was required in
contract, so their turnaround
time, turnaround times by
contract, 10 days.
They were hit at closer to about
20 days. Uh, we have reduced
that just through some good
vendor management, I think, and
uh really paying attention to
that.
And we are also, we've made some
system updates to ensure that
level of care delays do not
result in gaps in coverage for
individuals who are renewing
coverage. And again, we are
going to do that uncoupling of
the level of care people will no
longer be starting in December,
removed from eligibility because
their level of care is expired.
That will not happen. The level
of care requirement is required
of every 12 months. Um, that
will still occur, but the only
reason that that would affect
eligibility would be if there's
a change, which largely they are
not, is not a change.
This population and so we will
be implementing that soon.
Um, we have also really
substantially improved our call
center wait times, um, in May of
2024, our call center wait times
for institutional care waive our
services was about 52 minutes
for providers. We had providers
calling me directly saying I'm
spending the entire day on the
phone. I can't see patients, uh,
really paying attention to this,
great, incredible leadership
from um our new ISD director,
um, wait times are now about 2
minutes and 12 seconds. Uh, so
great improvement in 5 months.
Um, on slide 15, I'm not gonna
walk through the entire process
for getting into waiver
services, but I think this
illustrates how complicated it
is and how many different uh
cooks there are in the kitchen,
um, so I really just want to
articulate that together.
I am insisting that all of our
divisions are working together
to simplify the process so it's
easier and faster for
individuals to start receiving
their waiver services. I think
we owe it to the people of New
Mexico to coordinate better and
uh just work together the way
that
you would expect, um, and I know
you all don't care and neither
do our uh customers. Which
division does what? Uh, really
only matters how well we're
serving the population, and I
agree. And so that is the
philosophy that I'm taking on
this and we will do a better job
with um that waiver allocation
process and streamline it as
much as we possibly can. OK, and
then director Rodriguez is going
to talk about our health and
wellness visits.
So as Secretary Armijo
mentioned, um, one of the themes
that came up at the recent
provider summit was related to
the state, um, conducted health
and wellness visits and a lot of
comparison to how poorly they
were executed when we were
initially beginning these, um,
to where we are today. And so I
wanted to give everybody an
update and assure you that we
have heard you and made
significant adjustments to our
process. And so to date, um,
only healthcare authority
specifically developmental
disabilities Sports division and
of health improvement, state
staff are conducting the health
and wellness visits with, with
families and individuals. Uh, we
do have a required comprehensive
abuse, neglect, and exploiting,
uh, excuse me, exploitation
training, um, that is required
of all staff to take on an
annual basis. We also have
developed a health and wellness
visit toolkit, um, for use
during preparation for visits as
well as uh providing some
guidance on the required
documentation of.
It and then resources for
consideration based on the
individual needs that might be
identified along with any
follow-up activities that might
need to occur from the visits.
DDSD is also in the process of
developing a formal training for
staff on how to prepare for
these visits, how to conduct
them, how to complete them, and
then, uh, what follow up might
be required and what the
different types of follow up
that might be, um, as a result
of a health and wellness visit.
Also, DDSD is finalizing.
Health and wellness visit policy
and procedure that will be
completed by the end of this
month and to date, over 20,000
visits have been completed,
which demonstrates that we've
seen our entire population more
than 3 times over at this point.
So big accomplishment there um
on the right, just wanted to
demonstrate an excerpt from some
of our training materials about
different signs of trauma, um,
that might be able to be easily
recognized by simply laying eyes
on people.
Um, next slide 18. Why is the
healthcare authority committed
to the health and wellness
visits. Um, so, you know,
obviously this is one of our um
uh very large strategies related
to trying to prevent abuse,
neglect, and exploitation and
ensure that folks receiving
services are living in safe um
environments. So with improved
oversight, um, homes are going
into homes and again laying eyes
on people can really help
identify any potential issues.
Early on, and again we train our
staff on how to detect signs of,
of neglect and abuse. In
increased social support can
really help reduce isolation and
improve overall well-being.
Sometimes a visit, um, is, is
the most social interaction
people have had based on, you
know, maybe where they live or,
or just different uh
circumstances and then case
management. So I'm not talking
about our providers who are
actual case managers, but DDSD
being a part of the overall
case.
Management and increasing
effectiveness, um, that can lead
to better outcomes by way of, of
safety and wellbeing and again
reduces the incidence of neglect
and exploitation when we are
actively engaged with the people
that we serve, are laying eyes
on them and seeing them in their
home environment and then of
course, overall community
engagement. I mean we've all
heard the expression it takes a
village. Well, it takes a
village in this case too, um,
and we at the state are one part
of, of a support network for
people, um, and you know,
Data shows that with stronger um
support networks, people do have
lower um incidence of, of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation.
And with that, um, I'm going to
turn it over to my colleague
here, Mr. Lunari, to talk more
about our incident management
system. Thank you, Jen. Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee, good morning.
Uh thank you for having us. Uh,
so yes, I, I wanna talk a bit
more detail around uh DHI's
roles it relates to abuse,
neglect, exploitation, the
intake process, uh, the
investigation process, and then
the follow up. So I will begin
with that on slide 20.
Uh, so slide 20 outlines what
that intake process looks like,
uh, and so, um, important to
note that the hotline number
that we utilize also the online
reporting system that we utilize
that that's a shared system
between uh the adult protective
services and DHI.
And so all um reports or
allegations of, of A&E come
through that hotline. And, and
when, and when individuals
report into that hotline, they
are um asked to, to, to press
certain numbers that may, uh,
bring that intake process
towards the APS side or to the
DHI side. However, um, we, we
are consistently cross
referencing those to make sure
that they get into the correct
department's hands and so, uh,
how that works is, is if there's
anybody that is.
In the DD waiver or waiver
services receiving services
under the waivers, those go into
the DHI uh platform and then any
other uh reports will land with
APS, uh, and so that's what's
outlined there as you see that
green area arrow if the
allegation does not involve an
individual on waiver services,
then APS conducts that
investigation.
If they are under way of
services, then DHI is
responsible for doing that, um,
after hours intake is shared
between DHI and APS, so this, so
this is a 24 hour hotline. Uh,
and so how we staff that 24
hours is, uh, so we essentially
have 5 people on call on DHI. So
we have 3 investigators that we,
um, separate into three regions
of the state. Uh, the reason we
do that is for the those
emergency intake uh situations
where we need somebody to
respond within 3 hours.
Uh, they're able to do so. Uh,
we also have one intake
coordinator and one supervisor,
uh, that is on call, um, after
hours and then the weekends. Uh,
and that's important, uh,
especially as, uh, the
complexity of those reports come
in, we want to make sure that we
have uh multiple eyes on those
reports and to ensure the
accuracy of our screening and
our priority levels and then of
course the initiation of our
investigations.
Um, so that's what our intake
process currently looks like. If
we go to, uh, slide 21, the next
page, um, that, that gives a bit
more uh details around the
priority levels, uh, and so as
those reports come in, um, they
are assigned one of 3 priority
levels in the emergency priority
level of priority one or a
priority 2, and to the right.
You'll see on that table is what
our response time is required of
us, um, when we assign those
priority levels. So when we're
talking about emergency
priorities, those are where harm
or potential for harm is life
threatening, um, so we need to.
Uh, received that report and,
and follow up immediately, um,
and so initiation of that
investigation is required within
3 hours. Priority 1, harm or
potential for harm is moderate
to serious but not life
threatening, uh, the response
time or the of the investigation
needs to be within 24 hours. And
then lastly, priority 2 is going
to be a lower minimal or
potential for harm for the
initiation of the investigation
is required, um, within 5
calendar days. Uh, and so that's
important, um, that we are
accurate with that.
So that we can allocate our
resources, um, uh, aka our staff
to respond to those emergencies
quickly, uh, and uh through all
hours of the day.
Going to the next page, the
substantiation of, of abuse,
neglect and exploitation. Um,
this was, uh, a topic, uh, that
we spent some time together, uh,
when we were in Socorro a few
months ago, uh, and
I heard very clearly, uh, your,
um, concerns around the um
numbers of substantiations and
so last time, uh, when I was
with you all, I gave those
numbers and, um, so I appreciate
that and I, I believe that, that
it's my job as the DHI director
to also always question those
numbers, uh, because DHI's role
in all of this is, is safety.
That is our number one role with
the DD waiver program because
we're responsible for
The
Investigations of abuse,
neglect, and exploitation. So
when our when our role as the
agency, uh, or as the department
is safety. I as the leader,
always need to be questioning
those numbers and making sure
that our processes are sound and
that we are training staff
appropriately and that we are
doing what we need to be doing
correctly.
And so how we substantiate that.
I wanted to outline what that
looked like for you all. Um, you
know, within the New Mexico
administrative code, of course
it gives definitions of what
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
is, um, however, the important
part of that substantiation is
then what do we do with those
definitions as those reports
come to our intake coordinators
and so that's what we utilize is
called the preponderance of
evidence. And so this is
What we train our staff on our
intake coordinators, our
investigators, supervisors, etc.
And so this standard is what's
followed in civil matters and we
use what's called the 51% rule
of thumb or the preponderance is
based on more convincing
evidence and its probable truth
or accuracy.
And so what that means is the
job of those intake coordinators
as they are gathering that
evidence and that evidence may
be through interviews, whether
it's phone interviews or face to
face interviews, um, medical
records or, uh, or assessments
or, or written statements or all
sorts of documentation. It it is
their job to take all of that
evidence and if there is enough
evidence to
Tip the scale, so to speak, to
that 51%, um, it is expected
then that that case would be
substantiated, uh, and so.
I felt like that was important,
uh, uh, to share as far as what
that looks like, um, and it's
very different than a criminal
case, so criminal case is, uh,
of course, beyond a reasonable
doubt. Uh, that is not the
standard that we follow, uh,
regarding substantiations of
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
in these cases, and so.
As I said, uh,
Complexity of cases it can vary
and as we bring on new staff,
um, it's important that we
provide adequate training to
them, uh, but also that we have
multiple eyes on these cases as
they come through and that's
what we've implemented to make
sure that it's not just one
person making this decision on
if it's substantiated or not,
that we have, you know, the
correct experts and multiple
experts on these cases, uh, so
that our accuracy can be assured
to the, to the best of our
ability.
Last page for me is on slide 23,
uh, and so that's the actions
after substantiation. And so
what is required of the
provider, um, first they have to
submit an immediate action
safety plan. Um, they also have
to.
Uh, submit a corrective and
preventative plan. So
essentially two different action
plans that they have to come
back to DHI that we have to
approve.
Um,
criminal cases, and we talked a
little bit about this last time
I referred to local law
enforcement and or the
Department of Justice. Um,
usually the, the local law
enforcement involvement is going
to be in more the immediate
nature. So let's say we have
this um emergency case that
comes in that we need local law
enforcement support, um,
they'll, they're gonna be the
ones that would help respond to
those situations where the
Department of Justice, they're
going to be the entity that
reviews.
Our substantiations and then
proceeds with their criminal
investigations and so uh we meet
monthly with the Department of
Justice. They're provided all of
our reports and, um, and so we
meet monthly on those shared
cases as they're going through
their their process and, and,
and we are there to give them
more information as necessary so
that they can complete their
criminal investigations.
And then lastly, uh, if, if
applicable, employees are placed
on the employee abuse registry
and so I just outlined it a few
quick facts of what EAR is and
what that looks like, um.
From the substantiations and so
referrals are made, um, by a
manager within DHI after those
cases are substantiated.
Uh, that, that next step is that
a letter goes out to that
individual, uh, and they have 30
days to appeal that and request
a hearing.
Um, if they request a hearing,
it would go through that
process. Um, there would
eventually be a decision made,
um, after that hearing on
whether or not they would be
placed on the database, um.
If an employee gets placed on
that database, uh, a provider
may not employ or contract with
that individual, um, and also
providers are required to query
that database prior to making um
any employment hires.
And then lastly, employees that
get put on that database, they
stay on that for 3 years, uh,
and then after 3 years, uh, they
can file a petition for removal.
Uh, so I just wanted to close
the loop on some of those
questions that came up last time
where we were with you all and
with that, I will pass it back
to the secretary. Just on the
When you're talking about
employees in that last section
there, um, you're talking about
the employees of the provider
agencies. Does the agency have a
role in trying to
Uh
Take action about them or I mean
or is it all DH HAC,
uh.
Putting them on the registry
without the employer having a
role in that, yeah, so yeah,
they would also could make a
referral um to that for that
process, um, and then we're the
employer would come into play as
once that employee.
Comes onto the registry, they
can no longer have, you know,
direct contact, um, with, with
individuals, you know, etc.
Mhm.
OK, um, moving on to slide 25.
Um, just wanted to talk a little
bit about the rate increases
because I know everyone's
frustrated about the time it's
taken and I just want to
acknowledge that I do not
disagree. I think we really do
need to do a better job of
planning at the front end, uh,
when we know we're going to get
money for those rate increases,
but it is about a 7 month
process end to end that's part
of the challenge here is that we
are trying to execute something
for July.
Um, that really, you know, we
are working just we have just a
couple of months of a window. We
are going to be trying to work
through this process to see what
we can do to shorten it, but it
is a pretty lengthy process and
that's part of the frustration,
um, Madam Vice Chair, your sort
of acknowledgement that we
didn't get those the waiver
amendment until the end of
September. Also, I agree, very
not acceptable, that isn't
something that the agency will
do again, I think what we will
do is be planning.
From the very get-go, we know
during session there's a lot of
discussion and we'll be plugging
numbers in. Um, I will say
sometimes there's an adjustment
that we have to kind of go back
and recalculate what the rates
will need to be based on what
that final number is, but I do
believe we could do a lot better
with that early planning. Um, so
we did, um, implement the rate
increases, those are from the
2023 rate study, um, you can
kind of see what those amounts
will shake out to be, um, based
on those appropriations, I
calculated that over the past
A couple of years we will have
implemented about $800 million
total in rate increases for the
waiver programs, we do have a
rate study that's published a
rate study RFP that's published
for fiscal year 25, so we're
going to be on that by annual
cycle, uh, for those uh rate
studies doing those every couple
of years. Um, I think, based on
some feedback that I heard this
morning while during the
previous presentation that we
may need to implement like a
public comment process on the
rate.
studies as well, so we'll take
that back and look at that. That
is something we did, uh, we do
the rate studies are kind of
like largely how Medicaid is
establishing rates nowadays.
We're kind of taking the a look
at how other states are paying,
how Medicare is paying, if
that's relevant as a pairer, um,
and then, um, having kind of
that all come together to inform
the state's analysis, um,
but in that process, I think it
is important to consider the
feedback of providers, things
that might get missed in the
process of the rate study and
so.
I would like to have a more
stakeholder inclusive process
for those rate studies going
forward.
OK, I'm moving forward to slide
27. I just wanna mention again,
behavioral health, um, heard a
lot of feedback about this that
the provider summit. It was
really interesting, um, I have
to admit I wasn't, it wasn't the
First and foremost thing on my
mind, I was kind of thinking
more about what we think of more
traditionally in the waiver, um,
and then of course, obviously
behavioral health in a different
context. So it's really, really
helpful to get the feedback from
the providers that we need to
lean in here and pay attention.
There has been, uh, we've seen
an increase over the time of the
super allocation, um, in the
mental, um.
You know, illness challenges and
substance use disorder
challenges of the waiver
population and so we are gonna
need to provide some additional
support. Um, I think that
includes crisis support and
really thinking about as the as
the state builds out the crisis
network of care, how we include
individuals with disabilities in
that crisis network, how we're
supporting providers. So more to
come on that. You all know that
we at the agency is working very
hard on the crisis network of
care. We are also going to be
Standing up 7 provisionally
licensed, um, certified
community behavioral health
clinic starting in January, um,
in different parts of the state
with like round 2 close behind,
um, and then we've really been
ramping up our efforts around
certified peer support workers,
reinvesting in our supportive
waiver, supportive housing
programs, um, substance use
disorder and suicide prevention,
but really interested in this
topic and seeing what we can do
to better support our waiver,
uh, participants.
Um, I won't go through all of
these on slide 28 and 29, but
those are some of the supports
that we are providing for
individuals with complex needs.
There is a provider crisis line
for that's um run through DDSD
to provide that after hours and
weekend support for waiver
providers. I received feedback
during the provider summit that
the providers don't know who to
call if they find themselves in
a challenging situation. We need
to make sure we do a good job of
making sure providers know that
that support is available.
And then, of course, um the
behavior support consultants,
um, providing those direct
supports to waiver uh
recipients, their families and
providers on strategies to
mitigate challenging behaviors.
Moving on to slide 31, I'm gonna
go ahead and skip there to talk
about our FY 25 appropriation.
86% of the DDSD budget is
designated for direct services
that support the waiver
participants. Um, so, uh, you
know, we have about 234.1
million in general fund
appropriated, um, about 20.4
million for provider rate
increases, which with the with
the Medicaid match equals to
about 80 to 90 million, um, 3.6
million for maintaining
the
the no wait list, um, and then
about 210 million in program
expenditures or services, um, as
we mentioned, the waiver
amendments with the rate
increases are occurring now and
then we would do those
comprehensive rate studies every
2 years, um, and we have
requested funding for FY 26 to
support and sustain the growth
in the waiver programs due to
eliminating the waitlist. One
thing I do want to make sure you
all are aware of and as you
think about the budget and the
appropriation and the
conversation earlier today is
that um
It is true that the waiver
waiver participants have become,
it is more expensive over the
three year period. They incur
more costs. So we are starting
to see those costs really hit
the system now from the super
allocation. I think it was
brought up earlier today that it
takes a while for people to get
into services and to really
utilize their services and so we
are really starting to see that
increase in costs is creating
some pressures on the budget.
Just want you to be aware of
that as we kind of think through
it, um, some
Back that the program is maybe
even more expensive than what
was anticipated when we
originally did the super
allocation.
So, um, on slide 32, I'll go
back to Andrea, um.
The division of Health
Improvements incident Management
Bureau investigated the report
of suspected neglect, and Andrea
received the repairs that she
needed for her wheelchair to
help her be out in the
community, um, neglect was
substantiated and the direct
service personnel were retrained
on reporting requirements to
make sure that they knew how to
report those needs, um, and they
were also required to retake the
DDSD abuse, neglect and
exploitation training before
they could work with Andrea
again, the healthcare
authorities.
Behavioral Health Services
Division was consulted for
substance use resources and
Andrea is now attending a
support program to assist her in
overcoming her substance use
disorder. She's been in recovery
for 2 weeks. Um, Andrea's
consultant assisted her to find
a new behavioral support
consultant in Taos, who was new
to working with the waiver but
learned about it through DDSD's
call for providers. The Medicaid
third-party assessor has
improved its efficiency and
decreased its review time so
that she was able to receive
those behavioral support
consultants.
Services faster, and Andrea is
grateful that she can
self-direct her services and
supports, live the life she
chooses and have a functioning
wheelchair in which to navigate
her community. With that, Mr.
Chair, I will pause and stand
for questions from the
committee. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you all, all
three of you, very helpful
information. So, uh, Senator
Rodriguez had raised her hand
first, so we'll start with her,
then we'll go Representative
Chasey you'll be 2nd and we'll
go around this way,
Representative Hendon, you'll be
3rd and come on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairs, how many
seconds are we giving people?
I'll be 180s 180 seconds.
Thank you, I'll be quick. Thank
you, Carrie and Jennifer and and
the gentleman here for your
work, uh, Jennifer, I know that
um when you came on board, I, I
felt that we really have gotten
some someone who deeply cared
and and uh working extremely
hard to make things better for
people with disabilities. So
thank you for that and of course
Carrie for your work. But Mr.
Chairman, let me, you know, this
is really sobering, um.
To see that first, the lady, the
young lady Andrea, um, I know
it's touched our heart to every
single one of us, but I do have
one question that has that I
don't think we think about as
we're going through all this,
um.
And you know, for example, this
young lady here had uh or still
has some substance abuse issues
in addition to her multiple
developmental disabilities and
who knows what other forms of
disabilities.
The question that I have is who
monitors, for example, a
situation like hers that.
And and I'm using this.
These words because I've seen
another case very much like this
where the same um.
I don't know a family providers,
whoever was taking care of her
at the time was actually giving
her anti-anxiety medications,
for example, Valium and Ativan
and Xanax and all these things
that are highly um addictive
just to keep her calm and then
she couldn't sleep because she
was going through withdrawals,
so they put her on sleeping
pills which are in themselves
very highly addictive. And so
they were contributing to the
substance abuse.
use of this young woman and
I, I just can't. I'm trying to
visualize what that would have
done and how much.
You know, was, I mean, it was so
bad and so, um.
I guess the question that I have
is it doesn't have to be
alcohol, as we know it could be
medications that are being
administered, uh, and who is
monitoring the medications are,
are these the providers who do
this, um.
Who who monitors this to ensure
that they're not addicting these
these uh individuals.
With in trying to help, it could
be well intended sometimes,
sometimes it isn't, as we've
heard also, but for the most
part it is well intended, so
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, it's such an
interesting and complex
question. I think there's a
little bit of it may depend on
the situation. Some individuals
have a guardian, some don't. So
some individuals really able to
make their own decisions about
what they do and um, you know,
have that full authority to to
do that. Um, obviously,
You know,
The individual will have
prescribing doctors also, um,
but I, what you're describing
sounds a bit like exploitation.
It's something we really have to
watch for in the system, we see
it sometimes with children who
are in the, you know, in state
custody going to facilities
where um chemical restraints are
used to kind of keep them from
moving around and really getting
out into the community and that
could be the case. Um, and that
is part of what the wellness
visits are designed to to
identify. I'm gonna hand it over
to
To Director Rodriguez to see if
she has anything to add in terms
of that oversight and
monitoring, but um it is a very
complex question. It's something
that we're really alert to and
wanting to make sure that it's
addressed, but it is part of,
you know, sort of that abuse,
neglect and exploitation sort of
trio, um, when we're kind of
going out and looking and
putting our eyes on folks to
make sure that that's not
happening.
OK, thank you. Um, I, I would
just maybe add in addition to
everything Secretary Armijo
mentioned that this is part of
the abuse, neglect and
exploitation training that I
spoke of earlier, um, the
chemical restraint or maybe
inadvertent chemical restraint
in this case, I think what
you're describing, um, but we do
also have requirements for all
of our providers that support
people with IDD that they too
have a responsibility to be
aware of the signs and symptoms
and to monitor that.
So in the event that this person
may or may not have a medical
power of attorney in place or a
legal guardian, um, we do expect
that people are tuning in. Um,
they do take folks to their
medical appointments typically
and that, yes, if there is any
concern of that certainly should
be addressed with the primary
care physician or the
prescribing doctor, but if not,
that can certainly be reported
as abuse, neglect, or
exploitation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for that
response. And just quickly I
promise on the next one it's not
even a question. I just want to
say thank you because we
recently were at an LFC meeting,
as you may recall, Jennifer,
and, and, uh, we talked about,
um, the Didi waiver on some of
these big issues. Um, one of the
Most important things that I
found today and thank you for
this. I just really want to say
thank you for not reimplementing
or considering reimplementing
the system, I think that
Representative Thompson would
remember the horror stories
about that. We never forget, uh,
it was a system whereby DD
waiver recipients um were
basically tested in some way to
see what level of services they
should be getting or not getting
in a way to alter the cost and
And so on, and it turned out to
be an extreme situation where
they were cut off from services
because of the system.
And so a good thing it stopped
and we don't want to see that
again happen, um, but I mean,
I'm saying the system
reimplemented, so the question
that I have just quick, not even
a question because I know I ran
out of time. I'll just make the
statement that you mentioned Kry
that um unless the this pop
something changes with this
population, um, the very needy
population of DD waiver that
unless that happens, we should
be able to continue the
services, um, and, and
To get the funding. I'm talking
about the federal level, so can
you elaborate just a little bit,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Chair, just
quickly because I know my timing
is over.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, I'm not sure I
understand the question. In
terms of the federal funding,
um, that's secured through the
waiver authority. Obviously, the
State has to provide its share
of the match for that and I
think that's part of the tension
here is just how much, how
expensive it is, um, but the
federal funding um and looking
to the team here, I don't think
that that's in jeopardy. Maybe
it was state funding, however,
maybe I thought it was federal
as you were talking about
federal funds then, but my
point.
Is that you don't intend or do
you intend and I, I'm a little
confused, Mr. Chairman, to
reinstitute this system that was
there at the time to not anymore
please.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm, um, Senator
Roger Gus looked
Director Rodriguez. I'm not sure
about the system, so.
Senator Rodriguez, if you're
referring to the sports
intensity scale, we have no
intention to implement that
again at this point in time.
Thank you, thank you. That's all
I had, Mr. Chairman. And just a
reminder, it's 3 minutes for
questions and answers so people
can be brief and only one mic on
at a time. We're getting some
feedback and I, I'll start
pointing at you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think
I'll be brief. I noticed on
slide 31 you had mentioned that
with the general fund
appropriation for provider rate
increases of 20.4 million, it
will bring in 80 to 90 with the
federal match. So if we are
successful in getting an
emergency appropriation of
$10,000 and I know our LFC
persons monitoring this that
then we'll get a match on that
as well, right? That's all I
wanted to know.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative,
uh, that's correct. Uh, there's
a federal match of it's about,
um,
Um, it's the state pays about
20, it's about 25%. I just say a
quarter, it fluctuates every
year and sometimes it's higher
and sometimes it's lower, but
let's just say about a quarter
of this year comes from the
State.
That that's good to know. I
mean, the state puts this in,
but the feds are going to um.
Generate more for this provider
increase. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank all of you,
your wait time has been
considerably improved since May.
That's pretty great. And I, it's
obvious you care and are trying
to listen.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Herndon, we'll go
to you and then we'll move
around this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
presenters, my question is
focused on the the vision of the
organization to have coordinated
and seamless healthcare and to
make sure that no matter where
someone is in our state, they're
going to get consistent care.
I'm a bit concerned in asking
you to please explain. I
understand that the state just
implemented the use of something
called find health for purposes
of integrating services, which
is very different than some of
the largest uh counties.
In cities in our state, uh,
we're using and I understand
they were using something called
Unitas. And why are we
different? How do we coordinate
when we have two different
systems?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, you're asking about the
closed loop referral system that
went through a competitive
process, and the scoring team,
um, really kind of preferred to
find help, um, system. It is
something that we will be
coordinating with the local
governments, um, the, the there
were some superiorities in find
help in terms of um it's ability
to be more flexible and the data
that it provides to the state. I
will say uh I having
With a number of other states,
many states are kind of now sort
of leaning into to find help for
their closed loop system. So I
wasn't, you know, I wasn't
directly involved in scoring,
obviously, um, and it was a
competitive process so uh find
help was selected by that
committee of folks.
Thank you, Madam Presenter, and
Mr. Chair, my question is, are
you all looking for a way so
that these two systems can talk
to each other. I think that's
another big concern.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, absolutely. Uh we will
be working with, um, you know,
different entities, um, find
help and unite us, our
competitors in the space, and so
that is going to be a bit
challenging for us to figure
out, but there's going to be a
governance committee, um, that's
established, that really is
working with local governments
to try and figure out how we
coordinate, um, and, you know, I
think I anticipate that it will
be a very successful, uh, system
implementation.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, the
final question is, with respect
to holding employees accountable
for, uh, when there is some
abuse or neglect. At what point
in time do you hold the provider
accountable?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Herndon, I think,
um, Director Lenari spoke a
little bit about how the
providers can be put on the
employee abuse registry. I'll
ask him to sort of queue up um
that distinction between the
provider and the employee.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herndon, and I
will, I will start with that and
my colleague Jen may have others
to add, but as far as holding
the provider accountable, so,
um, once one of their employees
gets put on that registry, uh,
it is, it is clear in our state
statute that they need to remove
that individual from having
direct contact contact with
individuals in that home. And so
that is, that, that is something
that we need to ensure on the
DHI side, um, also, um, like I
had mentioned.
Previously, it is the provider's
responsibility.
Prior to um.
Hiring individuals that they
query the database that that
they're not hiring individuals
that are already on that
database. Uh, and so that is
something that we have, um,
clear visibility to, um, there's
a, there's a tracking mechanism
within our EAR database of who's
going into that system and what
reports are they running or what
reports are they not running?
And so we have complete
visibility on how the providers
are accessing or not accessing
that system. And Jen, I don't
know if you have anything else
to add on the provider's side.
I would just add that um the
developmental disability
supports division does have a
contract management policy that
we would execute in the event
that that's needed, so that
could look like anything from a
performance improvement plan for
that provider agency to an
outside monitor being required
of that provider agency to make
sure that they are following
our, our service standards and
our, our rules and regulations.
So we have mechanisms to do that
outside of the investigatory,
um, sort of uh process that
might
Also execute some sort of
compliance activity.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
before I go to Senator Lopez,
um, Representative Martinez, uh
asked me to mention that there
is water and coffee available in
the lobby outside for those of
you who have been
Looking around plaintively
asking about water and coffee,
it's now available in the lobby.
Thank you to whoever arranged
that. I'm not sure who it was,
but whoever it did, we
appreciate it. Representative
Senator Lopez, your turn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your presentations this
morning. Um, just for my memory
purposes, who is the ISD
director?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez,
our new ISD director's name is
Niki Kozlowski, and I can um I'd
be happy to email you our
contact information or uh and
her spelling. I probably can't
spell it off the top of my head,
so, um, I would be happy to
share her contact information
with you. OK, no, I appreciate
that. Thank you. Um, and then
just kind of going through your
presentation, I had just a few
questions, Mr. Chair. How often,
and I may have miss
But how often are the health and
wellness visits taking place?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez,
those are taking place at a
minimum of twice per year.
2 times per year, twice per
year, yes.
All right. And then, um.
And this was just some questions
um from page 23, when we talk
about actions after a
substantiation.
And uh one of the questions I
have is, um.
From
Reports, right, of of potential
abuse and if there's
substantiation, how many cases
have been referred.
To law enforcement.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez, I'll
see if we have that information
today. Um, OK, it sounds like
director Lunari has that
information in total since the
wellness visits begin.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez, uh,
the most recent data I have as
far as referrals uh is 131
referrals, uh, within the, the
last fiscal year have been, had
referred, uh, to law
enforcement. However, that
number is ever changing.
Um, Mr. Chair, so that's the
last fiscal year ending June
30th.
That's correct.
OK, Mr. Chair, and then, OK, so
if there have been referrals,
um, do you
Uh, is there a specific area? In
other words, do you have a map
to show as to where some of
these referrals have been, Mr.
Chair, is it Bernal Leo County,
Donana County, Chavez County,
um.
Do, do we have at least a
listing as to where those
referrals have been made.
I don't believe we have a map
that I believe, however, we
could produce something like
that, uh, and provide this
committee, um, the numbers as
far as the closing the loop of
when those referrals are made
and then.
How many of those the Department
of Justice takes up, I believe
they would probably be the best
to answer that number. Uh,
again, we meet monthly with
them, uh, and they bring to us
what cases that they need more
information on, uh, and so that
total number, uh, we'd have to
get that from them, but as far
as our referrals being made out,
um, we could definitely put that
together as far as by region.
So Mr. Chair, then we're asking,
so for law enforcement, you
don't go to local law
enforcement, you go to the
Attorney General or Department
of Justice.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez.
We work with local law
enforcement in the immediacy of
that case, uh, and so that is
where their involvement um comes
into play and then Department of
Justice comes in afterwards as
it relates to uh the criminal
investigation components.
OK, and Mr. Chair, I know my
time is, is kind of up, but with
regards, you know, in other
words, where I'm leading for is
to see, OK, referrals are made,
etc. etc. but what really comes.
To fruition, where there are
charges, etc. etc. I mean, we
can all make referrals, Mr.
Chair, but what is the outcome?
Right? Are there pleas that are
made? I mean, what is the actual
system and
Of her end result, um, that was
part of my question, Mr. Chair,
with regards to the
investigations.
Um, there's more, but I know my
time is up, but it's just.
There's a lot more questions to
be asked on this. Thank you, Mr.
Chair Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez,
I think those are great
questions and that's I want to
be clear, we're sort of
struggling with that too because
there are different
jurisdictions involved, so we,
um, one of the things that we've
been talking about is making
sure that we make sort of public
reports a couple of times a
year, um, what started out as
more ad hoc process now sort of
becoming a more permanent
process, um, and what are its
telling us what are the trends
we're seeing and then what's the
outcome of these
And the dispositions we are
working on that. I don't know
that we have the perfect
solution yet because things do
get handed over to those law
enforcement agencies, but we
could kind of, for example, say
who got how many entities got
placed on the employee abuse
registry. We can definitely do
that and then I think we need to
kind of work on a closed system
where we actually get some
feedback back from those
agencies. Like today, I wouldn't
say that that's a set up, um,
the way that you would really, I
think that would help you.
kind of answer all of those
questions, but it's something
that the agency needs to work
on. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
serve on the wings subcommittee
with the state Supreme Court,
and we're always looking at the
issues that affect with our
guardians, um, because I think
Mr. Chair, this also has to loop
in our guardians also who have
um quote unquote oversight for
those in their care. So more
questions, Mr. Chair, that I
have with regards to this
system, because that should be
communicating with the wing
subcommittees and especially
since we're looking for.
Any statutory changes on that.
Thank you.
Just a reminder, I'm gonna get
tough if I have to.
Uh thank you, chair. I will
donate my time this afternoon to
the senator if she needs it
because I, I, I too like those
questions. Thank you, Senator
Lopez. Um, thank you for your
presentation. Thank you, Cabinet
Secretary. I definitely continue
to fill your authenticity and
your curiosity of how this
program works and what's not
working and what is working and
I very much appreciate all your
effort into moving that forward.
Um, my questions and, and I'll
ask them all at once and then.
You can uh type is is uh
regarding DHI, so, um, as an
ex-p provider of this program,
I've sat through A&E training
numerous, numerous times. And
one of the things, and I do see
it, is one of the values of A&E
training is report report
report. It's all about reporting
so that let let a third party,
um, figure out, you know, what
is needed in it, but what I
never hear is what is
DHI do about it so what I have
here is you say, well, we're
looking to confirm 51%, but as a
legislator, I'm looking at how
many of those reported did you
go physically go.
Physically eyeball the
individual in question. How many
did you interview the family?
How many did you interview the
providers, the neighbors, the
peers, what what percentage of
those reports require a face to
face. We're providing, we are in
care of the vulnerable who are
non-traditional communicators
and picking up the phone and
saying, does this really happen
is not.
Usually adequate, um, so what to
determines when it is adequate
and when it is not adequate, um,
investigations require other
types of investigations require
confirmation in different
sources. Those are statistics
I've never gotten from DHI and
in all fairness to you, I have
never talked to you before, so
that you're a different, you're
a new director and so um this is
not handing in your lap, but I'm
asking as a legislator.
I'm looking for um what how many
of them have been confirmed and
by what ways then when we do get
statistics a lot of times you'll
say, oh, here are the number of
confirmations we want to know
how many more abuse, how many
neglect, and how many were
exploitations. So for those of
you know you have an A&E report,
it could be something horrific,
a physical abuse, and it could
be something unfair.
like an unfair distribution of
ice cream in the home or
whatever it is, and we need to
know what as legislators we need
to know what category those are
in, so I appreciate this this
presentation on this, but I'm,
I'm looking for and then also
what is DHI's uh to to piggyback
off of Senator Lopez's question,
what is DHI's process in
determining patterns.
Of referrals if you're
reviewing, if you had them on
the map um you might be able to
see the patterns. I'm, I'm
looking for quality processes.
Your time is up. Oh, thank you.
I'm so sorry. I didn't hear it.
that using the time you donated
to Senator Lopez, fair enough.
Thank you Senator, please be
brief if you try to pick one of
those questions Mr. Chair,
Representative Cates, uh, so,
uh, number one, as far as, as,
as the numbers, uh, as it
relates to substantiations. And
so, uh, last fiscal year, uh,
there was around 2400 cases that
were reported to DHI, um, 645 of
those, um, were substantiated.
So around 27
and 69 of those were abuse
cases, um, and so that's, uh,
and I can get, I can stratify
that data further and provide
that to you, but I have that
offhand as far as our numbers.
Uh, that number, that
substantiation, of course,
that's always the the question
of is that high enough or is
that, is, is it, is it too low?
Uh, we have national averages as
far as substantiation, uh, and
that's around 30%, so OK, it's
around the national average, but
I still struggle with, does that
mean that we're doing the best
we can or not, or does it mean
that care is becoming safer in
these facilities. It's something
that internally we always
struggle with, but it comes back
to the importance of our
accuracy in substantiating those
cases and that 51% rule is.
Any and all evidence and that's
why we want to make sure we're
casting essentially a wide net
in our investigative process. So
when we have enough evidence
that tips the scale, it gets
substantiated and follow up on.
Thank you Mr. Chair. So I'm
gonna try and be brief, um.
So some years ago I thought I
would be a DD waiver provider
and I got the packet and I
believe it was like 500 pages
long, asking about fire exits.
I'm going into people's homes to
see them so um my question is,
are there specific applications
for people who go into a home as
opposed to group homes. I mean,
I, I, I just gave up. I said I'm
not doing this and I know that a
lot of my colleagues did the
same so just very briefly.
Are there separate application
packets for therapists.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, we have one waiver
application per waiver. However,
there are different components
of the application that folks,
um, would fill out based on what
type of service they're applying
for. So a therapist would fill
out some different information
versus a supported living or
group home provider, yes, and,
and I will say that that that's
I, I think you should have
separate applications because
when somebody gets a 500 page.
they're not gonna go through
with a fine tooth comb and say I
gotta fill this out, make them
separate, um, and then in terms
of uh freedom of choice, which
is your freedom to choose
providers. We were looking for
an OT occupational therapist and
a speech and language
pathologist for my son. There
were 2 SLPs and 10T. There's no
freedom of choice and that's in
Albuquerque, so it's not just
rural that don't have the
providers, um.
I have heard from several people
that um.
That kids are not allowed that
parents of kids are not allowed
to.
Apply for the waiver until their
18th, that, that people have
been told that and I tell them
absolutely not if we get another
waiting list, you really.
Lost it so get up but I've heard
that from more than one person,
and I don't really need an
answer, but I would like you to
look into that and make sure
that that's not. I also would
like a breakdown of how many
people are waiting for which
services. How many are in a
waiting list for OT for PT for
uh living family living,
whatever, um.
Let's see.
And then on page 25.
I look at this timeline and it
takes 2 months for routing for
DDSD and MAD approvals that and
and then another two months for
um routing for approval, so
that's 4 months.
For routing ridiculous.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, I totally agree.
That's what I meant. I think
that we have to condense this
process, um, what you are
inheriting or seeing the result
of.
I
a large bureaucracies not
working as efficiently as they
should, and I'm not gonna
pretend like.
It's working well. We are going
to get it under control for the
next round of rate increases
that we've got a plan and it's
much earlier and it's much more
condensed because I do agree
with you. We tend to do this in
government. We try to make the
timeline pretty long, um, and it
feels like it takes forever to
get anything done. And so don't,
you wouldn't hear any
disagreement from me, thank you.
I appreciate and I do want to
thank you, Madam Secretary, for
agreeing to meet with the
providers who were upset about
the evaluations that were being
Hoist upon them by folks who had
no idea how DD works. They were
like hospital type people and uh
the totally different world, so
thank you for for being
responsive to that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question is with regard to um
slide or page number 8 and it's
the first theme on that, um, in
terms of the role healthcare
grant delivery fund.
So my question is.
Um,
Who does that money go to? Are
you, are, is everybody included,
for example, nonprofits,
for-profit entities, private
equity, are all of those
included in who can apply for
the grant?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, uh, it is, it includes
everyone in a rural county, so
providers serving a rural
county. The statute doesn't
really allow for an exclusion
for a type of ownership. Um, the
agency has
Kind of, um, had to, we, we
received in the first round of
funding about $500 million worth
of applications for funding and
we had 80 million. So as you can
imagine, we had to sort of
weight things so largely what
we're supporting for that first
round of funding is primary care
and behavioral health, children,
uh, maternal child health um
services where we know there are
no services like such as autism
services. Um, so we really kind
of tried to balance out and make
sure that we were meeting the
needs.
We knew there were the greatest
shortages. We're kind of doing
the same thing again, less
funding this time, 46 million to
go around anticipating a big
need for demand, wanted to make
sure that we got the word out to
the DD providers. Um, if there
is anyone who really wants,
needs that support to expand, to
really get the word out and
hopefully we'll see some awards
go out to the DD population
providers. And then the other
question that I have related to
that too and so FQHCs would also
be able to apply for that, for
that money.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, yes, that's correct. OK,
and so does the, do the grants
also cover, and I'm not sure,
you know, how much, how much
work that sort of the rule
healthcare, um, clinics,
agencies, providers, um, provide
right now, but do those grants
also cover work that's not
reimbursed.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, they do, it's their
startup grants. The only thing
that they don't really cover is
capital, um, so it's not
covering capital, but it could
cover like equipment, um, and
other supplies. It could cover
the first year of like, you
know, first year of a provider's
salary before the reimbursable
services have really kind of
kicked in, um, so it does cover
all of that, um, those initial
startup costs that typically
cost the business a lot of
money, um, before they kind of
become profit.
profitable or make money.
get a list of the grantees.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez,
absolutely happy to provide
that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cedo Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
My concern is for the employees,
um.
Who actually provide the care,
um.
I noticed I, I looked up the,
the budget request because you
said here increased funding has
been requested for FY 26.
To support and sustain the
growth in the waiver programs
and so I noticed that the
Department of asked for $46
million is that correct on.
In the fiscal year 2026 state
agency budgetency requests?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Cedilia
Lopez.
I may have to get back to you on
this. There were the budget was
broken into a couple of
different components, including
a special or supplemental to
cover underfunding in this year.
So there was, there was a little
bit of a breakout there, um, and
so I'm not sure which piece
you're looking at.
I just whatever the figure is,
does it include paying a living
wage wage to the people who
actually do the work.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Cedo
Lopez, it includes the
sustaining of rate increases
that were passed passed in
previously that were funded by
the legislature. It puts us on
that by annual rate study.
There, there is no, uh, to my
knowledge, um, legislation that
sort of says at this point that
the dollars have to be passed
through to the workers, but that
is coming, federal rules do
require that, I think.
That that was referenced earlier
today, um, that that is part of
where the government is going
and so we are going to have to
get there, um, through, and that
will be sort of factored in for
the rate study, um, that we are
that's going to be underway.
OK, so this request is a request
before that rate study. So we
don't know what it's gonna do
for employees who actually
provide the service.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Cedillo
Lopez, that's right. I mean it
really is sustaining those rates
that we have today, as I talked
about, we've got that $800
million of more or less that's
gone into rate increases over
the last couple of years.
To support the DD waiver
program. I, I wouldn't say that
I think
Uh, the rates are high enough. I
mean, I, I don't want to create
the illusion that I think
that's, I think the direct
service professionals have a
very, very difficult jobs. Um, I
know that they're trying to
support their own families, um,
you know, we are also faced with
what our appropriation is and
what the funding is, so it's
just that tension, but um I know
earlier today there was
discussion about a new number,
uh, what would the number be?
Um, we will be happy to provide
you all with that number so that
you know.
What that is, to get to that
place. Um, so that you
can't have that, I think, um,
you know, that's the challenge
here. It's, it's pretty
expensive, um, and we've got
limited appropriation, but we
will be a source of information
for you all for that. I really
encourage you to make sure that
that the individuals who
actually provide the services
are paid and I guess what you're
saying is with the federal rules
coming down, we don't need to do
anything to ensure that it goes
to them.
Is that what you're suggesting?
I wouldn't say that, Mr. Chair,
Senator Sia Lopez, and the
reason I wouldn't say that is
because that doesn't go into
effect for several more years
for the HCBS waivers. So I think
it's really we're looking at if
you wanted to do something
sooner, um, you would want to
take action legislatively, I
think, and you can't do that you
can't do that in your contracts
with the providers?
That's time, Senator.
Go ahead, Mr. Chair, Senator
Cedo Lopez, um, I'm not sure. I
mean I have to look at that. Can
I get back to you on that and
just I'll circle back with you
in terms of what I think that
that would be really important
because I'm not sure if it
requires legislation. I think
it's something that you could do
and that I think would make a
big difference in the state.
OK
If we could provide enough and
make sure it gets to the right
places and unfortunately that
doesn't let me ask about how
many cases are referred.
After substantiation, but I'll
ask that if I have another
chance.
Or maybe somebody else would ask
that, or you can talk to them
after.
Senator Tubman, any questions?
Uh yes, thank you.
So I yield the I don't take a
minute and I yield 2 minutes to.
So.
So,
well, thank you, thank you panel
for being here, very excellent,
uh, and, uh, informative and
comprehensive report. Uh, I was
just wondering, um, how many
people, folks do we have on the
wait list?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
that's your mics that's the
number on the.
And
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Tomman, we have, um, about 7900
people on the waiver, and then
we have about 250 people on the
wait list. One of the things
that happens is that all that
allocation occurs in a yearly
increment. This is another thing
that I think we should fix as a
state, uh, because we're, we're
kind of funded to release those
in one fell swoop rather than a
continuous, um, sort of
allocation to the waiver, um,
so.
Something that I'm really
interested in fixing so that we
really have a true zero. what we
would do is, uh, and people may
qualify for an expedited
allocation. So that always does
happen, but um I am interested
in getting to a true zero, that
kind of accumulates and then
once a year there's a release of
allocations. I'm interested in
changing that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Haman,
there's about 250 people on the
wait list.
250 people so.
Um,
So you you
On your page slide 31, you got
3.6 million for maintaining no
waitlist.
So
If you have a wait lists, how
can you maintain a no wait list.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Toman,
we're actually funded to sort of
release the waiver allocations
and one time per year. So then
what happens is once those
allocations are released,
anyone that comes in new after
that is actually put on the wait
list until the next allocation
and that's what I was talking
about trying to fix. I think um
it's we're at.
We, you know, the wait list
years ago was, was thousands of
people. It is far less now, but
it isn't truly zero because we
really need the funding to make
sure that we are sort of in a
continuous allocation process
and that's really what I would
like to see, uh, for the agency,
people apply every day and so
we're just funded to sort of do
that in one at one point in the
year right now. Thank you for
the answer, Mr. Chair. So what
would it cost him
To eliminate the wait list.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Tollin.
We'll, we'll get you the number.
I, I'm sorry, I don't know the
exact amount. It was something
that we were talking about for
our budget request for FY 26.
Thank you for the vice chair, I
have time for 11.
Time's up.
Where you run a tight ship here,
so.
OK. Well, thanks again for being
here and thank you for your
answers. That's all I have, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
have one.
Question observation on your key
themes in in HCA commitments.
Um, you're talking about
improving.
The home visits.
Um, and I'm looking at the
Legistat.
Uh report Medicaid home visiting
put out August 21st.
Of this year
And I'm
I'm struck by the numbers
they're.
According to this report,
there's 10,677.
Eligible families.
And there's been 440,440
families served.
Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Martinez, I just
want to clarify one thing. I
think the Legistat that you're
looking at is home visiting for
pregnant women and children, not
for the individuals with
disabilities. Um, so that's a
different benefit in the
Medicaid program also happy to
answer questions about that, but
um it's not related to the
waiver services or individuals
on the waiver. That's really a
prenatal service in the Medicaid
program.
OK, thank you for that. The, the
report then is misleading.
Um, because as I read it.
Um, maybe I need to.
Look at the context of the
report.
But even at that, the.
The numbers are shocking.
For the amount of money that
we're investing.
Um, maybe I could visit with you
after and discuss this.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, I'd be happy to,
unfortunately don't have the
subject matter experts with me
today to talk about home
visiting, but I would be happy
to take back the questions or
schedule a follow-up meeting
with you to talk about home
visiting, um, and that service,
which just was expanded actually
we just announced the expansion
of several new models for the
Medicaid home visiting program
as well as new uh Medicaid
rates.
of that participation, but I'd
be happy to talk with you
offline about that. I'll follow
up with you.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr.
Chair, appreciate the time.
Maybe I could just clarify a
little bit that um what you're
talking about is basically home
visiting, not anything to do
with.
birth to 3 who have
disabilities. It's a, it's the
open program for and we're
trying to get more folks to be
on Medicaid programs because
then the feds will pick up part
of that cost, so it's kind of
two different systems.
OK, I had one quick question,
um, and it has to do with, uh,
on page 17 your statement that
only HCA staff
From DDSD and DHI are conducting
these health and wellness visits
were these staff that had other
assignments and you took them
off of those to do these health
and wellness visits and are they
going to continue to do that? Is
that now a permanent assignment
or how will you do that in the
future? Do you have to hire more
people or or what's the
situation? So Mr. Chair, great
question. Um, as you all
probably are aware, when we
initially started doing the
health and wellness visits, we
were taking staff from
Other agencies and really trying
to execute very quickly. It is
now becoming a permanent part of
the agency, um, you will see
that there is additional support
uh requested in the 26 budget to
make sure that DDSD and DHI are
really particularly DDSD are
adequately staffed, to make sure
that this is part of the normal
work we do, um.
It is true that folks had to
pivot from their other work to
start doing the health and
wellness visits and that the
agency probably requires a bit
of investment and additional
staff.
Hm.
Yeah, because if you're doing 2
a year and there's uh 7500 or
8000 that you're visiting,
that's quite a, quite a, a heavy
workload to.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you for the work you're
doing, uh, uh, good to get solid
information that you're
offering. Thanks so much. All of
you. Thank you, everyone. And
members we'll break for lunch
now. I just, I wish we had
enough uh box lunches for
everybody, we don't, we, we did
not anticipate providing, uh,
box lunches for the whole
audience. So, uh, uh, Richard
Romero, uh, and his associates
provided the lunches for the
staff and the, and the committee
members.
And um.
You know, possibly Roy Soto can
squeeze our, squeeze the lunch
out of us, but beyond him, I'm
not sure anybody else we can
actually cover. But with that,
we'll break for lunch, we'll
return at one o'clock.
