Was the status of the lawsuit.
No other matter was discussed.
Thank you, Madam Pro TEM Any
Debate or opposition to that
motion. C. None motion carries.
All right, let's go to the next
agenda item legislative district
offices.
UH, members staff has continued
to work since the last council
meeting on the policy regarding
district offices and legislative
staffing.
In your folder is a discussion
draft of a new Legislative
council policy regarding
legislative district offices.
These issues were all discussed
at the meeting of the council
and staff was instructed to
develop the policy.
The leadership, uh of Senate,
Um, house, uh, members of both
parties met to discuss a policy
and as I understand it, it's
been shared by the leaders with
their respective caucuses.
The policy is now before the
council.
For its consideration for
adoption today.
Uh, please note that there is
also another copy of the policy
that is red lined with some of
the proposed revisions that
Mister Bga can address today.
Um, Mister Biaa, will you please
walk us through the policy and
then we'll have debate comments
and then we'll take a vote.
German
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
morning Again. Members, um,
might be easier if we just go
with the one. That's red line.
It's the same as the original.
It just has a few, uh, proposed
changes.
Uh, that came in after this was
distributed. So, um, uh, I guess
I'll refer them as section
section a
His authorization to, uh, hire a
district legislative aide.
Uh, to include salary and
benefits, IT support and the
like. One thing I will mention
here is that one of the things
we talked about, and I forgot to
put in here was the possibility
of allowing, uh, a district
legislative aid to be hired on
contract.
The only thing I will mention is
that, um
Or professional services
contract that that this would
fall under, Uh, anything over
$60,000 is subject to
competitive bid. So this may be
a situation where somebody's
hired on a on a part time basis
under contract. Uh, this was
brought up at the, uh,
discussion with, uh uh, staff
working group. Uh and I
apologize. I forgot to include
that as as one of the, uh,
proposed, uh, changes
Um subsection B, uh, is about
the ability to hire a district
office liaison.
And, uh, in response to a
request about what happens when
a
Particular caucus. Uh, has a
significantly more members than
uh, uh, counterpart. Uh, it
indicates on here that a second
liaison may be hired by a
leadership office. If that
office has 1.5 times more
members than the corresponding
leadership office in the same
chamber.
Uh subsection C, the council
service L CS will provide the
administrative and logistical
support for the district
offices.
That includes HR, accounting, IT
and other services.
Subsection D. Uh, is the section
about what happens? Excuse me.
if a legislator opts out
And decides not to hire a
district led state of aid. Uh,
what happens with that? The
unused funding? Uh, this is to
make it clear that that unused
funding shouldn't be used for
any other purpose than a
subsequent use for, uh, District
office and a legislative aid.
So the respective leadership
office can do one of two things.
they can retain the funding in
their budget.
And provide a district aid. If
the if the legislator who opted
out decides to opt in or if a
successor legislator chooses to
opt out.
The other option is that in
consultation with the legislator
The, um
Uh, the leadership office may
hire a district legislative aide
to serve the district.
Provided, however, that the aid
works at the pleasure of
direction of and under the
supervision of that district's
legislator.
Subsection E is an authorization
to allow legislators to combine
resources and use one office
for, uh, more than one district
provided that that office, of
course, is in close proximity to
constituents in in those
districts.
Uh, four. Excuse me, Uh,
subsection F.
Um, the district office must be
located in in state, preferably
within or close proximity to the
district. Um
And, uh it really is up to the
legislator to select the
location that they shall consult
with the district with the
liaison and L CS before entering
into an agreement because the
director of L CS would need to
sign that on behalf of the
council, would you want to make
sure that things are in order?
Uh, subsection G is that
preference should be given to
district offices and public
buildings.
The one change or suggestion
here is that that also include
tribal offices.
Uh, if no public building is
available, then we can look to
the private sector. But again
that um, um is something that
should that the liaison and the
director of L CS should agree on
with respect to cost because
anything that's unreasonable or
extraordinary should probably be
referred back to the Council for
review and approval.
Um
Um
The legislator with help from
the liaison may hire the
district aid for the office. Um
Provided, however, that that, uh
there has to be consultation
with the council service before,
uh, making an offer to ensure
that all hiring procedures are
followed. Um, and that the
legislator may hire a district
Uh, at no less than half time.
That's 40 hours per two week pay
period roughly 20 hours a week,
and the reason for that is just
to ensure that the employee is
eligible for benefits.
On the SEC. The next page,
subsection, I
Legislator and this is based on
statutory
prohibition on nepotism. Uh uh.
district Aid cannot be hired
that is related by
Consanguinity or finity to the
third degree. Uh, the
legislator.
Subsection J. The A is an
employee of the chamber, of
which their legislator is a
member. But again, each is going
to work at the pleasure of
direction of under the
supervision of the legislator.
Subsection K, Uh, talks about a
vacancy and again the respective
leadership office shall be
responsible for supervising and
directing the work of the aid
until that vacancy is filled.
but the new legislator may
decide whether to retain the aid
or request a new one.
In which case the previous A may
be terminated.
Subsection L.
Um, this is to ensure that a an
aid is not hired. Uh, in in
classification he is not hired
at more than 75%. We had, uh
We had discussed the possibility
of of having it having an
individual hired to no more than
70%. But when we looked at the
numbers, the 75% is closer to
the midpoint and we just felt it
was more appropriate and gave a
little bit more flexibility. Uh,
but again, this would require
that no aid
Be hired at more than 75% of
the, um
Maximum
Again. The the the eighties is
eligible for benefits as other
state and and legislative
employees. Uh, the A
Shall be shall reside in New
Mexico. Uh, not simply be a
resident, because that can, uh,
be different.
Uh and to the extent
practicable, the aid, uh, should
reside in or close proximity to
the district. Um, they can work
in a, um, And this was a
suggested thing suggested, uh,
should reside in or close
proximity to the district. Um,
they can work in a um, and this
was a suggested thing suggested
a proposed amendment to this is
to allow the aid to work a
hybrid schedule that would
include working from home or in
the district office. However,
that individual is working
solely from home, then no
district office would be
provided.
Subsection M.
Uh, that a district like state
of aid, uh, would be subject to
the same admin policies and
procedures that are applicable
to the council service. This by
the way, mirrors the language
that is in council policy. Now
that says leadership staff is
also subject to the same admin
and and, uh, policies and
procedures that are applicable
to the L CS. Um, However, there
may be situations where, um,
down the road is discovered that
something may have to
Be tweaked a little bit simply
because of the the nature of
remote district offices.
Uh, the aid may provide support
to include those listed
correspondence, scheduling
policy research, constituent
services, provided that that's
coordinate, uh or or reference
with respect to what the chief
clerks are responsible for with
respect to constituent services.
Uh, the aid can organize a town
hall as long as it's
nonpartisan, and, of course,
other duties as assigned by the
legislator, uh, provided that if
there's any question about the
appropriateness of something
that's being requested
That should be referred to the L
CS and the liaison for further
discussion.
Subsection O is, um
About not allowing the aid to
engage in electioneering and for
purposes of this, I used the
Definition that was in the focus
groups.
Uh, the organization, the focus
group in their report last year,
which, as you can read here just
means an activity directed
towards a desired electoral
outcome. I won't read the entire
thing.
I do have a long note on here
because this raises First
Amendment issues, So we have to
be careful with this. Um uh and
how that that gets done I have
requested from N CS L. Uh,
copies of other legislatures
policies on what they allow
staff to do from an
electioneering perspective,
whether or not it can be done on
their own time or not. Some are
very strict. Some are, uh, not
as strict but I'm hoping to pull
that together and and
Bring it back. So, I, I would
only recommend that for now the
adoption be Excuse me that this
language or this definition be
adopted for now and will bring
back some other options if
necessary.
On subsection P. Um the, uh,
Council service is going to
provide for and conduct training
for district. Let's say AIDS to
include
Obviously, policies and
procedures of the L CS the use
of state resources, including IT
equipment, cyber security
becomes very important. A
general overview of Let's say a
process and then ethics training
that would cover those acts that
are mentioned in there,
including the anti harassment
policy.
Um, nepotism, electioneering, et
cetera. Uh, I did add a note to
hear that. I think the council
may wanna consider requiring
annual or biennial training for
both legislators and legislative
staff in these areas, um, as
well as new member orientation
and new staff orientation to to
address them.
Ah, Mr Chairman and members
That's those are the policies.
There were a couple of other
things that I addressed at the
bottom of of your handout.
Um, one is a timeline. This is
the same timeline that was
proposed by the staff working
group and that was presented at
the last meeting.
And I believe leadership had a
discussion about this September,
1 would be the date at which
district AIDS could be hired if
the incumbent has no general
opposition.
December 1 if the incumbent wins
the general election, then they
may hire an aide on December 1
of this year and newly elected
members those elected in 2024,
The legislator may hire an aide
in April of 2025.
Um
You may want to discuss here
after I wrap up the next There
was a question about the
liability issues that may be
raised with respect to a
legislator who now is somewhat
of a quasi employer and is
providing direction to staff.
Generally a legislator has
immunity pursuant to the speech
and debate clause, otherwise
known as a privilege and
immunities clause. Um and so by
by and large, they're covered by
that, Of course, they aren't
covered for criminal activity.
Uh, but in some case, in most
cases where an entity of the
Legislature is being sued, Uh
uh, We hire somebody by through
the council service to represent
as Mr Nasco has done on the
atten lawsuit, but in some cases
Some of these issues are
referred to risk management
division. Uh, because they have,
um attorneys on contract that
represent members in certain
situations where it would not be
appropriate for the council
service to hire an attorney.
And we have a two or three of
those in process right now.
Uh, on the last page. Uh, I just
reiterating that the, um
Well, this is about the policy
that the council may want to
consider review of these
policies again.
In 2025 after you've had roughly
a year of implementation, I
would say again in 2026, and
maybe every year that every two
years thereafter around an
election year when there is
change, uh, of, uh, membership
occurring
The second to last bullet. The
$6 million appropriation that
was in House Bill two is for
salaries and benefits as well as
it equipment, software,
furniture, supplies and the
like.
Um, it has been estimated that
the total cost for a one year
would be about $15 million.
Uh, so that $6 million will only
allow for some, um
Implement, uh
What's the word I'm looking for?
Um, slow implementation. Gradual
implementation, if you will of
of the district offices, But you
can, of course, include money in
the feed bill in the 2025
session or in House Bill two,
depending on how you want to
approach that with respect to
additional funding for the rest
of fiscal year 2025 that starts
next week.
Lastly, the uh uh, $6 million
appropriation does not include,
uh, cost for salaries and
benefits of L CS employees that
are gonna provide administrative
or logistical support that would
include staff and accounting,
human resources and IT. Um and,
uh, I've got later on a, uh, a
recommended motion for the
council to approve the L CS to
use money out of interim
expenses to hire
HR accounting and IT staff with
that.
Mr Chairman, Adam Pro TEM and
members of the council. I stand
for questions. Thank you, Mr
Boga. Before I get to questions
and comments I do want to
highlight the very good work of
of, uh, that you've done along
with our incredible team of
chiefs of staff. Um, Alicia
Mazzo, my chief of staff. Uh,
Alisa, Lower. Uh uh. Sanders
Moore, Ryan Haden Vin ST.
Laraine Montoya. Thank you all
for, uh, putting in so many
hours of work into this, Um
It feels like us getting out of
the way, uh, becomes a little
bit more productive and we let
you guys cash out the details.
Um, I'm very happy with what we
have here in front of us. It's a
long time coming, and, um, I'm
grateful for the good work that
you all have have done so, uh,
in publicly, uh, just want to
thank all of you for for your
hard work. Um
On this, uh, on my list. I have,
uh, representative ream,
followed by Armstrong.
Oh, thank you, Mr Speaker. Uh,
One of the things I was thinking
of, Uh, in your comments. Uh,
what if we make the contract
term like six months?
And why I say that I don't You
know, we'd have to figure it
out. But that keeps us under the
$50,000. That's what I'm trying
to do. So we just make the
contract four months or six
months. Um, and that way we
always stay under that, and then
you could renew it.
But
Mr Chairman and representative
Bream. The procurement code
doesn't allow that procurement
code says you can't break up a
contract to keep it under the,
Um um
The threshold.
And Mr Speaker, and, um
Then, um
When we put it out to contract,
then the legislator will have
the sole
Choice.
Of picking that person.
Irregardless of
How? How.
Beneficial. It might be, uh, for
another person on paper.
Mr Chairman, just to make sure I
understood your question. Um
A
Or let me clarify what what I
said earlier, a legislator.
Is the one who will decide if,
uh who. They who he or she wants
to hire.
The only thing that we're
putting in policy is that the
legislator should consult with
our HR department.
And the leaderships District
Office liaison just to make sure
the eyes are dotted TS are
crossed in terms of the hiring
process, whether it's a regular
employee, or whether it's a
contract employee, OK?
But it basically is up to the
legislator. Unless there is some
red flag that
And Mr Speaker, Mr. Bury
And Mr Speaker, Mr. Be. Ha! You
know what? You see the 75%. No
more than that. Is there a what?
I'd like to see is that the
Uh, Legislative Council say that
75% is X dollars per hour.
Or
Could I go ahead and hire two
people?
For the total of that 75. Mr
Chairman, representative. We
I think we briefly talked about
that in the staff working group.
I don't know that we came to an
agreement or consensus on on
that. I think the idea was that,
um it should be one person that
that's not in the policy,
necessarily. But, uh, costs then
go up in terms of either the
size of the district office, the
support that's provided IT
equipment and the like, Um, the
75%.
Is for classification E and I
Somewhere in my notes, But I
don't have it in front of me. I
can tell you what that is, but
it's in the neighborhood of
about $60,000.
Give or take, Um
That's classification. E and the
Max is 70 something I believe.
It is something and that brings
it about 60,000. But no
Um
I'm I'm not sure how to answer
the question about whether or
not you can hire two people for
the same amount of money because
that would require more
resources. Um
To support that staff. That
number of staff uh, Mr Speaker
and Mr Burr, I what? I'm
What I envisioned is is I hire
two part time people.
And they use the same equipment
the same desk.
So I don't double
The, uh, support. You know that
you all would have to have
Um
Mi Mr Chairman and
representative, I think that
would be up to the council. I
I can't remember. I know that we
talked about that in terms of
the money being used, but I
don't think we came to a, um
An agreement or consensus on how
to put that in policy. But if
the council wishes to consider
And then Mr Speaker and Mr Bruce
Haga in the case of a person
like myself who is retiring, you
know, at the end of the year,
the beginning of the next
session, however, you wanna say
it, Um, would I be eligible to
hire someone for the fall?
Mr Chairman, representative. No.
That was That was part of the,
uh, discussion on those three
categories.
That individual? Yeah.
So, Mr Speaker and Mr Bea, then
how do I, uh, provide services
under this to my constituents
during the time? I'm the
legislator.
Mr Chairman, Representative, uh,
not sure how I can answer that
question. Except, however,
you've been doing up to this
point and how members who do
have general opposition
Would also not be able to hire
anybody until after they win the
general
Um
That this does create
Kind of a two tiered. That's
what we had recommended and
Presented to leadership.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. And before we
continue, I, I failed to think
or too incredible clerks. Um uh,
for Cheri Luhan and and Li Ortiz
McCutchen for all of their work
on this as well, I apologize for
that. Uh, you guys, uh, were
instrumental in making, uh, this
happen. So thank you Both
appreciate you. Um and I've
already made it up ahead of time
because we were talking before
you, uh, you came into the room
in Santa Fe. So I'm on the
Representative, I'm stronger
next. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, Mr Biaa. Um, I have a
couple of questions on the
office space. Um, it says
preference will be given to, uh,
District office locations in
public buildings, and then it
goes through the list is, um
Will they be compensated for the
office space, or are you trying
to just roll it into what they
already pay or how we How is
that gonna work?
Mr Chairman, representative when
the architectural research
consultants did the, uh uh,
survey last year. A number of
the, uh public bodies, counties
municipalities, universities and
colleges all indicated that they
had space and that they would
either provide it at no cost.
Or at a very low nominal cost.
And so that's why we were
suggesting that preference be
given. A number of them did say
that for any number of reasons
they do have some space. Uh
maybe it's increasing in hybrid
schedules for employees and the
like, But, um, that was the
indication is that that would be
available at little or no cost.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you, Mr BSA, so we don't
really know if it's going to
cost or not.
And and so we as legislators
have to be very thoughtful.
On where we pick
Um, I'm just using my district,
for instance.
I can go Valencia County,
Socorro County, Catron County,
Sierra County, So I have to be
very thoughtful about where I
pick. And so I think, um, that
might need to be hammered out
before because some may be
paying for space on some may be
getting space voluntarily and
and I. I think we have to make
sure that we know what our costs
are moving forward, and so that
that was a concern. And then, of
course, if there's no public, um
Space available. You can do
private. What if a private
entity wanted to donate the
space? Is that something that's
allowable without looking at the
public space first?
Mr Chairman and representative,
Uh, if it is donated space at no
cost I, I would assume it is OK.
I would probably just
Want to
Double check any of the, uh
I think statutes make sure that
that doesn't run afoul of that.
But
I
I. I don't know that that would
be
Prohibit it. Ok, Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I. I
was just curious because I wanna
I want all all of it ironed out
before we actually roll it out.
Um, the other question I have
where it's not very clear in
here is that this is for the
legislative aid only.
Is that correct? Not for the
legislator.
This being the district office,
the district office? Yes, Mr
Speaker and Mr Brisa, Um
Mr Chairman and representative
for the most part, yes, that's
going to be for the, uh, aid
Only there has been discussion
about whether or not the
legislator would also need
office space. Uh, one of the
things that we had discussed
with architectural research
consultants was, um, the
possibility of of a lot of
seeing if there was, for
example, meeting space, So if a
legislator wanted to meet with
constituents or advocacy groups
or the like
That there might be that kind of
space available and again that
was more available in public
office space where they have
those kinds of meeting rooms so
we would anticipate that those
kind of meetings room would be
available, but a dedicated
office space for legislator was
not contemplated.
OK, I just wanna make sure
Mister speaker that that's clear
to the legislators that it's not
office space for us. It's office
space for our legislative aid,
and we may have to go there to
meet with them or whatever. But,
uh, I just wanna make sure it's
not that that that it's clear.
So thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, Mr Biao.
All right. The next on the list,
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And and I
do appreciate all the work
that's gone into this. There is
a lot of
Things to look at a lot of
moving pieces. But I I
I really appreciate the time and
the effort that's gone into
To get us to this point, I. I do
have
A few questions. A follow up
question, uh, to align that
represented Armstrong was asking
Um
I'm not quite sure of the
concept. Now, if this is
A district office for a
legislator.
Is it a one room office?
Where a legislative aid is gonna
sit there.
And just
Take walk ins of my district,
for instance, I do a lot of
constituent work.
Um and I and I've had a few
calls it it have asked me why I
They drove all the way to Santa
Fe to my office, and I wasn't
here.
And why I didn't have an office
that they could visit me in. Um
I work out of the office at my
house.
Um
But I would think that there
would be space available for
That legislator to meet with
constituents.
Um
And part of the scheduling. I
would think that the legislative
aid would do.
Would be scheduling meetings.
Uh, for me with a constituent.
Um, my wife jokes that my office
away from the office is the
local Starbucks.
Um, because they have Wi Fi and
we can get a table and
And have these discussions with
some of the issues that I deal
with.
Deal with very confident
confidential information.
Um, I do a lot of work with
veterans issues.
Where those issues are covered
by HIPAA.
They're covered, you know, under
the the confidentiality, Um
Laws where I you know, Some of
these discussions are very
personal.
Um, and some of them cannot be
handled over the phone, so I
would
I would ask you to
Rook at that.
Uh, issue
Um
You know if we could have a
dedicated meeting space at least
Uh, I. I think that would best
serve our constituencies. The
other question that I have. I
just want to get a grasp of the
amount of
Staff we're gonna bring on to
the state payroll.
So there is a possibility of 100
and 12 a. I DS
One for each legislator.
Then there's gonna be a
possibility of three.
legislative liaisons.
In the leadership office. One If
there's a super major, two
people if it's a super majority
And then one for the minority.
Is that correct?
Mr Chairman and members, uh re
Martinez.
Yes, 100 and 12 District
offices. The leadership officers
would have
To start with probably four
liaisons.
If that if a leadership office
has 1.5 times more
And its counterpart in the same
house, and they're eligible for
a second one. So at minimum four
The most six. My understanding,
however, is that the speaker of
the pro TEMs office don't have
Um
A liaison. So 4 to 6.
That's so that's 100 and 16 to
100 and 18 new staff. I would
also state that the council
service is probably going to
need
Between eight and 10 staff.
To, um do the administrative and
logistical support for those 100
to 100 and 20 staff, So we're
looking at a possibility of 100
and 28 New
State employees.
122 125 Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and Mr
Biaa do we have
A number.
$6 million is not gonna cover
this.
Do we have a number?
We institute this
This program this year.
In 2027.
When we have a good idea of how
this is working.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bea, Do we
have a number of what we're
looking at?
As far as cost.
Mr Chairman, and Rosen Martinez
when the study was first done
last year.
Uh, by the focus group.
They estimated based on on their
criteria of everything from
staff to office, space to
equipment and the like. They
estimate about 14.3 million
I asked our chief financial
officer Anessa.
To do her analysis based on
What? What It takes.
Um, her number was closer to
about $14.9 million, So I
rounded that off to about $15
million
Uh, and that includes benefits.
Although taxes and the like
That is just for
One year one fiscal year.
Of 100 and 12 staff.
With equipment furniture.
Space.
And and some of that is
estimated because we don't know
who's gonna be at little or no
cost on on space.
What is not included in that $15
million
Are the 4 to 6 liaisons or the 8
to 10 staff.
That would probably be
Over a million dollars.
And we
Are looking. There's um
I'm gonna bring this up in a
bit. We are looking to ask for
us the Legislative Council
service to be able to hire out
of, uh, the funding that is
interim expenses.
Um, we have more than we usually
do in there. Um
And actually less than last
year, but
We have. We believe we have
sufficient funding in there to
provide the L CS staff. The $6
million
Is, um
Is not enough for a full year.
Um, That's why it probably makes
sense to just stagger this.
Uh, and get it started, but I
would expect that we would have
a good
Number by
December and certainly by
January, when the feed bill gets
introduced to see what
supplemental funding would be
required to carry this through
the end of FY 25.
And what would be needed for FY
26. Thank you, Mr Chair, and Mr
so
I mean, we we could do this with
about $16 Million in your
estimation.
Back of the envelope, Mr
Chairman, Mr. Biaa, Um
I. I have struggled with this
decision.
Um, I. I
I'm not a big
Um
Fan of increasing state
government.
Um, but I've balanced that with
the phone conversations I've had
with constituents who have said
I would like to meet with you
someplace other than Starbucks.
Or a local restaurant or
Driving up to Santa Fe to find
out you don't actually go to
that office.
So I, I You know, I. I have gone
back and forth. Do I wanna put
an additional $16 million of of
Taxpayer money to grow
government.
With the benefit that my
constituents are gonna have, Um
But I thank you for for the
time. Mr Chairman, I thank you
for the work and the answers.
Uh, I appreciate being able to
ask a question and
Just get a straight answer. Um,
I truly appreciate that. Mr.
Merci, IA
Um
Thank you for the time. Thank
you, representative. Any other
questions? Any other comments?
Uh, represent con.
Uh, representative, Can you come
up to the mic? Make sure
you should just sit up there? Um
This is where we get breakfast.
Anyway.
The one question that I have is
that
On the part. I who decides who
gets a 2020 hour. Uh
Employee.
Mr Chairman represent al con
That would be up to the
legislator. Uh, because we when
the survey was done last year,
there were a number of
legislators who said I don't
know that I can keep somebody
busy 40 hours a week. I think 20
would be enough. So we
anticipate I think there's been
some discussion about some
members saying
I'm fine with the half time
person it would be up to that
individual. The funding for a
full time would still be there.
The idea is to keep that funding
available because it could be a
change of mind or it could be a
change of legislature.
OK, Thank you. The other
question. I have Mr Chairman and
Mr Bruce is, uh
The one thing I want you to look
at is, uh, I believe that under
the state, uh
Uh, employee a more in that area
In order to qualify for
benefits. You have to be a 24
hour employee, not a 20.
You might wanna look into that,
OK?
I'm not really positive about
it, but I think I have one time
in my past. I have seen the
Where in order to qualify for
the benefits. You have to have
24 hours.
And Mr Chairman. The other
question that I have is, for
example, I serve. Uh, Cibola and
McKinney. Would it be possible
to have an office?
And work. Uh, that employee work
at in two different counties,
and, uh
I have a have them part time in
different in different counties
or different location. Um, Mr
Chairman and members, um
That's a good question. Just so
I understand you would have, uh,
an individual in more than one
location and maybe just
alternate exactly, Mister
Chairman. Uh, Mr Borger. What
would happen is, uh maybe, uh,
that put so many hours and she
will. And so so many hours in
McKinley
Would that be a possibility for
the office spaces available?
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee with your permission.
I would like to take this back
to the staff working group and
and
Look at that and how we can
bring back a recommendation to
this body about whether or not
that could be accommodated.
I'm making you think, OK, that's
good. I'm doing a good job then.
Uh, the other thing that I have
is chairman and Mr B, Why are we
having to wait till April, the
first for the newly elected
legislator to be hired
You hire somebody? Because I
mean, we're gonna have a
especially in a
In some cases, uh, some of the
new, uh, the more people that
won the election in the offices
in the general
So I'm just wondering if we can
bring that any closer to before
we come into session. New
legislator can have somebody.
Handle all the phone calls that
they're gonna be getting while
they're here in Santa Fe.
Mr Chairman, representative of
the, uh, the discussion that the
staff working group had on that
was that
Those new members, um, coming in
Uh are are new. They are
drinking from a fire hose.
They're overwhelmed. They will
have staff.
Here in the capital. They will
have, uh, either an individual
person or they will share
somebody with with somebody
else. So that seemed quite a bit
for a new member to undertake
while also trying to maintain a
district office in their
respective district. Um, that
was simply a recommendation that
we took to that we brought to
this body and that leadership
considered it was just the
timing and the
Um, amount of of, uh,
Work, if you will, that it would
bring on a member who's brand
new.
Going into a 60 day session.
Like I said, drinking from a
fire hose with all the
information that they have and
trying to manage a staff here at
the Capitol and also at the
District office.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. That's
all I have.
Thank you, representative, Uh,
pro temp, Stewart.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I want
to add my thanks to to, uh, the
great chief of staff and
Chief clerks and Mr Piao for
doing this, Um, I. I just wanna
suggest that, uh that we move
forward with the memo that we
have worked on for all of these
months without this doesn't say
anything about contracting. I
believe we should begin without
that in the memo like it is now.
Because after we see how it
works, and when the leadership
offices then can say, well, we
think we should do a contract
that might come up come back to
the council. But at this point,
uh, the memo doesn't really
address that. And so I suggest
we move forward with what we
have. Now we meet every three or
four months. We will be, uh,
looking at these issues for
years. If we pass this today, so
Um, I just suggest that we move
forward with the memo that we
have
Thank you.
Next on the list Little worth.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Are you
ready for a motion at this
point? Do you have anyone else?
No one else on the list. You can
make a motion so I would move
that we go ahead and approve.
Uh, the Legislative District
Office memo with the red lines
of the additions that were made
by the staff.
We have a motion to approve
Legislative Council policies for
legislative district offices.
the Red Line version and just
for the record, I'm gonna read
the 228 number 228645.1.
That is the one with the red
lines is
Same number of
votes. Oh, it's the same number
of both. OK, well, just just
just look at the ones with the
Red line.
All right. We have a motion to
approve Legislative council
policies or legislative district
offices. Please call the
Uh, hold on. Hold on on the
calling of the roll, senator.
Duh.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
Just just to make clear so we
are accepting for the
electioneering part the language
That's there with the idea that
we'll be revisited. But this
other language all the folded
stuff is not being
Accepted as policy, uh, with
this phone, correct.
Jerk Cal roll.
It was sort of Armstrong.
Yes.
Armstrong is yes.
Senator Baca is not present.
Senator Brant.
Is yes.
Representative Chay Yes, yes.
Senator duh.
It was a Martinez.
Yes.
Montoya is not here, Senator.
The bill
is not present in a
representative Romero is not
present. It was a robot car was
not keeping head to Senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth is yes.
Madam president.
Yes.
Mr Speaker? Yes.
And Senator K Ocean carries 11
to 0.
7 to 0.
Yes.
All right Members motion carries
by a vote of 11 0.
Congratulations. It's a big
deal. 10 0.
10 0. Congratulations. This is a
big step forward. Uh, Senator
Neville.
Just just a comment, uh, not
opposed to the policy. Uh,
But you have just increased the
workload for all the legislators
and
Substantially.
Good point. Uh,
Mr Bruce.
Mr Chairman and members just to
clarify you. Prove the the the,
uh, the policy. Are you also
approving the timeline as part
of that? Yes. OK, just
clarifying that. Thank you.
OK, thank you all very much.
Appreciate it. Uh, let's go to
the next part of the
Agenda.
And that will be
Interim committee work plans and
budgets, Miura
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members. Um, before we begin, If
I may, I would just simply like
to introduce
Our UN M law student intern, Uh,
Michelle Rivera, if you can
stand
Michelle, uh, started with us
just recently and he'll be
working here. Uh, uh through
August. He's uh at a law student
at UM, and we'll be helping with
interim committees. But more
importantly, we'll be doing a
lot of, uh, assistance for the
attorneys on research on legal
issues and the like. So if
something comes up, let Shana
know. And she'll assign it to
Michelle. All right. Welcome.
Oh, I also wanted to introduce
one other individual who has
actually worked with us for two.
Um, two sessions at Agneta is
now working in the, uh, Library
Legislative library.
So any other research questions
on the library? I would be happy
to help you with that. Welcome.
Thank you for being here.
That's it for introductions and,
um
With that.
Um
Yeah, I was gonna say, Mister
bag. Don't you have something
else before you begin? The I do
want to mention Mr Speaker and
Madame pro TEM and members of
the council that we are keeping
tabs on the conditions in
Ruidoso. We've had committees
planning to have meetings there.
I think everybody's in agreement
that, uh, we want to support the
community in any way we can and
often a committee holding a
meeting in a community provides
some economic support. Uh, we
may revise the meeting schedules
to ensure that if a committee
meets
That it can be accommodated and
that it doesn't interfere with
any, uh, recovery efforts so our
staff will work closely with the
committee chairs on this issue,
Uh, as well as with, uh uh, the
community itself.
With that, Um
This is Speaker. Madam Chair. I
would ask Xander Dawson to come
and present the Health and Human
Services Committee.
Good morning, Mr Speaker. Madam
President, members of the
council. My name is Xander
Dawson. I'm the lead staff for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee. I, uh,
presented the work plan to you
at the last council meeting, So
I'm going to be really brief.
Um, just go over a few big
points. Uh, L HHS has decided to
focus on addressing child
welfare access to health care,
expanding the health care
workforce and addressing
behavioral health issues.
Uh, committee will also address
various topics like disability
issues, and, uh, the Human
Services Department's transition
to becoming the health care
authority. Um, just two things
to flag for you, Uh, first is
that L HHS will be meeting in
Rio Rancho October 24 21st to
the 24th, which needs the
council's approval and second,
The budget includes $10,000 for
expert testimony, and with that,
I stand for questions.
Questions from the committee.
All right. Thank you very much.
Next Nancy Martinez will present
the UC CJ.
Committee.
Fine.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. I stand before
you to present the proposed
courts, Corrections and Justice
Committee work plan. The
Legislative Council did approve
four additional meeting dates.
Uh and those were for the month
of June. The next C CJ meeting
will be held on June 26th and
27th. And with those states the
committee has and will continue
to discuss the intersections of
the justice system with mental
illness and addiction assisted
outpatient treatment, competency
regulation of panhandling and
other items that will
potentially
Uh, brought up at the upcoming
special session and those
meetings will be held here in
Santa Fe. In addition, the
committee proposes to discuss
probation and parole DW I test
and motor vehicle crimes,
governmental ethics housing,
including legal barriers and
landlord tenant relations.
The meeting. Locations for the
committee are as follows Santa
Fe for the July meeting,
Albuquerque in August Espanola
in September. Las Cruces in
October and back in Santa Fe for
the final meeting in November.
The committee is requesting
$5000 for expert testimony and
included in the budget is
$50,000 for professional
services. And with that, I stand
for questions.
None. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Nancy. Uh, Jared.
Will present
Military veterans fairs.
Mr Speaker members.
Good morning. You should have
the military and veterans
Affairs work plan in front of
you. It's largely a continuation
of the work that the committee
has been doing for the last 10
years. And that's in no small
part because the issues
confronting the military and
veterans affairs communities are
ongoing. Health care is still a
problem. Transportation is still
a bit of a problem. Education is
a bit of a problem. And so the
committee would like to continue
to explore those and do what it
can for the communities. Um I
should point out or I need to
point out that the committee is
requesting an October meeting
date outside of Santa Fe.
And I'm happy to answer any
questions.
Any questions?
Right. Thank you very much. I
need a motion to approve this
one, though.
I did forget to ask for
permission The committee would
like to attend the ribbon
cutting of a Vietnam veteran
memorial wall in Angel Fire.
July. 28. Is that right?
Correct. Um, they would like to
receive per diem and mileage
reimbursement for attending.
Would they? What do they count
as an additional meeting or
what's the I think, in addition
to their additional meetings
OK?
Right?
If unless you want to vote on
that separately, you could just
can We just order everything at
the end,
OK? Yeah.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Aaron Bond.
We present uh ER DPC.
New or DPC.
First time I hear that
Took me a minute.
We haven't figured out an
acronym for that yet, Mr
Speaker.
Tough one Mr Chair, the economic
and Rural Development and Policy
Committee will discuss economic
We can see most of those listed
out on the work plan, but some
of those will include UPDATES
from government agencies. Um the
chair would like to emphasize,
uh, economic development
initiatives in the communities
that we plan to visit. Um as
well as, uh, energy economies.
agricultural industries, Um,
recreational cannabis and some
of the challenges that they're
currently facing.
Uh, outdoor recreation
economies. Um, Workforce
development programs such as, um
as well as, uh, opportunities
and challenges facing a New
Mexico.
Oh, excuse me, Uh, industries
and small businesses, And then
there's several other items such
as, uh, the relationships
between the economy and for the
meeting dates, Um
Economic development in rural
policy committee was initially
planning to meet in Rido. So in
July the chair has requested to
cancel that meeting. Um and so
the next meeting would be August
21st and 22nd in Farmington,
then September 11th through 13th
in Las Cruces and Santa Teresa.
Uh, October 15th through the
17th would be in Albuquerque.
Uh, we would request permission
since that would be out of the
capital.
Um, excuse me and, uh, November
13th questions from the
committee.
All right. Thank you very much.
Christina.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um my name is
Christina Vasquez. And I'm the
lead staff on, um the
Investments, Pensions and
oversight Committee as well as
the Mortgage Finance Authority
Act Oversight Committee, and I'm
going to present both of these
to you. Now, Um I'll start with
the investments and Pensions
Oversight Committee work plan.
Um this interim the IPO proposes
to receive reports on the
sustainability and solvency of
the per the ER B and the RHC. We
also will hear reports on the
value and investment of public
funds and on the transparency of
the agencies and invest those
public funds. Um, we will review
um
Reports and testimony from the
Para on cost of living
adjustments, including an
overview and history of cola
payments.
Um we'll also receive an
overview of best practices
regarding solvency ratios, uh,
for public funds and as
necessary, the IPO C will
examine other relevant issues as
they arise.
Um, It's also important to point
point out that, um, the IPO
wants to meet in Albuquerque on
July the 30th and in Tao on
August 29th with the approval of
counsel. The IPO has
historically held their meetings
at the Capitol. So these two
changes in meeting location will
necessitate an increase in the
IPO budget from last year.
Um, you'll also notice that iPod
has requested three K for, um,
expert witnesses.
We may not use all that money.
Last year we had one person come
for $600. So it's just a better
safe than sorry situation. Um,
and now I'm gonna move on to
Mortgage and Finance Authority
Act Oversight Committee. This
interim the Mortgage Finance
Authority Act Oversight
Committee will focus on the
committee's statutory duties,
and those are monitoring the
distribution. The distribution
of funding monitoring mortgage
commitments, receiving reports
on the enforcement and the
provisions of the Mortgage
Finance Authority Act overseeing
the issuance of bonds and
reviewing it.
Approving rules that are
promulgated by the M FA in
conjunction with the M FA board.
Um, it's also important to note
that the M FA Committee work
plan does include a proposed
meeting location outside of the
state Capitol for November. The
14th which will be held in
Albuquerque, at the M FA office,
with the approval of counsel
Um, thank you for your time, and
I will stand for questions on
both of those committees.
Any questions from the
committee.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Christina.
Um
Sarah.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is
Sarah Weed. Meyer, Um, lead
staff for water and natural
Resources Committee. Uh, the
committee will receive the usual
updates from all the related
agencies and lawsuit updates and
what not related to natural
resources and water. Um
Uh, this interim, however, we
will be going back to each
meeting having a particular
focus area, so our schedule and
those focus areas um will be
July 22nd through 23rd. And that
is one of the meetings scheduled
for Riodosa. So we are paying
attention to that and will
potentially have an alternative
backup location set. Um and then
that focus area will be energy.
Um, our August meeting will be
the 26th and 27.
And Socorro, and that was, um,
chosen to accommodate the
multiple overlaps with L HHS
members.
Um and that focus. Excuse me.
Focus area will be water. Our
September meeting is the 26th
and 27th in Red River in Questa
Focus area being conservation
October 28th and 29th in
Corrales, which will require the
approval of the committee to
meet outside the capital, so
that focus will be climate and
other W NRC related topics to
give us some flexibility on that
last category and then in
November. Back in Santa Fe, the
Fifth and 26th, and that will be
our legislative priorities.
Any questions questions from the
committee.
See none. Thank you very much.
Oh,
And how many of these committees
have I been to and
L and I can't even remember Turn
the mic on.
Mr Speaker, Madam president,
members of the Legislative
Council on Martin Fisher lead
staff for the revenue
Stabilization and Tax Policy
Committee.
This interim. The committee Pro
proposes meeting five times.
All here in Santa Fe. Lastly,
December 16th and 17th, which
does require your explicit
approval.
The committee proposes to
examine previously unaddressed
work plan items such as long
term
Revenue stabilization,
especially in light of the
Um reliance on oil and gas and
and the ability to diversify.
Also liquor, the excise tax and
its implications and benefits.
Next. The committee proposes
addressing other work items that
that are both big picture and
small, such as the underlying
principles and rationale for the
state's tax policy.
Considering what's best for the
residents evaluating the
effectiveness of the value of
the various tax expenditures.
local government funding and
fiscal issues.
And the state's property taxes
And, lastly, the committee
proposes looking to the future
and the tax implications of the
evolving technological
workplace, such as remote
workers. Artificial intelligence
machine learning.
And lastly, the state's tax
approach to the changing energy
landscape. And with that, I sit
for questions.
OK, now it's
Um
Good morning, Mr Speaker, Madame
Pro TEM. Members of the council.
My name is Mark Edwards. I will
be the lead staffer for both the
land grants and the science and
tech committees, uh, for so
covered land grants First land
grants.
We'll be covering many of the
same issues that it has
personally covered and land in
natural resource issues
predominate. Phil grants also
governance issues, the
Legislature created, uh, land
grants as political subdivisions
about 20 years ago, and they are
still, uh, getting their feet
under them as far as being
effective small units of
government
I will note. Uh, one of the, uh,
on the media proposed meeting
schedule, the, um
October meeting is proposed to
be in plats.
And that outside of the capital
so that we'll need
Uh, approval by the council.
Um
And if with your permission,
I'll move straight on to the
science and tech.
Uh, for science and tech.
The, uh
Committee is proposing to focus
on four
Particular items in addition to
its normal oversight, and
general, uh
Development of science and the
science business sector issues
that is always covered. Those
four issues are
Uh,
Various aspects of artificial
intelligence, including how it's
used in decision making, both
for government services and in
Uh, the private sector. For
example, in in loans and medical
decisions. Uh,
The growing number of of
Uses and applications of a I and
whether the state should be
investing in a I research, uh,
building literacy. Uh,
Within.
School systems and adult
programs for a I literacy
because it is becoming so
prevalent and then uh, how a I
will impact various resource
uses.
Water, energy and labor. I
believe the committee, uh, at
the discussion, it was hoping
that labor would become
something that it would be a
growth industry, but
predominantly, uh, so far it
looks like all the experts are
telling me a I is being used to
Reduce the number of employees
so it may actually have a
reverse effect. When the
committee looks at that. The
other Com uh, focuses that the,
uh, committee would
Plans to look at our, um
And this did not turn out right.
The, um
Cyber security and state
offices.
The, uh
There had been a flurry of
legislation or
Proposed legislation last year,
but a lot of it not did not go
through. So would like to review
uh, our cyber security threat
environment for state agencies.
Education institutions and the
like and see if there should be
some
Things the state should do to
strengthen our security
position.
The, uh
Energy and energy storage. Uh
Is another area and, uh, I
apologize. My my printout left
off one of them. It seems the,
um
So unless it's in front of you,
and you have a question. Please
ask me, um
The, uh
This is another committee that
has an a meeting outside of the
Capitol after September. It's
actually September 30th October
1st meeting. So the second day
would be, uh at UN M in
Albuquerque in October 1st and
that will also need, UH, Council
approval.
And for that, for that, I stand
for questions.
Questions from the committee.
All right. Thank you very much
for your presentation.
Good morning.
Madam chair members of the
committee S Simon Suzuki, with
Legislative Council service and
I'm lead staff of the public
School Capital L, a oversight
task force. Um, the task force.
Uh,
Was created in statute when the
Legislature passed the public
school capital L a act, um, so
pursuant to its statutory
requirements. Um, the task force
will monitor the overall
progress of bringing schools up
to the state wide adequacy
standards.
Um, monitor the progress and
effectiveness of programs
administered pursuant to the
public school Capital L, a act
and the Public Capital
Improvements Act.
We monitor the existing
permanent revenue streams to
ensure they remain adequate long
term funding sources for the
public school for UM, public
school capital that a projects
and oversee the work of the
public school Capital Lake
Council and the public schools,
Um, facilities authority. Um,
additionally, if time permits
the task force will also review
unrelated topics, such as
updates on the Zuni lawsuit.
Uh, newly enacted legislation
that affects the public school
capital outlay system. Um, it
may examine the impact of
inflation on construction costs
and maintenance efforts. And,
um would, um, you know, may
receive updated forecasts of
supplemental severance tax bond
proceeds and review long term
trends in severance tax revenue.
Um and then also it may review
the expenditure of federal funds
impossible additional federal
funding opportunities and, um,
other task force. Um other, um
Items it deems necessary within
its purview. Um, the task force
meets four times a year. All of
the meetings will be here in
Santa Fe at the Capitol.
And, um
I. I don't. I'm not sure if
Mister, I do believe Mr Biaa
discussed, um or will discuss.
um, some changes in the
membership. Some, um, of the
public members are retiring from
their positions.
Um so
The council will have to appoint
new members.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Are there any questions?
All right. So thank you so much.
Madam chairman members. I'm
Nicole Wages pack representing
the Indian Affairs Committee.
Uh, the committee will be
tackling for main topics this
interim those include state and
tribal relations, economic
development, education and
reports from executive agencies.
We have one meeting that falls
after the September deadline,
That'll be meeting at the
pueblos of Zia INS.
Right. Any questions?
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Speaker, Madam
Pro TEM, members of the council.
My name is Sheila Kelleher and I
will be the interim. This
interim, the committee proposes
to look at alternative revenue
sources.
And strategies to establish more
sustainable long term federal
funding sources such as the
bipartisan infrastructure deal
and the National Infrastructure
Bank.
Private public partnerships.
Economic development for roads
with updates on the new Mexico
trade, ports and the border Pex
region.
Electric vehicles and related
infrastructure for charging
stations.
Lastly, the electrification and
decarbonization.
The committee will hear
presentations from the
Department of Transportation.
All six transportation
districts.
All of the New Mexico Council of
Government regions.
As well as the National
Conference of State
Legislatures.
The committee proposes to meet
six times this interim, uh,
primarily in Santa Fe, with the
exception of two
Meetings in Albuquerque.
And the committee is also
requesting an additional 4000 in
the budget to bring a net.
Thank you and without a stand
for questions.
Questions from the committee.
Thank you very much for your
presentation.
Good morning, Madam President
and Mr Speaker. My name is
Sabina Gaynor and I staff in New
Mexico Finance Department for
the 2024 interim. The committee
will receive reports from the
Border Authority and other
entities that are under its
purview.
Um, it will receive reports from
NM FA that are required pursuant
to statute. Some of those are
the public private or, um,
Sorry. The uh, Public Project
revolving fund, the Economic
Development revolving fund and
as was passed and hospital, 195
by and Housing Development Act.
The committee will consider
rules proposed by the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
And it will receive reports from
the Cultural Affairs Department
Bioscience authority.
It will see a presentations on
public private partnerships.
Um, and it will review statues.
Statutes, uh, to consider the
need for improvement, Whether
it's a clean up bill or
What have you
Um
And the committee is requesting
an additional day.
On November 12
To consider what
Legislation at historically
endorses.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
All right. Any questions from
members?
Thank you for your presentation.
Hi. Good morning.
Good morning, Mr Speaker, Madame
Pro TEM and members of the
committee. I am Erica F lead
staff for the Tobacco Settlement
Revenue Oversight Committee
pursuant to statutory
requirements. The committee will
be focusing this year on, um
Reviewing the programs that are
receiving our funding. I'm
making recommend
recommendations, uh, to improve
how that money is being spent
Major focuses for the year
include, UM, working with the
Department of Health on their
new P a program um, increasing
Vaping.
Prevention amongst our school
age population. Um, and
discussion of how to ban smoking
in Recinos. We have one meeting
that will be passed the
September 30th date in Las
Cruces on October 16th and we
are wanting to add. Excuse me.
The committee is wanting to add
a November date to be determined
here in Thank you. Any comments?
Questions? Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Oh,
Feel like we should have walk up
music next year.
Mr. Chair, Madam President Paul
S stock. Uh, the
Staff for the Radioactive and
Hazardous Materials Committee.
You can see from the work plan.
There's an extensive list of
topics they're gonna examine
Most of those topics fall under
the mandate of the statute that
created the committee.
Um, a couple of
More topical things would be PF
stuff is
Big everywhere. Um
Plutonium pit production.
Obviously, it's gonna be a big
deal.
Um, but most of this stuff falls
under the statute.
As far as meetings go, Uh
there's a meeting October 15th.
The committee is proposing an AD
that would require committee
approval. Other than that, um
I stand for questions.
Any questions?
What would it be your walk up
song?
I'm sorry. What would be your
walk up song if you're
introduced
That would be it.
Pretty close.
Thank you.
OK?
Mr Chairman and members of the
council. Uh,
Next is myself for the capital
security subcomittee. This
committee has generally been
created every year and
Has usually only met once, if at
all, and usually before the
session to discuss any issues
related to security of the
building and the capital. Um
Complex. Uh, not just the
capital, but capital north and
also the, uh, parking structure.
Um
I would like to recommend that
rather than actually creating
the subcomittee and assigning
members to it that this be
folded in under the facilities.
Review subcomittee, which is
already in council policy, uh
which is, uh, traditionally been
the speaker. The pro TEM and the
four leaders, Uh, because you
approve any kind of changes to
the
Physical building itself. Any
construction changes and the
like, and I, I think it probably
is more appropriate that that be
the same group to look at any
security issues. So if you're OK
with that, then they they can
just be a on approval of all
work plans.
Secondly or lastly, the interim
legislative ethics committee
What you have in front of you is
the cost of a one day meeting in
Santa Fe for the committee,
which is the name of about
$7900. The interim legislative
ethics committee only meets as
necessary to consider one
advisory opinions where a
legislator has requested an
opinion on on a specific matter,
Uh, usually it involves the kind
of work that can or cannot be
done by a legislator under
contract or in a professional
organization. The like and the
the
The committee has actually
issued an opinion to that
effect.
Uh, which is online?
Also if there are any complaints
filed against the legislator,
Then it goes to the
Respective chambers.
Members. So if there's complaint
against the House member than
just the House members would be
involved against the center,
then only the senators would be
involved. Um if the entire
committee is meeting and I think
it's only met once in last 1015
years, and that was just to get
an update or a briefing on that,
so that's requested. We can do
that as well. Otherwise, this
would allow us to, uh uh, with
your permission to schedule any
confidential investigations that
Be paid out of interim expense
And for those members of those
subcommittees to me, as needed.
And with that, uh, Mr Chairman,
Madam President, I will stand
for questions. I do have a quick
comment on um that last one. So
we do have a house Republican
vacancy. Um, on that committee
and in conversations with leader
Montoya, We're going to appoint
that, uh And I'm going to
appoint that member in July at
the July meeting.
Mr Chairman. Thank you for that
clarification. That's correct.
It's short one.
Person. Hopefully, that won't be
needed.
Uh, Richard Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr. B. I
just have a quick question.
For clarification going back to
the capital SE security
subcomittee who Who are the
members on this?
Miss.
Uh, Mr Chairman and represent
Martinez.
Um
What I had suggested. Was that
this subcomittee just be, um
rather than being appointed.
That the existing facilities
review subcomittee, which is in
Legislative Council policy.
That they be the ones to, uh,
take over security issues, and
that is the speaker, The pro TEM
and the four leaders.
The majority minority leaders in
both houses.
That would comprise
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr Biaa.
Right, madam Proto.
I move approval of our work
plans, which are significant.
Is. Is there? OK? Uh, is there
opposition to that motion?
See none. Interim committee work
plans have been approved.
Um, I will do a brief editorial,
Uh, members who are appointed to
these committees.
Please. Please, Please show up
to the meetings.
Um
What ends up happening when
folks don't show up is there's a
lack of quorum staff presenters
and others have worked really
hard to pull these meetings
together, particularly those
that are outside of the
building. And if folks don't
show up, it delays the process
and it it is really unfair to
them, and it is unfair to the
legislators who do show up. Uh,
because, ultimately if there's
no quorum, and they have to go
into some sort of special
subcomittee
Theoretically, there's no per
deal for folks who traveled to
those meetings. So if you're a
voting member of any of these
committees, um and I know that
pro TEM and I get, uh, lots of
requests at the beginning of any
of your interim about all the
committees we wanna serve on,
please make sure you show up if
you can't For whatever reason.
Let the staff know ahead of
time. The council let ourselves
know ahead of time. Let our
staff know ahead of time. That
way we can appoint one of the
advisory folks.
To be a voting member for the
purposes of making a quorum. Uh,
but that is a, uh not so much a
directive. It's more of a plea
to all of you. Please. Please,
please make sure you show up.
Uh, moving on. Uh, Mr B you see
on the floor?
Thank you, Uh, Mr Chairman and
members. Uh, if I may for an
editorial comment, first of all,
thank you for that, But I would
also like to thank the
Legislature for, um
The additional funding we've
received over the last two or
three years, uh, to get
additional staff for the interim
committees. Uh, some of you will
remember that In the past, we
usually had just build rafters
be the lead staff on those
committees, which took them away
from, uh, drafting legislation.
Uh, some of them are still sing
those committees, but at least
now they're only staffing one as
opposed to several At one point.
I think Mark Edwards was lead
staff on three and back up on
1/4. So it has helped to get the
additional staffing both
Year round and contract staff.
So thank you for that.
Uh, I will make sure to, um
Um
Uh, update any like the capital
security subcomittee that that
is gonna be, Uh uh, subsumed
into the face review
subcomittee.
Um
Have a few housekeeping items.
First, A law was passed in 2004
that allows the Legislative
Council service to use funds out
of the kitchen fund.
Um, that kitchen fund I is the
the money that was made out of
the kitchen when it was operated
by House staff. That's no longer
the case. But we still have
money in that fund and the only
thing we need authorization is
spend money out of there.
Uh, for coffee and coffee
supplies that are provided for
committees here in the Capitol.
Uh and I probably can do these
all at once. Unless somebody has
any questions on these and I go
through them. So one motion is
going to be to allow us to to
use the kitchen fun for coffee
and coffee supplies. The second
Is that the morning that uh,
there was a morning meeting of
the Public School Capital Outlay
Oversight Task force.
A few weeks ago, and there was a
two hour delay on I 25 and a
number of members couldn't make
it or just turned around and and
went back. Uh, because we only
had about seven or so.
Attendees, which did not
comprise a quorum or special
subcomittee. We need council
approval to pay those members
per diem and mileage.
The third one is that there was
there is a Senate Memorial five
that was passed during this past
session. It has four legislators
who are appointed by the speaker
of the pro TEM and both minority
leaders. Uh, this is a task
force for, uh, CYFD
restructuring the CYFD
restructuring task force.
And, uh, there was no provision
made to provide those four
legislators were per diem and
mileage. So this is would be a
request for the council to
approve PD MP, DM and Mileage.
Uh, for those legislators
appointed to that task force.
And lastly, I believe, uh, Madam
Pro TEM that you have some, um
Changes or some appointments. I
don't know if you wanna do that
now, or
Separately.
We don't need to vote on those,
Um, just announce them so I'll
make the motion to approve your
three requests.
Did you have a a change to the
three requests?
No, it was
All right. The the request that
represent Mcon talked about is
going to be included in the work
plans, and that's for back to
attend. The, uh
Um
Angel Fire ceremony.
That will be included in there.
Uh, no. So, I. I think this
would be an appropriate time for
emotion on on those three things
that I just mentioned.
So I moved approval of the three
requests.
And just just to clarify the
angel fire for veterans that was
already approved in the prior
motion, right?
Yeah, that was that's gonna be
in the in the work plan as well.
Fair enough. OK, um All right.
Is there a debate or questions
on those three requests from Mr
Bags? No motion. Scary.
See on the floor.
Mr Chairman. I believe that
madam protest announcement to
make
Uh, So, uh, Mr Speaker. Thank
you.
I have 123456 changes for, uh,
the interim committees, uh,
mostly involving to a senator,
then Eo.
So if you will remove him as a
voting member of economic rural
development
And water and natural resources.
And move him to advisory on
those two committee.
For re step if you will remove
him as vice chair.
And move him down into the
standing advisory group and
replace the vice chair with
Senator Pete Compos and finally
For Legislative Finance
Committee.
If you will, Uh, remove Senator
Sera Hemphill from voting put
her in the standing advisory.
And replace that voting member
with Senator Benny Shindo.
Madam chair. Was there any
change to Senator Sho?
Um
Membership on the public School
Capital Oversight Task Force.
No, that that that. Me So, uh,
Infrequently. It's a large
committee. Um, I think he'll be
able to make those
Thank you.
Right?
Mr Biaa Next agenda item is
classification and compensation
plan. You have the floor.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members.
Um, just wanted to mention that
at the march 25th council
meeting, you approved an updated
classification and compensation
plan that expanded the
compensation ranges.
Um, and that provides more room
for recruitment and retention
Since that time, the staff
working group has continued to
review and work on a policy to
bring back to the council.
Uh, that updated policy will
include the makeup of the Class
and Comp Plan Committee, which
will be staffed.
Uh, chiefs of staff. Uh,
directors and the, uh
Chief clerks.
Uh, also the process by which
the plans compensation ranges
get updated.
Uh, that will still be subject
to council approval.
Uh, one recommendation that I'm
gonna request that you vote on
today is that staff
Um
Be hired at no more than 75% of
the range Maximum.
As I mentioned earlier, we had
suggested 70% be when we
reviewed those salaries. Uh,
show that 75% was a better
option closer to the midpoint
and better for recruitment and
re well for recruitment,
primarily
Uh, that would also apply to the
district staff and district
office liaison. Uh so we can get
moving on those
The UM updated policy will
include a process for approving
salary increases for
The, uh um upper level staff
management, the directors, chief
clerks and chiefs of staff.
It will also include a process
for increases, including
longevity increases for staff.
Uh, for those that have been
with the Legislature for 10 or
more years and have reached the
compensation maximum.
And also a tuition
reimbursement.
Um So at this point, we are only
requesting that you approve the
proposal to hire staff at no
more than 75% of the
compensation maximum.
Uh, so we have a guideline on
hiring staff for fiscal year 25
as well as the A I DS and
liaisons and the, uh, support
staff at the Council service,
But we will bring that draft
policy back to the council. Uh,
for its consideration at the
next council meeting.
I. I stand for any questions on
the comp, Uh, plant that we
would need a motion to approve
the 75%.
Recommendation.
Questions, comments.
OK, we have motion.
So move
OK with motion at 75%. Is there
a debate comments? See? None
motion carries.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members.
The This is just a understaffed
reports. Uh, I wanted to mention
that, uh, with the start up of
district offices and staff, um
and hiring decisions by
legislators, we are working on
developing training sessions for
leadership offices. The liaisons
legislators on HR issues,
particularly with respect to
interviewing candidates, Um,
questions that can and cannot be
asked, Uh, similarly.
Newly hired, uh, district staff
will undergo, um
Significant, substantial
training on a number of areas,
including the ethics laws.
Um and policies, Anti-asthma
policy, campaign and election
laws, HR policies and
procedures.
Um, along those same lines, I
would, uh, suggest that the
council consider and we can
bring back to the council. A
proposal to, um
Include, uh, similar training
for all staff and legislators.
Uh there's been a lot of changes
to the laws and one of a couple
of areas that we have not
included in the past, but I
think is become very important.
One is the Americans with
Disabilities Act. We're getting
ready to hire an AD, a
coordinator. That position has
been posted, and it's important
to make sure that all staff and
all legislators recognize that
we are subject to the AD. We've
had a number of requests and a
number of issues that we've
addressed.
So wanna include that? Lastly is
cyber security. One of my
biggest nightmares is, is that
something might happen, uh, to
bring the system down and our it
staff has done a great job of
backing it up and making sure we
have the firewalls, but it's
also very important that staff
that has access to the network
itself and, um, be trained as
well as legislators.
Um, Lastly, um
The two things one
Is we have reserved the first
week in December, December, 2nd
through sixth.
Or new member orientation or a
council meeting.
And for some of this other
training on ethics, anti
harassment and the like, uh, for
both staff and, uh, members, So
we're hoping to keep that week
clear. It's the week after
Thanksgiving, but we need to
make sure that there's at least
a council meeting and that, um,
we have a new member orientation
for those elected in November.
And lastly, I believe the next
meeting of Legislative Council
is scheduled for the morning of
Thursday, July 18th, which
coincidentally is the same day
that you were supposed to be
here for a special session.
So the council would meet in the
morning at approximately 9 A.m.
mi before we continue. Um, we
need nine boarding members for
quorum. Correct.
I apologize. We need nine voting
members on council for you. OK,
so we're going to have to retake
that prior vote because we were
down to eight. Thank you, R and
Armstrong for pointing that out.
I'm gonna point as a voting
member for the remainder of the
meeting. Uh, so, Senator
Neville, if you'd like to re,
uh, restate your motion on the
75%, please.
OK, um so we are resetting the
motion on the 75% for the
compensation plan. Um, any
opposition to that motion?
OK, see none of that motion
carries, uh, with representative
call now, uh, haven't been
appointed a voting member of
council.
And are you asking for a motion
on the last piece you just
mentioned
No, just just an FY. I just an
FY I
nine AMI Forget this one. Thank
you, Uh, brought them Stewart.
So we wanted to, uh, let you all
know that, um
What we're planning for July.
18th is, of course, the
compensation plan but also, uh,
interviews.
With people who have applied to
be legislative Council director.
So it will be, uh, voting
members will be the ones, uh,
taking the action on that day,
if we if we're successful
And also Mister Bagga, don't you
have another motion for us to do
for your staffing?
Oh, I was way in the beginning
and kept waiting for you. But
now I'm gonna remind you, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
had mentioned that, um, we did
not because we did not know the
direction that the Legislature
would take on district staffing.
We did not have in our regular
year round budget. Uh, staffing
for
The administrative and
logistical support for the
district offices. So my request
is that the Legislative Council
authorized the council service
to access interim legislative
expenses to hire staff.
Or the support of district
offices. That would be for this
fiscal year. Uh and then, in
January. We would include those
costs in the feed bill as part
of our year round or at least
the council service. Well, I
won't They
right. Uh
Both ST I move that we allow the
staffing and let's say council
to help us and authorize them to
use up to a million inter
expenses.
OK. Is there opposition or
comments on that motion?
You see non motion carries.
Mr B, I believe we are done.
Mr Chairman, Madam President and
members? Yes. Thank you very
much. Thank you all very much.
We urgent
