But
Oh, OK. Of state engineer, OK,
go ahead.
Hello, um,
Thank you for having us here
today. Um,
this chair and director. So I, I
just wanted to start out today.
Are we going ahead, are we
getting started now? OK, great.
So, um, can everybody see the
slides? Yeah. Are we able to
adjust the slides on our own
right here.
Yeah. Oh, with this. All right.
All right, thank you for having
us here today. Um, what we
wanted to do is go just briefly
through the slides and make sure
to leave plenty of time for
questions at the end. Um,
everything that we're gonna talk
to you about today is of a
critical nature for water in our
state, we don't have to tell you
that there are so many, so many
needs out there, um, so I wanted
to make sure to, to
emphasize that that director
Riley Wright and I are sitting
here today as a team. Everything
that we do, we're working on
together. There's so much
overlap between, between ISC and
OSC, um, it really is 11 team,
and you'll see that throughout
the presentation today. Also,
just in order to frame the, the
requests, um, with climate
change and the um and the 25%
less water than we anticipate
seeing in our water supplies in
the
next 50 years, all of these
requests are putting us in a
position to be able to um to,
to, to meet the challenges that
we see coming forward. It's
gonna take a lot of work. I know
all of you know that, um, but
the, um, the leap ahead analysis
that was done. So I've got this
giant document here. This really
frames that that reduction in
water supplies that were we're
anticipating.
Um, also, I just want to thank
you for your support, all the
support that you've given to us,
um, I know that there's a lot
of, a lot of support for water
issues in the state and and that
is.
Coming from you. So thank you
for all of that.
Um, it's made a significant
impact what you've given so far
and we'll be outlining our needs
in addition to those today.
Um, also,
Oh
I just wanted to highlight the
need this today in the New
Mexican, there was an article,
um, or a a a flyer here for the
water can't wait, um.
But and
And that's something I think
that Director Wily we'll talk a
little bit more, but just
framing what we're gonna be
talking about today in terms of,
you know, in, in all things that
we do water can't wait. So thank
you for that. Um,
On the slide here, we're we're
outlining all of the different
um requests from our agency. Uh,
we'll go through each of these
in, in detail. Um, but I do
wanna emphasize that these
requests are in alignment with
the broad consensus that was
developed, um, between the
water, the New Mexico water
policy and infrastructure task
force. Um, this is a group that
I was a part of. I.
Um,
before I was working for the
state, I was representing
municipal interests, looking at
the issues of our state, the,
um, there were broad consensus
that was provided on the
recommendations of this report,
and, um, and it really fed
directly into the governor's
50-year water action plan. So
with this huge stack of
documents on my table is a lot
of the work that's been done in
just the recent years, um, that
are guiding these requests that
we're putting forth to you
today.
Um,
and with that, let's see, going
actually, do we wanna, did you
wanna say anything at all with
that?
I didn't really give an
introduction for ourselves
either.
I'm so sorry. I got excited. Um,
I'm Elizabeth Anderson, the
state engineer designate. I've
been in this role for 3 months
now, so you can um give me a
little like a
A little space for um for my
excitement. But um I am really
excited to be here in this role.
I've been working in water in
New Mexico for about 25 years
now and um I had a variety of
different roles, um.
Within the last year, I was able
to work with Mike Hammond, and I
was his senior advisor, and so I
really look forward to
continuing the the work that he
has done with all of you. Um, I
feel like the opportunity to
work with him is offering a
really smooth transition into um
into the, the work that we're
doing, continuing to do, um,
they're very important work that
we're continuing to do. On the
First item here on our request.
So
Yeah, I'm just briefly, hello,
Hannah Risley White, director of
the New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission. It's a real pleasure
to be with you all. Um, I just
wanna take a moment to
acknowledge the staff that's in
the room with the OSC ISE staff
just stand up briefly. We have
an incredible team at the agency
actively working to move forward
all of the initiatives that you
all have funded in previous
legislative sessions. I just
wanted to acknowledge them, and
then we'll run through our
slides relatively quickly to
ensure we have time to answer
all of your questions. Thank you
so much.
All right, thank you for that.
And thank you to all of our
staff for being here. Um, we
really have an incredible team.
Oh, we've skipped ahead to the
here we go. OK. So with that in
mind, this first request that we
have is absolutely our most
important request. I know it's a
big request, $5 million. This
would go towards um igning our
staff's pay with the recent spo
salary studies over 80% of staff
within the office of the state
engineer and Interstate stream
Commission were effect.
by those salary studies. These
are high, um high high tech um
jobs that we have here, there
are water resources
professionals, engineers,
attorneys, IT professionals, and
HR professionals. So significant
roles within the agency had a
big impact to the salaries, and
we need to work to realign
those, those staff to the um to
the new pay scales. Also, um, I
wanted to just acknowledge the
funding that the legislature
already provided for us.
Within the last, within the last
session that we've been working
um at, at rolling this out into
new positions throughout the
agency and it's been incredibly
helpful.
Um
And I don't know, do you wanna
take it from there? Yeah, sure.
Um, just to reemphasize how
important this request is for
us, our staff is really the
backbone of the agency providing
support across all of the other
initiatives you're about to hear
about, um, and because of those
recent salary studies, it's,
it's apparent that our, our
staff is largely not paid
competitive salaries. So in
order for us to retain and
recruit qualified staff, having
additional funding for this
corrective salary adjustment is
going to be critical.
For us, how, however we get
there, um, at Interstate stream
commission, I can say of our
technical staff, um, only 3
people are at midpoint or above,
so just speaks to the need for
our existing staff to have
salaries to help us retain them,
um, and this again is relevant
for every other of the
initiatives that you're about to
hear about.
And I can uh take the next one,
which is related to our water
planning, education and outreach
efforts. I want to thank you
all, as you know, in the 2023
legislative session, you will
pass unanimously the water
security Planning Act, which was
again a recommendation of the
water policy and infrastructure
task force and um had broad
support amongst constituencies
across the state as well as the
other foundational documents
that state engineer Anderson was
just mentioning, um, so thank
you for that support.
We really see that water
planning work as the framework
within which New Mexico can
confront the challenges
associated with climate change
and increasing water scarcity in
our communities across the
state. We have been moving sort
of full speed ahead to implement
that act primarily focusing on
getting robust public engagement
on what the future of water
planning needs to look like for
New Mexico, as I think you all
know the original regional water
planning statute passed in 1987
and had
been considered to have largely
met its purpose. We see the, the
rulemaking and guideline
development called for by the
act, um, as setting the, the
framework that could be in the
place for decades to come, so we
have dedicated all of this year,
essentially to extensive public
engagement we had in person
events, um, 16 of them across
the state. Thank you to those of
you who participated in those
and online participation, we had
over 27,000.
responses online. Uh, we asked,
uh, participants if they were
new to water planning and we had
over 50% of people engaging as
their first time engaging in
these initiatives, um, super
excited to get that kind of
response. We are now on track to
release draft rules and
guidelines as called for by the
Act in January. We're excited to
get those in front of you all
and to get them in front of your
constituencies for your input as
we work to finalize those rules
and guidelines in 2025 and then
begin to
work standing up the regions as
called for by the act, you
should have received in front of
you also a little um card that
has a QR code on it. I also have
some nifty little bookmarks
here. Um, I highly recommend you
check out the campaign website
for that initiative through that
QR code. Also all of these
foundational documents are on
that link as well. Last I would
mention as part of that act, the
act specifically called on us to
work with, um, Indian Affairs
department to convene for the
first.
time a water security tribal
advisory council, that process
has kicked off. We had initial
input from tribal leadership and
technical and legal staff over
the summer. We've now had two
meetings of that council has
broad engagement from tribal
leadership from across the
state. They are very, um,
committed to next steps and sort
of shaping their involvement in
regional water planning,
including implementation of
Indian water rights settlements.
So very pleased with the
progress that we're making on
implementing.
That act and happy to provide
additional information. The
funding request, um, highlighted
on this slide will be critical
for us to stand up this next
phase of this this process to
finalize those rules and and
guidelines to engage in water
education initiatives across the
state, um, and to stand up those
future planning regions. So, um,
important ask from from us in
terms of this.
Um, next I'd go on to the next
slide, so slide 5.
In parallel to our public
engagement and working on
implementing regional water
planning across the state. We're
doing a lot of work to ensure
that that process will be
informed by the best data
science and models, as called
for by the Act, a big part of
that is implementing the Water
Data Act, um, including
participating with New Mexico
Tech and the other directing
agencies under the Act to
identify data to be made more
readily available to water
managers into this future
planning process, that effort
takes
Uh, resources and so there's
another ask and in our budget
request this year for further
implementation of that, that
critical act. It's very hard to
plan around your water supplies
if you don't have information
about what you're planning
around, and so this this uh
component of uh further uh
implementing the act is a
critical piece and I'll hand it
back to state engineer Anderson
to talk about the ITC2 funding.
Oh, I need to change the slide.
Um, so for the C2 funding, we
realize this is a large ask $6
million. This is absolutely
critical to bring our agency
into the 21st century. We're
operating off of databases that
are 30 years old, which is like
the ice ages for IT, so the, um,
basically what we need is, is
funding to update and this is,
this is just the um
22 of the projects, but we have
a number of different projects
that will be rolling out here.
One of my big initiatives for
the agency is modernization. We
can't implement the water Data
Act unless we have our data in a
format where it can be shared,
and I'm so grateful for those of
you who supported the water Data
Act. It's really forward
thinking and it really um it
really sets the stage for a lot
of very necessary updates in
order for us to make data
available to the to the public
and also it effectively
administer water.
rights and meet the challenges
that we see coming in the future
with water in our state.
I think the next slide.
Um, regarding Indian water
rights settlements resolving
Indian water settlements for the
state is a, is a huge priority.
Um, we've made great progress
getting these negotiated, um,
the partnerships that have been
developed in in aligning, um,
the settlement parties to the
settlements have been really
outstanding, um, and we will
continue to do that as we, as we
continue to make progress on
more Indian water aid
settlements, uh, with this $40
million.
appropriation, we would be um
putting this money into the fund
that's gonna be matching the
funding coming in from the
federal funds, as well as some
of these projects are going on
right now. Some of this work can
be done in advance. So aligning
the funding um recognizing the,
the funding that you provided
last year was incredibly
generous. Um, we need to
continue with that momentum and
continue adding to that fund.
The, the $40 million would be a
a significant benefit to it, and
it also demonstrates the state's
commitment to meeting the the
match requirements and that the
support for the settlements as
they move through Congress. Um,
We do have 6 settlements moving
through Congress right now and
our state has been very
dedicated. Our governor and the
delegation are dedicated to
moving those through Congress,
and we see good momentum, um,
but it's, it, it, you know,
recognizing that um we have a, a
short window here with this
Congress to move those forward.
So there's been a lot of
concerted efforts to move those
forward.
Um, also the $500,000 ask in the
general fund will um will also
help implement the settlements
through more water masters and
um some of the some of the tools
that are needed to help
implement the settlements. So
that's why they're both here on
the same, same slide. Did you
wanna add anything? Let's see. I
think that.
Go to the next place.
All right. Um, along the same
lines, um, middle Rio Grande
administration and enforcement.
Um, we're asking for a total of
a million dollars, um, that
would support staffing, it's
necessary to maintain the
compliance with the compact.
This just setting the stage at
the Rio Grande is our, our major
river, um, and, and supports our
major population centers within
the state, um, that we are,
there is ongoing work to
continue to um to work on.
on implementation measures and
administration within this part
of the state, um, but more
metering and monitoring,
monitoring is needed. Um, we're
working on regional planning in
that region, um, we're expanding
our capacity to do the work that
we need to do, this funding will
help us do that. We need, we
need the resources to be able to
do the work that needs to be
done in the middle Rio Grande,
um, to support our state all the
way from the headwaters on the,
the border of Colorado down to
um.
Down to Texas. It's all 11
connected river and we have to
treat it that way and uh working
very closely with director
Risley White and the Interstate
Stream Commission on that as
well.
Um
The funding here also supports
capacity building so that we
could have more local staff in
these regions where we're doing
this administration and um work
that needs to be done there. So
the request also provides for
more office space needed to do
that. Did you want to add
anything to that? Yeah, um.
I would just say a state
engineer Anderson just said,
we're really looking at the Rio
Grande holistically. This ask is
focused on the middle Rio Grande
because there are big things
moving there, including, uh,
settlement of the 6 Middle Rio
Grande Pablo's water rights, ESA
issues, real interest in
planning and compact compliance.
It, it's critical that New
Mexico focus on ensuring we're
continuing to meet our compact
obligations into elephant Butte,
and that's gonna take some
effort, uh, in terms of
As outlined here. Uh, so I would
just emphasize again the
importance of, of this
particular ask.
Um
And just maybe a comment on the
Indian water right settlements,
you know, I haven't in the time
that I've been here, I've not
seen such tremendous progress on
the state's part and pushing
forward those settlements. It is
challenging to again plan around
water resources without standing
any water rights settlements
claims. So the effort and I
really commend this
administration and and working
to to advance those settlements
as, as something that's very
important for the state of New
Mexico and for our communities
on the ground.
The next slide here is a request
for to replace agency trust fund
dependency with general fund. I
think as you all know, uh, over
a decade ago, significant
portions of the agency OSE and
ISCs operating budgets got moved
into being funded from our
irrigation works construction
fund and the income to the Rio
Grande, uh, uh, improvement
fund.
It's not really sustainable for
those trust funds. It also was
not the original intended
purpose of those trust funds,
given the challenges that we see
ahead for New Mexico. We'd like
to ensure that this funding is
available for its originally
intended purposes, and so this
is an ask to replace our agency
dependency uh on those trust
funds with general fund, and we
see that as as important piece
of ensuring sustainability of
the, the trust funds moving
forward.
Last, uh, wanted to highlight a
couple of our other special
appropriations. Uh, these are
both compact related, uh, you
know, we are in good standing
under our compacts that involves
uh investment.
We have been putting on an
incredibly strong case in Texas
v. New Mexico. I'm sure many of
you are following that. However,
given where things are at with
the US Supreme Court, in fact,
we're headed to mediation next
month in Washington DC. We need
to ensure that the state is
supported with the best legal
and technical uh team possible
uh with the uncertainty of where
that case might land. And so
having additional funding to
support the potential for us to
head to trial in that case is
going to be important.
And then the ask related to the
Peco settlement is to support
further implementation of the
2003 Peco settlement agreement,
which has been New Mexico's
strongest tool in support of
compact compliance on the Pecos,
we have almost 150,000 acre feet
of credit on the Pecos largely
due to this agreement, the
special appropriation request
here is for funding well-filled
operations as part of that
state's commitment, the water
pump from those well fields
provides water supply to.
New Mexicans in southeast New
Mexico and having this funding
in order to support that is
helpful, as you all saw in the
news recently, we got a lot of
rain on the papers all at once.
It's a little bit frustrating
because that part of the state
has been brutally dry. We've
been operating those well fields
pretty consistently over the
past two years, um, so we're
obviously thinking very
creatively about what do we do
when we get all of that water?
How do we keep it and harness it
as best we can and not have it
be destructive looking in.
into the future we do anticipate
further need for, for pumping
those augmentation well fields.
And I think we're pretty, pretty
much through our presentation
here. Um, just wanna, again,
reemphasize the critical support
that the legislature has
provided in the last couple of
years for these efforts, we have
been putting that funding to
very good use, happy to provide
more information about that.
These apps are informed by the
broad consensus, um, of the
waters folks in New Mexico about
what's needed looking into the
future, and they are what we see
is the top priorities coming out
of this.
Legislative session. I'm gonna
hand back to state engineer
Anderson, but mostly we wanted
to make sure we had plenty of
time for your questions today,
so state engineer.
Yes, thank you for your time and
your, for your support. Um, just
wanted to let you know we're
very motivated to make progress
on all of this as we know that
you are as well, um, and it, and
Very much looking forward to um
the work ahead, um, as much as
it's a challenge, it's also
something just so rewarding and
needing to be done. So thank you
and just ending with the note
that, you know, water can't
wait, the great tagline, I'm
glad that it's out there in the
public and people are thinking
about these things. Thank you,
and we stand for any questions.
OK. Thank you. uh Engineer
Anderson and uh Priestley White,
uh, I've got the Senator Campos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
to uh go ahead and get started
and I really appreciate the
presentation this afternoon, uh,
to the state engineered
designate Anderson, uh, with the
50-year plan and with the vision
that you bring to this
particular position, can you
help me to outline and uh as a
concise as possible, talk about
what your plans are going to be
for the next 2 years.
Of that plan and what those
priorities are in in essence
what I'm getting to what's going
to be the plan, how do we
continue using the uh issues
that were dealing with when it
comes to interstate stream
commission, uh, how we're gonna
to conserve our, our water, how
we're gonna continue to
adjudicate how we're gonna deal
with Texas v. New Mexico because
that was an agreement that
basically was already there. And
then as you both indicate how
we're gonna continue to thrive
and to grow with this. So, so
specifically,
Uh, can you indicate what your
plans are going to be there for
the OSI or in this case, the OSC
as a state engineer.
What, what are your thoughts and
ideas and plans for us for the 2
years to come.
I feel like I could talk about
that all day. There are so many,
so many things to do. Um, I
think the number one priority
is, you know, modernizing our,
our agency, um, and supporting
the staff that we have there to
do the jobs, um, in the best, in
the best way that we can. Um,
Having the resources in place so
that asks that we had um for
capacity building for the um for
the agency for the corrective
salary adjustments that are
needed. That's exactly what we
need to be able to meet those
challenges. I outlined in the 50
year water plan, um, the, the
piece on modernization, we need
a lot more metering and
monitoring of our systems. Um,
we have programs that we're
developing right now in the
lower Rio Grande and I could
have, you know,
Um,
director Wesley Wright could
speak more to that, but the work
that we're doing for depletion
reductions in the lower Rio
Grande and really working with,
with the stakeholders to
identify how how to preserve the
water resources that they have
there and throughout the state.
So, um, the, the modernization
piece is really, really
critical. Um, also working, um,
working collaboratively with the
Interstate stream commission to
to to um
To really
stand up for the water supplies
that we have coming through the
state, we have to, we have to
make sure that we are, um, that
we are
Basically, um,
They like kind of last with that
on that one, but we really
standing up to make sure that we
that we support our water
supplies and um
Both our interstate supplies in
meeting our compacts and the
supplies that we have within the
state.
So, so if I may, as a, as I
continue and uh primarily what
I'm, I'm helping you to do is to
relax a little bit when it comes
to how you're gonna focus and
what your plans are going to be
for the next 2 years,
particularly as we get ready for
confirmation, uh confirmation
process during the 60-day
session. Um, that's going to be
very important to the membership
and also too, if you will,
members of the House and the
Senate.
The second part of this deals
directly with when you're
talking about modernization, uh,
prioritization, um, ensuring
that, if you will, your
employees, uh, do have, if you
will, a very competitive wage in
the positions.
The other part is when we talk
about expansions when it comes
to your office, is there
adequate space to go ahead and
do all these things that you
want to do, or do you have plans
to grow out and to uh to expand
when it comes to the physical
facilities.
We, that's a great question.
Thank you for um for bringing
that up. We do need additional
space for the additional staff,
and that's something that we're
working on directly with GST so
it's an ongoing effort.
So, so then as we move along,
then the next issue ties into
many of the unfinished projects
that we have throughout the
state. And, and what I'm doing
is I'm not only talking about
the programmatic as we move
along and there will be a few
other issues that I want to uh
bring up.
But when it comes to the
projects that we have, and let's
just say for example, our aging
down projects, uh, our
waterways, our seas, the kind of
systems that we have in in
state.
Particularly as we deal with the
fires, the floods, if you will,
in some cases, even the
redirection of of water and how
that's occurring. So as we deal
with that,
What are those unfinished
projects that really stand out
in your mind today that are
gonna definitely make a big
difference when it comes to
water storage and water
distribution.
There, I mean, in, in terms of
specific
Unfinished projects. I think
that there there's a huge
backlog of work that needs to be
done in terms of aging
infrastructure and repairing
that aging infrastructure, um,
uh, you almost can't look at a
system and, and not find, you
know,
A huge, a huge amount of work to
be done. So supporting our
Water systems are eass are, you
know, ag districts, um,
In having the, the
infrastructure in place, the
dams in particular, as you, as
you mentioned, the, the list of
dams that we have with priority
needs is, is it wrong. So, and
I, and John Ramirez is happy to
speak to that as well, um, if
you have specific questions.
I would just love to add thank
you for these questions, Senator
Campos really hopeful. I think
one of the things that I'm very
optimistic about in terms of the
planning process that I spoke
about earlier is that that act
really calls on us for the first
time to do a better job of
linking planning to
implementation by requiring that
the regions prioritize projects
for funding, state and federal
funding. And so I think, I hope
that that will be helpful for
you all and that we will be
working with those regions,
looking at the existing
infrastructure, dams, um, you
know, municipal distribution
systems, even our river channel
systems and thinking through how
what are the improvements and
what are the priorities for what
needs what needs funding most
critically, um, and so I would
just say that process that we're
working to um create through
implementation of that act. I
think we'll go a long way to
helping New Mexico prioritize
funding for the right
initiatives to address those
concerns and I really appreciate
that.
Mister Chairman, as we continue,
uh, again, how do you advocate
for that and, and specifically
uh uh Adam State engineer
designate as we uh prioritize
and what those projects are
going to look like, um, do you
have the adequate planning? Do
you have the adequate resource,
uh, do you anticipate that there
will be some of these projects
completed, uh and we'll just say
during the next 2 years and then
part of that, as we do move
forward.
Uh, it really ties into
something to me that's also
important. We talked about the
assekis, so have there been
additional dollars coming from
the federal level within the
last few weeks, uh, specifically
for ase as in this case, the
$150 million that is coming into
our state and, and, and how do
you anticipate uh setting up, if
you will, the rulemaking for the
distribution of those dollars.
Um, I'm, I'm glad you're
mentioning federal funding,
Senator, um one of the things
that's super important when
you're asking about what is
critical infrastructure, so
there's a couple of big, big
kickers and one of those is
Elvato, of course, right? And so
one of our priorities at the
agency is to really build our
relationship with our federal
agencies and harness this moment
in time. There's a lot of effort
underway as we speak to secure
inflation reduction Act dollars,
bipartisan infrastructure law
funding for
infrastructure across the state,
we will continue to to do that
and and push on, on our federal
partners to, to prioritize
funding for federal
infrastructure, including some
of the major dams in our systems
that that need to be addressed.
Um, with regards to a funding,
I'm excited to say we've been
working closer than ever with a
a group between Interstate
stream commission and as you all
know, we now have a full bureau.
We just had a couple of staff a
few years ago, but we now have 5
individuals working on a fun.
projects through our community
and ditch infrastructure
program, we are working really
closely with our colleagues at
DFA, which has been very
helpful, um, and then working
with the New Mexico EEA
commission and the SACEA
Association to collectively look
at the need across the state
conduct some assessments of post
wildfire, flooding and
infrastructure impairments that
can then inform prioritizing the
funding that we have moving in
our shop and the funding that's
gone gone to DFA. We
will continue to do that. We're
also working, um, with our
colleagues at Army Corps of
Engineers. They have a federal
program that supports the AI.
I'm excited to say that uh
hopefully at our January
Interstate stream commission
meeting, we will be taking an
agreement with Army Corps that
is reducing the cost share, the
state funding cost share towards
those projects, so the state
funding dollars will go much
further once that agreement is
in place. Um, so continuing that
effort hopefully that answers
your, your question.
So, so, Mr. Chair, if I may
also, as we go along, soil and
water conservation districts are
an integral part of what we deal
with there and, and going back
to the collaboration as we move
forward. And again, uh, directly
to you, um, Madam State engineer
designate in terms of how that
coordination is occurring, uh,
what are you doing to reach out
to ensure that all of the
stakeholders are at the table,
whether it be a symposium.
it be the statewide meetings
and, and how are you gonna work
to help us all be successful
because those water needs are
inordinate, and every corner of
our state, and we want to ensure
that uh that we're gonna be
doing these things in the most
effective manner.
Icky Senator Campos. I, I, I
think it goes back to what um
director Wesley Wright was
saying with the, with the
regional planning efforts that
are underway, that is an
excellent forum to get
stakeholders together and
collect feedback and prioritize
projects. Um, sometimes some of
the recommendations that might
come out of that might be for
something more specific, more,
more specific to a grant
program, more specific to
whatever it is, but that's the
basic, the basic starting point
to get those groups together.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and I have a whole bunch
of other questions, but I'm
gonna hold off on those. I wanna
commend and thank you, uh, Mr.
Romero, for the ongoing efforts
with several of these projects,
uh, and to, to the entire staff
as we move forward, you all have
continuously brought forth, if
you will, a progress for the
well-being of our, our water
system here in New Mexico and uh
do you uh madam state engineer
designate, I want to indicate
today what I'm doing.
It's more of a practice run. I,
I really want you to be a
successful as possible, and I
know that whenever the
confirmation comes forward with
a great help of institutional
knowledge and, and a lot of
energy. Uh, we want to make sure
that all these specifics are
laid out because water
definitely is one of the top, if
not the top issues that we'll be
addressing during the 60-day
session. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, this, I have, uh,
Representative Chaffield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome.
Um,
You know, I've been around water
for a long time.
Uh
Water issues.
I don't know how often the, the
regional plans come up, but I've
been in on writing several of
them.
Mr. John Romero's been one of
the first people I met when I
started doing some of this
stuff. He's been there a long
time.
Uh
I was one of the people that
reached across the aisle and
worked with Melanie Stansbury.
To get the water data.
Because
We will write the regional
plans.
And then I never saw it again,
you know, and.
And uh hopefully we can get a
one central place with
with like data where I can get
on my laptop, go there and get
whatever information I need and,
and we've started to centralize
quite a bit of our
Data in the state like that and
I, I, I really am.
Pushing for you and, and hoping
for you to
Go ahead and get the completion
of the Water Data Act, I think
it's a.
It's a great thing.
Um
The
And I'm, I'm looking at the, at
the presentation and, and the
50-year water plan and you
looking at alternative
administrative.
Alternative administration of
water rights in times of
shortage.
And I just urge you to be
cognizant of the fact.
That the doctrine of prior
appropriation deals with water
shortages.
It says that the first in time,
first in line, so the most
senior rights gets all of their
water.
The 2nd most senior I in you're
the state engineer, you know all
that. But I'm talking to you and
uh the people in this room and
the people.
Uh, so, so we have a.
We have a plan for water
shortage, and that's the
doctrine of prior appropriation.
Understanding
that in some instances,
The right is vested in the
Asacius.
And in some instances it may be
invested in an irrigation
district, in which case,
The various members can
To work amongst themselves.
And uh, so, but I just urge us
to that, that is a good law.
It's uh throughout the, the
West, it's uh been recognized as
one of the best.
Water laws, uh.
I've sat through many pushes for
highest and best use of the.
for sharing, uh, doctor in a
prior corporation is very, very
Important to me.
Um
Uh, that's a beautiful,
beautiful picture. We're talked
about things that we, that we
need to do. I, uh, you know, I,
I look at that picture, I think
I wish
be, but I have a, a profession.
That, uh, kind of messes up your
psyche because also when I look
at it, I see Russian olive.
Uh, sea salt cedar back there in
the background, salt cedar.
with radiance diameter truck
uses 200 gallons of water today,
depending on the availability
and they reach densities of 5000
per acre.
Um
I know the Russian olive is
similar, so one of the sources
of water that we have in New
Mexico is to get rid of these
high consumers of water, uh,
that do not provide much benefit
salt cedar.
Two species use salt cedar.
That's honey bees and nothing
else.
Uh, like
I think
400 species use willows.
So
We're wasting some of our water
in, in uh non-native invasive
vegetation.
And um that's all I have, Mr.
Sheriff. Thank you.
I wish you luck.
All right thank you. We have a
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I also want to thank you for
all the training, conferences
that you've had this year cause
I've, I've tried to go to as
many as I could and I there's so
much to do with water. I mean,
it's overwhelming, but slowly
I'm learning. Um, I wish I had
the background, uh,
representative Chatfield has,
but I do know, um, as far as the
data act position. I'm hoping we
will fund that. I don't see much
in our our our funding sheet,
but um because the data, the
database is important. We have
to know where water is.
and how it's being used. Um, I
think in certain parts of our
state, it's not being used
really wisely, so hopefully we
can, we can look at that,
getting that funded and, and
represent Chapel and I I thought
we put money towards it, but it
didn't end up going to Emer
instead of you. I don't think it
went to the right place or
something. We went somewhere,
not to you, but um and I also
think we need to make sure we're
funding the acts and compact. We
asked them to do these, we, we,
we, we legislate these acts and
compacts, and we need to make
sure they're funded because we
can't just ask them to do it
without funding.
So I think our job is to fund
what's needed and in water, this
affects the whole state,
everyone in the state, so we
have to really have this as a
priority. Um, I don't really
have a question. I think I've
heard from you guys between the
water committee and and
conferences on, on everything.
So thank you for all the work
you're doing and continue to
push because we need this to
get.
Thank you.
I mean I guess.
Thank you, sir. Thank y'all. I
came in late on your discussion,
love of Sarah Campo set you up
for confirmation, uh, I think
it's
It's good you get ahead of this
man designee, uh, had a couple
of questions, so, uh, years ago,
way before you were there, I had
a ranch in Colorado that, uh,
the head gate was closed in
Mexico head gate caused an issue
with the Texas-Colorado Water
Compact. I was gonna sue y'all.
They went ahead and put a
Uh, welded a nut.
The bottom of the head gate, so
they'd always have the cubic
feet across the property I had.
With the compact, but one of the
topics came up back then and I
was trying to look in your
budget, excuse me, in your
budget is the um
The opportunity for
Uh, tell me.
And I know it's hard in certain
areas, uh, do you have anywhere
in your budget that you line out
on that. I, I at that time there
was, I'm gonna say Brian
Gallegos used to work for y'all.
Sad story, he came to Antonito.
met me up for breakfast, and he
says, Sir, is there any way you
can go to your ranch there's a
state rep as a pickup cross
street. That's mine.
And he says, why didn't you tell
us your state rep? because I
don't sue you. It's Colorado
rancher.
But we resolved it, but he was
sort of apprehensive to be in
Colorado to discuss this, but in
the discussions with him.
It had been as easy as if we had
had a meter there to see what
was going into the Osea.
That your web page would be able
to show flow.
And I'm wondering to me, it's
always gonna be about how many
drops of water we're losing or
like represent Chatfield, you
know, thinking about the uh the
salt cedar and how much they
take away, there's a lot of seos
that may not do it
intentionally.
But overuse due to need.
I'm just, I like the idea of
telling me. I told Ryan back
then, I would use capital money
that we get for grow money now
to invest in that because it
doesn't matter if you're in
lower or upper Rio Grande or in
in the Ortiz area, that water
matters.
And, and to have an
accountability of it.
is pretty important. I just
wondered if you had it in your
budget if you guys are looking
at that long term or what your
thoughts are.
That does me.
Mr. Chair, Senator Gallegos,
thank you for that question. Um,
yes, there's, that's actually
located in two places in our
budget. It's in the C2 requests
that I think that's on page. It
was, it was in the slides here.
Um, on, on page 5, the 2nd
bullet. It's 3 million of that
total 6 million for real-time
measurement systems, and then
the second place that it's in
our request is in the ICIP
request for metering and
measurement, 1.5 million.
Thank you for that question, and
thank you for that, and that it
makes you feel better. I was
actually recently in Socorro,
and one of the ranchers there
was complaining because it
Did you get to the Las Cruces,
it's harder and harder to
irrigate.
And I told them that that's
something that I think all
along.
Any of our waterways in New
Mexico, we're gonna need to have
accountability for that.
Earlier than later, so I just
wanna make sure that was uh.
In your
A view of what we need to do.
The last question I had.
is over so I live in Lee County.
Uh, and uh, there's a lot of
people are trying to clean up,
produce water.
Uh, the
I think the cool thing about
that where we're at, uh, got
Carlsbad. The desalinization of
the natural water in the Pecos
is pretty high.
And I'm just wondering, do we
have any guidelines for them. I,
I hear a lot of chatter out
there where they're trying to
clean the water up.
Get it to pure level.
Enough that they can put into
the pickles and, and, and my
thought on that is that Colorado
on the New Mexico, Texas Water
Compact.
It's a pretty heavy load, a
heavy lift.
If we're able to put that water,
send it on in Texas. I really
don't care, because then it's
not ours, it's theirs, but I'm
just wondering how stringent
that is, and if we have any kind
of dialogue going into that
because I know there's a lot of
people that are researching it,
and I've been told to get it
down to 0. Well, in salination.
It doesn't matter. Is it called
natural salization is a high
peak there in Eddy County.
I think we ought to match that.
Like I say, once it's passed our
border comes Texas problem, but
I just wondered if you guys had
any kind of dialogue or thoughts
on that.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Deaygos,
thank you again for that
question. There is a lot of talk
going on in that right now. Um,
and I have some different
thoughts, but I think it might
be better to talk about it
offline if you have any specific
questions that you wanna discuss
on that matter.
Did you want to add anything to
that?
I would just add thank you Mr.
Chair and and Senator Gallegos,
um, I think when, you know, we
started this today talking about
the context, which is the
projections of 25% less water by
2070.
I think that necessarily
requires us to be very creative,
um, and looking at all of the
possible solutions including
various types of reuse and
fundamentally, um, we will have
to learn to conserve, so it's
gonna be in all of the above
kind of solution that well is
what we're looking at, um, and
implementing multiple things at
once to to get there, but
absolutely conservation is gonna
be a part of that, but yeah, how
do we look at those supplies and
use them more creatively or make
them more accessible, um,
within.
in the oil field or whatever,
like I think we need to be
thinking about all the possible
solutions, so I appreciate the
question. Thank you. And thank
you, Chair and final question
I'll give you a card. I'd love
to participate with anything we
can do to resolve that, but we
have waters under Lee County.
They are brackish, not all
filled used they're just
brackish.
So that's an opportunity for us
to pull that up, refine it,
clean it, and use it to fill
that void cause we are gonna
have void.
Yeah. Yeah, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and, and just to, to
mention on that, um, you know,
the governor's 50 year water
action plan again, looks at
calls on us to work on
conservation, work on new
supplies. We are working very
closely and this is part of what
our data Act implementation
initiatives and partnerships
across the natural Resource
agencies in New Mexico Tech with
our colleagues at the New Mexico
Bureau of Geology and Mineral
Resources. I think they have
moving this session of funding
requests for aquifer mapping, we
see that is very critical for
to better understand certain
aquifers in New Mexico are very
well known. There's a lot of
data about them. Others very
little and so investing in that
and that that will be real time
data once we get those
monitoring wells in place will
be able to understand all of our
aw aquifers including brackish
water aquifers much better, so
encourage you all to support
that request if it's moving this
session.
Thank you for that.
Really this is my last one, but
uh just for a thought on that,
the gentleman that do the water
wells or the ranches, they have
a lot of really good historical
data.
They will give you that level
where those are at is instead of
having to reinvent the wheel,
I'd rather use their pay for
instead of poke another hole in
the ground, but with that, I do
yield. Thank you.
We think you of unless we have
a, uh, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thanks for helping
with the uh cheering. We're
running a little ragged to
different places and committees,
but um I just wanted to thank
you, uh, state engineer, and
also Hannah. So good to see you
again. I was telling uh Senator
Shando that we heard this
presentation, most of it, if not
all, at the last Indian Affairs
Committee meeting. Thank you for
that work and all your extra
hard work that you do, you know,
one thing I, I have to say is
that many times we tend to
think.
fairly, uh, when it is the
legislature, when we see staff
bringing in requests for
additional funding when we feel
like, oh my gosh, we thought we
just finished funding, for
example, the water settlement
Indian water settlement. We
thought we were like done
funding that pretty much after
60 years of, of uh working
towards that settlement. It was
finally here, right? And so here
we are again, and we realize
that more funding will be
needed, and so it's incumbent
upon us.
to, to just accept that and know
that if we want to get this
thing done, not only that, but
all these other requests you
have here in your, in your
presentations for water, um,
that we need to think of it
realistically and and do
something about it. Continue to
fund these uh these amounts, you
know, to fund such a large
amount as the state has already
funded and then not proceed to
do the rest doesn't make any
sense. Um, it would be truly a
lost cause to do that, so it
would be good to
continue. But in addition to the
other um things that you
presented other areas of funding
that you fund a request that you
presented at the last meeting,
um, you know, I just uh wanted
to, to say that the engineer's
office has Mr. Chairman, always
been, um, just very, um, you
operate with very meager funds.
Sometimes you have to borrow
from Peter to pay Paul. You have
to take from other funds to fill
in for those other needs that
you have and then you get
criticized.
Because you, you had to take
from other funds, and you come
and ask what next year to to
refill that little pot you had
to empty out, so, um, you know,
we need to ensure that you have
the funding that you need, uh,
water is, as we know, nothing
like it, right? The life source
for all of us in New Mexico.
Thanks for your work. I don't
have any questions, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
sorry I'm late to the dance,
guys.
I've got a couple of questions.
I see my friends out in the
audience, so I would just be
feel terrible if I didn't ask
about the unit.
Give me any progress on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, I'm glad you asked. Um, I
think you all know New Mexico
under the Arizona Water
Settlements Act has received, I
think the balance is over $110
million now in funding for
projects in southwestern New
Mexico that support the water
demands of that 4 county region,
uh, under House Bill 200, which
passed in 2021, we were tasked
with working with water trusts
board, um.
to set up a process by which
they would vet projects to
recommend to the commission to
Interstate stream commission for
funding with that pot of money,
um, I'm pleased to say that this
year we really stood up a
process that included
significant community engagement
in that part of the state, we
held 4 listening sessions in
person in the four counties in
southwest New Mexico over the
summer gathered input that
informed a pilot funding cycle
is what we're calling it, uh,
that was a
approved by Interstate Stream
Commission, the policy for that
pilot cycle.
A couple of months ago, uh,
we're now working with Water
Trust board to set up the
application process for that
pilot cycle. The pilot cycle is
intended to fund uh planning and
design only with the idea that
there would be a 2025 funding
cycle that could fund a much
broader range of projects,
including construction, so it's,
it's been good to see that
effort moving or anxious and
committed to get that funding
available and on the ground for
those communities in in South.
US New Mexico. Happy to continue
to provide you all updates on
that. We also just uh we're
required by statute to provide a
report to the legislature every
year that just got finalized
recently, so if some of you
would like to see that report,
happy to provide more
information through that report.
Thanks for the question, chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I
appreciate that.
That is one of the deals that
when I first came in the
legislature that
We had a lot of discussion on.
And I'm glad that something's
gonna finally be used out of
that.
Uh
Water rust port.
We have
How, how much backlog have we
got on that now? I know that we
had more
I, I don't remember how you
exactly say that process, but we
have
We had applications for that,
and we had some that was deemed
We didn't fund everything that
we had that we was OK, is what
I'm trying to say.
So, kind of how much backlog is
there in that still?
You know, just off the top of
your head.
And, and it's, if you don't,
that's fine.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um, we
were just throwing some numbers
around here. I'm not exactly
sure, but I do know that there's
at least $300 million worth of
backlog worth of projects. I
think that number's probably
low. There's a, there's a lot of
need and the expansion of both
water and wastewater projects
for utilization in that fund is
really critical and such a huge
um huge benefit for the state,
but that does mean that they'll
be even more need for that, for
that water trust board funding.
Thank you.
And that, and Mr. Chair, and,
and I think
Elizabeth, that was a
One time deal that we put money
in there.
Um, we put money both in there
and, and we also put 50 million
in the, in the trust fund trying
to
To increase funding on that too,
uh, so that with future funding.
Um
So we could stand some more
money in there if it just
happened to be available.
To, to do those projects.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, yes,
we could. Thank you.
The other thing that I worry
about a lot.
Have you got enough money to
finish up the lawsuit.
Uh
With the Supreme Court in Texas,
New Mexico.
Colorado
Rio brand lawsuit.
You want to answer?
Mr. Chair, OK, I'll pass that
one to,,
thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, and we also have OSC
general counsel, not checkers
and ISU general coach to Lisa
Hen in the audience. You'll
notice in our budget request of
$5 million special appropriation
request, uh, that is intended to
position us well for whatever
may be coming at us in that
litigation, as you all may know,
we are headed to uh DC in
December for court-ordered
mediation. Um, I would say
we have an incredible team
pulled together for New Mexico
between us, uh, the New Mexico
Department of Justice, our
technical and legal staff. I
think we are very well
positioned in that case. I think
you all know we reached
settlement across the three
states. So we're, we're, uh,
still locked up together with
our colleagues in Texas and
Colorado, um, the issue is
resolving issues with the United
States. We hope to be able to do
that. We hope that
case can be resolved as
expeditiously as possible. I
would prefer to have that
funding be used to implement
initiatives to support
communities in the lower Rio
Grande. Uh, so hopefully we'll
get there, but we did include
the $5 million ask in this
year's budget so that we can be
prepared in the case that we
need to go to trial and I'll
look to the staff attorneys if
they want to add anything to
that answer.
And, and Mr. Chair, and
Where's EIB on this deal?
That
So, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Woods, one of the things that,
that we are prioritizing at the
agency is engagement with
stakeholders in the lower Rio
Grande. We just came back from a
very productive meeting on
Friday last week with all of the
major water users, including
Elephant Butte Irrigation
Irrigation District, the pean
growers, the rogue croppers as
well as the city of Las Vegas
NMSU, um, it is imperative that
we work collectively to
implement solutions down there.
and there's very goodwill across
those parties to do that, um.
Elephant Butte Irrigation
District as a federal project is
still currently aligned with uh
uh El Paso number one and the
US, but I don't know where this
will land heading into the next
several months, and so I don't
know if there's anything else
that you all wanna add to that.
What I'm pleased about and what
I'm excited about is when the US
Supreme Court ruled in the US's
favor in June. I was very
concerned that everyone would
just walk back into their
positions.
And we be at a standstill in
terms of implementing real
solutions in the ground. You
all, this legislator allocated
significant funding in the 2023
legislative session, including a
large special appropriation to
support the solutions on the
ground, and I'm anxious to move
those forward, um, and so the
fact that we are continuing to
have dialogue across all of the
users, um, and having this
stakeholder group take shape to
help direct that funding in the
most productive way possible. I
find very encouraging.
So we're gonna continue that
effort in parallel to the
litigation track with the hope
that we resolve that litigation
as expeditiously as possible.
Well, I think, I think, Mr.
Chair, I'm gonna pull away from
that line of questioning. I
don't want to drive wedges.
And I could very well do that
with my next question, so I'm
gonna pull away from that.
I noticed you're asking for some
money for the middle Rio Grande.
Um
I, uh,
So how, how is the
Middle real great.
cultivation this controversial.
District.
How are they aligned on this
deal?
You're asking for
A half a million dollars.
For, uh, maintaining compliance
with the Rio Grande Compact.
Including monitoring
enforcement.
So
What part of the enforcement are
they doing? What part of the
enforcement are you doing?
And is there a difference?
In the tooth.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Woods for that question.
You know, in our comments, we
said we're really looking at
this system holistically, and
that is absolutely imperative,
so part of the solution in the
lower Rio Grande is ensuring
that we get water to Elephant
Butte. We have been working very
actively with the full range of
partners in the middle valley to
make that possible, including a
lot of partnerships with our
federal, uh, agencies including
reclamation has numerous funding
announcements that have already
come up. A couple of
Additional funding announcements
coming in the next couple of
weeks related to to channel work
in the middle Rio Grande.
Um, as far as Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District goes,
Interstate stream Commission
actually entered into a
cooperative agreement with them
in March, with the idea that we
could have a little bit more
agility and in dealing with both
habitat and channel conveyance
issues, we will continue to
engage heavily with the federal
initiatives that reclamation is
carrying out, but we want to be
able to also address other river
reaches that are not part of
those, um, initiatives, looking
at them.
again all holistically, I would
say we're working really well
with Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District and and
taking on those challenges and
we are going to need to be
thoughtful about depletions
management in the middle valley
and across the state, and this
goes to what I was saying
earlier about, um, needing to
conserve and so I think having
the additional staff capacity at
the office of the state engineer
is gonna be a critical component
of that. We didn't highlight in
our comments because this
presentation is about budget.
We will also be advancing an
office of the state Engineer
enforcement bill, this
legislative session to give
Office of the State in general a
bit more teeth in enforcement
across the state, the
representative Chatfield, he's,
he's gone a point about prior
appropriation. Um, that is
exactly right. We have a
shortage sharing system in New
Mexico. It is called prior
appropriation, but in order to
do that and do that well, Office
of the State Engineer is gonna
need staff capacity for
enforcement and the right
regulatory.
teeth, which is what the bill
hopes to address, um, and so,
Given, as I said earlier, all of
the challenges that we're facing
in the Middle Valley, it is
gonna be really critical that we
have the right staff capacity to
engage in that arm while we are
also working collaborative,
collaboratively with our
partners like Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District on channel
projects and also on following
we have two different following
initiatives in place with them
that they're continuing to
advance and all that, uh, state
engineer Anderson maybe add to
that answer if you'd like to.
Mr. Chair, Senator, what um,
what I think that that, I think
you really answered that
completely. That was great. Um,
and it really ties together a
lot of the things that we're
working on right now, the
enforcement bill is really
critical. The um the need to be
able to create programs where we
can find reduce depletion
reductions and conservation in
general, but the, the um the
programs that we're putting in
place right now and the metering
is is really what's needed. So I
think stakeholder engagement is
key. Thank you.
But
I've got one other question.
Uh, a burning question in my
eyes, Mr. Chair.
And
If, if we have a groundwater.
Well
That has been
for irrigation.
And we decide to change use, put
it in commercial.
It's an automatically, the
pumping.
is reduced
Because we don't have the, the
uh the loss of water.
To the plant.
The consumptive use.
So if, if there's no protest in
a deal like that, and there's no
impairment.
Or do we have to prove
impairment?
If there's no impairment, no, no
protest, how long would it take?
Something like that.
To be approved.
I'll go ahead and pass that one
to our general counsel not
checkers, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, so this
The statutory factors the state
has to look at are impairment,
as you stated, whether it's a
water right in good standing,
and then whether the application
be contrary to conservation of
water within the state or public
welfare of the state.
And in the example that you
provided where there's no change
in place of use.
Um, the impairment, you're,
you're correct, would, would,
would not occur. Uh, if it was
already an established water
rights. So the only reasons why
that application wouldn't be
able to go through quite quickly
would be if there's an issue
with conservation of water
within the state, which is a
pretty
Yeah, doesn't doesn't apply,
yeah, it doesn't apply in, in,
in, in a lot of circumstances.
And uh public water, public
welfare of the state, but I, I
think typically, when we see
those applications, they move
very fast, if there's no
protests, uh, you know, our, our
staff checks everything out,
make sure the water rates in
good standing and, and those
are, I'd say among the very
fastest applications that go
through. OK. OK, well, I, I, I
would assume that if there's no
impairment, no protest that it
could.
it happen pretty quickly.
Um
That, that was my main.
thing that I had going, uh, just
a quick question, and I know you
don't know the answer, but
Mr. Chair
Surely all that flooding.
Down there and and uh Roswell in
that country put water.
Over there in Bradley Dam.
It would tell me how much.
bunch.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senators, I
don't have that exact number,
but I can tell you that we
turned our well filled off. Um,
and also, and I had mentioned
this a little bit earlier, I
really think we need to be
creative and thinking through in
future events like that. How are
we capturing that water using it
to recharge our aquifers and
being strategic as we're seeing
prolonged periods of drought and
then intense storm events in in
short succession, right? So I
think there's a lot of thinking
across the state right now about
stormwater management and how to
harness that.
effectively. But that's, that's
why we built the dams to start
with.
So that we can hold that water
back in those huge events, uh,
but thank you for that. And I
did hear from someone at at
Logan that the Ute Reservoir was
within 2 ft of overflow also.
So we've, we've done a lot of
good.
Uh, in the last month as far as
Holding up water.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Representative Chapfield for
2nd time.
OK.
Hm
Thank you. Thank you for
allowing a second bite. I have a
question that was asked to me
the other day and I'm just going
to pass it along and let y'all
talk to it.
Uh
Whenever you pump agricultural
water and you run it down a
canal, there's a certain amount
of recharge that, that is
involved.
And if you transfer that water
over to industrial use, do you
forfeit some of the
feet of water that you own, uh,
it goes from agricultural use.
And you say you lease that.
Water rights for industrial use
for
2 years or something like that.
Can you lease the full acre feet
that you own agriculturally, or
is there a reduction
automatically because of the
change of use.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Chatfield, I'll go ahead and
pass that one over to not to,
Mr. Chair Representative, um, so
I, I would not call it forfeit
just cause that's a term of art
in, in water, but you would only
be able to lease what we
consider to be the consumptive
use portion of the water, so
those losses, uh, that occur in
the ditch that would come off
the amount that could be leased
to another purpose.
And Mr. Chair.
What would be the portion of the
consumptive use portion of that
water, but, or what's, what's
left for me?
Uh, to lease it to industrial
use, um,
Mr. Chair's representative, that
varies depending on the, on the,
uh, part of the state you're in,
typically in adjudications that
those numbers will be a set
after we apply uh the scientific
methods to determine how much
water the plants are actually
consuming. That's the
consumptive irrigation
requirement. And once that gets
set by by law for each um for,
for each district. That, that's,
that's what
you're allowed to transfer, um,
in areas where adjudications are
not completed. We've often
administratively through
guidelines or permits, uh, set
those based on the best
available science. So Mr. Chair,
once the uh what's, what's the
lease is over with.
And it comes back to me for a
use.
Uh, it returns to its original
value.
That's correct, Your Honor. Uh,
excuse me, uh, I've been in
court too much. That's correct,
representative
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
allowing me two bites at that
apple, right, OK, uh, Senator
Munoz.
We're gonna share a mic, I
guess. Let me ask you on the, on
the Indian water rights
settlement, how much more
obligation do we need to put to
fully make our federal match.
Or what percentage is that?
I mean, we've been,
we've been yeah, thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so
there are 6 settlements moving
in Congress right now. uh uh
Senator Rodriguez talked earlier
about like, did we, didn't we
already fund these, um, these
are additional settlements, um,
and I want to emphasize these
settlements are intended to
address issues amongst tribal
and non-tribal entities,
typically the state cost share
goes to the non-tribal entities,
the federal cost, I think that
the the dollar amount associated
with those
moving in Congress is around 240
million of state cost share. So
this would get us a good chunk
of the way there that state cost
share if all 6 of those were to
move, leverages over $3 billion
in additional federal funding
for New Mexico.
OK. Let, let me ask you cause
this came up, I think it came up
yesterday with the DAs or
someone, you know, you have
these marijuana farms.
And they have to have commercial
water rights.
Let's use the one in fans, for
example, right?
They don't have enough water to
produce that. How, how come you
guys have not cut them off of
water.
Uh, in the marijuana industry,
and then you go across the
street and the guy has a right
to sell water and, and he's
going through a 6 month hearing,
but meanwhile, this guy is
illegally.
Using water and illegally using
a lot of water.
How come you guys have not
stepped up to, to get rid of the
illegal use. I'll let my
colleagues at the office of the
state engineer comment on this,
um, but I think, you know,
cannabis applications have been
a heavy lift for the agency with
a lot of extra work, our teams
worked really closely with uh
RLD.
Um, but, but also it, it really
comes down to enforcement, um,
and so that's where our asks
related to additional capacity
on enforcement are critical and
the enforcement bill that I just
mentioned earlier, but yeah,
I'll I'll let us, uh, OSC
general counsel that checker
speak to that. Yeah, uh,
Senator, that with that with
respect to that, uh, Mr. Chair,
with respect to that specific
operation, we did when we were
alerted to the illegal water
use. We did go out. We've, we've
taken all of the regulatory
measures we can take to prevent
water use.
But to the extent they're bad
actors, we've referred them to
RLD to revoke the entire
cannabis license, but all we can
do really at this point, if
somebody is illegally using
water to say don't use more
water, or else you won't be able
to use more water.
And that doesn't really get it,
someone who's an illegal water
user. So what we're going to be
asking for this legislative
session and what we're going to
be talking about next week with
the interim Water Natural
Resource Committee is real
substantial monetary fines to
cut those people off it, you
know, it, it, it's that, at that
level to hit them at that level,
we don't have that capability
right now. All we can say is
we'll stop using water or else
you can't use water.
Yeah. Well, well, but you're
doing that to other people.
You're, you're stopping them
from someone selling water.
And saying you can't sell any
water until we have a hearing.
But you're saying the marijuana
guys can just do whatever they
want.
And you don't have the law to do
that.
That's, that's.
Two different
Things and you have the
enforcement to stop if someone
objects to the water.
Stop them from doing that.
Mr. Senator, I don't, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I don't think we're,
we're not doing anything. We, we
have, we have ordered.
Illegal users to stop using
water and we will, we will do
that when the law requires that.
When somebody wants to change a
water right and needs to go
through a hearing process. They,
they need to go through that
hearing process, but I don't, I
don't want to leave the
committee with the impression
that we're allowing illegal
water use. We just don't have
the tools to determine that we'd
like to have. But under the law,
if you're going to have a
marijuana farm, you have to, you
can't use just well, you have to
switch to commercial. So when
that's what should have
happened, irregardless, you
could have stopped them.
is shaking their head behind
you. So you have it in certain
instances, and you don't want to
use it in other is what I'm kind
of getting.
Um, Mr. Chair, I
And I'm not sure I I I fully
understand that if, if somebody
comes in with an application to
come into compliance where to,
to convert a water rate to
commercial purpose of use so
they can come into compliance.
We're, we will, we want that to
happen. We want the water used
to be, to be in compliance with
law. So I'm, I, I'm not, I may
be misunderstanding what your
question is. I don't think we're
trying to stop people from, from
using water. We want to, uh, we
want to get them in compliance
with the law. So you may want to
take a seat. So if, if our
be approves of marijuana
license.
And you may want to sit up here
at the mic because I mean you're
probably answer the questions.
Or you may want to run out of
the room
would be an option for you right
now, um.
So if RLB comes in and says,
This marijuana farm wants to
open. He checked the boxes,
right, and he doesn't have a
commercial will to do that.
And RLB.
Calls you and says, is that a
commercial well? and you say,
no, that should stop the
process. Yes, Your Honor.
No, I'm not.
They're calling you speaker
yesterday. They called me queen
one day
um.
You can stop the process. So why
did that and it's an illegal
operation, you do not have the
authority to say.
You cannot pump water, period.
Stop immediately call the power
company and say,
They're not authorized to pump
this water.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we, we do have
the authority to, to, to
Take whatever steps we need to
do to stop someone from pumping
water illegally. So you already
have the authority, but why
hasn't that happened in, in that
case and stancia or, I mean, I
don't know what the, the case
was in in Farmington, but I know
the cases they don't have the
water. There's somebody else
dying to get up here, so I'll
let him,
you know.
So, so it's a lengthy process to
get an injunction to actually
get us to be able to compel the
power company to cut somebody's
water off. We've begun the
The legal process to do that to
get people, but that's not an
overnight process for us. If
somebody is illegally using
water, they get it, they get a
day in court before we're
allowed to.
You know
Compel a power company to cut
them off. But that, that is
something we have. Uh, we just
think of monetary penalty would
be uh
A really effective deterrent in
addition to that. But if it's
illegal, do you think you're
really gonna recoup the monetary
penalty.
It can, it can, uh, involve
assets being attached. Most
people don't want large legal
judgments against them, even if
they're not going to voluntarily
pay.
Yeah, but if they're leasing the
asset and doing the operation,
they don't really care. I mean,
you're you're dealing with
people that are doing working
illegally.
They're basically a 24 hours a
day to outsmart you guys to know
what the law was so they don't
lose anything. It, it is a cat
and mouse game. Uh, we, we want
all the tools we can get. I, I
agree with you. Sometimes when
you're dealing with bad actors,
it's, it's that much harder.
Then across the road, if someone
wants to sell water, then you,
you completely stop that sale of
water and, and you say we're not
going to do it until we have a
hearing or we get approval, but
you can't stop anything illegal.
Like I said, we are taking the
legal steps to stop the illegal
use through compulsion. That
doesn't happen overnight.
And and why is the guy that's
doing it legally doesn't have a
quicker process than the guy
that's doing it illegally. Uh,
Mister Chair, we're actually,
uh, working on regulations to
make that faster for those guys.
I agree that it's too slow for
somebody who wants to do it
legally right now. And that's,
that's something that we would,
we very much are looking at all
the ways we can to expedite
that.
And, and how long will that
take? The regulations?
Uh, we are, uh, going to be
vetting those regulations
informally with stakeholders in
the next several weeks. Uh, we
could go to promulgation as
early as uh.
Uh, probably right after the
legislative session.
It's still a long time.
It's, it's, it's, it is a long
time. It's longer than, than
certainly those people who want
to do the process the right way,
I feel it should take. We're,
we're doing what we can.
And and in the 100, I'm just
assuming you guys are 100 years
old. In the 100 here you your
history, you've never done that
to promulgate rules to expedite
things to come into compliance
quicker than people in
noncompliance.
We have 100 years old, so Mr. uh
Mr. Chair, uh, we have seen in
the past decade, a much greater
need for, for this expediting
process because the hearing
process, uh, for contested
applications has gotten a lot
slower and more recently and
that you can probably blame on
people like me on lawyers for
making those hearings slower
than they were 30 years ago, 40
years ago. Uh, when I talked to
lawyers who were practicing
then, they said, you're in and
out of those hearings in a
couple of months, and now it's a
couple of
years. And so those things have
changed and that is his mandated
the need for us to update the
regulations. We're building this
economic
Package across the state are
looking at it, right? Water is a
key issue.
And, and if we can't get to
water access, and you're telling
us it takes years.
You might just throw up our
hands and leave because it's
whoever wants to come is not
gonna wait 3 years to get.
Water.
And, and so they'll just, like I
said, Senator Wood said they'll
just steal it, I mean.
We have ditch riders in areas
that monitor ditches when you
turn on water and you can only
turn on when the dishrizer is
there, but
I, I mean, you're gonna have to
figure out how you're gonna get
these things done quicker.
A lot quicker.
Senator, we agree completely. I,
I have no disagreement with
anything you're saying there. I
mean, if we, if we may produce
rural waters or oil and
injection oil, water, or
something, you guys are gonna be
involved in and so we can't
wait.
And if someone wants to sell
water, and they sell produce
water each and every day.
And someone's doing it
illegally, you can't stop the
illegal person, but you stop the
legal person, which is
Not very fair. And, and so I, I
don't, you guys are gonna have
to figure that out. I mean, it's
happening in other places where,
you know, they're allowed to
sell the water and you guys are
holding them up. Meanwhile, the
guy across the street can steal
everything he wants and and have
an illegal growth farming, I
mean, it's a three-pronged
approach and you and RLD and
every and the courts should all
have the authority to shut them
down immediately when it's
illegal.
But the good guys.
You're forcing him to be the bad
guys.
And the more you don't comply,
the longer you take is they'll
figure out a way to do it
illegally.
And that's what's happening over
there and and so you guys are
gonna have to have like a
shorter timeline as we look
through your budget to, I want
to see that.
Before we, before we get the
session with that shortened
timeline is gonna work. How many
cases you have backed up, how
long they've been sitting there,
how we're gonna make this
functional.
As if we have
Somebody who wants to move into
economic development in
Estancia, and you guys said, oh,
it's 3 years before we're gonna
promulgate this rule before we
can get you the amount of
commercial water for a data
center or a
Facebook Center.
They're gone.
We've lost an opportunity, an
opportunities getting tighter
and tighter with the workforce
and so.
You don't want to be the one
that gets the repercussions
because we
I know you're a lawyer, but you
know, Mr. Senator, I mean I'll
let the er speak, but we agree
completely and that's why we've
been working on these
regulations very hard and
actually I'm, I'm really glad
you brought this issue up
because it is an important
issue. It wasn't central to our
budget requests, but we're happy
to talk to you more before the
session about what we're doing
to shorten those time frames for
the people who are trying to do
things the right way. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, the question I had was
on the Indian water rights, but
I think you answered that
question from Senator so
thank you. I don't think I have
anybody else, so.
committee with questions. So
thank you both for your
presentation. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Well, that's fine with me if you
have nothing. Have a nice day,
uh, you got the airplane
purchased and how long does it
take to buy a helicopter and
We're ready to start when you
want to stay in that seat.
That's, that's if you want an
increase in your budget. If you
want to get in the left seat,
that's a decreased seat.
No.
You're ready when you are.
Thank you. Whoa, thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee members. My
name is Robert Gette. I'm the
cabinet secretary of the General
Services Division, and I
appreciate you allowing me to
come in front of you this
morning. So as you can see your
Does everyone have a copy of my
presentation first. Also it's
gonna be up there, as you can
feel it's 5 slides.
So go to the first slide. Thank
you.
This is what we're asking for
for next year. Um, two caveats.
We reverted last year 0.3%,
about $57,000.
The general fund is about 12% of
our total budget, the general
fund base increase we're asking
for is about 1.9% of that
budget.
In our 200 categories includes
26 per positions at FMD has
filled for two years, changing
them to permit positions. These
are for staffing for the 7 new
buildings that we have.
Accounting for increased pay
costs that were not budgeted FY
25, such as the 3% increase.
This is where the general funds
we received are used, which are
primarily for facilities
management. And you can see
that.
On this is about $4 million. A
little caveat, last January 1st
in 2024, we were allocated 320
FTEs, 68 vacancies, and 21%.
Last time it was in front of
you. Now, we have 331 FTEs as
November 5th, 53% vacancies and
only a 16%. So we are still in
our positions, our percentage is
lower with greater FTEs.
In our 300 category, we're
asking for a 4.1% increase, not
from the general fund for our
new workers' complement. If you
guys can move out of the room so
we can, they won't talk water.
There's a water fountain
outside.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In our
300, we're asking for a 4.1%
increase for new workers'
compensation TPA which started
July 1st of this year.
No physicians were eliminated.
They were reallocated within the
agency.
In our 400 category, we're
asking for 34, 35.4% increase.
This includes a 32 million
budget authority increase for
the public liability fund based
upon the last few years increase
of claims costs and to prevent
further compounding of the fund
deficits. This why didn't we
only discuss our basic budget
request. It does not show the
special preparations requested
of $50 million for the public
liability fund. We originally
asked for 72, um.
Hopefully, we're granted the $50
million.
Next slide.
This just breaks down our funds
for the entire GST budget.
This is in the pie chart for
each percentage. Only two
programs at GSD do not use
enterprise funds, that is
facilities management, and a
portion of the aviation um
program.
Also, we have a slide of our
revenues collected by GST for
each fund for FY 24. This was
verified from our GST audit and
for the FY 26 budget authorizing
GSD is requested for each fund.
We, we've not been living out of
our revenue outside of more what
we needed. We are increasing
slightly requests to keep up
with increasing cost.
Where we see the revenue is not
keeping up with their budget
requests such as transportation,
we have implemented a $5 month
fee increase the fiscal year to
close the gap. I think that was
the first fee increase around 5
years of that.
We have discussed the liability
funding, you can see that's
where our greatest gap in risk
exists. The expense for the
liability fund in FY 24 was
around $129 million which added
approximately $25 million to the
fund deficit. Next slide.
Public liability fund.
What we've done as you can see
by this.
We're working on, we're working
with agencies more. We are,
we're trying to close the pay as
we go method. Traditionally,
agencies have been able to cover
clean cost per FI year solely
from fees collected in that
fiscal year. More recently,
causes have arisen inwards have
been larger. But once would have
been considered a shock loss
word is now more common. The pay
as you go model is no longer
working for the fun and more
traditional methodology used for
underwriting by reserve and
should be utilized by the fund.
Last year, we collected around
49.6 million and we paid out
$66.7 million.
GST has been working with DFA
and LSC lysts to identify
potential other funds that we
could use to reduce the deficit
out of our budget.
GST is changing methodology from
pay as you go to more recognized
industry standards of reserve
and premium increases to
customers will be raised upon
their experience and other
factors, but will also take in
account the size and ability of
the customer.
This will be done in a 3-year
phase, not to cause shock to any
budgets. RMD has created new
programs and engaged customers
at the in the beginning.
community outreach and training,
customer integration and
litigation process, posted on
that reviews and analysis more
aggressively review of cases for
litigation. If someone hasn't
been in court for the last 10
years, I only recommend
settlements. We're no longer
using them, and that is a true
case of what I saw when we took
over.
And we also raised the fees I
know one wants to hear this for
attorneys, but this has allowed
us to get other law firms who
have never worked with the state
before, in a deeper pool to look
at this.
Next.
These are some of our
highlights, um,
Of what we've done this last
fiscal year capital outlay, the
state claim, as you know, you
gave me money to buy another
state plane. It is working. The
older state claim mandatory by
FCC maintenance, that should be
in operation around March. So
the money you've given us, we're
spending, and I appreciate that
and I wanted to, that was one of
the big things you gave us.
Of our state printing for anyone
who's listening or anyone here,
it's
The money you gave us last year
we've upgraded what we can do.
And they do a great job.
Everything you have in front of
you is from state printing, and
please use us as a resource for
that.
Excellent.
And these are just some of our
bigger accomplishments. I'm not
going to read off if anyone has
specific questions.
So that's my presentation.
Thanks, Joe.
Mr. Chair, who I have beside me
is Jeanette Chavez. She's the
head of my risk management, so
I, I assume most of the
questions will be aimed towards
that.
Questions from committee
members.
woods.
OK. Thank you for your report.
Um, a couple of things.
How are we doing on the
veteran's home down in Tier C.
And it will correct me if Mr.
Chair, Senator, to my knowledge,
we have given over to the
veterans home to
And
Anna, go ahead.
Mr. Cha, Senator Woods, uh, we
have completed the Veterans'
homes and we have turned them
over to DOH. DOH is now
responsible for maintaining
them.
And so,
We're done down there. We've got
the
The new old building.
Functional again.
And we've got the new stuff
built.
And
OK. Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, so
we have the annex that is fully
functional. We have the small
homes which are fully functional
and right now we are uh
Figuring out what to do with the
old main. So in the meantime,
uh, we are getting an A&E on
board in order to do an analysis
of what the possibilities are
for the old veterans home.
The main facility.
So that may still be used.
Well, never mind. You, you're
saying possibilities. All right.
I understand we, we did
something in, in Clayton, so.
We're kind of squared up there.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, we are
official owners of the new
prison in Clayton and that
transaction was completed last
week.
Great.
Makes my life simpler.
Thank you.
They have a room for you I've
got a place to stay up there.
Uh
I'm a little concerned about
your vehicle purchases, um.
Your
F-150 lightnings, I heard that
they've quit.
Manufacturing those.
But I guess we've got ours
bought, so we're OK.
Mr. Cheer Underwoods, I would
say yes, sir, specially.
Good.
OK.
Well, um,
I really don't have any more
questions. I, I'm
I've I've chewed on you guys
long enough, so.
Uh, you know, my other question,
what it was going to be, but uh
it was transferred to another
agency, so
So I don't have to worry about
that. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Let me, uh, I, I.
There's a state vehicle in front
of us yesterday. It must have
been the lightning cause it
passed us in the 15 mile an hour
zone doing 35.
But I wonder who's GPS tracker
is gonna go off and they're
gonna get written up for that.
It did say EC EC ECB uh on the
way by, so be aware of that, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, on that, um, any
of those violations go to my
assistant, so, and it is
standard of how much they go
over for how fast and we take
that very seriously, the first
offense, they have to go back to
the driver's training the
eight-hour course, which
It's not fun.
Yeah, I'm, I'm just making
downtown Santa Fe, so that one
should really pop.
Um, I, I mean, if we're gonna go
to electric vehicles, right?
Why are we buying Ford
Lightnings at $77,000 a piece
versus a gas truck at $35,000
apiece.
When
Common sense tells us.
Maybe they should buy a car.
And use the car and use gas
trucks, I mean.
Um, Mr. Chair, so we are not
just buying um uh
I, right, we're buying hybrids,
some electric vehicles, some
SUVs were trying to be as
prudent with our, um, money as
possible. So right now with the
appropriation that we received,
we're um purchased roughly 20
vehicles to include trucks,
hybrids, and SUVs.
For lightnings are almost the
highest cost vehicle in the, in
the Ford truck fleet.
I understand that the executive
has ordered you to buy electric
vehicles, but why aren't we
buying?
Gas trucks and electric cars in
telling tough stuff. If you
don't have a shovel, you're not
hauling dirt, you don't need a
pickup truck.
Um, Mr. Chair, so the majority
of our um vehicles are uh
hybrids and SUVs. We only have
just a very few, like maybe 4 or
5 that are um.
Or lightnings.
Because if they're broke down on
the road, I'm not stopping.
That's your own damn fault and
tell them to call Anna.
Let's get into the liability
issue.
Let me go to healthcare for the
GSD for state employees for the
percentage that state employees
have to pay.
I mean, we didn't get a rate
high enough, and we knew that.
You knew that.
How are we gonna
get the non-state employee
portion.
Cities, counties, cause it was a
mess last time we did that.
Are you billing them for the,
the shortfall.
That we're currently
experiencing, or did you just do
the rate increase and not
include the shortfall.
Mr. Chair, last year before
transfer July 1st, it was a 10%
increase for the LPBs as state
employees. Um, what they're
doing in the future, I cannot
answer a secretary or me could
answer that. But before it moved
over, we did the 10% across the
board to increase that gap
center. So, so John, I forgot
they made that transfer.
So get her in here because I
don't mind paying for state
employees.
On our side, that the one bowl
we roll that has insurance, that
guy should be on his own, and
the cities and the counties
should pay their cost share.
You invoice them the last time
and they threw a fit and we came
back and picked it up. Lessons
learned.
That cities and counties should
not be subsidized on their
health care by us, that there's,
that there's a cost to them even
though under a state plan, they
threatened to leave the last
time.
And
You know, at this point, go
ahead and leave. We won't have
to backfill that. We won't have
to subsidize you in other areas
you needed to build those into
your budgets and, and fix those,
so.
That was the short answer.
Uh, let's talk about
The liability in your 400.
Have you guys looked at
legislation to start capping
this.
I mean, we went from
Roughly
10 to 15 a year to now, you
know, 32, and now you're looking
at 124 million for the next
year. I mean one claiming.
I forget the acronym, I'll say
the wrong one, but in public
schools.
was $40 million.
They negotiated that down.
11.
And that wasn't any.
sexual murder, death, any?
Anything that was really
egregious.
But was egregious cause I went
to court, but, but it wasn't.
That life threatening.
I mean, this is gonna be the fun
that's really gonna go from
$300 million.
In the next couple of years, and
then hopefully there's no
lawyers in here because it'll
probably shoot at me. But we're
gonna have to figure out how to
cap this.
And how to set a claim. I, I
personally would, you know, a
person's life is worth
something.
dollar value, but the older you
get, the less you're worth.
Right?
How have you looked at capping
any of this.
I did have this conversation
with the executive.
The governor, that this one will
break the state.
And we're gonna have to start
looking at it.
The civil rights claims, all the
claims, how are we gonna start
looking at capping this and have
you looked at that, Mr.
Chairman, we have not looked at
a cap. Last year in the 30 day
session, there were a few,
couple bills where there were
different caps that we worked
with the elected officials who
were proposing that. I'm
assuming in the 60 day session,
there will be a few of those
bills to at this moment, no
one's approached me on those
bills yet, um, and I agree with
you, Mr. Cha.
that these are things we have to
look at. Last year was the first
time in the history of this
fund, that what we collected, we
exceeded. And as we've talked
about many times in this
committee, I've been in front of
you. When someone files a
lawsuit files a lawsuit, sorry.
We don't know when the court's
going to hear it and when that
judgment's gonna come out. So
it's not linear. We could have
100 cases in 10 years, 10 of
them, and they make up the bulk
of the cost. That's why we've
tried to work with state
agencies where
going to charge those agencies
who we pay out the most, not at
once, because this will be a
short cause, they're gonna pay
more into this fund. This fund
by statute, the executive
agencies have to be a part of.
The LPBs and others do not have
to be in it, um, but
Myself and Miss Chavez, about a
month ago we sat there with UNMH
this is one of our bigger
partners in this fund, what our
expectations in the future are
going to be, and some things
we're going to expect that have
not been expected, but sorry,
the short answer is we have not
looked at a cap yet. um, Mr.
Chairman.
Maybe um.
We need to probably talk,
discuss that with the exec and
figure out, um, cause we're
gonna have to cap this.
There's no way we can
Pay that dollar amount out at
that rate and expect budget
cuts, not to come because it has
to come from somewhere, so, uh,
I mean, what is the number one
cause for the lawsuits. What's
the number one suit that comes
across is there like a list of.
David Letterman's top 10
reasons.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair. Um,
There's not really one top
lawsuit type that we have, we're
seeing a surge in employment
claims. Civil rights is huge.
We've paid quite a bit in civil
rights, and we're trying our
best to track that now to kind
of figure out how much we paid 2
years ago versus right now, um,
but those are our biggest
vendors right now, also medical
malpractice.
In in the medical malpractice,
it's my understanding that if
they get a claim and and they
get a settlement, that the
attorneys are telling that you
want a full 100 say the person
becomes disabled.
The attorneys are wanting the
full payment immediately so they
can get all their money up
front.
And then the patient is
Getting their share.
Which won't last him over time.
And and so, uh, have you looked
at capping where attorneys' fees
are not the whole entire amount
can't be paid when a person is
disabled that they get paid
overtime, so they.
don't eat it all up.
Mr. Chair, that's a very good
point. Um, we don't have any
control over what happens to the
money once it gets to the
attorney who represents the
plaintiff.
And we only settle the claims at
one time. So when we get a
release, when we have gone
through the investigations and
negotiations, then we'll settle
the claim that we only pay once.
So what happens to that money
when it gets to the attorney's
trust fund, we have no control
over.
In in the civil rights claims, I
mean, I don't remember what year
we did that. I'm trying to
think, was it pre 202021 I think
it was 21. I could be wrong.
It's the same situation there,
Mr. Chair, um, in terms of we
settle those claims and they go
to the plaintiff attorney and we
have no control over what
happens to the money when it
gets to them.
From 21 to now.
In civil rights claims, what is
the number, do you know?
Approximately
200 million? Am I wrong?
I'm gonna look and see. I may
have to get you that number
because it changes constantly.
Sorry.
No.
Mr. Chair, I can get you that
number unless Joey has it.
So from
2021 when it was enacted.
50.
74 120 62 roughly right around
$180 million in 3 years.
I mean
We can't paste that, right?
And, and, and
Is there a liability insurance
that we should be requiring
agencies to buy to the outside
market or how, how are we gonna
reduce that cost? I don't, I
don't know if that exists in for
me, I know, but for income, I, I
don't know, I mean, but that 300
million paid out in claims in a
three-year period just under the
civil rights, that doesn't
include anything else.
Mr. Chair, you're absolutely
right, it's unsustainable. Um.
I don't know whether or not
there is a liability specific
like a uh uh extra um layer of
liability coverage to a public
liability fund, yes, um, I don't
know that they exist and if they
do, they're going to be very
expensive, but we are actively
um exploring those things now
with our new broker. We have a
new broker for the state who's
very engaged with us and we're
looking for ways to mitigate and
transfer risk any way we
possibly can.
Mr. Chair, one of the things we
looked at for
Our two major universities are a
fund. We're looking at a a
liability.
But that they could go out there
for um sexual assault, bullying
for coaches and stuff, we're
actively looking to see if
there's any additional coverage,
though you in New Mexico they
can cover, so if those claims
came, it would hit those claims
first. Um, we just started
looking about a month ago, um,
we're assuming those costs are
going to be high, but we are
actively looking for those type
of things that would hit that
fund first before it came to the
state.
Yeah, I, I really like to see
that cause I mean.
this, this is gonna be one of
those things that turns into 500
million to a billion annually if
we don't get a handle on
caffeine it and you keep shaking
your head yes,
this, this is gonna be one of
those things that turns into 500
million to a billion annually if
we don't get a handle on
caffeine it and you keep shaking
your head,
you know, you deal with them,
right? And, and how we do that,
but it, it like in the case of
NMSU, they settle rather quickly
cause they didn't want it in the
press. I mean, was that the best
deal? No, probably not, right?
Cause we don't know what the
real actual claim is. They just
settled it and get it out of our
hair. I mean, and now their
insurance cost is bore upon.
them cause they're gonna have to
re
Their rates are gonna go up
because their risk is higher.
And that's gonna just
One snowball here in 3 over
there that cause a large
snowball to all meet together,
that's just gonna take down the
system. It, Mr. Chair, on that
point too for New Mexico State
what we paid out. If they left
the fund today, we have no
clawbacks.
We have nothing that we can say
we paid X, you left 2 years
later, you ask why. Um, all
executive agencies have to be in
our fund. Um, we're looking at
language on that if an entity
leaves, and there's a big payout
before they go somewhere else,
what clawbacks, we, we are
looking at those right now. But
that's a key point about this
fund. Executive agencies have to
stay this fun. Anything else can
lead, could give us a 30 days
notice, and there's nothing we
can do about it after you.
We write a big check. Can we
give them a 30 day notice that
we're not gonna insure them
after claims cause that's what
happens with my insurance
company.
We can
get one fender bender and they
say you're, you're terminated,
right?
I have USAA, so I don't know
what that feels like, sir.
Wait till you make a claim,
they'll dump you like a hot
potato too.
Um, that's one issue.
Um
We're gonna have to get to work
on this new executive building.
And so the legislature is
I
Dying for space, we have council
staff working in the committee
room doing their HR work in a
committee room, not in their own
offices independently.
Which is really hard to
accomplish, especially in HR,
it's a little more detailed than
things.
Um
by the Secretary of State knows
that or not, we should maybe be
getting ready to start packing.
Because we need to move.
How, what is the timeline and
what are the needs for the
executive building and.
Plan or should we just get some
fleet of 4 lightnings.
We are uh ready to complete the
uh ACs or entities that will be
going into the executive office
building, once we get final sign
off on those entities.
Then, uh, we will start with the
programming and the design.
Hoping to have that complete by
June of next year, and then
we'll go back before the
historic review board or the uh
demolition of the Casitas.
And then, uh, move forward with
construction.
So time frame for construction,
we're looking at uh
Being in line with the $100
million request that we have in
this next session to complete
the executive. So.
What is the total cost that I, I
know that we had.
Somebody had done some really
crazy stuff like 600 underground
parking space. I mean that, that
thing has got to come in.
When we have probably 400 right
across in the parking garage.
And we reduced the size of that
and the cost of that.
In that parking. I mean no other
place in New Mexico has a 3
story underground parking
garages and one flood and we're
gonna have the state parks
managing is a recreation area.
Um
Have we reduced that?
That footprint and come into
some common sense and say we
want a nice building, but we
don't need 3 stories of parking
underneath.
Mr. Chair, when we went before
the Capitol Building Planning
Commission, the initial size was
194,000 square foot.
Um, uh, executive office
building and 700 parking spaces.
That was the maximum site that
we could put on the location
that we determined was going to
be the location for the
executive office building.
Since then, uh, we have
determined that we will have
fewer parking and a smaller
footprint. However, the exact uh
size and footprint hasn't been
completed until we get consensus
on the uh entities that will be
going into the executive office
building, but yes, there will be
a reduction in the size and in
the amount of parking spaces.
And, and so why do we need a
consensus from the executive?
Don't we just say, here's our 28
cabinet secretaries.
How much campus space do we have
off court of the they, who's
gonna stay over there?
Or if they vacate that, who's
gonna move over there?
Right? And and so we could have
a whole bunch of empty office
building as we moved the exact
across.
I mean
Have we calculated all of that,
Mr. Chair, we have in our master
plan, and when I say consensus,
I'm just saying we need um
approval and to be in line with
uh governor's office on the
entities that are going to be
going into the executive I think
the legislature gets designed
the executive's office.
You definitely haven't
definitely.
We need to shrinking and
expandable walls so that way if
we like the governor, we can
expand it, we don't, we can
shrink them. Uh, that needs to
happen.
We need to get that process. So
you're saying you have enough
planning and design money, and
then you have to go to the city
of Santa Fe for approval on
On demolition of the buildings,
and that's, you think that's
gonna be done by June.
So, um, Mr. Chair, we have a um
An agreement with the um
historic review board that we
will have representatives be a
part of the exterior design.
So that we do have a consensus
when we go back before them for
demolition.
And uh we will be seeking uh
approval for the demolition of
the Casitas in order to make
sure that we have appropriate um
Size of a a location for the
executive office building.
OK, I, I, that needs to, to
start moving is a hot potato and
get that.
I think that has been 10 years
ago we were doing the executive
office building. Do we know how
much and, and this is so we know
where we can move the Secretary
of State is, do we know how much
vacancy I know the attorney
General, said he.
He had a whole bunch of office
space that we could shift them
to until the exact we know how
much vacant space we have at the
old PRC, which is the EC ECD we
have an accounting, I guess on
the campus of how much vacant
space we have available to ship
people to.
Mr. Chair in state-owned
buildings, we have no vacant
space. Um, the attorney general
is, we are actively working with
them on their current lease in
Albuquerque, but, uh, space here
in Santa Fe, there's no extra
space. So when we build the
executive office building, it's
not like we're going to have an
excess of state space. We'll be
moving agencies and
consolidating them in individual
buildings, moving agencies and
entities from lease space into
state space to save.
Um, lease dollars, but right now
there isn't an excess of state
space.
OK, I, I
I, I just
Hard to imagine we're gonna
build 74,000 square foot of
space, and we're not gonna have
any space left over. Seems like
somebody's moving and somebody
thinking.
I don't know you have to explain
that to me, so that's one thing
I need to put, but if I go to
the PRC building, you don't
think I'm gonna find any any
space available that
Leaning forward conference room.
Mr. Chair, let me clarify, we
will be moving from lease space
to state space, so there will be
some vacancies in the lease side
of the equation, but in the
state space, we will not have.
And, and then, you know, I, I'm
I'm proud of GSD that they're
not doing builder at risk.
Builder risk is driving up
costs.
Throughout and it's fine for
contractors, and this is the
problem is big contractors will
take out small contractors when
their builder at risk.
I'm gonna give you some horrific
examples of where I don't think
the state can keep up with the
amount amount of money and
builder at risk, I mean, the,
the forensic center in Las
Vegas.
Went from 120, and they're
asking for another 120 million.
I mean, that is.
I don't know what cost per
square foot.
In the, in the school arena, the
Pueblo of Zuni did a builder at
risk for 1500 square feet for 8
units.
a million dollars for 1500
square feet.
And, and if the state.
I'm surely not dumb enough to
allow that.
It's almost criminal.
And so I think we may have to
draft something and start
figuring out how we start
controlling these costs because.
If we look back and say, well,
we should have done some cost
controls back then, and some,
some measures, but I mean,
everybody's allowed to make a
profit, but.
I mean, a 1500 square foot home
for a million dollars apiece and
8 of them $8 million is just.
It's not right, and so on.
I don't know how we're gonna do
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I feel that um what we are doing
is we're holding the A&Es
accountable when we start the
design, um, because to me the
max and the cost per square foot
start there.
And coming into a design with a
a misconception or or um an idea
that the state is willing to pay
over 1100 $1500 1800 dollars a
square, but we are holding the
line and saying we are not doing
that. And so we are holding our
A&E's responsible when they come
in and say, let me set the
expectation. Our stances, no, we
will be setting the expectation.
So we're working with the A&Es
to try to change.
The narrative and to hold
construction costs.
Do you want to add something,
uh, Mr. Chair, the last few
projects we've done at GST we've
not been over budget because of
that. No, I, I, I know, but
you're not the, you're not the,
the root of the problem. You're,
you're doing it correctly. I
just don't want to see these
things come back with these
design builds, which they've
sold them and told them this is
the best thing, you're not at
risk for whatever it costs, and
then, I mean.
There's nothing wrong with
having nice things, but a
million dollar homemade for 1500
square foot is.
is worthy of the Attorney
general's look in an auditor's
look.
Uh, to see what the costs are
just, we could probably build.
50 units for for the 8 million
versus 8 units for the 8
million, it's just, and it's in
Zuni, it's a small area, but
it's still not that cost
prohibited. Appreciate your
time. Hopefully, you'll look.
Our requests. Congratulations on
the new plane.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members for the
governor is not requesting a new
plane this year. Thank you for
your time, Mr. Chair
Wait before you leave.
Please remind us to place money
for the governor's mansion for,
for repairs and maintenance,
that was in the budget last
year, somehow I got removed.
Um, but we need to upgrade that,
that's thing is getting to the
point where we need maintenance
and repairs and
A face lift on it.
No matter who the governor is,
we need to make sure that gets
in there. So make sure you may
want to amend your budget
request to include the dollar
amount for that. Mr. Chairman,
we will do that. Thank you.
Thank you. Have a good day.
OK, all right, thank you. The
next um agency we have is Office
of the Superintendent of
Insurance, Alice King. Hi,
Alice. And I think you will
introduce your staff, right? is
it the superintendent.
Yes, hi, Alice. Sure, is this
too loud back there? I don't
know. Maybe it's bouncing back
here.
You're good? All right. Thank
you. All righty, you can
proceed. OK. Uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to present uh OSIs
FY 26 budget request to you
today, but before I start, let
me introduce the people who are
here, uh, to my right is
Christian Meyers, who's our
chief actuary, who was in one
piece until last night, so I
apologize, but he's a righty, so
we're in good shape, uh, behind
me, I have Tim V Hill who's
running property and casualty.
Player, I canniva who's running
life and health, uh, and my uh
finance people, uh.
Fran,
Moya.
And wasabi.
And
Molly.
And then we have our
representative from the law
enforcement group, Den.
OK. Um,
Shall we proceed? Please
proceed. Thank you for
introducing your staff and I, I
don't know how you're seeing the
slides, um, there they are.
Thank you.
OK.
um,
For those of you who I haven't
had a chance to meet, um, I am
the superintendent of insurance
Alice Kane. I've been in the
insurance industry for
Close to 50 years now, uh, and I
bring a significant industry and
regulatory experience to this
position, uh, and, uh, time has
gotten gone very fast and I have
been in this position now for a
year and a half.
I would like to thank the uh uh
Madam Chair and the members of
this committee for the
incredible support that we have
gotten from your committee since
I have arrived.
Uh, let me, our next slide.
Uh, we're gonna do this quickly.
I'm sure as you know, OSI is a
mission driven agency with the
goal to protect consumers, uh,
we do this through a competitive
marketplace, ensuring that
companies are financially sound
and that they treat their
customers fairly, and we ensure
that producers who sell
insurance are honest and
trustworthy.
Slides 34, and 5 talk about some
past activities, uh, that OSI
has achieved, but in the
interest of time, I think I'm
gonna move to slide 6, which is
more current, um.
I, I, I know you were all more
than familiar with the Riodoso
wildfires, uh, OSI was very
active aside from issuing our
emergency order, uh, we had
staff up in Riodoso for 4 months
along with the uh industry to
assist consumers and claims
processing.
Uh, we also increased our public
outreach efforts with on a
dedicated phone line and uh we
continue to collaborate with
other states and other program
and we're trying to put in other
programs, um, to improve our
fire reduction and mitigation
program starting we hope in
Riodoso and then moving out to
the state and you'll hear that
in my, in my requests.
Uh, a little background OSI
processed over 1100 policyholder
complaints and recovered 2.3
million for consumers, be
assisted 450 consumers with
their healthcare grievances,
recovering 1.3 million.
Now we move to the revenue side,
uh OSI is a self-supporting
agency. We collected over 3.8
million in licensing fees,
affiliations, penalties, and
continuing education fees from
July 24th through October 24th,
and uh just to show we are uh
improving uh the uh professional
opportunities for our staff.
We're getting NAIC
certifications across the
agency, and most recently our
law enforcement officers.
Um, the Criminal data analysts
in the division director passed
the national certification for
insurance fraud investigations.
Now, uh, a very critical slide
is slide 7.
Um
Oh aside faced 3 major
challenges shortly after I
arrived, uh a year ago June, uh,
and we are continuing to address
them.
I'm sure many of you know that
OSI suffered a cybersecurity
incident on September 25, 2023.
Uh, we received, thank you, uh,
it was quite uh devastating. We
were pretty much out of the, we
were closed totally for close to
2 weeks. We probably were not up
to providing full services and
access to all our internal
systems and communications
probably till January, and I
would say in March, almost all
of our systems were up. During
that time, we
work closely on a daily basis.
We had uh a morning meetings
with uh Dewitt and the other
cybersecurity experts that they
recommended to us. We had a
forensic group trying to find
out who the threat actors were.
Uh, we put in uh a cybersecurity
protection secure on, which is
one of the more uh well-known
groups is now on all our our uh
devices. We've increased
authentication, we improved
firewalls, uh, and I'm repeating
things that I somewhat
understand.
I sat in that room, but uh I
have my expert here, Brian
Salter, if you want details on
the, the actual um
Uh, technical side of of what
was done, but we did, uh, you
gave us uh $2 million in a
special appropriation, uh, we've
used a million of it, and we're
going to ask that you extend
that another year so we continue
the improvements, and also we're
gonna have two in assessments,
uh, the federal, uh,
Department of Homeland Security
is coming in to do a cyber
assessment and some cyber
training, and we've gone out to
General Dynamics and independent
third party to come in again and
assess uh to see if there are
any threats. I would say uh the
problem really was that uh uh we
probably needed more staff and
more diligence and some of the
things that we're doing vis the
upgrades, there were things that
weren't done, and there was an
old system and that's how they
broke in an old e-docket system
that was left open.
Uh, and it turns out they were
sitting there for about 9 months
waiting to get through. The good
news is very little data I mean
um.
Few folders, very little data
was taken. I'm not trying to
minimize it. There's really very
little and the reason I think is
because most of our sensitive
data is on NAIC systems, our
producer licensing information,
our company information, uh,
whatever, so that's, that's
been, that was a blessing and we
the NAIC is gonna come in with
their chief, uh, information
officer to speak with us in a
few weeks to show us all the
other areas where we might go on
their system. They're spending
multi, multimillion.
uh, on what they're building and
uh I think that will help us
stay secure and give the
industry comfort because I would
say for a few weeks we were
getting phone calls from
companies. Should we even file
with you, you know, and we said,
the good news, the good news is
what you're you're really
following with the NAIC. So that
was where we are on that, um.
Let's see, uh, secondly, that we
had uh uh you, you gave us 2.1
million in a special
appropriation to improve and
rebuild our company financial
analysis and examination
capabilities. When they arrived,
we were up for uh the NASC
viewers came for a re-review 10
days after I arrived and went
through our system and pointed
out some areas where we needed
improvement, uh, mostly in the
staffing levels and in us really
being able to do the
in depth, uh, qualitative
reviews, uh, and we needed staff
with more training and more
experience, uh, so to bridge the
gap, we retained INS, a
well-known financial regulatory
regulatory consultant and uh we
retained two of our uh
examiners. One just got promoted
to be to a supervisor level, and
we were able to recruit a chief
financial examiner, uh who uh
who's
Had an incredible career in
industry. He was with Price
WaterhouseCoopers and also was
one of the the uh chief
financial chief financial uh
executives at Hanover Re. Uh he
was personally he's been a great
add to the team, but he also
gave us a lot of credibility
with the NAIC when we went to
the uh F committee, which is the
accreditation committee.
Uh, let's see, the 3rd
challenge, uh,
was
And he was again assisted us
with this. Uh, you gave us 100.3
million special appropriation to
improve staff recruitment and
retention efforts. Um, let's
see, OSI has reduced our 34%
vacancy rate to 12%, and I
understand we made a new hire,
probably 11% today. Uh, we've
been able to retain the people
that we wanted to retain and
also to uh
Recruit professional level
positions which are often hard
to to do in small states like
New Mexico. We have, uh, again,
to my right or chief actuary who
came to us from Uber and AAA,
uh, as I said, our chief
financial examiner, Don Gilbert,
who came to us from Hanover and
PWC. We have a pharmacist, um,
who is with us, Alejandro, I
think he's here, um, who's been
working with us on the PBM, uh,
oversight.
And also on the drug
transparency Act that we've been
asked to uh work with, with
everyone on, and we have a
cybersecurity and a new CFO.
Next slide
Um, as I said before, OSI is an
agency that is funded entirely
through revenue generated
through from the insurance
industry assessments and fees.
Um, in FY 24, we collected 38.7
million in assessments and fees,
34.8% were licensing fees,
renewals, and penalties, uh, and
they are distributed as follows.
16.9 million for insurance
operations and
the remaining 17.9 million is
distributed to other agencies
such as fire law enforcement,
and a hospital fund called Carry
Tingle. A 6 million was also
Reverted to the general fund.
Slide 9.
This side, this slide is now
what we're requesting for FY 25.
Uh, we, our budget requests for
insurance operations is 17.8
million for our insurance fraud
and auto theft program 3.9
million, and our title program
1.4 million. Insurance
operations, as I said, is, is
funded by licensing fees and
assessments to the industry.
There's no general fund impact.
The fraud and title programs are
both funded, also funded by the
industry assessments and are
non-reverting funds. The
insurance operation request is
at 15% increase or 2.3 million
more than the FY 25 operating
budget.
The $2 million increase in
salaries includes 800,000 for 11
additional FTEs for consumer
licensing, IT actuarial,
property and casualty and life
and health, and a 1.2 million in
recurring funds to replace the
special appropriation for the
salary increase, which is
greatly improved our retention
and recruitment opportunities
and a $300,000 increase in
contracts is for the life and
Health Bureau to expand their.
reviews, compliance reviews,
training and enforcement
efforts. There's a $5,750,000
increase for the fraud program
for 3 additional FTEs and again,
recurring funds for the uh
special appropriation for the
salary increases, and the title
program is requesting an
$100,000 increase for one
additional FTE. We anticipate uh
a retirement at a high level,
and I've also taken, uh, you
know, is it.
Tim B Hill from running that
title uh group day to day to now
running property casualty and
and title as well.
Um, slide 10.
Uh, the patient compensation
fund.
This is an interesting funded
fund, which I'm sure you're all
familiar with, um, it's funded
by independent healthcare
provider and hospital
surcharges, um, as well as some,
uh, infusions in 24, the actual
settlements at the PCF for 48
million, uh, if we're FY 25, the
estimate of settlements is 60
million. Uh, and FY 24, the
deficit, the PCF death.
deficit was 69.6 million.
Uh, there was a 44 million
general fund special
appropriation and a 19.4 million
um improvement in operations
including surcharge increases
and um a reduction in uh act the
actuarial estimated uh future
open claims experience and
investment income, we took a, we
doubled our investments in uh in
equities and other higher, we
hope we're
but higher returning funds. Uh,
the deficit today is 6.2
million.
Slide 11.
Uh, OSI's combined recurring
request is 73.4 million. We have
to correct one number on the
slide, uh, that 54 million for
PCF fraud and title is is
actually 35.8, 17.1 million for
insurance operations and 1.15
million for the uh addition of
two new bureaus. Uh, the, the
request without our expansion in
the life and health uh.
Defiance and data retrieval area
is um an 8% increase or 5.3
million more than the uh the 25,
uh, the current 25 operating
budget. It includes 15 base FTEs
and 7 FTEs, as we said, for the
life and health area, which is
1.15 million.
Slide 12.
The highlights of the $3 million
recurring increase um without
that 1.15 expansion request 2.7
million in salaries and
benefits, 1.5 million for 15 new
positions, 1.2 million for the
recurring funding, uh, to turn
that special appropriation for
the retention and recruitment
increase, um, and then 189,000
in contracts and this confuses
me a little, so I hope I can
explain it to you. It's really
320,000, 200,000 for life and
health, uh, to get assistance in
form and rate review, 120,000
for increased compliance and
enforcement, uh, and it drops
down to 189 because we have a
realignment from fraud, uh,
which will cover increase their
increased rent and uh do it
increased rates and 109,000 and
other costs for increase in
rent, and most of that increase
in
rent is re expanded our
Albuquerque office, which was uh
totally inadequate for the
number of employees that we had
and we had the opportunity uh to
get a fairly good rate because
uh uh uh uh health, I think it
was a dermatology group, large
dermatology group moved out, and
we were able to take over some
of that space in the same
building in uptown.
Slide 13. Uh, I want to explain
the uh expansion requests for
the life and health division,
which is my largest division.
Uh, it, at the 1.15 million. We
want to create two additional
bureaus. A data analysis and
enforcement support Bureau with
4 additional positions, uh, as
you know, there are many, uh,
there are a number of health
insurance laws that have passed
that require OSI to provide
annual reports and other other
support and
We need staff with expertise and
data analysis to allow us to do
this and to increase our market
regulation.
And 700,000 to establish the PBM
and prescription drug compliance
Bureau. Uh, we need 3 additional
positions and 400,000 for
contracts. In the last session,
there was a special
appropriation to OSI for 100,000
to implement that prescription
drug transparency law, uh, as we
noted during the session, we
knew that uh that that
additional resources will be
necessary this year to fully
meet the mandate.
Slide 14, please.
OK, slide 14. Um,
Oh, I'm, this is really
disgusting, um, appropriation
appropriations for uh proposed
legislation, um,
One, as you've all been hearing,
I think that we are putting
together a healthcare
consolidation oversight Act. Uh,
we got it SB 15 passed last
year, which was
Very, uh, uh, uh, which was a
compromise bill that just
focused on the hospitals, but we
think we need a broader bill.
Uh, we are, we, uh,
Uh, in order to do this, uh, we
will need some expertise in
legal and uh business
transactions, um, we, we think
we need 1.5 million to set it up
and then going forward, I think
that will drop, uh, the one part
of the health consolidation
oversight Act is proposed is
that we will be able to go to
outside experts, uh, legal
actuarial and financial to to
really have the
The expertise to look at a large
transaction which pro was would
have been necessary if the
Presbyterian merger had been
regulated at the time, and
that's what really prompted some
of this. Um, I would say the,
the press, uh, nationwide and
even here in New Mexico, um,
the, the need for healthcare
consolidation oversight, uh.
Uh, has become more apparent,
uh, in the last 12 months. Uh,
now, oh.
With the Riodoso fires, uh, we,
we looked at uh expanding the
fair plan. We've had a fair plan
that's been in place, I think
since the 70s with low amounts
for for home, it's, it's a
residual market. You can only
get into it if you've been
rejected by two insurance
companies, uh, and the, um, the
amount for homes was 250,000
about a year and a half ago. My
predecessor raised it to
350,000.
and a million for commercial.
Uh,
We've been looking at other fair
plans and been working with some
of the experts around the
country to find out what other
states are doing and the numbers
have gone up dramatically, even
if you think about a 250,000
when it was implemented,
probably bought an amazing
house. So we're looking to uh
raise it to a million for uh
individual homes and uh 2
million for commercial buildings
with a cap of 5 million, so we
don't have like 20 enterprise
buildings together.
Uh, we are trying, uh, the fair
plan never had not had
assessments in 20 years, and I
think there were 8 or 9, I think
8 million in assessments this
year, uh for the Rio doo fire
and some of the hail storms, uh,
what we're trying to do is, uh,
ask for 50 million from the
general fund to provide a
backstop because it's gonna take
a while for the premiums to come
up to fund anything if there is
an issue, and not have a huge
industry assessment.
Uh, and we're, we're gonna see
whether there would there be a
clawback we haven't worked out
how we'll work it all out. This
may not be permanent, and we may
get it back if they don't have
so many perils, but we don't
know. Uh, the, uh, the way the
industry assessments work is
that they are then passed on to
the consumers across the state.
So this isn't an ultimate
industry cost, um, the funding
will be used, uh, I think most
of it we used as a backstop for
the interim in case we have some
large.
Perils, catastrophes, and then a
million to increase uh the uh
the operations. I think now
their budgets around 900,000.
Uh, if this is a successful uh
is as we think they will, they
will increase greatly, as you
know, many of you know that uh
there's been uh a lot of
non-renewals, uh, and
cancellations in the property
casualty industry, so we think a
residual market is, is really
warranted. One of the things
they told
me, since I've been talking to
everybody I can find is that you
want to have a ramp off, you
don't want it to be permanently
that the people stay in the, the
fair plan, but you, you go to
the areas where they're not
writing, hopefully you put in
mitigation programs so we can
get the industry back into that
market. So that's, that's our
goal there. A fraud and auto
theft prevention were asking for
571,000, um, as you know, uh,
we, we do not have a great
record in auto theft where.
The 6th worst in the country.
Uh, so we really want to, uh,
increase some of the funding and
uh this uh this will allow us uh
to rebuild their case management
system, and I think increase
FTEs by about I think 3.
Uh, the 18 million in medical
malpractice premium reduction.
Uh, last year, at the last
session, uh, the, it was a
governor's appropriation of
around that amount, 18 million
that OSI was or two years ago
was tasked to distribute, uh, we
distributed largely to OBGYNs.
We covered a 10 100% of their
premium. Christian was very
involved in that and then we
covered other specialties.
I think up to about 60%. Um,
As part of the uh of the uh
healthcare consolidation
oversight, uh.
Uh, a proposal, uh, the
legislature asked us to go out
and create an outreach program,
and we did hear from many
providers that the uh
malpractice insurers what was an
issue in attracting and
retaining providers in the
state. Uh, we did, we did get
back um some uh very nice uh
Uh, acknowledgement from the
provider community that it was
very helpful and we'll see where
this goes. So we are wanting to
put that uh that back if we got
the 18 million this year, we, we
anticipate again, uh, reducing
100% of the premium in the PCF,
not all their premium, but in
the PCF, um, by 100% and 70% for
other specialty types.
There was a $5 million auto
insurance affordability pilot.
I, I think we're gonna, we're
gonna shift, um, to not asking
for subsidizing, um, drivers
we're going to try to get focus
on credit scores, uh, and
lowering the costs and spreading
the cost and perhaps attracting
uninsured drivers back into the
marketplace because the costs
will be lower.
Um, and let me go to the final
summary of our request.
This is definitely accurate, but
in the in the monies that I
think I have control of its much
smaller amount, but um 130
million, um,
Uh
And would be reduced to 125 if
we take out the auto insurance
pilot, the recurring request is
53.8 million. Uh, the expansion
request is 1.2 million and the
non-recurring special
appropriation request is 75.1
million uh reduced to 70 million
a couple of the numbers get
double counted sometimes because
we the 170 million operations
has to be, uh, you know, we
reallocate to other funds.
so that that accounting
mechanism is uh uh keeps being
explained to me, but I, but I
think the uh
The number is probably about 34
to 35 million, uh, of, of, of
monies that I think I control
personally.
So
Welcome.
Welcome, Mr. Chairman. I'm sorry
you uh I've been here all
morning and all week. I'm sorry,
but you were, you were very, I
wanna again thank you, you
weren't here of how supportive
LFC was when I first arrived,
uh, for helping us through the
hack and through the uh
rebuilding our financial
analytic group, and now I have,
I've been able to, I've been
able to afford to hire a cheap
actuary, uh, a very prominent
financial chief regulator, uh,
pharmacist, and uh and.
and on. So thank you very much
and our vacancy rate has gone
from 34% to 11%.
That's improving. We're trying.
And I sat on the left side cause
I am asking for an increase.
You, you were paying attention,
you're ready for questions? Yes,
sir.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Questions Representative Benson,
oh, I'm sorry, Representative
Armstrong was first and then
represented Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Thank you, Superintendent Kane
for your presentation. I wanted
to see if you could elaborate a
little bit on the insurance
fraud and auto theft prevention,
um,
Of 571,000 for anti-fraud
software, statewide auto theft.
Garage
Gun violence safety project. OK,
um, well, we've been doing this
all along. We've uh expand,
we're trying to, uh, and we've
been fairly successful. I have 4
prosecutors.
And then I think how many
investigators?
I should have it on my list, but
7 investigators and uh we've
been prosecuting along with the
uh uh the DA's auto theft. We
think we can, and we've been
very successful. We think we can
expand that with 3 FTEs. We also
had a case management system
that uh fell apart and it's
really important for us to have
case management system that can
communicate with all the other
law enforcement agencies and,
and that's, and they wouldn't
deal with our old one because of
the hack, so we really have to
rebuild and and restart it.
That's really the focus there.
Uh, and we have been, I think,
uh, Devon won a national award
for prosecutions last year, and
uh and uh we've been recognized
by a number of national
authorities that we are doing
pretty successful in a very
difficult situation. The fraud
and the fraud area is funded by
the industry through the fraud
fund, uh, the industry expects
us because auto theft hits them
and every state is required to
have a strong fraud.
ment uh to reduce frauds against
the industry.
OK, thank you, and the gun
safety, gun violence safety
project.
I, I think that's what happens,
I'm told, and I guess Devon can
even be more graphic than I am,
uh, if, if you'd like him to
speak, but uh most of the uh
most of the, not most, a large
number of the crimes start with
auto theft, and then they have
guns and whatever. I think one
of the uh hijacking crimes that
was in the news, we were, we
were the ones that were involved
in the prosecution, which is, if
you like Devon can share some
more details.
with that. Uh yes, ma'am,
please. I just wanna know what
it, what it does and what we're
funding.
Please.
grab a chair.
Uh, good afternoon, Chairman,
uh, Representative the with
respect to the specific 571,000.
I, I think it's broken out in
some of the materials that have
been provided, but I can go real
detailed if, if the committee
would prefer, I think about
135,000 of that is for personnel
overtime and, and expenses like
that because frequently our law
enforcement agents are called
out to do uh extra, extra hours
in the field, be it for the
responses that the
superintendent was uh describing
down in Rudoso.
And some of the uh fire problems
and flooding problems we've had
elsewhere around the state the
last couple of years, as well as
the number of the special events
that we end up working with law
enforcement on both like the
fiesta surrounds the Zobra up
here in Santa Fe and the Balloon
Fiesta. Um, that's one portion
of it. There is the, the 189,000
of it is broken out for the
anti-fraud software. Uh, it
became apparent, especially as a
result of the hack, um, that our
systems weren't adequate to the
to the load.
of of referrals that are coming
in to us on a daily basis. Uh,
for those unfamiliar, we get
referrals from all of the
insurance companies from the
NAIC from the NICB, and from,
uh, concerned citizens from
other practitioners, uh, and
those number in the thousands,
uh, and it takes a significant
amount of time and manpower just
for our law enforcement guys to
call through those and try to
figure out what is actually
worthwhile and worth looking
into, uh, as a, as
they suspected, uh, insurance
fraud case. Uh, the, the
software package that we're
looking at, uh, is, is being
widely adopted across the
country by a number of, of
similar organizations, uh, and,
and that's where that portion of
the
Of the, the monies are coming
from with respect. I know the
representative mentioned the
auto theft garage, uh,
inspections and stolen vehicles
are kind of an art, and in, in
terms of uh determining the
actual identification and um.
What's the word I'm looking for
and sort of the actual where
that what that vehicle actually
is, where it's come from and who
it belongs to. Uh, our, our
offenders are becoming more and
more sophisticated about kind of
concealing that information or
changing it, and we have a very
limited number of inspectors
around the state that are
qualified to do those kind of
in-depth investigations in terms
of determining the, the origins
of the vehicle. Uh, we last year
for the first time, we worked
with uh APD.
state police, a number of other
agencies and established a, a
garage in, in the Albuquerque
area kind of central to the
state that any law enforcement
agency around the state could
bring a vehicle to, uh, and
avail themselves of the more
qualified investigators and
actually have a space where they
could, if necessitated tearing
down the vehicle to figure out
what vehicle we're dealing with
and where it's come from. Uh,
and that's that portion of the
money. And then finally, with
the, the gun violence, I know in
response to the governor's call
last year regarding gun
violence. There was some
investigation that that our
division director did in terms
of looking at new, new ways of
addressing and, and protecting
and hardening some of our
facilities. I think the, the 120
that's, that's broken out for
that particular thing is
relation to a safe point scanner
system, there was, there's still
discussion about where we would
like to try and implement that
to see if it's an effective
solution.
Uh, to try and protect our
people and other government
agencies around the state and we
have, like I said, we haven't
decided to determined what site
that's gonna go to yet, but
that's what we're trying to
explore at this point. OK, thank
you. I was just curious about.
The details of that. And then,
um, uh, Superintendent Kain, I'm
um
We talked earlier, uh, in
another uh uh committee meeting
about caps, and I am thoroughly
actually disgusted.
By the medical malpractice
premium, $18 million of taxpayer
money going to something that's
actually fixable.
That we haven't fixed.
Not you, personally, the
legislature.
We broke it
And so we're funding $18 million
to go to trial attorneys.
And, and, and other entities.
And so have you ever thought of
considering putting a cap.
Um, on what can be paid out.
I know this is to, to supplement
the the cost of medical
malpractice insurance. Is that
correct? Yes. OK. So, have you
ever thought of trying to fix
the initial problem instead of
Supplementing one of the things
we actually have been talking
about uh.
In a conceptual basis, so it's
not ready for prime time, uh,
but we, we think one of the big
issues, at least we've been
told, uh, when we did some of
the outreaches underwriting, the
underwriting of the uh of the
providers, and we've been
thinking of maybe putting up a
mutual or reciprocal uh to
provide that initial layer of
200,000 to get into the PCF
which would have strong
underwriting uh criteria.
also might be ultimately doctor
owned. There've been a couple of
successful, um,
Uh, companies along those lines
because if the doctors police
themselves and uh we weed out
and do the underwriting, uh,
then we think, you know, we've
seen a drop, a dramatic drop in
claims and maybe more
intervention before it ends up
in the courts, um, and uh that's
something we've been exploring.
But, but again, it's not ready
for totally for prime time, but
It could be soon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and thank you for that. I, um, I
don't think that we have a
doctor problem in New Mexico. We
have an insurance problem.
And, and we broke it and we
should fix it, um, and until we
fix it, or they're having a hard
time recruiting and retaining
doctors in the state of New
Mexico. We supplement growing
our own, trying to do a tax
rebates, tax credits for people
to stay here. Why would they
want to?
Why would they want to?
And so we are doing this to
ourselves.
And tell
This side of the table puts some
big boy pants on and decides to
fix it.
And the governor will sign it.
Then uh this is gonna continue
sorely disappointed.
that we're supplementing.
I mean, we're I'm happy for the
doctors. I mean, we, we have to
keep them here, but I, I'm glad
that you're thinking outside of
the box. I appreciate that so
much, but, and I'm not blaming
you. I'm talking to the
legislators. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Uh, this.
I got more questions,
Representative Vincent.
Did you want to respond? I.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you Superintendent Kane,
and I wanna, I know my district
thanks you, and I want to
personally thank you for this
fair plan and you get the caps
raised.
However, I think there might be
just a few.
Things wrong and I just wanted
to ask you as far as loans go.
Um, do banks, are the banks
recognizing the fair plan and
are they made whole if something
happens, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
the banks do recognize fair
plans for mortgages, uh, and we
are pushing replacement values
and uh we're, we're, uh, you
know, taking complaints, um,
and, and we're also trying to,
uh, at least I am personally
trying to both here and around
the country to uh have uh
evacuee funds available if
there's a uh an evacuation order
because it became very clear, as
you know, even though I'm
In a battle with State Farm that
uh people need money, you can't
get receipts if you don't have
money to leave. So, uh, and we
keep on seeing on the
television, not just here, but
we saw it a lot in Florida
clips. People were couldn't
leave cause they couldn't afford
to, and then they have to go
farther than people usually
think, uh, and then there's also
the price gouging that starts
happening, so, uh, I've been
talking to my fellow um
Commissioners, uh, and I'm
getting some resonance that uh
there should be an amount that's
immediately available without
the requirements of receipts
behind it if there's an
evacuation order, so people feel
comfortable enough to get in
their cars when they probably
only have their pajamas on and
and go 100 miles and see if they
can at least get to safety in
Riodoso, I think it was
compounded. Yes, there were
people with second homes, but it
was also compounded by a lot of
people who didn't have the funds
and and didn't have jobs. So,
uh,
Uh, you know, as, as you know,
we, we, everyone at OSI is
really um wants to help Rios so.
We're trying to get, we haven't
gotten there yet, but we're
trying to immediately change the
fair plan. I'm having a little
resistance from the advisory
board to uh focus on Ruidoso
immediately. I don't even need
legislation for that to raise it
to the million and 2 million,
and uh and be able to offer
policies as early as January,
but I'm getting resistance and
I, I, I can't overcome the bore.
So then we'll probably be back
for a statewide plan that would
would pretty much mirror what we
want to do in Riodoso anyway.
Thank you, Mr. I thank you Mr.
Chair and Representative
Vincent, you were the uh impetus
for us looking at changing a
number of these things, uh, so
we appreciated your input during
the crisis. Mr. Chair and thank
you, Superintendent, and I, uh,
I'm glad that you're looking at
the people that were evacuated
and we don't think about that a
lot until it really happens. And
I used to always chew on my kids
for, you know, keeping their
vehicles on empty, and a lot of
people keep their vehicles on
empty, and sometimes when you
have, well, in in this
particular case, when the
vehicles were on empty.
And it come time to leave.
There was no gas.
Everybody was filling up that
could fill up, some of them
could not fill up, and you know,
I tried to put myself in their
position and they're leaving
Ridoso with no money.
With no credit cards, and I'm
not saying it's anybody's fault,
but
Going somewhere and trying to
find.
housing for you and your
children, and not having any
money in your pocket, that's got
to be scary. And you get to
think about it for an hour and a
half, OK, whenever I get to.
Travis County or whenever I get
to Otero County or they went all
the way to Lubbock, and they,
they really drifted off.
How am I, what am I gonna tell
the lady at the hotel.
Mhm
That I need a room, and I have
no money.
And I mean, I've got this watch
here, you know, I'd be willing
to put that up for collateral.
And, um, you know, thankfully
our outlier, they let him stay.
And I really appreciate that,
but being able for them to be
able to access some money, that
would be outstanding. And the
other thing that I had is, and
there's just been, you know how
rumors get around.
When somebody gets on the fair
plan.
Because they can't get
underwritten, they can't get a
policy. When they get on the
fair plan.
Is there a time frame? Do, do
they have to get off of it in a
certain time. The, the way we're
looking at the way they're
usually written is that every 2
years you go out into the
marketplace to see if you can
get renewed.
And so that's really the way
it's supposed to work. I would
say currently when uh we looked
at the fair plan in a with a
more, you know, immediate focus,
uh, the rates are probably 20%
lower than the market.
And I don't think we've been,
they've been very active in
making sure people move off it,
it's to really give everybody
the help they need. This really
should be a residual market
where people stay on it until
they can get insurance and uh,
you know, and, and the mark and
the insurers come back, uh,
this, this whole, you know,
this, the whole market's in an
uproar because of the wildfires,
the insurance companies don't
know how, you know, truly how to
uh deal with it all the time.
And they're really getting
pressure from the reinsurers not
to write in certain areas, so
we're trying to reach out. I
think my Louisiana uh
counterpart uh made has made
some good inroads with the
reinsurance market and uh we
are, we now have a contact, uh,
someone who lives here in uh
Santa Fe, who is on the Swiss
reboard, and he's gonna be
introducing us to them to try to
distinguish New Mexico uh from
some of the other West, you
know, the other western states
where you all usually thrown in
that California
your bucket, and we really want
to go back and say, look at us
differently and see if we can,
you know, maybe get, get some
relief there as well. But we're,
we're looking for every lever we
can find. We're doing, we're
trying to do a strong mitigation
program we're working with IBHS
which is the insurer funded
research group on how to harden
homes, uh, and we're, if we, if
we get this in, if we get the
Redosal plan in or the broader
state plan, there's going to be
a strong mitigation program in
there and we're trying to look
to other agencies for
Some grants that people can't
afford the hardening and
changing the building codes, uh,
the, the fire marshals are being
trained to go out annually and
see if uh people are meeting
those criteria, so we can like
get certificates so that this
one I can't promise. I wanna, I
can push for access, but, but if
we do all this, would there be
some reduction in premium. We're
starting to hear that some of
the companies, if there's true
mitigation programs are giving
some reductions. I that one I'm,
uh, that one I, I
OK
I'm working hard on access. I
hope we get reductions. We're
doing everything, we're trying
to find every lever we can, and
it's not just us. We're working
with uh uh forestry and a
homeland security, you know,
homeland and every everyone we
think the fire marshals who can
can come together and and and
see what we can do to uh
You know, again, we can't stop
forest fires, but we can stop
the, you know, we can lower the
risk.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I know
the the state forester and I
know the the fire marshal and I
have full faith that they're
gonna make this happen and
whatever I can do to help them
along, that's what I'd like to
do, but
As small of a place as Lincoln
County is, I know all the
insurance people.
And I'm not trying to put the
insurance out of business by no
means, and I'm not trying to
even get the state in the
insurance business, what my sole
goal was is people that did
evacuate to Lubbock and all
these outlying places, when they
call that, they just want to
come home.
Well, if they can't get an
insurance policy,
Well, if you're a New Mexican.
We're gonna help you out, and I
think that, that, uh, getting on
the fair plan and giving them an
option, and then, you know,
later on, whenever all the dust
clears and um hopefully we get
some money for some smart
logging.
Mr. Chair, then uh we start
really
Doing some robust thinning
around all these mountainous
towns and maybe we won't have
that big of a problem anymore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for all the
support.
I tell my wife the same thing,
always keep your tank full,
especially when you get on I-40.
So if you want to give her that
same advice, her number is
867-5309.
Um,
let me ask on the fair plan. I
know that you guys are working
on it. One question comes to
mind, are we setting it up so
that banking institutions are
required to accept that
insurance. Yes, it's, it's in
the statue.
Currently, it's in the statute,
not ours in uh Tim we.
That
But only if you have a Fannie
Mae or Freddie May Long.
We have a standard conventional
loan.
It's not, is it recognized or
not?
You might come to the mic, so.
This.
Why he came.
Mr. Cha, my,
my understanding is most
mortgages are, are backed by the
Fannie Mae system.
Um, there may be some mortgages
out there that aren't that have
some qualified qualification
about the type of insurance they
will accept.
But with my experience, most
that's something you probably
need to research because if
someone has a mobile home.
And they may not qualify under
those deals under that loan
terms. Are they gonna be covered
if they buy this airplane to
their lender.
That's one of the big questions
I know that, that we were
looking at. I don't know, I know
he center worth and you guys are
working on this. That's one of
the big question is how do we
assure that I got insurance.
In
This gentleman to the left told
me just, they just canceled his
and sent in the middle of Santa
Fe.
If he has a a home loan and it's
a standard conventional loan, it
may not be a friend of me or
Freddie Mac or who's accepting
this as insurance because
they'll want insurance and even
in mobile homes or modular homes
or whatever standard that's
gonna be key, especially in
Certain areas.
And we're hoping for some of the
areas that they're canceling in
aren't aren't we think we may be
able to get a recognition
perhaps we're pushing for it,
that these aren't high risk
areas, and, and they, they
should still be writing, but
again that goes back to the
reinsurers and us getting them
to understand where the high
risk areas and
And see if they'll continue to
allow the Dures to write.
OK. Let me ask you my next
question.
is
how does a hospital get in into
the medical malpractice plan and
in what hospitals are in it and
PCF Mr. Chairman, are you asking
me about the PCF?
Uh, yes. OK. Uh, uh, as far as I
know, there are no new hospitals
that have applied to the PCF
since I've been here, they were
allowed in a number of years ago
when it was expanded and uh
they've stayed, there's my
understanding is the the uh
legislation that was done a few
I think 2 sessions ago requires
the hospitals to leave the PCF
and where's Christian 202,020.
2026.
So they can't get in until 2026
again.
they're no more are being taken
in, they're supposed to leave by
2026.
OK.
And, and what's our balance in
there.
I, we, we went through it right
now. It's uh
What was it a negative 66
million.
Uh, and I think part of that was
due to better that here it is
better than we had the 44
million special, you know, 35
million special appropriation
for the doctors and 8.1 rural
rural hospitals that came in the
2024 25 session and the
surcharge increases of 19.4
million with the current
projected deficit of 6.2.
That's not very good news.
Um,
Mr. Chair, it's a lot better
than last year.
You're
44 to 11% when we're going.
69 to 6.2, you know, and, and
I'm just gonna, cause I, my
experience in my hospital, they
got a judgment for them to get
76 million and they had the
insurance and the insurance
company wouldn't settle. They're
not in this fund
and, and so, I mean, I don't
know how we get rural hospitals
and I take grants of all, which
I represent. I mean, they're,
they were spending their
Reserve money to pay for their
insurance, and we offset some
costs for next year and I don't
know how we're gonna.
Handle this going forward. I'm
not an expert. Do you know any
way we can begin to start
I think we need Mr. Chair, I
think we need a long sit-down
discussion on this cause I don't
off the top of my head to have
one. We know very, we, we know
about the hospital in your area.
I don't know the, uh, we
understand the case was settled
a few weeks ago. Hopefully, the
hospital survives, uh, which is
really was our, you know, since
I've been looking at the
oversight bill and then up in
the community.
I know how critical that
hospital is. Uh, you know, I, I,
I would imagine some people
decided not to join when it was
opened up. I, I don't know how
that decision was made. I again,
I, I can look back, but I don't
have many of my staff that were
here at that time.
You know, and, and we talk about
this $750,000 cap for.
For doctors, right? And you
carry this policy and your cap
is 7150, we're gonna move in, I
mean,
I'm in the real estate business
and, and so, you know, I have
millions of dollars on property,
right?
It's a fact of doing business.
And maybe the premiums are
higher, but how are we going to
get a handle on the premium
costs.
Level off what the value is. I
mean, if.
We have a, it's completely
different scenario, but
What's this?
You, your premium can't be
$10,000 a year for a single
person for $750,000 worth of
coverage, I mean, cause
Mr. Chair, I, I think the the
actuary for the PCF has been
recommending surcharges for the
individual doctors, I think, uh,
This year, for the doctors that
are hospital employees, we
didn't do any reduction for the
independent providers we did
because of the drain of
providers, um,
But uh it, it, it, it's an
issue. I mean, we, we really
have to figure it out. One of
the things that we've been told,
which I, I don't know if you're
here for the discussion or had
arrived, but uh we are, we're
we're talking about this 18
million for reduced surcharges
premium, but we're also looking
at uh perhaps creating the
underlying insurance company,
which right now is open market.
We're being told there's not
very good.
underwriting in there that
doctors aren't removed if there
are issues, uh, we've seen some
examples in in Pennsylvania and
New York, uh, and Illinois,
where there's doctor owned, like
reciprocals uh where the doctors
self police and the
underwriting's better and the
claims experiences better
because they report them sooner
and they're handled sooner, um,
we're looking at any models we
can find to help uh
Adress this problem.
Yeah, and, and how do we handle
when these suits are settled,
you know, say someone's injured
and this prior presentation.
Say they're injured and and.
They're paraplegic.
And they need long term care,
but the lawyer.
wants a lump sum settlement.
I mean, my policy, the Mr.
Chair, the policy of OSI is not
to pay lump sum settlements um
on the um I think I'm the
superintendent is personally
named in some cases because
we're not doing we're opposing
lump sum settlements. I feel the
same way you do as an attorney,
uh, if they want to get
consequential and some other
things, but you know, the, the
medical care should be
protected.
Uh, and there should be, if you
want to get paid by the hour
perhaps to get a certain amount,
but that's one thing. The other
thing is if if uh if you don't
get a lump sum settlement, the
PCF is liable to take care of
you, your medical expenses for
the rest of your life.
If you, if you get a lump sum
settlement and and and use it
up, then you end up in the
Medicaid system.
and is there any way we can
control that? I mean, I, I think
we, let's discuss how we can
deal with that, but I, I think
once it not allowing lump sums
for medical costs is one way and
and another thing is my personal
opinion, this is not the this is
not OSI opinion, but I mean one
of the things we see is built
versus paid.
You know, there's a big
difference between paid in the
past that we pay out versus
bill. So, um,
I'm, I, I'm with you that this
has to be looked at. It, it's a
real crisis.
It's a crisis for the doctors
and I think it'd be a potential
crisis for some of these
individual patients.
Well, most of the ambulance
chasing lawyers deliver pizza in
the evening and practice law in
the morning and then get a good
case and they want a lump sum
settlement.
OK personally having been on in
many as a lawyer and been in
many positions. There are
situations that require
Uh
I'll, I'll, you reimbursement
based on what's happened, not
you, but at it more than in
adequate and whatever I do think
the legal system, it, it is a
place to go. I do think at times
these these judgments are are
extremely um
Difficult.
Yeah, and I don't know how we're
gonna handle this in this
perfect storm in this small
state that we're in, right?
Cause I mean healthcare is so
critical um.
When you need it and then
something happens, I mean, some
people make mistakes. They may
not do them intentionally and
things happen and, and you may
need to to sue him in and to do
that, but I mean, what's a life
worth versus what's an injury
worth versus what's a slip and
fall and claim in, so.
I don't know how you figure that
out, I mean.
Most most lawyers that Su me
look and see what the amount of
policy I have and then they sue
me for the full policy amount
plus the umbrella and, and so.
I, I
We got to figure this out
because
Alice Cain wants to go to the
doctor.
And needs an appointment.
They're gonna tell you 23 weeks.
You may only have the flu and
may need to get it immediately
just so you can get a
prescription.
You may have a critical need
that needs to be seen, and you
go to a specialist, good luck.
See you in 3 to 6 months, right?
And
I don't know how we increase
that and reduce that, but
there's, there's gotta be some
gift because we're never gonna
gain population.
You're never gonna have um
Growth when you don't have.
Doctors here and people with
young kids, I mean, those are.
Kids are always sick or
something always happens,
whether it's.
A baseball bat when they're
playing with pinatas or going
down the slide those things
happen, broken arms and and
getting them in and getting them
to do. We're gonna have to, I
don't know, it's gonna be on
your shoulder, so get ready.
Well, Mr. Chair, I, I think
we're, we're seeing it in a lot
of areas in OSI because we do
the QHP process we try to find
out where the qualified
providers are. We've done gone
out for this outreach program uh
for the uh
Healthcare oversight and we've
seen what's gone wrong with some
of the prior transactions and
how do we, uh, you know, when
profit comes into medical, you
know, into medical care. There,
this is, this is a multifaceted
problem that
That I feel like it's almost
whack a ball, you know, you fix
one thing over here and
something will up here. It
really has to be a a full review
and, and
Make sure something can't shift
one way or another.
But, uh, but I would say the out
when we did the outreach, it's
very clear that people are
concerned about getting
essential services, they're
concerned when there's a change
in ownership. There's concerned
when uh in the hospital that
you're talking about had a
management group come in, which
caused some of the problems. Uh,
there's concerned by the
providers that are the
employees, whether they're being
constricted in how they can
perform health care, the
independent providers are afraid
they're losing access to
hospitals.
It's, it's the uh the outreach
program that we conducted most
of the summer, uh, with and then
focus with the hospital
providers and the independent
providers and the consumer
advocates, uh, was enlightening
in the sense that it raised a
lot of issues, and you can see
they're not separate.
OK. Thank you. Thank you for
your time today. OK. Like you
got some work to get to prime
time and.
60 days, 45 days where our farm
we're out at this point, so be
prepared, thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members of
the committee.
Homeland Security, last one for
the day.
Are you feeling guilty, Ellie?
It's not my birthday.
But it can be telling.
Well, it was your birthday that
day, but I got stiff, so Ellie,
you can tell him it it can be
his birthday, birthday is the
day in the calendar, right? So
you can make it today.
Generally, you want to start us
off, we're at the end of our
A day, so hit your highlights
and
points and what you really think
you gotta have before we smash
the piggy bank for the end of
the day. I, I thought the cake
was gonna buy some goodwill, Mr.
Cha. It appears to have, you
know, I tried buying Goodwill
with her and it was her birthday
and I I actually went to the
store myself and very rarely do
you see me in the store and got
candles and the cake and then
she didn't show up to the
The dinner we had for the for
the LFC committee and so um
yeah, we had to eat the cake
and so uh
This is a lot smaller cake than
I got so quarter at the
Goodwill. So.
Yeah
We got plenty of time coming up.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, uh, thank you for
your time. I'll, I'll be fairly
brief and then we'll, we'll open
to whatever questions you have,
uh, I'll just go over quickly,
uh, on our budget, the types of
things that we're asking for and
some of the justifications for
him. So, if you refer to slide
3, you'll see that or slide
number 2 you'll see that uh the,
the ask for this year is a total
increase of 1.5 million on the
DHSEM side, we'll talk fire
marshal here in a minute, um,
and slide 3 is probably
the one you wanna look at
related to to the types of
increases that we're asking for,
uh, 3 major categories of
increases, uh, as, as we've
outlined in here, uh, I, I'll
tell you the first one is, is an
increase of about $360,000
related to, uh, to the 200
category. We've worked really
hard over the last year, uh, to
try to, to clear our vacancy
rate.
Uh, that, that we had, you know,
uh representative Yan, I think,
uh, challenged us to do that
last year, um, we did a really
good job at one point toward the
end of the fiscal year, uh, we
had really filled every vacancy
that we could with the amount of
money that we had.
Um, are, are a reversion of this
last year in the general fund
was $0. Um,
The our vacancy rate was about
34%, uh, this year, uh, we're
currently sitting around 24% um
It um
We're in a space where it's
challenging to keep people in
these positions and um one of
the things that we did in the
last year is we took our copper
ratio, uh, on average, which was
around 92%, and raised it to
103%. Uh, there's more work that
we have to do.
The, uh, the types of expertise
that we ask for out of emergency
managers, um, is very difficult
and we're underpaying for them.
And so, uh, we, we get people
in, uh, they become well
qualified and they walk away.
Um, with the exception of those
who are really, really dedicated
to the state and this agency,
one of them sitting to my right.
And so, um, we, we have to do
more to reclassify and, and
continue to retain our employees
that we build expertise with,
uh, this, this, uh, ask for the
$360,000 is, uh, is designed to
allow us to continue to do the
work and maintaining those uh
those employees.
Uh, the second, uh, uh, increase
is about $70,000. Uh, we're
seeing like everyone else is an
increase in rates that we're
being asked to pay for
contractual uh services, uh,
audit is one of them, uh, and so
that $70,000 just allows us to
keep pace with the contracts
that we currently have.
And then the third item that
we're asking for is, uh, is an
increase, um, of, uh,
Of $922,000 in the 400 category,
and there's, there's 3 broad
categories, uh, that we're
asking for. So $322,000 to pay
for radio services to do it.
That's that we pay for out of
the uh EMPG grant, um, just to
provide public safety radio
services across the state. So
these are not radio services
that DHSEM uses. These are fees
that we pay for so that, uh,
local and municipalities can use
these services, um.
The, the move away from the EMPG
grant allows us to provide
additional funding, uh, to our
EMP, uh, through our EMPG grant
to to county uh emergency
managers and locals. Uh, we, uh,
we made that shift internally
this year. We'd like to continue
to do that, um, it's, it's no
surprise to to some of you that
um, what, how our emergency
managers are staffed at the
county level.
Uh, is minimal. So if you go to
Chavis County right now, uh,
Karen Sanders is an employee as
an emergency management team of
one. if you go to Lincoln
County, it's an emergency
management team of one. When
something happens, yes, we, we
grow uh the staff to deal with
the emergency, but it becomes
increasingly difficult for them
to do that, because usually
it's, it's folks that are
rotational, or you're taking
people away from the
municipality or the counties.
That have other
responsibilities, uh, to, to
shift over and of course, then
those things that they normally
do don't get done. Um, so
that's, that's, uh, that's the
radio services. The other one is
uh is an increase in the amount
that we uh we have in rates that
uh um I'm sorry, it, it's to
create some new software, uh,
that allows us uh to make
submittables much easier uh for
local.
County uh applicants for grants,
and so that'll just allow us to
purchase the types that software
that will allow for that. And
the last one is uh is an
increase in IT uh in-house
services, uh, so, um, you might
have recalled last year I
mentioned that we had been
contracting IT services.
Uh, through, through a vendor in
Albuquerque.
Really bad idea for an agency
who's supposed to be able to
operate in all conditions on New
Mexico's worst day. So we're in
the process, we've shifted away
from that contract. We're hiring
staff, uh, but what we also
found is our Wi Fi system was
outdated. Our network switches
were outdated, and in order to
meet uh the security standards
that we must now meet, uh, we
have to continue to purchase IT
uh equipment to bring it up to
standard. Do it has been working
with us hand in hand.
Doing this, uh, but it's an
increase in cost.
OK, um,
The um
DHSEM, um,
I'm not sure why I have capital
outlay up there.
I'll switch over now to our uh
special request. Um, so the, uh,
the special that we asked for is
an additional um
$275,000 as well uh for uh for
continued increases in this
current year, uh, to update our
IT systems, uh, that are bad uh
need of being done.
Swing over to the state fire
marshal's office. Um, we're
asking for, uh, it's a total uh
increase of $48 million you'll
see as that breakdown, um, where
they're coming from that most of
them, uh, is, is a movement from
the fire fund into grants that
support uh local uh local fire
departments, um,
I'll flip over to the next one,
it gives you a better, a better
idea of that, so, um, I'll start
with this, um, there, there, we
are asking for bar language, uh,
in the general fund this year
that allows us to more easily uh
bar be from the, from the state
fire marshal's office and the
DHSEM.
The reason why that's important
is that, uh, since the fire
marshal's office has moved over
under DHSEM they were paying no
overhead for the administrative
costs of operating um the uh the
state fire marshal's office
under DHS, um, there are
significant size um um agency,
and so we, uh, the bar language
would, would more easily allow
us to say, hey, you're a certain
percentage of, of HR, uh, it's
gonna cost 10 number of dollars.
In order for us to continue to
provide those services uh that
we had been paying out of our
general fund. In some cases,
it'll give us the opportunity to
Get more personnel in place.
Uh, in order to, to, to more
easily operate the uh the grant,
the grants, uh, the same on the
financial side and the budgeting
side, uh, with moving all of
these grants through the system.
So, uh, that bar language uh
would be helpful. Um, the, uh,
the increases in the, in the
budget for the fire marshal is
200,000, uh, again, it's for us
to continue to do uh to provide
one the support services to
DHSCM and the other is.
Uh, we have, uh, been working
through, uh, modernizing and
bringing up to par their pay
scales, um, and, and it also
allows for a slight budget for
overtime, especially out of our
investigative services who often
get called out to work fires in
the middle of the night.
Um, the, uh, the other increase
in the 400 category is 367,000
for increases in in equipment
and travel and it's the same
thing, it just costs more money
to do other types of purchases
that they normally.
And, um
I turned over to the fire
marshal in case I missed
anything.
Was it Capitol was I supposed to
talk about?
I, I, I apologize. So the
capital outlay for the state
fire marshal is, uh, is two
things, and then I'll jump back
to DHSEM. One is uh $40 million
to build the fire training
academy and and uh firefighter
Memorial, uh, and the other is,
uh, is $900,000 to to buy a new
truck.
Uh, that, uh, that the training
academy des desperately needs,
uh, on the DHSEM side, um,
I'll flip back over.
They, uh, so, uh, a million
dollars, uh.
So the building that DHSEM
currently resides in is a lease
under the Department of Military
Affairs that honestly was leased
the DPS.
Years ago.
Um, there, there are not, there
aren't facility, uh, folks that
are that are budgeted under
DHSEM staffing, uh, FMD
currently does not cover, um,
taking care of the building or
janitorial services, uh, nor
does the Department of Military
Affairs.
And so, um, this amount of money
is simply to get the building.
Functional, uh, from a lack of
maintenance over the 10 or 15
years that uh this agency is
existed. Uh, we're currently
working with uh GST now in
conversation about them taking
over their services. There's a
little bit of, of uh uh uh work
we've got to do on the language
because the building is owned by
the Department of Military
Affairs under the State Armory
Board, uh, a state entity, um,
but there's, I think there's a
belief.
That maybe that's not the way um
that FMD can support and, and so
we think like we think we can
work it out. We've got to redo
the lease anyways, um, but
someone's got to take care of
this building, uh, because
almost no maintenance has been
done for many, many years. I
miss anything?
Oh
And with that, sir, I'll stand
for questions.
Go back quickly to that bar. Did
you guys request a bar here the
other day or shortly back is at
the bar that we're seeing coming
through, and it's not the, as I
understand it, it's bar language
that we're asking is, is within
uh the, the appropriation when
we go to the session that will
allow for that money to move
across cause it doesn't, we
don't believe we have the
authority now.
So you have a bar coming across
in the system right now.
He's shaking his head, so this
is for the grant that we give
out to the fire department.
And so you bar those out and
then.
Then give it up.
Oh, yes, uh, we actually are
giving out $33 million this year
in grants to the fire
department. We actually had $18
million and then we talked about
the grant, uh, the bar earlier
in the year, so we did language
change to that, and I believe
Miss Lisa can probably explain
that as she worked on it quite a
bit.
We just want to clarify and make
sure we're not doing the same
thing we did over and over again
after warning, but so that's
barring out money and the fire
protection fund to to distribute
it, it's not an issue.
Yes, sir.
OK.
Questioned uh representing
Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Have you
guys ever
Put a pencil on the paper and
figured what it would cost to
pay our rural EMTs.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh, currently we do not.
Have those figures is what it's
going to cost. But we did, uh,
last year we get those 25
million that uh were already
awarded and they believe we got
1090 employees out of that,
which actually cover EMTs and
firefighters.
So,
Mr. Chair, a lot of those EMTs,
they're, they're EMTs that are
employed, but in my area, a lot
of the real, very rural areas,
they're just volunteers.
And, uh, you know what,
something, uh, I brought it up
the other day. My son.
He saved two people's lives that
I know of, just one of them when
he was in college and one of
them, really, he was a senior in
high school, I think. He's
pretty good at that kind of
stuff. But he went to go to the
EMT class and he said, you know,
Dad, I can't uh make a living.
And do all this training, do all
the stuff that you have to do to
keep your license up and, and
that's the case with most of us
out there. I mean, we, most of
us are teachers, ranchers. You
have to have a job to live out
where I live and may some of us
have 2 or 3 jobs, uh, but we
still need to be saved when we
have a bad accident. And so like
we uh
When I was in EMT, there were 10
or 12 of us.
Right now, I think there's one.
There's one person that's
qualified to drive, and one
person that's a qualified EMT
and uh
It's tough, you know, I mean, if
they're, they're one place, they
can't be somewhere else either,
and I know that our, that our,
and I live in Harding County,
610 magnificent people.
But not very many of us.
uh, and, and there's a, my
district has a lot of counties
like that, they're very, people
are few and far between, and
really to do a good job, we need
a couple of
A couple of people that are paid
uh to run that ambulance and uh
oftentimes it's it, we rely on
the helicopter.
we might be able to get by with
an ambulance if there was
somebody there to drive it.
Ah, Mister Chair,
Representative, uh, we currently
do give a $25,000 tipho on our
grant if counties and
municipalities apply for it,
which also helps support.
EMGs and firefighters when they
do respond to calls.
So Mr. Chairman, uh, there's, if
our, if my county applies for
it, there's $25,000 available to
support.
Uh, wages for an EMT above and
beyond just equipment and all
that stuff. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, I would
have support with stipend for
pay for running calls.
And that would be up to the
policy that the Kai puts in
place.
Thank you. All right. Thank you,
sir.
Represented Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
all of you.
And I just wanted to take a
minute, General Aguilar, I
really appreciate what you've
done in Redoso.
I really do appreciate. I
haven't got a chance to shake
your hand and see it because
everybody's been so busy, but I
appreciate what you did, what
you've done there.
Uh, Ali.
You're the kind of employee that
we've been talking about for the
last 2 or 3 days, and you
deserve more than what you make.
I've never seen somebody be able
to juggle things like you. And
when we talk about having the
best and the brightest.
And as far as state employees,
we've been talking about, uh,
you know, them not being able to
me starting people out at
$45,000.
And we're never gonna keep.
Good people, if we're not paying
them.
And we've got to grow our own
and make sure that we're paying
our people good. And um as far
as that statewide service that
you mentioned, Mr. Chair, and,
and General Aguilar on the EMs.
It's not a matter of if
something happened, it's when it
happens, it's gonna happen,
especially in my district and,
you know, after about a week,
maybe 10 days, when you start
looking at the EMs, you can see
them fading.
You can see that they don't have
that bright look in their eye
anymore. They just start to
fade, and then they start, when
they go home at night, they're
sitting there thinking, how long
is this gonna last?
How much energy do I have? And
we don't have enough EMs.
We don't have enough EMs to go
around and, and I, I think
they're there always needs to be
somebody to backfill for sure.
Um, the last thing that I wanted
to talk about is the
And I'm, I'm not against it, Mr.
Chair Representative Vincent,
before you get to the next part,
can, can I just, I just want to
add something to what you said
is I think it's, it's critical.
Uh, one, I, I didn't do anything
in Riddo, so other than drive
back and forth. Our guardsmen
did a significant amount of
work, uh, in the emergency
managers, so on their behalf, I
thank you, um, when, when we
talk, that's why the, the, the,
the movement away from this EMPG
fund at DHSEM uh for, for
personnel costs is critically
important.
Um, we, we use about $1.7
million.
Uh, out of that grant fund to
fund almost all parts of of all
of the positions at DHSEM and
another $700,000 out of gap
funding.
Nationally, that's not how that
fund is used, um, and as, as we
started to see more and more and
more emergencies, it's becoming
more critical that we try to
take as much of that money as we
can and shift it down to the
local county level, which is
where the fight is, um, all the
time and they really need to be
prepared, and so, um, we, we,
we're having conversations
internally about how we, we need
to shift away from funding this
agency, uh, out of that.
Grant in providing more
opportunity at the county level,
especially those counties like
Lincoln, San Miguel, Mota, uh,
that we know are going to deal
with fires.
Time and time again in the
better staffing that they have,
uh, the more prepared they will
be when that day comes.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair, and General Aguilar, I
appreciate you, uh, giving those
accolades out to your guardsmen,
and that's exactly what I mean.
And I think them and I thank you
for your leadership.
And the only thing that I wish
would have happened is you would
have been able to take your
detail out to the riddles and
Downs racetrack, and put our
racetrack back together while
you had all that heavy equipment
there. I think it had been
really good and hopefully with
your leadership, you and Ali,
y'all get that, you get the, get
that done. Um, as far as the
capital outlay on the $40
million to construct and equip
the fire training academy.
What are we gonna do with the
academy in Socorro, Mister
Chair.
Prime Minister Chair
Representative, uh, the Academy
squirrel will remain, as you
know, the academy in Socorro is
one of 3 places in the nation
where that's the only place we
can actually do burns like we do
right now if we pay Burns in the
Senate for Ariel Albuquerque
area, environmental and not past
that. So the academy will remain
our first stage in Santa Fe
would be the, uh, $40 million
building with training rooms,
um.
And the officers for the fire
marshal's office and an
auditorium, which will support
us support DHCM and support
forestry at the same time so
they could hold trainings. The
second phase would be the
training facility that would go
on the backside.
And then at that point, that's
what would be a fire station and
props for training for
firefighters, and we'd like to
be able to separate so we can
cover Northern New Mexico. So
anytime they would have to burn,
they would only go to the
academy for one day and do the
burns.
But would also continue to do
trainings at the fire academy in
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, I think this, this goes
back to what Representative
Chaffield was talking about as
well is that it ain't ordering
academy just reduces some of the
travel time and the hardship on
those volunteers from northern
New Mexico, uh, having to go all
the way to Socorro, and in some
cases, if they're, if they're
fairly local, they can drive
back and forth every day, uh,
in, in, in other cases, at least
they won't have to drive nearly
as far, um.
In order to do the training that
in most cases can be done, you
know, here versus incorro.
Thank you for that and thank
you, Mr. Chair. So, you know,
I'm pretty partial to Socorro.
And that's where I cut my teeth
is in Socorro, and I would love
to see 10 million put into that
place and bring it back up to
where it needs to be because,
you know, it's, it's lagged, and
I don't think we've put.
We haven't put enough money in
the in it at all. And uh like in
Lincoln County Chat, well, a lot
of the art rescue.
They're having to go all the way
to Dallas, with this particular
facility right here, have our
training unit, Mr. Chair
Representative, what we've done
is we actually did a master plan
for Secoro, uh, this year, we do
have $2 million in capital to
spend to update first things we
would like to update is the
propane system, because we do a
lot of propane burns and the
liquid burns, uh, in the master
plan, it does show or a north it
does show that, but the cost for
that will be some.
We're around 6 million.
So we have to get $6 million to
put that in place at the.
Thank you and Mr. Chair.
We're, we're gonna build
something, we should build it
right.
Yes. And, you know, in order to
put another phase on it.
You know, why not just go ahead
and ask for that 6 million
because I know that all the the
New Mexico firefighters, the,
the uh paid firefighters, that's
where they would probably end
up. We might, we might as well
keep them here instead of
sending them to, to Texas to do
the RF training.
Mr. Chair, representative, I
agree with you. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
I'm 4 your facility here. I'd
love to see some money put
towards uh uh Socorro, but if
you're gonna get an office
there, then I'm gonna go ahead
and give the nod for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh.
Representative Vincent stole my
thunder on the uh Socorro
Training Academy. I was just
wondering how many, you know,
we're gonna, we want money for
our training academy in in Santa
Fe. Well, where are we going to
want it next? And I, I, I'm here
to advocate for Socorro and to
advocate for for firefighters
and the training as much as we
possibly can, but uh I couldn't
agree more that let's put $40
million into a quarrel. That is
Socorro uses that as uh um uh.
Economic development.
In that little town, um, Santa
Fe's got a lot of economic
development. So Coro doesn't,
and we would really appreciate
more money into uh into Socorro.
Uh, the other thing is I don't,
I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if
you all have control over the
size, the minimum size of EMT
classes, or who has control over
that.
I chair representative, that
would be the MS Bureau in Santa
Fe.
OK, so I won't complain to you
guys about it. But just so the
audience knows that, you know,
rural New Mexico, it's hard to
get 12 people.
To get that training. It's
really tough to get 12 people.
And most of the time those
little counties pay for it and
then they leave and go to a paid
position as representative.
Representative, yes, uh,
currently the Metro Chiefs
Association that has gone
together that are actually
working on that, and they're
working with the Yemen bureau to
see how they're going to bring
more classes to the rural areas
and to the cities.
So there are issues around the
state. OK, good to, good to
know. Uh, the other thing I just
wanted to bring to everyone's
attention is, you know, we're
gonna be, we're gonna be talking
about Roswell.
You know, we have set a
precedence now.
With
What we do in emergencies.
And uh I would really, I'm just
putting a bug in everybody's ear
that there there'll be a bill
coming.
Mr. Chairman, a bill coming for
uh money for emergency, uh,
Management type stuff in Roswell
and uh at a large amount and so
I just wanted to bring that to
everyone's attention, and I know
everyone's probably expecting
it, but uh I, I would, I would
uh.
Just make sure that everyone's
aware that there, there will be
a bill coming and hope that they
get the same uh respect that
other counties have received. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Charos of Armstrong, if I,
if I could just add to you, to
your comment about that because
I think that um we are more than
willing to help, um, sit down
and work through the language on
that bill if one comes, uh, to
ensure that what, what the
legislature is trying to get out
the door is, is written in such
a way that um that it, it works,
um, because I think even in the
last bill, the, the language
becomes constricting to what I
think the
The intent was, um, and we're,
we're more than happy to work
with you on on that language.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, uh, thank you, uh, general,
and I will send them your
direction. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you just to kind of wrap
this Ali, thank you for the
cake. I appreciate it, but I'll
let you know when my birthday
really is. Um.
Let me ask you, what are some
lessons learned as the
legislature prepares to to.
To draft a bill.
For emergency response for
Fires, flooding. I mean, do you
have like lessons learned that
we need to know and and how to
do that. I know what we learned
so far is you gotta cover A to Z
in the FEMA landscape.
Um
What are some lessons learned
and I think you should be
chatting with Adrian a little
bit as we move forward.
Well, I, what I, I will just say
one thing, um, Mr. Chair, is
Um
The adoration law.
Um, we've got a, we've got to
figure.
How do we need to change that if
we want to get money in the
hands of people and businesses
directly.
Then have the conversation about
what that means.
Long term, um, but, but that's
clearly one that becomes uh
restricting if the intent is to
directly help those that have
gotten the loss, um.
Because I think that's what the
public would, that's what they
always think, uh, when they say,
hey, there's $10 million to help
you, um, but the law is
restricting enough that it
becomes difficult to do that.
And so that's the first one,
the second one I would say, sir,
is as much as we are very
thankful for the $100 million.
If you're looking at, depending
on what size of a bill you're
looking at, whether it's to
cover all federal disasters for
the next year or if it's just
for Roswell, honestly, $100
million doesn't go very far.
a disaster like that, I mean,
in, in Representative Vincent
can probably speak to that, you
know, we have bridges in, in
Riodoso that one bridge is gonna
cost us close to $50 million so
it's just, it's gone. Um, that,
that would be one of my strong
recommendations is if you're
looking at it, I would, I would
strongly recommend looking at
more than just 100 million
because it won't go very far.
The second thing is making sure
that you're talking to your
local jurisdictions on what
they're expecting out of this,
um.
I think there was some confusion
with the
$70 million that was given to
him. I think they thought that
they could use it in any manner
that they possibly could, and
there is a potential that we
could work with them on that,
and it's one that we've been
working offline with them on,
um, but it's not a
tap into whenever I need to kind
of fun. It's one that you really
have to allocate to a project so
that way we all collectively
know that that money is coming
back to you guys in the.
Um
I think, I think that's some of
the big ones on my side.
But I would be happy, be happy
to talk to Adrianne offline. You
know, the legislature has to be
very careful with public money
in in the anti-nation can get
very tricky. I mean, there may
be a relief funds you could set
up to, to get things moving, but
then donation clause is there
for uh a specific reason, so we
don't have
Everybody walked to the front
door and saying, hey, you can
give me money.
Um, and so that's something that
we'll need to
Weave through in the
legislatures we did through that
for a number of years in other
scenarios with people coming and
saying I, I'm gonna go do this
and perfect example is a lady
said she's gonna build a $23
million housing subdivision in
Frances, New Mexico, and says
you're gonna give me $12
million. I'm like, I can't give
you anything, lady. You better
go to the city and the county
and, and make sure that money's
appropriated and accounted for.
That's the process.
Yeah, life is a different
scenario. In life in emergencies
is a different scenario. We need
to figure that out.
But, you know, Ridoso and
everybody, well, we need more
money. Well, tell us how you
spent the money that we gave
you.
Give us an accounting and let us
know how that money is spent.
But we don't know.
until we get some of that, I
mean, when we set up the the
fire up north, we set it up in
in an accounting way that we
could reconcile and know there
was a reimbursement coming, and
if there's backfilling that
needs to happen, we haven't
heard it. That's a different
kind of fire, so they have a
different kind of funding and so
it's hard to do that. Same thing
with the flooding in, in
Roswell, I mean.
There's, that's a different kind
of storm completely, and so what
is that scenario and landscape
look like because flooding is
different than fire, you know,
so I had a little bit of both,
but.
Um
I don't know how we figure that
out, um.
But the governor is the relief
valve in for the excess of the
100 million.
She did 50 million in I think 50
million in executive orders for
Ruidoso, which had no strings
attached.
And, and so.
We've never done this before.
I mean, we've got to figure it
out, but I mean,
It's not for a lack of try. It's
for a lack of knowledge and
experience that we don't know.
And, and so those are the things
we got to get figured out and.
To be prepared for these as they
come along and, you know, you
could go to the scenario where
we had plenty in McKinley County
and, and it was one bridge that
had money appropriated for it.
That they
screaming they needed emergency
money and overnight when they
already had access.
Bran is the same way. I mean,
they flooded too and and they
need to clean them.
belief and there was a fun to go
get clean up relief.
But you're gonna have to cities
and counties are gonna have to
do a lot of this work on their
own.
We can create funds, but you're
gonna have to be ready and be
prepared to to do some of your
own work and not just rely on
Ellie in the general and the
fire chief and everybody come to
your rescue and just say, here's
a, here's a bag of money we're
gonna leave town.
Um, and, and so it's very
interesting to to watch that
scenario, I mean, the
contractors that are in Riodos
are mainly from out of state.
A big contractors are from out
of state who are running through
another contractor that has a
local license.
When you have contractors in
town that could be doing the
work. It it.
It's a saddening scenario cause
uh
I do a bunch of federal work
and, and the feds call me for
buildings and in other
situations it's like.
I've never seen The Sopranos
move so quick into an area then.
You're, you're laughing, but I
know you, you know what I mean
so quick in to an area to do
that. And so,
I hope we can figure out, number
one, if they're in Rio, so there
is contractors that can provide
local work, but they're not
getting the work because the
contractor, they got the job as
a California contractor and then
you hear that those contractors
are the fire in California pays
$85 an hour and we're only
paying $55 an hour, and they're
leaving, right, for more money.
Which
Even makes it more messy.
I think you really need to sit
down with.
With Adrian and maybe LFC and
figure out.
Give us your best advice and
You know, we can only live
through it and experience it and
then try to fix that. Uh, but I,
I, I, I think that needs to
happen. Let me ask you, we had
an independent contractor there.
How, what do they do for the
state?
She worked under U Alley, I
can't remember the name of the
company, but I met her down
there when the 1st or 2nd visit.
What did they exactly do for you
and what do they exactly do for
the state and what authority do
they have to to do that?
Yeah, so Mr. Chairman, first I
want to go back to a comment
that you made earlier, but you
don't know, uh, the LFC is not
aware of what the $70 million is
earmarked for. Um, we actually
assisted with that, so I'd be
happy to get that information,
we're the 70 million, OK, sorry,
maybe I misunderstood. That's my
apologies. Um, OK, and then
you're talking about Flexos, um,
and Miss Ashley Tay is who you
met down in in uh Riodosso. So
Plexos was brought on during the
Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon fire to
augment our staff. So
realistically, we are in a
position at DHSEM where we don't
have enough staff to be able to
support the mission that is
outlined by us. So, um, right
now, roughly off the top of my
head, I think like so is
augmenting us by.
Do you have that?
You want to show that projection
show do we have it up there?
I don't think we have it in
there, but we can hand it off in
a.
We brought it back up.
Hold on
and once you're doing that, is
that in your budget request to
replace plexos with state
employees, so we don't have to
rely on outside contractors to
do that, so we, we have a plan
and kind of a layout that we
we're going to propose probably
in next year's budget that
starts to build out state
employees.
That will at least cover some
percentage. I mean, I think the,
the challenging piece becomes
What, what is DHSEM staffing
need to look like in an
emergency, and what does it need
to look like, you know, kind of
day to day and finding that that
place where we don't have too
many employees when things kind
of slow down, but that we do
have um enough that we don't
have to rely as much as we do
on,
uh, Chairman,
I know, I'm sorry, it's really
small. It was more to kind of
just show a picture, each box is
a person. Keep in mind that
staff is 100% paid for by
disaster funding, so none of
that money.
comes out of our general fund.
It doesn't come out of your
general fund, is 100% augmented
just by the disaster alone. Um,
our, our goal, our realistic
goal, and I know the general
just talked about it, is to get
to a point where we are moving
away from that vision and very
much moving into staffing up.
Um, we had some really good
conversations with spell. We've
had some really good
conversations with our analysts
about what that change looks
like and how do we get there, to
include anywhere from 10
positions that in long term roll
into stern positions or even now
learning that.
compositions can be funded by
general or disaster fund money.
There, there's no better time to
start than the present, cause
it's building this out, waiting
for the next disaster to happen
doesn't help us.
Do that. And and so start
thinking about what that plan is
gonna look like, even if it's a
slow start.
I mean, when we start building
this, I mean, you have to start
somewhere, you have to start
yesterday because we been
through 3.
Cross our fingers, no more
happen in the staff just sits
there and.
Maybe does some landscaping on
the building. Um.
But something we have to start
building that.
We may have to have a plan in
place, it can't be.
Let's call Ellie, cause that's
the plan.
Let's call Ellie cause Ellie
knows well, Allie may have lived
life and got married and has
children and that that gets
involved and I don't know if
you're or not, but I mean, we
have to have a plan for Eli 1,
Eli 2, Eli 7.
And, and, and not rely just on
one person cause
my understanding, by the time I
say we got to figure this out,
it's Ali's name that comes up.
Uh, I appreciate all the hard
work you've done, but only one
person can only manage so much,
so start figuring out how we
build that framework.
I know it's federally
reimbursed.
There's, they could be in
reinforestation, they could be
in places where we can play them
and you have to pull them in,
um, spread them throughout where
you think the needs might be in
and when they gotta come in, you
have a team.
That you just pull from.
I'm not planning your plan, but
I'm just
Thinking how how it works, but
start getting that ready cause I
think that's in everything we
have to do. Um, to get that
done. Mr. Chairman, I don't, I
know the general is about to say
something, but I do want to let
you know that's word for word
what the general has told me for
yesterday, actually, um, 2
months ago, 6 months ago, um,
and we were already in the
process of planning for it and
like um representative Vincent
said we were not expecting
Riodoso and Riodoso hit and we
really had to just.
shift gears completely, which we
don't want to be in that
position anymore, um, but
unfortunately life kind of
start.
And, and Mr. Chair, I think
that's, that's, you know, we're,
we're looking like what a, you
know, a year ago was a 3 to $4
million dollar agency. And um
It,
the need for emergency services,
the ability to surge into
counties, uh, from, from the EOC
perspective from finance and and
grant management, uh, we're
gross fully understaffed in
every single one of those. And
so Ali is the face of almost
everything. uh, there are a lot
of other really good employees
that work at DHSEM who are also
extremely overworked, and it
seems like every time an
emergency happens, we've got to
not just shift these
contractors, it's every single
body onto the next emergency,
uh, and, and I think you heard
me say that we have to have the
ability to plan, execute, uh,
and recover from multiple
emergencies simultaneous, we're
in that space right now, and
we're struggling, um, and the
contracting has been, uh, you
know, great at being able to do
that, but you're absolutely
right. Um, I just didn't want
to, like, I didn't want to walk
in here on a on a.
Hey, let's turn this into a $30
million agency ask in one year,
uh, and get run off out of the
building, but, but it certainly
needs to grow significantly so
that we, we are staffed and
ready for everything that
happens. Resenting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that.
Do we still have a New Mexico
Task Force One, is it still?
OK, so, you know, a New Mexico
Task Force One.
That's what I envisioned, and
then when something does happen,
You know, and it's happening
somewhere else out of town, you
can attach them and, you know,
they're paying the bills and
then when we need them here.
And we can use them here, but
We know that until we put a
robust smart logging system.
Into this state in these
mountainous communities, we're
going to continue to have these
fires, and you're going to
continue to put in the overtime.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent, we, we
don't have task Force One any
longer, um, and I think it was
highly subsidized from the
federal government.
We do have a force right now,
which is our National Guard
Community Emergency response
team that you've helped us fund.
fairly low, we're using federal
money to, to have, I have 41
guardsmen right now working
stayed active duty.
They're they're those swift
water rescue guys, the guys that
were moving snow, um, a few
weeks ago in, in San Miguel
County in the surrounding
counties.
Um
They, they
He
a general fund forced cause
right now I get about $650,000 a
year, which is not enough.
Uh, if I could fund those out of
general fund.
It, it's almost the concept that
you're talking about, which is
when something bad happens,
they're trained and ready to go
out, they've got CDL licensing,
we're doing heavy equipment uh
training now. We're buying snow
plows to put on some of the
vehicles so they can go out and
help augment snow uh movement
when when we need to.
The other thing that I'm seeing
across the state is, um,
The counties, the small counties
don't have the infrastructure in
place or the funding to be able
to clear out.
Ardis along the side of the
road.
Um, to clear to to create uh
places for water to go. Dexter
is a perfect example uh of over
the years, things have just
filled with sediment when it
rains a little bit. And so when
this storm hit, the only thing
retaining water was the railroad
tracks.
Uh, but, but there's nowhere for
that water to go, even though,
even when the culvert's filled.
We just would have went on the
on the on the east side of town
and flooded that part of town.
So, um, that, that force I see
as, uh, if we, if we weren't
tied to the requirements out of
the federal funding that we're
using them for now, uh, and
Hermanspe Caf Canyon.
Um, you could have counties that
would say, hey, I need you to
come, you know.
Do these things for us, uh, and
in the in between time, we're
helping go out to the counties
and maintain those areas that
they just can't maintain that
when that fire, especially flood
comes.
That they're able to to at
least.
You know, keep more water out of
homes.
Uh, that are possible. So that's
conceptually what we've been
kind of. And I totally agree
with that, and I would just
encourage the chair to look at
that.
Look at that model of the New
Mexico Task Force One. I'm not
saying it has to be that robust.
But when you look at it and it
has cadaver dogs. It has
doctors. It has hazmat text. It
has all the array of everything,
if you just look at all the, the
departments in New Mexico when
something big happens, they're,
they're taxed right away.
They need backfill right away.
And
What better place to put them
than under you guys. I think
you'd be outstanding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
So we'll look forward to getting
that before the session, cause
let's start now rather than
tomorrow. You, you know what you
need. I can't pretend that I
know what you need. Um, so start
figuring that so we can start
building that plan.
Um, and, and get it stood up or
starting to stand up within the
next year or so.
We know it's coming, it's just
react to that.
And, and I guess my.
My comments to is and I don't
know what your budget looks like
cause I haven't looked at the.
The number. If you think you
need to bar.
Stuff out to build that
immediately and come to us with
a supplemental.
This is for labor force for to
start that programming.
You should look at that bar and
and figure out how we supplement
that as we come into the session
to do that, don't get
outrageous, but start thinking
about how you can access that
now or building that framework,
so when.
April, May comes around, you
say, well, we didn't get our
money till July.
That's, let's think.
Ahead in in plan and but.
Just be cautious about it and
and let us know cause that's
something if you're gonna do it,
we need to start now, not
yesterday. OK.
Or I'm not sure you want
anything, dad?
You treated good in grants.
All right.
Thank you guys. I appreciate
your time. See you later.
