leading us to support a compact.
Um, they also were here talking
about uh efforts they've made in
the past to streamline
licensing.
So we'd like to hear what's
going on. We'd like to get your
advice and your
Counsel on this matter.
With us this morning are
Kelsey George and uh Razan Baer.
And uh
I'll turn it over to you. Thank
you so much for being here.
Thank you so much, chair of TC
Pino. My name is Kelsey George
and I'm a senior policy
specialist with the National
Conference of State
Legislatures, and I'm joined
today by my colleague Razan
Batter, policy analyst with our
health program.
And together we cover all
legislative policy topics
relating to health workforce.
So I'll start my presentation
today very briefly, next slide.
On the agenda. Um,
With
briefly introducing the National
Conference of State Legislatures
or NCSL, followed by a brief
overview of some national trends
that NCSL has identified across
states from legislative tracking
and requests from legislators
and legislative staff like
yourselves. And next, I'll dive
into some strategies that we're
seeing states pursuing relating
to licensure portability.
These include reciprocity and
endorsement, license your
compacts, universal licensure
recognition and telehealth
flexibilities.
And I'll close my presentation
with additional resources, and
we'll have plenty of time for
questions and discussion.
So before I jump into
legislative trends and examples.
I want to take a moment just to
introduce NCSL. Next slide.
Um, so we are the bipartisan
organization serving state
legislatures.
We provide a variety of services
to our members like yourselves,
um, including legislators and
legislative staff, and these
included legislative tracking,
policy publications that are
publicly available on our
website, individualized research
on policy topics, presentations,
much like the one I'm providing
today and meetings that bring
policymakers together.
So the main takeaway for you all
is the NCSL is a bipartisan
organization, and NCSL staff
like myself and Razanne are
nonpartisan. We do not advocate
for or against any state
policies.
Next slide.
So the work out on this slide
was built from research requests
or the individualized questions
that we answered from state
legislators, legislative staff.
The media and other stakeholders
in 2023.
Now, it comes as no surprise to
all of you that states play an
important role in regulating.
No. You'll see a variety of
health workforce topics
including licensing, training,
reimbursement, telehealth, and
more captured here. Health
workforce was one of the hottest
topics in 2023, and this trend
has continued throughout 2024.
States play an important role in
regulating health workforce
occupations, ensuring access to
safe quality care, investing in
workforce recruitment and
retention.
And I'm excited to share some
insights from a new resource at
NCSL, the Health Workforce
Legislation Database.
So this database was created
with support from the Health
Resources and Services
Administration, and we track
enacted legislation beginning
this year on a variety of topics
that are pictured on this slide.
The database allows us to
identify trends year over year
as we continue to track in
future legislative sessions.
So the database currently
includes more than 560 enacted
bills across 46 states and
territories.
We tracked a variety of health
occupations, including
behavioral health, primary care,
long-term care, maternal health,
nursing, oral health, pharmacy,
and other allied health
professions.
And I think probably
unsurprising to all of you all
as well that the profession with
the most enacted legislation so
far this year is behavioral
health. Makes up almost 1/3 of
enacted bills that we've tracked
so far.
Primary care is also common as
well as nursing and long-term
care.
We also tracked several
workforce interventions. These
include life insurance
certification, recruitment and
retention, scope of practice and
education and training.
Under the life insurance
certification, you'll see that
there are about 270 enacted
bills that we've tracked so far
this year. That's about half of
the bills in our database, and
this includes license
portability measures like
reciprocity, endorsement,
compacts, universal licensure,
um, which we'll dig into deeper
in a moment.
Next slide.
So
Again, states play an important
role in regulating health
occupations, including through
licensure processes. About 22%
of US workers require an
occupational license to do their
job.
These licensure requirements set
by states usually include
education and training,
licensing examinations, and
years of experience.
Although some states have
decreased requirements for
occupations in recent years. The
trend in most states is to
retain or increase licensing
requirements.
Licenser has historically been
occupation specific, often
making it challenging for
licensed workers to move between
states.
And so we turn to how states are
enabling licensed or portability
or the ability to practice
across state borders.
Affordability policies generally
assume that workers who are
otherwise qualified to practice
in one state should have options
that facilitate their mobility
and reduce the time it takes to
obtain licensure in another.
Several states have also
established study or oversight
committees to enhance
portability and of occupational
licensure.
These include Georgia and
Hawaii, which established
working committees to study the
transfer of credentials and
qualifications from one state to
another without facing barriers.
Idaho established a an
occupational and professional
licensure review committee to
study this and certification
laws to determine how to ease
those barriers while maintaining
public health and safety
standards.
And Utah established an office
of Professional licensure
review, which is reviewing all
licensed occupations within the
state, and they began with
behavioral health occupations in
2023.
So as you can see,
The last slide, um, states have
several options to improve
licensure portability for health
professionals. These include
Compaqs universal licensure
endorsement and reciprocity.
And I'll spend the bulk of my
time there, but I want to
mention a couple of other
strategies briefly.
We mainly saw temporary or
limited licenses and states
waiving certain licensure
requirements during the COVID-19
public health emergency.
And many of these provisions,
often done through executive
orders have expired.
An emerging topic that we're
also seeing among licensed
portability is a focus on
foreign trained health
professionals, particularly
international medical graduates
and foreign educated nurses.
I won't dive into these topics
today, but I'm happy to share
more information during the Q&A
or following today's meeting.
So states may develop
reciprocity agreements with
specific states or set standards
for licensure by endorsement for
health professionals that meet
certain requirements.
Reciprocity often recognizes
Leinster in another state, while
endorsement allows states to
verify their qualifications for
licensure before issuing their
own license.
States often direct their
departments of occupational
licensing or specific licensing
boards to develop by rule their
own endorsement procedures.
Generally, application processes
allow licensing boards to check
an applicant's credentials and
education in whichever state
they're already licensed in.
Now this may be a useful option
for states when another state is
not a member of a compact or an
existing reciprocity agreement.
Can also save a lot of time and
headache for applicants.
So there are a few examples um
on the next slide, slide 8,
here. So Idaho enacted
legislation in 2021 that
clarified and expanded their
endorsement procedures.
The bill allowed military
members, veterans, and their
spouses to apply for licensure
by endorsement as well.
So it allowed its licensing
authorities to validate the
applicant's current, valid and
unrestricted license in another
state, district, or territory of
the US or any branch of the
armed forces or National Guard.
Last year, Utah established
reciprocity and endorsement
measures and joined the
interstate Teacher mobility
Compact and the physician. This
is physician assistant licensure
compact.
Um, this, this bill in Utah
created a process for agencies
to issue some kind of license
permit or certificate through
endorsement.
And it targeted occupations that
required at least one year of
experience practicing under the
license that was issued in
another state before they were
eligible for endorsement.
Now licensed portability
measures can also bring about
concerns about potentially
oversimplifying comparisons and
in training and education
requirements between states or
between occupations.
In 2019, Arkansas clarified that
their endorsement process was
intended to ensure that
individuals may be credentialed
to work in Arkansas if they
generally demonstrate the skills
and ethics that are required by
state law.
And this clarified that
licensing agencies couldn't
simply compare the required
hours of training or other
qualifications under Arkansas
statute with another state.
The next slide.
Interstate licensure compacts
are a type of reciprocity. They
apply to specific occupations
and their only valid in
participating states.
Compacts allow various health
professionals to provide
services to individuals in other
states, whether that's in person
or via telehealth.
Compacts generally become active
once a certain number of states
enact legislation that includes
specific uniform language or by
a certain date.
And after his seat joins, the
compact is administered by a
non-governmental organization or
a commission.
Joining the compact is voluntary
for providers and participating
states maintain the authority to
monitor health professionals
that are practicing within their
borders.
I want to note and the
information on this slide
outlines a little bit how each
compact is unique.
They operate differently and
based on the model legislation
that states must enact to
participate.
They have different
requirements.
So the main distinction that I
would make here is on how health
professionals are licensed in
each of these models.
Under a mutual recognition
model, like the Interstate
medical Licensure commission or
Compact, um, applicants are
licensed in one state and then
they must request a license from
each participating state in
which they would like to
practice.
This operates like a check the
box system where licensees
request a license from all
partic participating states that
they intend to practice in
during their initial licensure
process.
Under expedited licensure, like
the nursing licensure compact
and many newer compacts,
individuals are licensed in
their principal state only, and
then are authorized to practice
in any participating state.
Generally, licensees do not need
to select which states they
intend to practice in under this
model, and they are
automatically authorized.
You know, also see several
conditions on this slide for
slide 9, including for licensure
renewal processes.
Next slide.
So several health-related
compacts are pictured on the
slide here, and I want to note
that New Mexico is participating
in the nurse licensure compact
or NLC.
And one common question that we
hear from state legislators and
staff relating to compacts is,
does it work?
And I want to acknowledge first
that the outcomes data relating
to interstate licensure compacts
is limited, and findings are
generally mixed. There are a
handful of studies that attempt
to answer questions relating to
compacts, like their impact on
licensure revenues in states,
the number of practicing health
professionals and the quality of
care delivered.
I'll provide a snapshot of a few
studies that are published by
various academic journals, third
party organizations, and state
agencies, but I want to note
that these are only a few
examples. There are far more
studies out there.
And I'll dive more into
telehealth later on in my
presentation, but I also want to
know the evidence is generally
limited or not statistically
significant in many studies
looking at the impact of
compacts on telehealth usage and
access.
Now I want to note that I'm not
an expert on research
methodologies, so I'm not going
to summarize all of the outcomes
and nuances of these studies,
um, but
I encourage you to look at each
of these studies for more
information and more detail.
Next slide.
So the slide captured on
Captured here comes from the
Aspi Office of Behavioral
Health.
Disability and aging policy at
the federal level.
So first you'll see several
concerns that asked to be
identified among legislators and
licensing boards.
These include accountability,
varying authorities, differing
credentialing standards and
funding uncertainty.
Next, you'll see several
concerns among practitioners and
organizations.
These include administrative
burdens, inefficiency, and union
considerations.
Lastly, this study identified
several opportunities to adopt
portability measures.
These include focusing on
individual disciplines.
Including services that are
delivered via telehealth and in
person and national
coordination.
Next slide.
So
Among compacts, the nurse
licensure compact often has the
most comprehensive research. It
was originally formed in 1999,
and at least 25 states were
participating as early as 2015.
So there's a lot more data to
work with there.
Generally research on the nurse
licenser compact suggests that
it may enhance the workforce
landscape, including labor
participation, employment
levels, hours worked, earnings,
and the likelihood of working
across states.
Now, a few quick statistics
relating to the nurse licensure
compact include, according to a
study in the Journal of Nursing,
almost 25% of all registered
nurses held in interstate
license in 2020.
According to the Brookings
Institution, 1/3 of nurses cited
that their incited using their
interstate licensure for travel
nursing. 16% for telehealth and
8% for distance learning.
I want to note here that travel
nurses were essential in meeting
search workforce needs during
the pandemic, but the practice
also created unpredictable
relocation patterns and new
staffing challenges.
In general, travel nurses can
earn up to 3 or 4 times as much
as a full-time employed nurse,
and many states have implemented
price gouging laws or wage caps
to regulate the cost of travel
nursing on healthcare systems.
And the research summaries again
on this slide are
oversimplified, so I encourage
you to read the studies
themselves for more information
and more nuance, um, but the
most commonly cited cited study
for the nurse licensure compact
is by Dave Pascual and Strange,
and they use data from 1999 and
2000, early on in the
implementation of the compact.
But they found no impact on
labor market outcomes.
More recent studies suggest that
nurses are more likely to move
to participate in compact
states, and that participation
in the nurse licensure compact
increases nurse mobility.
But one study did not find
evidence of increased
telemedicine usage.
And I've included the links to a
few other studies on this slide
as well for your further
exploration.
Next time. So in addition to
compact specific studies, states
have also conducted their own
analyses of interstate compacts.
These studies often answer
specific question that a state
is looking to analyze. That
might be the costs and benefits
of participating in a compact,
comparing licensure requirements
under the compact to their
existing requirements.
Analyzing the quality of care
provided or measuring outcomes.
Several are pictured on this
slide.
The first, the Bowen Center for
Health Workforce in Indiana,
conducted an analysis of
monetary and non-monetary costs
and benefits for the state
participating in the
psychological in jurisdictional
compact or sciact.
The Maryland Health Care
Commission study.
Studied, um, or Maryland Health
Care Commission studied
interstate telehealth expansion
in 2023 and made recommendations
for the state based on their
findings.
The Massachusetts Health Policy
Commission evaluated the
Commonwealth's entry into the
nurse licensure compact in 2021,
and looked at its impact on
cost, quality and access.
And researchers from the
University of Michigan conducted
a survey of registered nurses'
perceptions of the compact
legislation in 2022.
Researchers from Rutgers
University studied the impact of
New Jersey's temporary emergency
reciprocity program on the
health workforce supply during
the public health emergency.
And New York's education
department provided an analysis
of how compact licensure
requirements compared to the
state's existing licensure
requirements in 20022.
Next slide.
So well compacts are the most
common legislatively for a
license or portability that we
see across states, states are
also looking to other
portability measures like
universal licensure recognition.
Universal licensure recognition
laws gained momentum before the
pandemic and have since grown
into a more common practice
among states.
Where compacts require each
state to enact legislation,
universal licensure recognition
often requires less coordination
between states.
Universal licensure is a form of
occupational licensing in which
a state establishes a uniform
process to grant recognition to
health professionals that are
licensed in another state.
This is different from
reciprocity or endorsement.
Instead, the scope of universal
recognition and what's required
of its applicants still varies
from state to state.
Although it may reduce time
between application and
licensure. Universal licensure
does not
Results in immediate practice.
State licensing boards maintain
the ultimate decision-making
power on licensure applications.
And the diagram on the slide
demonstrates some of the
differences between
Universal licensure and
interstate compacts.
While compacts are restricted to
specific occupations, universal
licensure often applies to all
or most, most licensed
occupations within the state.
Next slide.
So according to, according to
research done by West Virginia
University, at least 26 states
have enacted universal licensure
recognition laws as of 2024.
Most states introduced and
enacted this legislation between
2019 and 2022.
And a question you may be asking
yourself is how do all of these
different license or portability
measures work together.
So for states who have enacted
universal licensure recognition
laws. Many include explicit
language addressing the
interaction with interstate
licensure compacts and other
rules and regulations.
Two examples are included here.
So Colorado states that
applicants are not entitled to
licensure if it would violate
any existing compact or
reciprocity agreement.
In Iowa statute says it's
universal licensure recognition
requirements do not apply to
licensed certification or
registration through interstate
compacts.
3 states, Montana, New Mexico,
and Wyoming do not specify in
their laws if they exempt
reciprocity agreements or
interstate compacts from their
universal licensure
requirements.
Next slide.
Also using data from West
Virginia University, the slide
breaks down universal licensure
requirements for New Mexico and
surrounding states.
As you can see, Texas does not
have a universal licensure law
in effect.
New Mexico was the 2nd state to
enact universal licensure laws
following New Jersey.
states may require applicants to
meet substantially similar or
substantially equivalent
licensing standards.
Other states may ask for a
similar scope of practice.
Colorado's 2020 law established
substantially equivalent
requirements.
In 2022 legislation created
another pathway for licensure
through similar scope of
practice.
New Mexico established universal
licensure with a substantial
equivalency model, but a since
removed this requirement.
Two states pictured here,
Arizona and Oklahoma, require
that an out of state licensee
established residence in the new
state to receive licensure.
New Mexico specifies this in
statute that a person who
otherwise meets the requirements
for professional or occupational
license shall not be denied
licensure or licensure renewal
because the person does not live
in New Mexico.
Traditionally, universal
licensure recognition laws
require an applicant to hold a
valid, unencumbered license in
another state.
Several states like Utah have
amended this requirement to also
recognize other work experience
for individuals who are coming
from a state that may not use
licensure to regulate a certain
occupation.
And finally, coverage differs
greatly across states.
Some states like Arkansas,
Georgia, and Virginia only apply
universal licensure law,
universal license or recognition
laws to non-healthcare
occupations.
Several states, including New
Mexico and Utah have expanded
occupations that are covered
under their universal license or
recognition laws in more recent
years.
Some states may also define when
a licensing authority must
respond to applicants or require
publicly available information.
Next slide.
So a study conducted by the
Idaho Department of Health and
Welfare and the West Virginia
University also looked at the
impact of examination
requirements for licensure fees
for pharmacists across 3 states
Arizona, New Jersey, and Idaho.
New Jersey's universal licensure
law requires substantially
equivalent licensing standards,
while Arizona and Idaho require
a similar scope of practice.
Idaho removed state-specific
jurisprudence examinations for
all universal licensure
occupations, except for
attorneys.
And this study found that Idaho
experienced growth in out of
state licenses compared to the
two other states.
One factor for this was that
Idaho also established limits on
the fees that could be charged
to applicants for universal life
insurance, making their
application fee lower than
surrounding states.
The study also considered
several safety measures in Idaho
also experienced lower
malpractice cases than Arizona
or New Jersey.
Next slide.
Finally, I want to touch briefly
on several options that states
have pursued to increase access
to services that are delivered
via telehealth.
Health professionals providing
services via telehealth must be
licensed in the state where the
patient is receiving care, as
well as the state in which the
provider is located.
Now I've included a printed
brief on telehealth and
interstate licensure compacts in
your printed materials that
includes additional detail as
well.
As I noted earlier, some studies
found that compacts may have
facilitated greater use of
telemedicine.
But the evidence was mixed or
limited or not statistically
significant in many.
The states have many policy
levers relating to telehealth.
These may include strategies
that we've already touched on
like reciprocity or endorsement
or interstate compacts.
Or it may also include
exceptions to state in state
requirements.
Or special registration or
license licensure processes,
which I'll touch on briefly now.
Next slide.
States may waive certain
requirements for licensure for
occupations or allow certain
exemptions in specific
circumstances.
So you'll see on the map here
that several states.
Allow exceptions from licensure
requirements.
For episodic care in TO
consultations and brown and
other circumstances in gold.
These may apply for services
that are delivered in person or
via telehealth.
two specific examples on this
slide, Idaho and Oregon are
specific to exemptions that are
services provided via
telehealth.
Next slide.
The states may also establish
special licenses, certificates,
or registries for professionals
who are delivering services via
telehealth within their state.
Under telehealth registries or
special licenses, providers
typically must have a valid.
Current unrestricted license in
another state.
Not be subject to any past
disciplinary proceedings.
Maintain and provide evidence of
professional liability
insurance.
Not open an office or offer in
person treatment in that state.
And register annually and pay a
fee with the appropriate state
licensing board.
The map on this slide shows um
in green or teal, the states
that have active telehealth
registries or offer a special
license for providing in-state
telehealth services.
This includes 12 states and the
Virgin Islands, including New
Mexico.
There are a few examples on this
slide that demonstrate how these
registries differ across the
professions that they cover, and
the requirements that they set.
For example, Idaho and South
Carolina have registries that
are specific for behavioral
health services delivered via
telehealth.
In Vermont sets a specific time
frame of 2 years for an out of
state license.
For an out of state license and
limits the number of patients
that a provider can see to 20.
Next slide. So as I bring my
formal presentation to a close,
I want to note that NCSL has
several resources that may be of
interest to you all, as you
continue to discuss licensed
portability measures and health
and human services topics more
broadly.
All of the resources that are
included here are publicly
available on our website.
And last slide with that, um,
thank you so much for your time
today and for inviting me to
speak. I'm happy to take any
questions or I'm always happy to
provide follow-up after today's
meeting if you have any
individual questions with that.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you very much, um.
I just wanted, uh, Xander is
checked in, apparently our
universal licensing is for
military dependence, basically
restricted to them. Well, it's
an expedited licensure we added
some more in 2022.
All right.
Um, let's, let's start with
Representative who has no
questions, representative Jo
Jones may have a question or
two.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair and presenters,
appreciate you coming all this
way to to speak to us. You have
a lot of information that
applies to the whole country and
I, I guess what I get out of it,
my, my bottom line question is,
do you have recommendations on
how we should move forward so we
can maximize.
Healthcare workers especially,
because that's been such a focus
of ours.
So NCSL does not make any
recommendations or identify best
practices we're here to provide
a menu of options and trends
from across the country, so
unfortunately I don't have any
recommendations for you, um, but
if you have specific questions
on each of these and how they
interact with some of the things
that are currently existing in
New Mexico or what they look
like in other states, I'm happy
to provide that information.
Thank you. I have, I have a
license, a nursing license in 3
states and um we've had
reciprocity for a very long time
in nursing.
At least 35 years because that's
how long ago it was when I got
to Georgia license.
Um, so those are inactive now,
but I remember it was easy for
me to move from one state to
another as a nurse, and I don't
know why.
You know, we can't.
Do that. I mean, I, we do in
nursing. I know we do that.
We're compact, we're members of
a compact, but I just feel like
whatever we can do to make that
happen across the board is, is
beneficial. So thank you so much
for being here and for all of
the information.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Lopez, do you have any
questions?
Senator Ced Lopez.
Thank you. I do have um quite a
few questions. Um, with regard
to the telehealth issue.
Um
So this whole, this started
because I had a constituent who
could not get a second opinion
at UCLA and UCLA apparently, it
turns out it was an internal
memo memo that accidentally got
on their website somehow
identifying New Mexico is a
state that they would not give
second opinions to, um, because
of our onerous licensing
requirements, um.
And I, I think, and there are a
couple of other medical centers
who, who declined to give second
opinions via telehealth.
I, I, as I look at this, it
doesn't look like second
opinions are allowed by any
state, right? With that unless
it's a consultation with the
doctor. What my constituent
wanted to do was get an
independent second opinion
without having to travel to Los
Angeles.
Um, and so am I reading this
right? There is no state that
allows um
an individual to get a
telehealth second opinion.
Thank you, chair. So to my
knowledge, um, I believe that
falls under the regular purview
of services that would be
provided via telehealth, so it
doesn't fall under a unique
exception, unless, like you
said, it falls under that
consultation between two
providers specifically, um, but
I'm happy to look into that more
specifically and follow up. You
know, I, I would really
appreciate that because that um
that's what I thought was the
confusion yesterday is if UCLA
were consulting with the New
Mexico doctor, they wouldn't
have been a problem.
problem, but that's not what she
wanted, uh, what she wanted was
an independent second opinion by
a UCLA team.
And, and then I ended up getting
calls from other people who, who
also had problems getting second
opinion without having to travel
there, which of course limits a
lot of our our population. So I,
I really appreciate it. With
regard to um the the the
interstate medical licenses, the
license compact for physicians,
an issue we've uh run into that
is of great concern to me, um,
is this issue of if someone um
gets loses her license or gets
discipline.
in one jurisdiction for
providing abortions in a state
where abortions are um made
illegal or maybe they do it at 7
weeks instead of 6 weeks or
whatever, um, what would be the
impact on other states, and what
I learned yesterday was my
understanding yesterday is
New Mexico could reinstate the
license in New Mexico if it
wasn't a violation of some
policy or law that we had in New
Mexico, um,
But that wouldn't necessarily be
streamlined, it's just under the
compact, we'd have authority.
Um, could you talk a little bit
about that issue, cause that,
that to me that's a concern. Um,
although I, I'm glad if, if we
could, um, you know, make sure
that we didn't punish
physicians.
If you could answer that. Thank
you.
Yeah, thank you, chair.
I, I'm not familiar with the
specific provisions within the
IMLC model legislation that
states have to enact in order to
participate, um, but I'm happy
to look in that. Um, I'm also
happy to follow up with the
Council of State governments has
a national center that studies
and is really involved with all
of the interstate licenser
compacts, including IMLC, um, so
they may have some further
guidance on that and I'm happy
to touch base with them and then
follow up with you for specific
guidance on that. That would be
great. That would be great.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. And next uh
Representative Thompson, bless
you.
So thank you so much for your
presentation, ladies. Um, I, I
too was confused by the
universal licensure, so I looked
up the bill and figured out, so
I, I mean, we, we have been
pushing hard for compacts in New
Mexico, and there's a few
sticking points for sticking
people, um, so,
Do you have any data offhand
about any negative consequences
from compacts, you know, some
people are concerned that the
compact will be sued for
malpractice and so, so do you,
do you have any examples, uh, I
mean, has there been any major,
oh my God moments around the
compact that really were uh
unintended.
Thank you, chair. I'm not
familiar with any specific
studies that um focus or found
solely negative impacts. I think
most of them were mixed on
whether it facilitated
telehealth whether it
facilitated interstate practice.
Impacted fees, impacted access
to care, um, but I'm happy to
look into that further for you
as well. I will say 11 note that
came up across states from the
nurse licenser compact is
state's ability because of the
licensure process through the
compact to gather information on
nurses who are licensed in their
state through their licensure
process. So there were some
questions on how, how do we
measure and understand, um, the
professions that are practicing
in our state and gather data on
that specifically, um, I
believe there was a study out
of, um, again, the Bowen Center
at Indiana University School of
Medicine that I can find and
send to you as well. Thank you.
So I guess, so there haven't
been any catastrophic failings
that, you know, would say, oh,
this is a horrible idea.
Not to my knowledge, but I'm
happy to look into that and
follow up. Thank you so much.
Um, and then just, just a
reminder for um for the
committee and for others that if
we pass compacts, we can't amend
them. They have to be word for
word what the compact says,
which has been a sticking point,
but hopefully folks can
understand why, why we all need
to have the same language or we
just get ourselves back where we
started from. So thank you so
much for coming here.
Enjoy Santa Fe and uh that's all
Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, um,
along that same line, as anyone
studied um whether uh.
states that have gone into the
compact, um,
have lost a lot of their
healthcare providers. Thank you,
chair. Um, I will say again that
research on the compact is very
limited, especially for some of
the newer compacts, um,
specifically because many states
enacted them during the public
health emergency amid many other
strategies like reciprocity.
Temporary licenses waiving
certain requirements. So
individually isolating um the
impact of the compact versus
other licensure measures, um,
specifically in the last few
years has been very challenging,
um, but I'm not aware of any
studies that specifically have
been able to measure
With, with that level of detail,
the amount of providers that
brought into the state or did
not bring into the state, um.
Because again, the limitations
on how they're able to measure
that in relation to all of the
other measures that states have
pursued.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Kelsey. Also, you had mentioned
something about Utah, um, I
couldn't pick it up really
quickly. Um, they did something
in that reduce their risk.
Which or I'm not sure if that
would meant, you know, they had
less malpractice. I should have
written a slide number down.
Um, it was later.
Uh, thank you, chair. I believe
that's on slide 8 for the
examples of reciprocity and
endorsement, so they enacted
legislation that um created
additional endorsement and
reciprocity pathways, and they
limited that specifically to
individuals who were licensed in
another state for at least one
year before they were eligible
to practice within a state. Um,
the other example from Utah that
I highlighted was on their
Office of Professional licensure
review. So that was created in
2022 and
was created to review all of
their licensed occupations, they
began with behavioral health in
2023, last year and released a
report that led to several um
legislative actions in this past
session, um, specifically
looking at behavioral health
occupations and um addressing
the gap in the career pathways,
so particularly for
baccalaureate professions, um,
so that's another example I
believe there their Office of
Professional licenser Review is
also looking at nursing and a
few other occupations in the
coming years, so they're
They're continuing on with other
occupations in that way as well.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative uh.
I just want to mention in
connection with your question on
slide 12, Representative
Ferrari.
There is a summary of research
on compacts, no, on the nurse
licensure compact.
And it's really interesting that
in 2019, there were two studies
done, apparently covering the
same period.
One that suggested by Ghani in
2019, no impact on migration
flows within the state.
But made divert some flows to
non-compact states.
And also that same year, another
study.
Bye
Uh, uh, Johnson and Kleiner,
nurses more likely to move to
participating compact states
than non-com, which tends to
tell me that we have no idea
what the impact of these has
been because there's so many
other factors going on. So it,
if we're looking to the research
to guide our decision making,
it's pretty fuzzy right now, it
looks like, correct, uh that is
that an accurate statement? Yes,
thank you, chair. I would say um
the nurse licensure come back
because of the years that it's
been.
Um, in effect, in, like I said,
many states has a little bit
more data and measurement. These
are just a handful of studies.
There are many, many more, if
you would like full literature
view, I can send you a whole
bunch. Um, but the, the research
generally on the nurse licensure
compact and other compacts as
well that I've been in effect
for less time, um, is generally
mixed and again, difficult to
measure with all of the other
affordability measures that
states have put into effect. I,
I think we generally prefer to
make our decisions.
With any information. So
keep it to yourself
it's interesting you go next.
Thank you.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I think you said um earlier that
Uh, this was a voluntary process
by the individual, and my
understanding was it wasn't.
So, the art state law, so
Xander, could you clarify that?
OK,
I heard them say that it was a
voluntary process by the
individual, but when we did the
nurse licensure compact. I
didn't think it was voluntary. I
thought it was.
A sweep
Did you answer that?
Or you don't know.
I'm
OK.
Yeah
I should have discussed this at
home earlier.
So it'd be fine if she wants the
insurance.
Do, do you want to go ahead and
explain why, what you know that
we don't know.
Please, yeah.
This is the lobbyist for the
nurses in 2003 did the initial
nursing compact worked with you
all who were here and did the
initial nursing compact.
And in New Mexico we have the
executive director of the board
of nursing here, but we, um,
there's in, uh, you're able to
get a New Mexico license or a
compact license in New Mexico.
So you can pick when you first
graduate. Isn't that right,
Gina?
Yes, OK. What's the difference?
Well, a compact license enables
you to take your license to one
of the states that already has a
compact and initial license you
can practice here. Now, the
problem
that would
not do a you don't want to
And also we have undocumented
people with licenses and they
can't get a.
So, but the, but the, but an
important thing for, for the
nursing, uh, trying to see when
we have adequate um staff
because we don't, you know,
we're 56, 7000 nurses short, we
don't know who comes to New
Mexico on a compact license.
So we could have 2000 people
here on a compact license, but
the board of nursing doesn't
collect that data because
they're not allowed to.
So that is a problem with all
the compacts is that there is no
way that a practitioner who
comes to our state on any
compact license, even though we
only have nursing right now. We
don't, you know, wherever
they're employed knows they have
a license, but the state in
looking at our, our workforce
issues that we don't know who's
here on a compact license.
So.
That's more than you wanted to
know. So thank you, uh Miss
Siegel, and thank you, Chair,
but that was part of my comments
coming up, and it, it might be
something that you take back for
research.
Is that individual states don't
really
have access to track all the
information for their state.
That's all done. Thank you.
Yeah, I, I actually did not
realize that we didn't, I
thought that
That it just meant that they had
to check in with the board, the
nursing board and
And that they could keep track
that way, but apparently they
don't, they just come and go,
but not all the the
Compact nurses who are here from
other states.
traveling nurses, right? I mean,
couldn't they come here, move
here, and just live here from
now on and, and
Well
Or they always just floating
around, Mr. Chair, if they move
here, they're supposed to get in
New Mexico compact license.
So, but what we have in New
Mexico on our borders on Texas,
the two Texas borders, uh,
Colorado border. We have nurses
with compact licenses who live
in Texas or live in Colorado who
work here, and that was one of
the reasons in 2018 when the
National Council on Boards of
Nursing said we had them do a
new compact that we had to pass
it here in 3 days or suddenly
all these nurses that didn't
live in New Mexic.
Mexico, but we're working here
would have had to get a New
Mexico.
Good.
Or not. Thank you.
Uh, Reverend Reverend
Representative Chase.
OK. Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr.
Chair, uh, could you please, are
the, the presenter explained uh
based on the comment that was
made by your vice chair that
once we enter a compact, that it
has to follow the compact and it
can't be changed. Who's writing
this initial document called the
Compact.
Thank you, chair. I'm happy to
provide clarification on that.
So as compacts are created, um,
there is a commission created
and there are um there's more
information available through
the Council of State
governments, which I'm happy to
provide on how that process
works, but essentially once the
commission and the participating
um stakeholders come up with
this model legislation, states
have to enact that specific
legislation, so you can't make
any modifications to the
statutory language, if you're
adopting.
it for that specific compact,
um, which again, back to the
previous question is one of the
reasons I wanted to emphasize
that not all compacts are the
same and they each operate very,
very differently depending on
the statutory language that's
put into those model bills, um,
and again, that's, that's part
of why, um, the mutual
recognition model and expedited
licensure model and
understanding how they operate
within that and the other
requirements that exist are
important to understand before
um moving forward to join.
Compact. Um, so for an expedited
licensure model, for example,
they're automatically authorized
to participate or to provide
services if they have that
compact licensure um in any
participating states, um,
Versus the mutual recognition
model, they would have to check
the box on every state that they
would like to participate in. So
that's part of the distinction
if they decide to go for a
compact licensure. That's part
of the difference, um it's not
answering my question. Who
writes the the document called
the compact, but wherever this
document is written, it can
always be amended, but uh it
it's unclear whether the central
document is being formed that
states are buying into.
So, each, for each compact it it
differs depending on what that
group looks like, um, for
example, there's funding from
the health resources and
Services Administration
developed a social work compact,
um, and to get buy in from
states to participate in that
social work compact. There are
different stakeholders depending
on which compact you're talking
about. So if you have a specific
compact that you'd like
information on or if you'd like
me to look at the Council of
State governments breakdown for
that. I'm happy to send that
information to you.
But they, they draft that model
legislation and once it's
enacted in a state,
It isn't changed.
OK,
so with respect to the documents
that you passed out, there are a
number that are highlighted in
blue. I, I want to know how do
we access these? Do we have to
go to the website in order to
see them because we cannot click
them on based upon what I see,
for example, there is a report
that is written by uh Hesa, and
there are some other documents
in here that are highlighted
which seem to be important
occupational interstate compact
action. I mean, where are these
reports? How do we find them?
Yes.
Thank you, chair. Um, so all of
those are publicly available.
Those are hyperlinked, so in the
PDF version that's on the
website for the Health and Human
Services Committee, you can
access all of those hyperlinks,
um, as well as if they're for
specific NCSL resources, they're
all publicly available on our
website.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then I had a couple of
questions myself, but I, I would
just say that typically,
At least with the psyche, the
psychologist compact.
There were
A few states that got together
and decided they needed a
compact, and then they just have
grown.
Since then, but the, but, but
the participating states have a,
have a board, and you can sit on
the board if you're a
participating state, you get a
representative, and that's the
group that wrote the compact,
and then you buy into that
compact, and if you don't accept
that wording, you can't buy into
it. You have to accept that
wording, and that's what one
some of the opposition to
compacts at, at the Senate
Judiciary Committee has focused
on that you can't make any
amendments in it.
But that's, I think it, it makes
comments, pretty common sense
that if we're agreeing to
something,
We're not letting you have a
little caveat of your own that
let you out of it if, if
everybody else is buying into
it, so I, I think the the idea
of the wording being
unchangeable, makes sense, but
some people find that an
oppressive uh condition, yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So a few
years ago, I got invited to go
to DC for a meeting for compacts
for speech and language
pathologists and audiologists,
and it was kind of the, the
The roots of it, they were
discussing what should be in it
and that, so I, I think the
point that it comes about in
different ways, you know, it
could be that the national
organization brings brings for
the um
Speech and language with their
um national board, um brings
folks together and then withyak
as the chair said, so it looks
different depending on which
board it, which, which
profession it is.
Thank you, ma'am. Bye.
So I did have a couple of
questions. One, on slide 5, you
go through a lot of, I mean, it
shows there's a lot of interest
in this topic, because all these
bills were introduced.
Do you have a similar
Chart showing what got out, what
came out the other end of the
machinery.
Yes, thank you, chair. So all of
the legislation that's tracked
in our health workforce database
is enacted. Um, so we don't
trust and introduced bills, it's
only bills that are enacted
within these are all enacted.
Um, and for the life insurance
certification category
specifically that may be
licensing a new occupation like
dental therapists. It may be
altering licensure requirements
for specific occupations or it
may be some of these licensure
portability measures. I will say
that the majority, um,
Several bills within that are
specific to compacts. We've seen
a lot of interest and action
among states adopting different
compacts. And when you say other
professions on that chart, that
is other healthcare professions.
Would that include social work?
Uh, thank you, chair. Social
work um is generally included
under behavioral health, other
professions includes things like
eye care professionals,
optometrists, massage
therapists, naturopaths,
dieticians.
Um, then on, um,
like
Which is the one where you have
a slide 10.
Um, you don't list social work
there.
The social work compact. Is
there some reason why?
Thank you, Chair. To my
knowledge, the social work
compact is still under
development and not active.
Those are all active compacts
that states are participating in
and
Uh, distributing compact
licenses through. There are
several compacts that are under
development that have not been,
have not reached that threshold
of the number of states that
have to participate for it to
be.
Enacted or um officially active,
um, or it hasn't reached that.
Threshold date yet.
Good.
OK, well, thank you for this. I
know, uh, we're getting lots of
uh requests from the social work
community in this state to
consider the social work
compact. That's why I asked
that, but and I think
Representative Thompson is, is
going to introduce such a bill,
but
Lots of food for thought here.
Thank you for coming and anybody
else have any other final
thoughts or questions?
Yes.
Use your mic, please.
Mr. Chair, so social workers are
not included in the counseling
compact that we said, so that
specifically excluded or cause
that was confusing to me.
It's a different profession,
with different academic uh uh uh
requirements. However, some
social workers are also
counselors,
so they couldn't
some social workers do
counseling, but their licensed
as social workers. Oh, I see. So
it's just a different licensure.
OK,
some psychologists do their
preparation
was different. OK, I got it.
Thank you. Yes. Um, on page 16
where you put the universal
licensure.
Requirements by state. It's
really outstanding how New
Mexico doesn't have any of the
other requirements.
That some states do or don't
have. Um, does that mean that
we're a little bit more um
accepting of whatever the
person's credentials are.
Thank you, chair. So for the
first two columns on there, the
substantially equivalent
requirements are very specific
language on.
What those requirements look
like and establishing that
equivalency, so that's a much
more restrictive, um, curfew.
Some states use a similar scope
of practice, so a similar scope
of activities they are allowed
to perform under your license in
another state, um, New Mexico
looks at a broader, to my
understanding, a broader scope
than just those two things. So
those are just two very specific
language pieces that come up in
universal licensure recognition
laws, um, and with
experience recognition that's
specifically recognizing a
specific number of years that
you've been licensed in another
state versus some other states
like I mentioned, look at work
experience that you weren't
licensed because you're coming
from a state that may not
license that particular
occupation or require a formal
certification process.
OK, thank you very much. Thanks
for letting me have an extra
question.
Any other comments or questions?
Well, thank you again very much.
We really appreciate your
Your presentation and and we
always rely on NCSL for good
information. Thank you.
Um, and we see a whole bunch of
people have just joined us in
the gallery, uh, we're in the
audience, and I understand that,
am I correct that you're with
the Model UN? Is that what this
is or student, what is this?
Student nurses Day at the
Capitol.
Well, you just missed an
explanation of why the nursing
compact has been uh enacted in
the state of New Mexico and why
we're so confused as to whether
that's been a good thing or a
bad thing.
But it's great to have you here.
Thank you for choosing nursing
as a future profession and thank
you for coming and sharing some
time with us this morning.
We're now going to find out
about the dental profession.
Some of you may want to switch
after hearing this. So, uh,
Doctor Shipsmith, we'll, we're
ready for your presentation.
So we have besides Doctor
Shrubsma, we have um
Uh, Christine
Na Na
Nathan,
uh, professor and director of
the division of dental hygiene,
and the vice chairman of the
Department of Dental Medicine at
UNM.
And we have uh Doctor Henry Chu.
Um, associate professor and
director of special care clinic.
The Department of Dental
Medicine at UNM. Of course,
Doctor Shipsma is the executive
director of the New Mexico
Dental Association.
So we'll turn it over to you,
doctor.
Oh, there we go. OK, thanks. Uh,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for um
having us this morning. We've
tried to coordinate a little bit
and we'll hand it off to each
other a little bit as we go
along and, and kind of see where
we're there. Um, also, I'm not
used to the, the new high tech
that you have where you actually
show slides, so you have a
presentation in front of you,
but you'll have to look at it on
paper. We can pass on, yes, mhm.
So
Um, and there's a lot of
information that's in the packet
and I'm not gonna read or talk
about every single thing that's
in there. Some of that's just
resource information for you and
then if you have questions we
can answer them for sure.
The first thing I wanted to
mention here in the on the first
pages is talking about the power
2030 plan. This is kind of a
strategic plan for advocacy when
it comes to oral health, um, in
New Mexico, um, for this decade.
Um, it was uh adopted by the
dental association in 2021, um,
and kind of followed on a
previous 10-year plan that we
had, um, and, um, talks a little
bit about some of our objectives
with regard to dental health,
um, not all of it is legislative
things. There's a lot of
educational
and other kinds of goals that
are in there, um, to achieve,
but you can see kind of a
summary of it and if you have
ever questions about that, um,
you'll hear about some of the,
some of these objectives and the
things that we talked about when
I was gonna give you a teaser
that I'm gonna talk about Compaq
too, so, um, all, all compacts
are not created the same, but
we'll get to that before we're
all done. Um, so in the next,
um, slides are a little bit
about, uh, just kind of the
state of the state when it comes
to dentistry and and so on.
Um, we've got a little over 1000
dentists in the state right now,
um, actively practicing.
Um, the next slide talks a
little bit about the, the
division with regard to
ethnicity, um, and gender, um,
and there are, are more
statistics um on the next page
to talk a little bit about age,
and I think the thing that I
would point out on that, on that
each slide, I guess is that
we're having an increasingly
younger um workforce when it
comes to the dentists in the
state. So people at times have
talked about the, the graying of
the profession and things like
that, well, we're, we're past,
we're past that hump, um, and we
a lot more young people that are
um that that are here now and uh
um and that's a good thing I
think for our future when it
comes to that.
Um,
Some things that are happening
with regard to practice and
things, I think most people
think of Dennis in, in more of a
private practice setting or um
some kind of a public clinic,
but there are other settings
that are, are, are starting to
predominate. Um, so,
A lot of that is being driven by
the fact that, um, student debt
is high. Um, we've now topped
300,000 as the average um debt
for a dental student when
they're graduating, but it's
important to remember that not
You know, for every person that
has 300, there's somebody who
has 0, and so there are actually
people that have an awful lot
more than 300,000 when they're
graduating and we see that it's
not that uncommon to have 400 to
$500,000 worth of debt for
students, at least from certain
settings.
Um
We in New Mexico do have a
program through the Western
Interstate Commission on Higher
Education. We're, we're, because
we don't have a dental school
here in New Mexico. Um, we send
our students to other states and
support that to some extent. Um,
it's been a good program for New
Mexico, 95% of the students that
go on a witchy, um, they call it
the scholarship, that's not
exactly the way it works
typically, but um those that go
on that um do have a requirement
to come back to the state, but
then they tend to stay in the
states, so we actually have a 9.
5% return rating um from, from
those who go with itchy.
Um
The normally right now, um, the
amount that the schools received
that except New Mexico students
under that program is about
30,000 a year from the state or
from our state, um.
And that seems like a lot of
money except that that's
probably only about half of what
it actually costs to subsidize
the students, so, uh, that means
that these other states um or
private institutions that are
hosting our students are
actually kicking in almost a
similar amount of money in order
to to pay that. So, um, although
we contribute something, we are
still um
You know, relying on the charity
of others, I guess, in order to
get our students uh trained. Um,
and then the, the last thing is
that almost nobody hangs out a
shingle anymore, so that idea of
graduating from school and
opening up a practice just
doesn't happen. Um, and so most
students are looking for some
type, type of an employment
opportunity, um, and we'll talk
a little bit about what those
kinds of things are.
One of those is there's a lot
more um with large group
practices and because of that
student debt, there's a lot of
appeal, um, a lot of the large
group practices are able to give
signing bonuses. Um, there's
immediate source of income when
they come out of school. There's
often benefits, um, which aren't
always the case in in smaller
practice settings.
But the larger practices are
also less likely to be located
in rural communities, um, and
they often have higher turnover,
um.
Just
Because students are um
employees, they tend to look for
other employment opportunities,
and so, um, they don't have a
stable, uh, a workforce
typically. That's not true of
all, I mean, I certainly there
are different models and
different things, but that tends
to be the the case with that.
That next slide just shows a
chart of where New Mexico is
with regard to, um, where our
young, youngest, um, um,
Uh, new dentists are going and
so um we're 2nd in the nation
when it comes to those who are
in large group practices, so,
um, uh, more than 1/3 of our new
dentists, um, are practicing in
practices that have more than 10
locations, and so that that that
model of the, the private
practitioner in their small
practice is kind of going by the
wayside when it comes to to the
practice of dentistry.
Um
And then, um, a DSO, that's a
dental service organization, is
one type of larger group
practice, um, it has a little
bit of a different model in
that, um, it tends to be
dentist-owned practices, but
they're receiving uh money and
support and services through a
dental service organization. Um,
there's different models of
that, some of them look a little
bit more like a franchise, um,
but, um, you know, they, they
are very predominant right now,
I guess, um, in.
practices that are forming, and
you can see that New Mexico has
a, is a high percentage compared
to the nation with regard to
people that are in affiliated
DSO practices, so.
Um,
Then the next slide is a little
bit of a trend about what's
happening um with dentists in
the state and it's a concerning
trend to us particularly, you
can see that in 2017, the ratio
of dentists to the population
was 53.9%, but if you move out
to where we are now, we've
dropped that from there to
47.7%. Um, that's not a huge
drop in terms of numbers, um,
but it's a concerning drop
because it's so steady and maybe
the, the asters at the bottom,
it's that small print, I guess
that's maybe.
Most concerning to us. So during
those years prior to 2017, where
you're attracting a lot of
dentists to the state. But since
then, we've been losing Dennis
on a pretty regular basis, so
we're gonna give you some
reasons why that is. I don't
have scientific reasons to tell
you, these are a little bit more
anecdotal with regard to that,
but um the main thing is we're
just not really competing with
surrounding states very well,
and I think people, um, you
know, dentists are aware of the,
the fact that there are greener
pastures, um, on the other side
of the border.
Um, and that doesn't seem to be
improving at the moment. Um,
some of the reasons for that,
uh, Medicaid is a, a troubled
system and especially troubled
when it comes to dental, and
I'll go into a few more details
about that after a little bit.
GRT is still a big um issue with
regard to dental, um, services,
um, that takes a big chunk out
of, um, you know, the, the
dental dollar that's spent, um,
so when you're taking that chunk
of tax out of there, that's that
same amount of money would buy
more.
Colorado or Arizona or Texas and
so um that's a problem. Um,
we're one of the most litigious
states in the country when it
comes to malpractice and and so
on, um, that's not because New
Mexico's dentists are more
likely to commit malpractice,
it's because there's just a lot
more lawsuits that are going on
in in um in our state, so.
And um we just have a problem
with uh a lack of growth in the
economy. Um, so, you know, I
mean that there's not enough,
there's not enough new people.
Coming to the state, I mean, our
census numbers have been pretty
flat for decades already. I mean
that's a, that's a problem when
it comes to any kind of a
business, um, but especially
small businesses like that.
So one of the reasons we talked
about is uh Medicaid, um, and
I'm not gonna go into a lot of
details about how it works. I'll
cite some things that I think
are problematic, but you can see
on that next page a little bit
about, you know, where we, where
we fall in, in the nation with
regard to um
Um, some migration issues and,
and so on with that. Um, that
just kind of reinforces what we
know from the numbers that we're
seeing as well, so, um, but one
of those is the Medicaid, um,
fees we know and if you look on
that map, you can see that we're
surrounded by states that
actually have some better um
better situation when it comes
to reimbursement, but we also
know that there's quite a few
other um issues that are, are a
problem. And um you know, these
are problems both for the
patients and
for, and for dental practices.
Um, while we have a very, um,
Liberal benefit for adults
compared to some states is still
a very inadequate benefit and so
there's lots of things that are
not covered and a lot of things
that, um, you know, make it
difficult for practices to, to
take the patients but also for
patients to receive the care
that um they would need. Um, the
restrictions and the rules that
are part of our Medicaid system,
um, tend to discourage care
rather than encourage care, and
so, um, there's reasons why
people don't seek the care
because they're, they're not
being encouraged.
to do that. Um, it has really
limited specialty care, um, and
that's a problem as we have more
complex specialty services and
so on, there's less of that to
be offered.
And there's just fewer options
because of the number of people
that are there, so, and um we're
we're gonna talk more about
special needs specifically, but
that's a, a weakness in Medicaid
as well and particularly because
there's so many people with
special needs that are covered
by Medicaid, but then in New
Mexico, there's just a lot of
people that are covered by
Medicaid period, so.
Um, from dentist standpoint,
reimbursement is always an
issue. Um, we're not keeping up,
um, a lot of the states, um,
surrounding us have made some
kind of bold moves with regard
to that. And um that, you know,
it, it's not helpful to talk
about competition, but it's um
helpful to rate ourselves a
little bit and understand where
we're failing, um, when those
kinds of things are happening,
so, um,
We talked already about the
rules, um, one of the big
problems we're having is
credentialing, and I hear from
practices almost daily who are
waiting for somebody to get
credentialed, but they cannot
provide any care, so, um, uh,
you know, what the answers to
that are more complicated, but
credentialing is, is a, is a
huge issue when it comes to uh
Medicaid.
Um, and then the other just has
to do with, with some things
that are sort of inherently
problematic with regard to
Medicaid, um, you know, in the
way that it's worked. Um,
The trends that I think we're
seeing in Medicaid that are
dangerous are the, uh, that's
most small practices are not
taking Medicaid and are
increasingly um getting away
from that. That's primarily
financial consideration. Larger,
larger practices that have
Medicaid-oriented business
continue to, to do it, but a lot
of them are, are telling us that
they may not be able to continue
doing it because they just, the
model is just not sustainable
for them.
Um, and the public clinics will
continue, um, but they may lose
capacity because there's just
not as much money that's there
to, um, you know, to have them
maintaining their capacity,
they're going to lose that a
little bit, so they will be
there to, as a safety net um
organization, but we may be
losing some of the net, so.
Um
We, the dental association does
have a, a task force that's
operating right now to make some
recommendations with regard to
Medicaid and doing a little bit
more research. I don't really
have any concrete um
recommendations to make at this
point, but I think we're hoping
that we'll have some of those
kinds of things within the next
6 months for sure, uh, maybe
even before that. Um, we have
been working with the um
The department, which I guess is
HCA now. I'm still learning that
one, but, um, uh, I, I think, I,
hopefully, we've gotten their
attention anyway. Um, we, we
don't know exactly what things
are gonna look like, but at
least I think they're starting
to pay a little bit of attention
to what some of the problems
are. Yes, I'm sorry. Well,
you're on that topic. Did any of
the reimbursement, Medicaid
reimbursement increases that we
paid for go to dental care.
Um, I'm gonna say no. I, I don't
absolutely know that there's
something that may have filtered
through a little bit, but it
hasn't made any, no, no market
increase. A lot of those
increases that have happened
most recently happened as a
result, uh, I mean, they were,
was indexing, so, you know,
there's indexing to Medicare and
other kinds of things and
because Medicare doesn't have a
dental component to it, indexing
didn't apply, and so we just
haven't really seen that change
in dental very much yet.
Um, going on to GRT, I, that's
an old topic and I don't have to
spend very much time on it, but
again, we're one of the only two
states that has that on medical
services or healthcare services,
and that's obviously a problem.
Um,
The next slide talks a little
bit about the workforce
distribution. Um, this is an old
map and it hasn't changed for
several years, as you know,
because of the, the data breach
that happened there, but the
situation hasn't changed
appreciably and so the areas
that have the, the most critical
needs are down in the um
southeast corner of the state
and the um west central area and
and so on.
We recognize what those problems
are, um, the, the southeast
corner of the state.
Yes, um, a part of that premium
basin problem and so Texas also
recognized the exact same
problems and have addressed that
somewhat, and we'll talk about
that in the next slide just a
little bit, but um, but we also
know that we're just not
attracting students from Navajo
Nation and, and so on and, and
particularly with certain in um
ethnicity, so we need to, we
need to start attracting
students who are willing to go
and and serve those populations.
Um, it's just harder to attract
people to go there if you don't
have some.
background and some um
foundation um in those um
cultures, so.
So the next slide talks a little
bit about uh two dental schools
that are relatively new, um,
and, um, in our area, uh, I
think we've talked before a
little bit about the, the
school, um, uh, in El Paso at
Texas, it's a Texas Tech um
school. Um, that's the school
that we've been excited about as
a regional program because of,
because of where it is to some
extent, but also because they're
um like culturally compatible
with us, and, um, have, have
been doing, um, working with us
kind of closely. Um, we
were able to get uh a contract
situation which is comparable to
Wiy with that particular school.
And Texas already has an
arrangement where any of the
border counties, students that
come from one of the border
counties received in-state
tuition at a Texas institution.
So between, between those two
things, we can pretty much cover
any New Mexico student that
wants to go to that school under
that itchy um funded um
arrangement. So we have a
memorandum of understanding with
the school.
Um
There are, um,
That school is about to graduate
its first class, so they, they,
there's no dentists that have
come from that school yet, but
they're 4th year students are
currently um in class and we'll
complete that at the end of this
year.
Um, it's not a very big school,
and the, the frustration that we
have with that one. Although we,
we love that school and love
working with it is that all the
Texas schools, there's a law
that they can't have more than
10% of their students that come
from out of state.
And so, um, when you only have a
class size of 40, which is what
their first class size was,
that's not very many people. Um,
and even though they've
increased the size of that class
up to 60, um, that's still not
very many people. The good news
is, however, that we New Mexico
students make up a pretty big
chunk of the of the 6 that were
able to get there, um, and they
do a lot of recruiting in state
and so we're, we're happy that
um they've been really closely
involved with it. And uh
cooperative.
Um, the other school there is
the Toro College of Dental
Medicine, um, and you may have
seen this on the news, some that
they broke ground on a clinic in
Albuquerque, um, that's part of
the, it's actually a remodel,
uh, of some of the facilities at
the Loveless campus, so Touro
College, um, which is a school
in New York, kind of suburban
New York City, uh, purchased the
Loveless medical research, um,
and they're using that as
And of their research arm for
the, for the uh university, um,
but then
They inherited the facilities
and are able to use one of those
facilities for a dental clinic.
And the model that they're
using, um, students will come
from New Mexico. Oh, I'm sorry,
they're not from New Mexico,
they're coming from almost
everywhere else, but, um, going
to the, going to the school in
New York for 2 years, and then
half of their class is going to
come to New Mexico, um, to do
the clinical side during the
last two years. So they won't,
it won't be a regular school,
but they will be, they will have
a regular dental clinic. It'll
be the uh dental school.
clinic that will be there. Um,
You know, at this point, so
students, if, if a student from
New Mexico is going to go to
Toro, they need to go to New
York for 2 years and then they
would come back and, and go
here. And I know that the school
has intentions of recruiting to
do that. Um, I think there may
be a New Mexico student that's
in there, um, in, in, there may
be one student that's in the
class that's um
is currently a um let's see.
Currently a D1, which is their
first year, and so they would be
coming to New Mexico in 2 years,
um, but that, that particular
class. Um, it, it's a clinic of
about, uh, uh, well, it's a 100
chair clinic, I believe, and
they will have 200 students that
will be here, um, when that
starts.
Um
And who would they be serving in
that clinic. Uh, the community,
I mean, I, I think they'll be
trying to attract.
Attract patients from that area,
and they're located in the
international district there in
at Loveless campus and so on. So
I think they're, they're hoping
to recruit and be able to
provide those kinds of services
there.
Um
We're certainly working with
them, I think in terms of, you
know, we, welcoming them and
trying to, um, you know, help
with adapting to it. I, I'm sure
there's going to be some issues,
there's some cultural issues of
coming from New York City and
then setting up shop in our
international district, um, but
hopefully they'll be able to
adapt to that and, and, you
know, find some some traction.
Um, I think we've also been
talking about ways that we might
see this as an opportunity to
actually um educate some of our,
our
Our students from New Mexico,
um, in, in some way. Um,
shipping them to New York is
probably not the best way to do
that, but if we could figure out
a way to do the 1st 2 years
here, and then, um, join their
clinic or something like that at
that point, that would be a good
thing. So we continue to, to
talk with them about what the
opportunities might be and we
want to have a good relationship
with them.
Um
I'm gonna kind of skip through
some of this um pathways for
students. I the one thing I, I
talked about this all the time
is the BADDS program, which we
don't have, but we'd have the
AMD program and we could
certainly start recruiting more
students in through that. The
difference between a BA, um, DDS
and a BA MD is almost nothing
until you go to dental school or
medical school. So therefore
that program could operate here
in New Mexico in a, in a pretty
easy way, it would not take very
much for us to be able to.
to a DDS program, we just have
to have a school to send them
to. So, um, you know, we'd
certainly be interested in doing
that at Texas Tech, if there was
enough slots to make that
worthwhile and be able to make
that work. But we're also
looking at that as a possibility
with whether they're clinical
facility might, you know, might
be able to serve us in that way.
So, um, I, I, you know, again,
something we need to keep on
talking about, but that in order
for us to really um impact
things we need to build the
pipeline and, and this would be
a
way to start getting to that.
Um, and then the next slide,
I'll just let you look at.
That's kind of an idea of what
the impact of a dental practice
in different locations are, um,
the main takeaway I would take
from that is that um it's good
business for rural communities
to attract to dentists, and so,
um, you shouldn't necessarily as
a rural community, just expect
them to show up there, but you
should be recruiting a dentist
to come to your community
because they will more than pay
for themselves. And, um, you
know, we would love to help you
if you, if we can.
So
Um, the next couple of pages are
kind of talking about our
supporting dental workforce. Um,
I'll let you look over that. It
talks a little bit about what
the different programs are in
New Mexico, but I would like to
hand it over to uh Miss Nathan
and to talk a little bit about
the UNM program and how that
fits into this.
Thank you, Doctor Scripsma. Uh,
UNM has had a program since
1962, and we actually have 3
academic programs. We have a
entry level bachelor's degree to
become a dental hygienist, uh,
program where hygienists who
have associate degrees from
other colleges are able to get
their bachelor's degree. We
actually have a um a lot of the
students who go to San Juan
College and Donna Anna Community
College graduate from that, and
we have a.
agree with uh Donna Anna where
they are getting their
associates and bachelor's at the
same time, um, and that's been,
uh, very well enrolled by Donna
and students, and then we have a
master's program in dental
hygiene, where we focus on um
teaching dental hygienists to
become educators and also to be
uh working in school-based
clinics, um, federally qualified
health centers integrating
dental and medical, um, nursing
homes. We, uh, a lot of our
alumni.
do a lot of those types of
things, um, we've had about
close to 2000 graduates, um,
over the years, so a lot of
dental hygienists in New Mexico
are graduates of the UNM
program. We just received
accreditation a couple of years,
a couple weeks ago, it, it
wasn't years ago for sure.
We did really well. We surpassed
all the standards, so we have a
really uh prestigious dental
hygiene, uh, school in uh New
Mexico, um, our focus is on
direct access to dental
hygienists and that's why we
have that educational component.
A lot of the community programs
we have are um.
Supported and we have
collaborations with actually
Delta Dental of New Mexico, so
we have
3 clinics where our students, we
have faculty that work in the
clinics and our students get to
rotate there in schools and we
have one in the pediatric clinic
at UNMH and in the Carri Tingley
clinic as well. So students get
exposed to a lot of um ways to
engage the community and really
spread dental prevention, um,
We have terrific faculty, uh,
UNM grads, a lot of our grads
also teach in the other programs
in New Mexico as well, and we
have a special needs, uh, dental
hygiene faculty uh position that
will be opening soon and Doctor
Chuu will talk more about the
special needs. Um, thanks,
Christine, and uh thank you,
chair, for uh allowing me to
speak today. Uh, my name is
Henry Chu. I'm a uh residency
trained.
uh dentist with 25 years of
experience treating individuals
with special needs. I was
recruited here, um, by
Representative Thompson to do 3
things. One is to decrease the
uh OR waiting time for
individuals with special needs.
2 is to revitalize the special
needs program which has been
dormant for about 2 or 3 years
and 3 is to train the next
generation.
dental hygienist and dentist
because I'm getting a little old
in the tooth or long in the
tooth, and so we need to start
thinking about replacing Henry
Chu with some younger uh
practitioners.
Um, I definitely want to, uh,
thank, uh, uh, Governor Grisham
and especially uh Representative
Thompson and Doctor Richards and
Doctor Finn at UNM without your
support, I wouldn't be here. And
um I would just like to reflect
on, uh, one case that we saw
recently that shows how your
support is directly impacting
the citizens of New Mexico. Uh,
we had a special
patient that was nonverbal that
came in and the parents told me
that that that he had been
hitting his face for the last 2
or 3 years, and his behavior had
become so uh uncontrollable.
They were thinking about
institutionalizing him.
And so, uh, we got involved in
the case. We took him to the OR.
We found he had several teeth
that were decayed, a lot of
cavities. We got them fixed up a
week later, the parents came
back and said,
It's a miracle, you know, he,
uh, his behavior has improved.
We've decreased his uh
medications. We're no longer
thinking about uh having to
institutionalize him.
So the decisions and the support
you guys are giving us has
changed one person's life
dramatically. It's kept the
family together and saved the
state.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars
in institutionalized care for a
lifetime. So, you know, when you
guys have a uh long day and you
feel unappreciated, no, that the
citizens of New Mexico
appreciate the work that you're
doing.
Um, uh, the staff went through a
lot of trouble putting the, this
packet together. So I'd like to
just quickly go over it. Um,
When I went to dental school
back in the 1980s, the teeth and
the body were two separate
things. They actually had uh
dental forms where they just
took the teeth and the gums away
from the patient, and we worked
on that as our practice.
Fortunately, over the last 40
years, we've recognized that the
body and the mouth are
connected. I had a
gastroenterologist told me one
time, hey, we're on the same
team. You're at the beginning of
the gastrointestinal tract, and
that's exactly right, um,
nutrition starts with
Be able to eat, uh, foods that
are healthy for you, um, you
know, cakes and and breads and
stuff are easy to chew without
teeth, but you want to eat
vegetables, if you want to eat
things that are nutritious for
you, you need a good set of
choppers, and so, you know,
nutrition is important. Uh,
there's some correlations
between heart disease and
diabetes with gum disease, and
so we're finding out that
everything's related and it's
important as a uh a method of
keeping good health and saving
money.
That we take care of our teeth
too. We have uh in our special
needs community, so many people
with uh congenital cardiac
conditions where they've had
Of $500,000 repair of their
congenital heart condition, but
we can't get Medicaid to pay for
a cleaning to keep the bacteria
from reinfecting their heart.
And so we're working with the uh
uh Medicaid uh representatives
to try to
Uh, let them know how important
that is and how that's ah that
also saves the state money, but
it also decreases patients
suffering, and um,
You know, the, the case I just
mentioned, uh,
points out, you know, the effect
of pain on behavior. We've all
come to work with like a bad
headache, a crick in our neck,
we're just grumpy, right? But
can you imagine having that
pain, the worst pain you've ever
felt in your entire life and not
being able to tell anybody.
And the only way you can express
it is hitting your own face.
And so, that's what you guys are
doing for us and, and we
certainly appreciate it, and the
citizens of New Mexico
appreciate it.
This is the uh uh dental hygiene
part that uh Doctor Nate has
already, uh,
Talked about and uh this is her
wonderful faculty. I've had a
great opportunity to work with
the hygiene faculty. You guys
have a great program here and
you
needed to give a lot of credit
to uh Christine for uh making
that really uh uh premier
program in the.
And so the, for the future, we
actually are lucky. When I first
got here, there were 2 faculty
members in the Department of
Dental Medicine. They were
responsible for covering two
hospitals, 2 surgery centers,
taking all the call, running a
12 operatory, um.
Uh, dental clinic and being
responsible for 3 residents.
When I came here, they treated
me like a king cause I thought
the reinforcements are here. And
so we've got additional
reinforcements. Doctor Wang is
coming on board. I have uh two
excellent, uh, administrative
assistants, Ryan and Lewis, who
were doing that hard work of
working with um
The various departments, uh,
Tiak, the Department of Health,
uh, letting the community
providers know what's the best
way to be able to uh work
collaboratively so we can get
these patients taken care of.
Um, once we have our second
faculty member, um, here, we're
looking for another special care
dentist to take, uh, my place
eventually, and the PGY2, what
that means is program year 2.
We're offering two
dental fellows for a special
needs in the coming years, and
what the goal is, is for each uh
resident class, I think we have
8 residents this year.
What my goal is to get maybe 1
or 2 of these people interested,
so that we develop a workforce
where we have, you know, 75
dentists in New Mexico that say,
I'm willing to do.
Special needs dentistry once in
a while. It's too big of an ass
to to ask one dentist to have
his practice be entirely special
needs. It's not financially um
sustainable. It's emotionally
and physically draining. So what
we need is we need a core people
throughout New Mexico that will
help address the um the uh uh
the care issues.
And uh I will say that uh the
special needs clinic is now
open. We're seeing patients and
uh reduce the waiting time for
people going to the OR in half.
So, uh, things that you guys
have done have really made a big
impact. I appreciate your time
and uh I'll take questions.
I'm gonna skip to my couple
things um regarding special
needs, um, some of you are aware
that the uh New Mexico Dental
Association Foundation got a
grant, um, a year ago for, uh,
to kind of study what our
situation was here, try to
quantify what the issues are
with regard to special needs,
um, figure out what resources we
already have available and what
resources we need to develop.
Um, we're happy that Doctor Chu
participated with that and gave
us some good advice with regard
to where that's going. We're now
kind of
looking at the research stuff
that we've done, there were some
surveys and focus groups and
things like that that were done
and we're hoping that that
report will be done by the end
of the year. I actually had
hoped that it would be done
today so we can talk about that,
but um with as all projects go,
it's taking longer than
expected, but, um, I think we
will have some really good input
that comes as a result of that.
You can read what some of the
significant findings are and um
what some of the suggestions may
be that we think there'll be
some creative suggestions.
with regard to it, we didn't,
well, honestly, did the results
we get surprise us very much.
No, because I think we knew
already that we had a problem
and we, we knew that we have a
lack of resources, but I think
out of this comes some really
good creative solutions and
we're really happy that Doctor
Chu is back here with us and
he's not back but this clinic is
back at UNM and that, um,
hopefully that'll actually lead
to developing more resources as
a result of having that there,
so we've missed that.
Um
I'm gonna backtrack just a
couple pages to talk about the
compact as I promised. Um, so
there is a, a compact, actually,
there are two compacts for
dentists and dental hygienists.
Um, one comes from the Council
on State governments, which is
generally the author for most of
the compacts that have come out.
The process that goes into that
is that um they find
representatives from what they
would call industry um to to
kind of come together and talk
about what our best practices
includes people that are from
licensing boards that includes
people from the profession.
There was a significant
involvement with the military
because they have an interest in
mobility, particularly what's
going on with licensing, and so
on. So the compact was
developed, um, all of the
parties sort of agree together
on what the language of that
will be. And then at that point,
it goes out to the states, and
as was said previously, states
do need to try to adopt language
that is completely compatible
with where that's at, but once
once.
state becomes a part of a
compact, then, um,
They, there's a commission that
oversees that compact and each
state has a representative. Um,
and I guess I would just point
out that if New Mexico has one
representative, that's better um
than what a population
representation would be, um, in
terms of having some say over
what goes on at a compact like
that, and particularly if we
happen to get in early when
there's only a few states, um,
we'll have a lot to do with
where, you know, how those
initial rules are drafted and
and so on. So going back, there
are two kinds of compacts, um,
some compacts
have to do with, um, licensing
expediting. So, you know, a, a
state needs to recognize another
license and then grant them a
new license and that is my
understanding, that's what the,
the medical licensing compact is
about. It's about getting a
license in New Mexico in an
expedited way because you have,
uh, you know, you're coming from
a compact state.
Um, the, the CSG uh compact for
dental, dentist and dental
hygienist is actually a license
recognition compact, that's a
little bit more like um a
driver's license. Um, so, you
know, people get a driver's
license in the state they go to,
they have to, they can go
anywhere they want to go, but
when they're in that state, they
have to follow all the laws that
that state has and so there's uh
it's not about getting in, you
don't have to go and get a new
license in each state you drive
in, but you can take your
license to that state and as
long as you follow the law,
Um, you're OK. Um, laws, the
states don't lose any of their
autonomy with regard to driver's
license, you break the law in
that state and you will feel the
full force of the law from that
state. And that's the way it
works in a dental compact as
well.
Um
Right now there are, um, 10
states that have adopted the
dentists dental hygiene
licensing uh compact that um
first kind of went online about
um.
Uh, just about a year ago, um,
actually, so a lot of states
have acted on this rapidly. Um,
it became active when there were
7 states, there are now 10, um,
and that was, um, just a little
bit earlier this fall, so, um,
What are the advantages? Well,
the first thing I guess I would
say is I, I'd like to temper
expectations because it's really
not about, it's not going to
solve our, our numbers problem
or anything like that. There's
just not enough people that
would be using a compact in
order to come that way. What it
does do is allow people to come
in who know they're only gonna
be here for a temporary time,
um, and practice without having
to go through all of the, the
bureaucracy of getting a new
license and, and having to pay
for it. Um, yeah, not that there
isn't a
With regard to, to compact
privilege as well, but, um, you
know, complying with all of the,
the licensing that goes into it.
So you hold the state, if you
hold the license in two states,
you have to comply with the um
continuing education
requirements in both states. You
have to, you know, whatever
requirements one state has, you
have to also add on the other
state whereas with the compact,
um, your prime state is the one
where you're having to comply
with whatever the rules are at,
the other state just recognizes
that when.
goes on from there.
Um, and you can see why this is
important and might be
particularly important for New
Mexico when it comes to military
spouses, so, um, you know, when,
when the decision is made, when
a military spouse has a, a
professional license um to
practice somewhere, um, and they
have to go with, with their
military spouse to another
location, if they have to get a
whole new license that takes
time, it takes money. There's
other kinds of things and
oftentimes they don't, um, they,
they'll just not, you know, if
they don't have.
license in that state, they
won't practice.
Whereas with this, they would be
able to come in with the license
that they have in that state,
um, and just work there. And we
think that that will make a
difference in terms of where,
where they go. I mean, military
spouses are gonna look for other
compact states because they know
they can go there and so if
we're not participating, people
are going to take New Mexico off
of their wish list when it comes
to transfers.
Um
And then the last couple slides
on here really are just kind of
talking about some of the uh
programs of the foundation. I
won't go into all of them. I
mean, I think people are
sometimes familiar with our
mission of mercy programs, which
happen about every 18 months or
so, they're kind of big and
often in the news, but there's a
lot of other programs that are
happening um in local
communities and are available to
your constituents and so on too,
so it's good for you to know
about, um, you know, what some
of those opportunities are, and
I will go through all of them,
but you can read about them if
you want to.
So with that, you've heard all
of our um presentation at this
point and we'd be really happy
to answer any questions from
anybody.
Well, thank you all, uh, great
information and really
appreciate the work that you're
doing. Um,
A few years ago, I say a few, it
was a bit about 15 years ago, I
had a chance to visit the
special needs clinic at UNM and
uh
I worked with the wife of the
dentist who was uh providing
those services at that time and
through her, her husband invited
me to accompany him. It was
right after I got let uh elected
to the legislature. I was just
so impressed.
With the level of care.
But more than anything with the
demand that working with, with
People some, some of the
patients were, of course, much
like your son, very large,
physically powerful individuals
who did not want to have dental
care done to them and, and, and,
but who needed it desperately,
and that special needs clinic
was, it was, it was an eye
opener for me and I really
appreciate you being willing to
come and, and to revitalize that
clinic, get it back up again.
Thank you so much. So we'll go
now to the committee for
Questions, uh, we'll start with,
we'll start over here this time
with Representative Herndon.
We'll work back around this way.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you presenters. Uh,
this was a very enlightening
presentation, but I was most
concerned about the information
you provided on Medicaid's
dangerous trends with small
practices no longer taking
Medicaid or some larger
practices,
not moving in that direction. So
my question to you is, uh, have
you
In this group that you talked
about that will be making
recommendations in 6 months,
which is really too long. Be
making a recommendation on an
amount that should be put forth
by us in terms of supplementing
dentists who are helping those
on Medicaid.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, I, uh, yes,
definitely, that will be part of
what that recommendation is. I
mean, I think we're trying to
look at the big picture in terms
of what that amount should be.
Um, but I think we're also
looking at it from the
standpoint of
we know what amounts it takes
for people to participate in
programs because that's the way
commercial insurance works too.
Um, you know, I mean, there,
there's, there's contracts that
are going on between dentists
and commercial insurance plans.
And so we need to
get to a level that is
reasonable with regard to that,
that's comparable um to some of
those kinds of things, and we
know how that, where, where that
should be. So, so yes, we
definitely will be making some
recommendations about, you know,
where, where that level should
be looking at other states in
terms of, you know, what
programs have worked there, um,
the amounts that people have
responded to.
And with respect to the uh
question or concern about GRT.
What if I told you that the DRT
that is charged uh by I get for
dentists for the work that they
provide goes into a fund that
will help them supplement the
pay the dentists receive when
they help low-income
individuals. Would you then be
OK with that GRT?
Um
That's certainly better, it's
better to know that the, the
money is going to search
treatment somewhere along the
way than it would be otherwise,
but it's probably not the most
equitable equitable way to to
manage that kind of a problem.
It would be better to fund
things and realistic ways, um,
rather than, you know, trying
to, to shift, you know, shift
costs from one patient to a
different patient in order to
pay that. And that's ultimately
what ends up happening when you
use a program like GRT to to
raise funds for health care.
And my last question, Mr. Chair,
is with respect to students who
are in Title I schools, they're
basically low income, they often
don't get to see a dentist very
often. And so, uh, to Doctor
Chu, with respect to the
definition of special needs, you
know, they moved the definition
of, of a special education in
our schools to include those who
are highly intelligent and those
who still need some uh
additional support. So I'm
wondering if that would be true
with this special.
needs clinic. I worry about
these students because they were
dental hygienists who came and
they wanted to go into schools
and help students with their
dental hygiene, but I, I told
them that I don't think we can
do that because of the, uh, a
dental hygienists would need to
have oversight by a doctor. So
I'm, I'm asking you about this
definition of a, of a special
needs clinic and I'll stop at
them tear on my time is up, but
if you would please answer the
question, that would be helpful.
Right, the way I defined uh
special needs in private
practice, was any patient that
could not be seen in a regular
dental office. So that would be
somebody that either has a uh
intellectual or physical
disability that the general
dentists with his training for
dental school was not
comfortable treating and
required the services of
somebody that had additional
training. So I think uh our
definition of special needs may
be different from like an educ
definition of special needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Chasey.
Now Chair, thank you very much.
Um, I just want to thank these
folks for their presentation and
Doctor Chu for your work.
Senator, thank you, um, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, um,
I appreciate the presentation.
There's a couple of questions.
Uh, Doctor Chu brought up
something about um surgeryies
and infections, and it's not
just cardio, it's almost any
other implant or any other
surgery that has to address uh
dental and oral care first.
And the comment that you made,
Doctor Chu, regarding.
The cost.
To Medicaid.
In relation to um heart issues
that could have been alleviated
with oral health. I'm wondering
if the dental board could
advocate for some um.
New amendments to the Medicaid
plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I'm
not really the board, but the
dental association does a lot of
advocacy when it comes to it.
No, I just wanted, I wanted to
be clear that I'm not part of
the board, but anyway, um,
absolutely, I think that's one
of the things we're looking at.
So when we talk about rules kind
of discouraging people to get
care, that's the kind of rule
that does that, where there's a
limited number of exams that are
allowed or a limited number of
cleaning, um, you know, cleaning
visits that are allowed in.
And so on, and we need to be
able to, we need to be able to
provide the care, um, when it's
needed and for what, what is
needed and not have that kind of
limitation, so absolutely I
think that's the, the kinds of
changes we're talking about when
in this task force um with
regard to Medicaid and, and
definitely we'll be looking at,
you know, what those kinds of
changes could be.
So, Mr. Chair, um, thank you for
that response.
I would encourage you to first
meet with
Medicaid to see if they are open
to just doing it before we enter
into
Um, legislation, because this
might be um
taking care of otherwise.
Have you contacted them? Yeah,
Mr. Church, Senator, absolutely
we are trying to work with the
department first, because we
recognize that just putting more
money in without fixing up the
program to make sure that it's
going to the right place is not
gonna work. So yes, we've
definitely been talking with
them. One of the problems has
been that there hasn't really,
there's not any dentists on
staff anywhere, um, in state
government at this point for the
most part. And so, um, getting
input into programs like that
has to be done in roundabout
ways. Now, recently
Um, and when I say recently,
that's probably been a year
already, but um they have hired
a consultant who we've been able
to communicate with who does
understand what the dental
issues are and as being able to
bring those into the department
and, and to address that. So
really our first emphasis right
now actually is working with the
department trying to figure out
a program in the structure of a
program that would work, knowing
that once we get something in
place, we're gonna have to come
to the legislature to look for
funding and, and, and so on to
support it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I just think
this needs some follow-up
discussion. Thank you. I, I
absolutely agree. I mean, one
possibility would be a carve
out.
Like we did years ago with
behavioral health. Now that
didn't work all that well, but
the idea was one that made some
sense.
Well, Mr. Chair, I think what
has to happen is that there
might need to be some specifical
specifical, specific, um,
medical uh standard that is
proposed to Medicaid as oral
health might be related to a
person's medical condition, and
that might open the door for
reimbursement. Thank you.
Representative Chavez, your
turn. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
just to follow up, um, follow up
that piece because I was uh
looking at your, your page that
has prevention and with
resources, kind of looking at
one of the recommendations that
you're, um, you know,
overhauling Medicaid, um, but
wouldn't we also need to address
dental health insurance as well.
Do they have some of those same
kinds of limitations in terms of
care.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
sorry, I'm smiling because they
absolutely do have limitations
like that that are problematic.
Um, and we're thankful to the
legislature actually for passing
some reforms, um, not this last
year but the year before that,
um, that, um, we haven't seen a
whole lot of the difference from
it, but the idea that we can
make some reforms that will
change some of those rules and
actually expand it a little bit.
I, I, I, I mean, you're
absolutely correct that we, we
need to be looking at commercial
insurance limit.
too, because I think they are
hurting people ultimately. I
think that's super important in
terms of overall health.
Um, my other question is for
Doctor Chu, the, the story that
you gave about that special
needs child hitting his face on
the um wall. I, I'm wondering is
Have you thought about um having
the conversation with like
behavioral health providers, so
that when they're seeing kids,
um, that they're understanding
that this might also be a
possibility in terms of a
child's behavior or even
teachers.
Um
Yeah, that's an excellent
suggestion. I think a
collaboration between dental and
all medical providers because I
think our uh medical colleagues
still believe in the same model
that I had when I was in dental
school where the mouth is
totally separate from the body,
and yes, I, I would uh
definitely, you know, it's been
a heavy lift so far with the 3
things I've been tasked with
from uh Representative Thompson,
but that's definitely on the
agenda is to help educate the
other health professionals
about.
The relationship of dentistry
and behavioral health medicine,
uh, we, we, uh, work very
closely when I was in private
practice with OTPT behavioral
health because they're all part
of the team. Those are the
people that can help our
patients, uh, be able to hold a
toothbrush, to be able to get
used to having somebody clean
their teeth. So, yes, that's
definitely, uh, should be on our
radar. OK.
You want to talk a little bit
about your cooperative program
cause you they hygiene school is
working on that kind of thing
too. We actually the hygienists
that work over at the hospital
have been giving lectures to the
residents, and we do that in
schools as well, so dental
hygienists do that quite
frequently. It doesn't mean that
we can't do it more, uh, but we
also at UNM have an infessional
education program, uh, that is
very robust in our uh health
professional students work
together a lot, um, in class
situation.
And um discussions and then
simulation activities. So, so we
do focus on that.
I mean, we need to be a team and
dental needs to be integrated
for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And Doctor Chu, I've
never felt so powerful. I didn't
know I had power to command you
to do things, and I'm feeling
really powerful right now, so my
committee says, oh no. Um, so
just quickly, you've all heard
about my son and um he he went
for two years with a broken
tooth and his language is
limited, but to hear your child
say, Mama, does your tooth hurt
multiple times a day cause
that's how we
A lot of times it's a question
how he portrays things. We
finally did get it fixed, and to
this day, it's been about 6
years. Every time he sees me, he
still says, Mama, does your
tooth hurt? And I think it's
PTSD from 2 years of
excruciating pain, um, and his
behavior, you know, I got tears
in my eyes when you were telling
the story because that that was
our story too, and so I want to
thank all of you who are
involved in this, um, cause it's
gonna really
change lives in New Mexico, but
um.
Let's see.
Uh, and I googled the tuition
for Toro, and it's $100,0605 a
year.
So it's no wonder there's only
one New Mexican there, so we're
gonna have to figure out a way
to come up with
Some money to, uh, I mean, which
is much cheaper, but which is is
much um
More limited, so, um, I'm glad
forturo and the thought of 100,
100 chair operation is like,
whoa, um, I, I have great ideas
for what they can do. Um.
And then, um,
So, in terms of itchy, is what
New Mexico students receive the
same as what students from other
states receive in terms of the
reimbursement for lack of a
better word.
Um, it
Uh, Madam Che I guess don't know
how where we go with that. Um,
I, I would say that it's
comparable, but it's also uh
there there are not very many
states that don't have dental
schools in the West anymore. And
so, um, we're one of the few
that still participates or has
to do something. So, um, you
know, I know that in a way which
he
is a kind of a compact. I mean,
in the way those states have
kind of worked together and, and
do other, other kinds of things
with that. Um, so I think there
are rules that govern to some
extent how states set the amount
that they're going to do that.
Um, on the flip side of that is
that an awful lot of the
students we say are attending
through which you are actually
attending through contracts, so,
you know, our students at the
University of Missouri, Kansas
City, um, at Creighton
University, at any of the Texas
schools, including Texas Tech.
Um, are doing that through a, a
contract, um, that the state
makes with that particular
school. Um, and it, it follows
the same guidelines, the same
amounts that are there, but
that, that's very, that can be
variable, that's not governed by
the, the witchy compact or
something. Thank you for that.
And then um going back to what
she senator Stephanic's about
putting it in rule um as opposed
to in law when we have a new
governor that could go up in
smoke, so, um, you know.
maybe we could start that way,
but with within 2 years, make
sure that we get it into law, so
that it's not at the whims of
whoever the the executive is,
um, and then we do need to fix
dental insurance, whether it be
Medicaid, whether, I mean, and
part, you know, one thing that
came to my head is right into
the Medicaid plan that if there
are special circumstances, if
there's a total me that, that
the dental care that is required
is required. It's, you know,
it's not.
a one cleaning every 6 years or
whatever, but so just um please
bring your ideas to us. I think
I'll be chairing this committee
for the next 2 years and we
really need to fix dental, so
please feel free to bring
everything that you think of to
to Xander
cause he's the memory.
Thank you, thank you all so much
for the work that you do. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Representative Cates. Thank you,
chair, and thank you very much
for your presentation. Um, I
just, uh, and I'm sorry we have
got a bunch of questions, so I'm
asking for brief answers. I,
you, uh, you've been very good
at explaining the out of state
why we're sending our best and
brightest out of state to be
educated, but I'm not clear on
do we not have enough uh
potential students.
who want to be dentists inside
of uh New Mexico to have our own
dental school for dentistry. Um,
why, why don't we have our
school in the state.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think
Um
Yeah, I mean, we've wanted a
dental school for a long time,
it's expensive, um, it's
probably the most expensive.
Um, kind of a professional
school to add to the to the
university or or college, so,
um, I, I think that's been a
barrier for sure. I do think the
pipeline issue is a, is a
potential, um, I, I think we're
sort of at that threshold where
we almost don't have enough
students to support a school all
by ourselves. Um, however, that
hasn't stopped many of the
smaller states from going ahead
with it because they're able to
attract others from out of
state. So Texas can do it on our
own, on their own, but, um,
there are
Lots of of applicants for school
that would probably love to come
to a New Mexico dental school if
we had one. and, um, that would
allow us to educate more of our
students. I think we see a
barrier. I know you wanted to be
brief, but I was gonna say there
is a barrier that um we don't
attract students into dental
programs because we don't have a
school. Um, if you're from, you
know, if you're from Gallup and
you're considering going to uh
some kind of healthcare
education, you're much more
likely to go to medical school.
Here in New Mexico because we
have that. We don't have it in
schools. I agree. I, I have many
clients who's one works at
Sandia Labs or Los Alamos and
their partner has completed
everything, is ready to go to
dental school, and they're like,
what they're there's nobody in
New Mexico and then they have to
postpone everything and go out
of state, so know that you may
have supported the legislature,
when you decide to go for. Um, I
do believe it's a request to see
him as maybe in the 10:15 for a
decayed waiver, uh, special fee
for special needs because
dentistry is usually paid by
service like they have
different different billing for
each tooth and each process, but
not necessarily a different.
type of patient and so I think
that might be a Medicaid and,
and I would suggest you follow
your recommendations from our
previous legislators. Um, thank
you so much, uh, Representative
Thompson and, and Doctor Chu for
the special needs, it's so well
needed for, for my legislators,
a GRT we we bring up GRT waiver
with the pyramid a year after
year and our small communities
heavily rely on GRT for
service-oriented.
And because we don't, we're not
a big manufacturer, um, but I
hear not just from dentistry,
but from everyone. Uh, I have, I
have.
Another question, I'm so sorry.
Um,
doctor, how many uh licensed,
how many practicing dentists are
in New Mexico.
Just a little over 1000. And how
many medical malpractice suits
have occurred, like, let's say
on average over the 5 years for
those 1000.
Um, I'm gonna have to say I
don't know. I, so when you come
in front of the legislator and
you say we are the most
litigious state, and we have
more medical practice than any
other state. I want to see data.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you very much for your
presentations.
The, uh, you know, and again,
thank you, Representative
Thompson.
Um
What Doctor Chu here is just
explained is is so or services
that our communities have
needed.
And under your guidance, um, we
are here and it, it really makes
a difference for many of our
families who have a special
needs, uh, member.
So thank you.
Um
I uh would like to ask is
When we talk about um
Some of the, you know, services
being provided by uh some of
our, our dentists here in the
state. I know there's been some
issues over the years of uh
maybe services that were
provided that weren't needed,
like pulling teeth and a whole
bunch of other things that many
of us have heard in our
communities, so, um, I would
hope that as we go, um, Mr.
Chair, Madam co-chair for the
next interim that we really
have. I think some more
definitive information and
conversation about dental
services in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, I did want to ask a
question, and it's just
Do, don't we have a dental
mobile?
Outreach program in the state.
Madam Chair, Mr. Co-chair,
Senator, um, we have had at
times, um, there is the, the
Department of Health has a
program where they go into
schools and provide certain
services and things like that
that you would call mobile, um,
at this point, I, I don't
believe that there is a, um,
that the state has a mobile van
or, you know, that kind of thing
that moves around from one
location to another and and so
on for that. There may be some
private entities that
that do, um, but I, I don't know
the details on, on what, what
they're doing or or how they're
doing it if they are.
had a chair and I just asked
because and it's not just for
children, but also for our
seniors.
Um, who need access to services,
um, some of us in the bigger
cities, you might have more
access, but you have like long
waits anyway when you go and try
and get an appointment, but in
some of our communities, um, you
know, a mobile service unit may
could help, I think in many
aspects too, so that's something
I think for for us maybe to put
on the list and consider as to
how we could strengthen what DOH
is doing, but also working with
um you know, the association and
others as to what we could um
Provide for for us for our
citizens, and residents.
Senator, uh, um,
You're having brought that up
made me think of something, and
that is that we just actually
just lost a provider for that.
So dentistry in your home, which
was a, uh, they were private
entity, but they were working in
nursing homes and going to
people's homes, particularly for
senior care, um, you know, had
to close as a result of
bankruptcy and um again, the
Medicaid model just wasn't
working for them. They couldn't,
they, you know, they, they
couldn't make that work, um,
financially, so I guess we're
hopeful that they'll be, you
know,
Some, somebody else will be able
to kind of fill in the gap. But,
um, that was just recently lost.
I mean, just a couple of months
ago, so.
And just one more too. It's
about Medicare.
That's a whole another
conversation too, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
And on that, that issue,
yesterday, the medical board in,
in its presentation brought up
the possibility of adding
healthcare.
To the Lida definitions of, of,
of industries that should be,
that could be economic
development activity could be
supported. And, and you're
slide that talks about the
economic impact of a dentist in
a community. If we could do that
for dental as well, that would
open up another funding
possibility for somebody trying
to establish a practice in a
community, uh, that might be
some, something else to pursue.
Uh, Representative, thank you,
Senator Lopez. Representative
Martinez, your turn.
Senator Pope, thank you for
joining us today. Do you have
any questions? Thank you, Mr.
Chair, I apologize for wearing
no tie today.
I'll do better.
it, no, it's just that you look
so classy with that three piece
suit and and the silk
that the absence of a tie does
come to mind immediately,
whereas with my outfit, nobody
even noticed I wasn't.
I appreciate that, Mr. Chair.
Um, I got a couple of quick
questions if I could get a quick
response. So I was listening and
talking about the Medicaid
reimbursement, and I was hearing
that there probably wasn't an
increase. I'll tell you I got
some
from Dennis and they were
talking about increasing as
well. I talked with folks with
LFC and they said it was a
really small one, so I just want
to confirm from your
understanding, was there no
increase? I heard it might have
been like 3 or 4% really minimal
and, and just won't understand.
I believe there was maybe a 2%
increase, but I think most
people saw that as a bringing
back something that had been
sanded down previously, so, so
we've really, you know, net over
time, I don't think there's
really been much of an increase
for quite a long time.
Understood and um I just want to
tell the committee and, you
know, our members on LFC that,
you know, we're doing a lot more
with Medicaid, but we have to
hit the dental side as well, um,
because they've been
You know, missing out.
For a long time, and that's
gonna be a path to get more
folks access. Um, some people
don't know, but when I was in
the Air Force, I actually worked
in the dental clinic. I was
actually a dental assistant.
I actually thought about going
to dental school myself. That's
what brought me to UNM, but um I
would have had to do witchy and
go around and so I just decided
to go back in the Air Force, so
there would have been an
opportunity for dental school, I
think I'd probably be there and
maybe not in the Senate. Some,
some folks might like that a
little better, but I, you know,
but I say that to say that I
think even though we have itchy,
we have these programs.
We're missing an opportunity to
really grow our own in our, in
this state, um, because it's not
just the financial burden it's
leaving and, and things like
that. So we really have to think
about that. I like what you
talked about the link between
oral care and health care in
general, uh, working in the Air
Force a lot of times we, um,
everyone goes to the dental
clinic once a year, for blood
pressure looking at a lot of
things, and I think because it's
kind of reverse on the outside
where folks might see a doctor,
but not see a dentist.
for 5 or 6 years and you're
missing out on missing out on
things and not, you're not
getting taken care of. So I just
think we really need to tie that
in as a tool.
Or just overall health care and
and and important that we have
that access. You mentioned the
licensing for the military
spousees some that come over,
um, there's not a lot of folks,
you know, some of them, you
know, might be an attorney that
worked for the government. Some
of them might be healthcare
professional. I know there's
plenty of nurses that do that.
And I wanna let folks know
that's a decision that folks can
decide whether to come here or
not, whether to get out of the
service or not in that spouse,
so it does impact those and so
we need to make sure that we're
doing that and more importantly,
Um, our folks here need that
healthcare service here, so I
think it's important that we
have that.
say, uh, once again, I, I really
do think uh there's a need for
dental school. We need to talk
about that. I know we have the
new one coming in cost
prohibitive, but I just think
just like you mentioned, dental
clinics and dental offices, you
know, what it does to the
economy and what it does to that
community.
I think it's going to be the
same way for dental school.
We have so many people that
don't even believe it's an
option as a young student
because we don't have a dental
school. It's gonna give options
for our dentists that get out of
practice to maybe go teach at
the school.
So I think as a legislature, we
really need to look at that. I
know it's expensive, but we have
to make that investment, and for
me,
This is the time that we
actually have the revenue to do
it. So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Thompson, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Just, um,
Senator Pope's reminded me that
I've been asked by some groups
to open up the telehealth Act,
so I'm trying to gather
information from different
professions about any changes
that you might want in the
telehealth Act.
Um, so if you have anything,
please get in contact with me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And
You know, I, I try to remember
when it was, it was at least 15,
maybe 16 years ago that we were
presented in this committee
during the interim with a study
that was done.
At that time, 70 million is a
figure that stuck in my mind
that they were estimating that
the state would, would need to
start a dental school here.
Uh, and at that time we were
70 million might as well have
been 10 billion because we had
nothing. We've got that now, but
of course, the cost would be a
lot higher now, but I tend to
agree with you that, that we, we
need to get serious about things
like that. Uh, now that we have
a surplus, is the time to use it
for things that will be around
for when we don't have that kind
of money. So I would, I would
hope that that.
You or somebody would make a an
effort at at getting a uh a task
force together this year to look
into that, maybe during the
interim and, and, and get some
momentum building, uh, as long
as the oil and gas bonanza is
continuing, we ought to use it
for good things.
Um
So
Um, a couple of questions, so
thank you for your presentation.
First of all, great information.
Uh, one thing that jumped out at
me is we heard no mention of
something that this committee
advocated for for many years,
and we thought it was going to
revolutionize the state's dental
system.
Dental therapist, any, any, any
information you can share with
us about the status of training
dental therapists.
You remember the, the idea there
was that the um uh
Kind of the analog to community
health workers. These would be
people who were
And it came out of Alaska, some
of the experience there, and I
think a couple of other states,
Minnesota and some others that
developed dental therapy
programs, and I thought you and
him had a dental therapist
program going, and they were
gonna work in Indian, Native
American communities and also in
underserved low-income
communities that didn't have
dentists, but they could do some
They could do the cleaning, for
example, they could do some
basic things that, that a
hygienist could do, but a little
above the hygienist, and so the
idea was that the hygienists
would be trained with the dental
hygiene training program would
also train therapists, and I, I
wondered what happened to that.
Is that still alive?
They designated me to talk
first, but I will, I will let Ms
May talk about you and them, but
um there, there hasn't ever been
a training program here. I know
that there's a couple of
institutions have looked at it
and um opted against it for
whatever reason, and I, you
know, you and I can talk about
that to some extent.
Um
Although there are a lot of
states that have passed
legislation with regard to it,
there aren't very many states
that have.
programs or that have any dental
therapist, and so, um, it's kind
of an idea that didn't find a
home very much and a lot of lot
of locations. Um, it's still on
the books and would still, you
know, if somebody trained
somebody wanted to do it. I
mean, the one thing that has
changed since we passed our law
is that they now are a couple of
um educational institutions that
I've been accredited, um, which
is a requirement for them to, to
come here to New Mexico. So I
believe there's just 2, but I
I could be wrong that has been
changing more recently, but I
think one is in Alaska and one
is in Minnesota. There's also
been one of those programs in
Minnesota that closed, as I
understand it too, so, um, uh,
you know, interestingly that
with the community health worker
analog that you were talking
about that actually we do have,
um, and, um, we're still not
training very many because there
aren't very many positions for
that, but the, the community
dental health coordinator CDHC
um is a program that's at Santa
Fe Community College, um, right
now.
they are training people for
that, so if you
Yeah, we, um.
We, we aren't um in the process
of starting a dental therapy
program at UNM. There aren't a
lot of like the uh number of
clinics that they're able to
work in are not that many in the
states, so it would be more of a
smaller student, and I think one
of the things that happen
nationally, a lot of states did
allow it, but I don't think
there were um many dental
hygienists that also wanted to
have do part dentistry.
We like cleaning teeth, and the
truth is we need more dental
hygienists and we're trying to
expand the program right now, so
that's our focus is that
prevention.
OK, good. Yeah, I think uh
Senator Shindo, uh,
He's the one who finally got
that bill through as I remember,
but.
Um
While we're talking about dental
hygienists, your slide on, on,
on page 3 of the Doctor Chu's
presentation. It, it's just
striking that suddenly after
graduating in 2021, 3 masters
level.
And in 20221 and in 2023, 34, it
suddenly jumped uh this year to
20. What would account for that
big jump.
We, um, worked with our UNM
online program, and we developed
both for our degree completion
and the masters and accelerated
online program, um, the tuition
is very reasonable. We get
hygienists from New Mexico and
we get hygienists from outside
of New Mexico, um, also a lot of
dental hygienists are wanting to
go into teaching and they needed
a bachelor's and a lot of times
a masters if they want to be
like a full-time faculty, so we
have a lot of hygienists that do
that.
But it's been great for our New
Mexico hygienists because they
get to be in classes online with
dental hygienists from all over,
you know, in different states,
and dentistry is really
practiced, not, not necessarily
the procedures, but just the um
infrastructure differently and
it's been a great, I think, uh,
group with diverse ideas for our
New Mexico students, so we're
happy it's uh the most enrolled.
In the United States, the degree
completion and the masters, so
it's good with the masters,
what, what can you do then? Is
it mostly to prepare faculty for
the program? Actually most
dental hygienists do do that,
but a lot of hygienists will
start up programs, um, you know,
when the mobile program was
discussed like a lot of
hygienists do that. I think.
There have been like mobile
vans. I don't think they're as
popular as they were at the
beginning because we can get
equipment that we can easily
like take from a truck or an SUV
right into a a school like that
we have better portable
equipment than we used to have.
Then my last question really is,
is for Doctor
Shuer trying to figure out.
You know, the, the Southeast
quad corner of the state,
especially Lee County. It's one
of the most prosperous counties.
I mean, if you look at
Per capita income, you look at
what they're able to do with
their local tax base, they have,
it's a very prosperous community
because of oil and gas. Eddie
similarly.
Southerned similarly.
Uh, I
And yet they have trouble
attracting dentists there. What,
what, what do you think is the
issue there, and, and because
mostly you think, well, there
wouldn't be enough people who
could afford dental care if they
don't, if they're not on
Medicaid, so, but there they
could.
Um, Mr. Cha, I, I
This is just my opinion. I
don't, I have nothing, no data
to go on with that, but my
suspicion is that it has a lot
to do with the boom and bust,
um, nature of things, and so,
you know, there have been enough
busts in the last 20 years or
something like that, that rather
than, you know, those practices
that were there and they're,
they were a considerable number
of practices in Carl's bed at
one time, um, Hobbs as well. Um,
and, um, a lot of the people
that were there just ended up
closing practices as opposed to
selling to somebody else because
they retired during a bust. And
so, um, and it's really hard to
get somebody to open up again. I
mean, we talked about a number
of reasons why opening is not
what's happening, but that is a,
that's a challenge, and again,
some of that has to do with
having to get people that are
from that, from those
communities to be interested in
practicing dentistry, I think,
you know, I mean, the, they,
those communities can grow their
own to some extent, and I think
that would make a difference
with it.
I, I,
that's the only thing I can
account because Carlsbad is a
great place. I don't know why
anybody wouldn't want to, want
to practice practice there, so.
Thank you, and, and uh final
comment, uh, Senator Seville
Lopez. Thank you. I had to step
out for, for another Zoom call
on another bill that we're
working on, but I just wanted to
say I'm thrilled about Toro um
University coming into, it's
coming into my district, um, and
I love, I was really excited
when you talked about maybe
doing something for the 1st 2
years. So my question is, are
the first 2-year classrooms and
then the second two years
clinical or um how does that
work? Because if it's classroom,
we ought to be able to.
To get that done here too, Mr.
Chair, Senator, that's the model
that they're using at Toro. So
yes, they are mostly doing
classroom and laboratory kinds
of things, um, in New York, and
then we'll be coming here to see
patients for the last 2 years.
That is sort of a an old school
dental, dental school model, um,
when I went to dental school,
primarily the last couple of
years were spent in clinic in
the 1st 2 years were spent in
classroom. That's not the model,
I mean, I, um, the school Texas
Tech School in El Paso uses a
really different model. They
get, they get students into a
clinical situation within 4 or 5
weeks, but, um, but, you know,
either model would work here if
we were partnering with Toro as
a, as a
resource for the clinical
facilities. So, um, yeah, there,
there doesn't seem like there'd
be any reason why we couldn't
get started here fairly easily.
A lot of the first couple of
years of dental school, um,
mirrors what's happening in
medical school, same, same
classes in pharmacology, same
classes and a lot of different
kinds of things, so the
resources might might be here to
do something like that. Um, it's
just a model we have to explore
and move forward and, and so
you're looking for a school to
partner and that the obvious one
seems you and him, like.
It would be you know, but, um,
well, if there's anything I can
do to, to help with that, um,
because I'm really excited about
the clinical, um, offices that
they're gonna be opening a
written letters of support for
them. I'm very excited about it.
And if there's anything I can do
to help New Mexico help you and
him because I understand how
expensive it is to uh have the
clinical piece and I know the
investment that dentists have to
make when they open their
offices is huge, um, and
you know, I totally understand
that. So if there's anything I
can do, uh, because I was just
thrilled to see that happen in
my district.
Thank you so.
Any other comments or questions?
Well, thank you so much. It's
always good to see you, Doctor
Stripsma and, and Doctor Chu
and, and then it thanks so much
for coming. Um, we're gonna go
now to public comment, and I
don't know if there's anybody in
the
In the audience here who wanted
to make public comment, nobody
signed up for it.
Or, or did somebody actually
sign up?
Do.
Oh, yeah. Ellen, did you want to
make public? No, she just, just
registering her presence here.
Good. Um, then we'll go online.
Is there anyone online who wants
to make it.
Yeah, it's, it's so you need to
go to your reactions icon and
then hit the raise your hand
icon.
Just
OK.
Then we'll, we'll hear from you
first.
Thank you. Uh, this is not,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Vice
Chair, I, uh, had the ice pack
on my face yesterday because I
had a major dental procedure.
Yesterday. So uh subject matter
appropriate. Um,
I do not have the year. I
believe it was somewhere around
2016, there was a a task force
study regarding children's oral
health and treatment for that. I
have been, I'm working from home
today. I was vigorously trying
to find that report, but I could
not find it on my computer. It's
probably packed in a box
somewhere.
Uh, and the subject matter is
extremely important.
Um
Doctor Chris with a K,
Hendricks, a diplomat American
Board of pediatric dentistry.
Who had a practice called
dentistry for kids in Santa Fe,
New Mexico was very interested
in this. So this has been as the
chair mentioned something that
has been on the radar for a very
long time.
The oral health of someone is a
window to all of their other
health.
And it is often the last thing
that gets taken care of,
although that is one of the
first indicators of health.
So thank you for focusing on
this, and I will try to find
that test force report so that
legislation was not uh just
begun from no history because
that can always help lift up the
process on 0.2 Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair members of of sorry
of the committee.
Um,
I would like to bring forward
the word stakeholder again
because stakeholders are more
Often the consumers of services
programs and supports.
And stakeholders brought to the
table that term is more often
being utilized as the
stakeholders are the providers
of the services and supports.
Sorry for my annunciation
problems.
Often the providers of those
programs, services and supports.
And it, it needs to be very
robust at the consumers of those
supports and services or those
who are struggling to be become
a consumer of those services
supports and programming are at
the table. I know it's hard to
get the people there.
But it is extremely important to
rounding out the way that
program services supports and
budgets are allocated to this
programs. Thank you so much for
your time, your service.
And this has been a very robust
in session. Thank you.
Nat, thank you so much for, for
your comment, comments, um, and
we have Mike McMillan.
Online?
Yes, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the, the
committee, can you hear me?
Yes, yeah, we can hear you fine,
Mike.
Thank you. Um,
I would like to uh reinforce.
Some comments that have been
made throughout the
presentations you've all have
have heard over the last few
days in regards to um
Solutions to our, our healthcare
systems in New Mexico and in
particular our private practice,
uh, physicians, a Medicaid
reimbursement, we've got to uh
continue to increase Medicaid
reimbursement. I asked the
committee to strongly look at,
um, continuing our increases to
Medicaid.
But not um isolate or um carve
out particular providers but
include all providers and
especially looking at the rural
practitioners, uh, consider
adding a, a 4 to 6% increase for
those particular
Or for those providers in our
rural areas. It's critical that
we continue to, to
Look at Medicaid.
As it is one of our largest, uh,
payers in the state.
Um, you've also heard, uh, about
GRT and uh
GRT is a burden to
Our healthcare, um,
Providers, if it's, if we can't
remove GRT I would ask that to
the MCOs be required that they
fully reimburse.
GRT, um, in their reimbursement
formulas.
Cause that's not the case now.
It's, it's less than what we pay
for GRT.
Um
Onto prior authorizations,
you've heard a lot about prior
authorizations, and I would
reinforce that this is becoming
more and more burdensome. If we
could, uh, one step would be
just tackling our um NCOs and
have one platform.
Or providers can go for a prior
authorizations that would, that
would help, but the prior
authorization process, I can
tell you is becoming more and
more burdensome.
Um, many of the payers in the
state have multiple platforms
that providers have to go to
depending on if it's a
commercial plan or it's a
Medicare plan or it's uh
Medicaid plan. Um, it's, it's
becoming more and more
cumbersome, and we need to look
at lessening the burdens to our
providers, not increasing
burdens.
And prior authorizations.
is becoming a significant
burden.
As I had mentioned in the past
as well, um, programs coming
into the state that encourage
Um
Members are to
Travel out of state or to
Albuquerque to receive services,
and I'm talking about the
surgery plus program that Nipsey
is contracted with.
We're there and
Providing a financial incentive
for members to uh receive their
orthopedic care in Albuquerque
or outside of our state is is
detrimental.
Not only to our providers uh
throughout New Mexico, but to
our hospitals where our
orthopedic surgeons operate.
So I'd asked the committee, um,
when you're considering your
legislation to
Move forward this this session
to consider these.
These items, um,
To support your uh healthcare
providers in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you for your
service and thank you for the
time this morning.
Thank you, um, uh, Doctor
McMillan, it's always good to
hear from you.
Anybody else?
That's it. So members, uh, we
will have a working lunch today,
and I think the food is gonna
arrive any minute now. Uh, we
will have at 12, we'll start at
12 with the speech and hearing.
Uh, speech, language, and
hearing association's
presentation, the uh
Richard Romero and Sue Griffith
bought the lunch today, uh, so
you can thank Sue. I think Sue
is here. Richard was here
yesterday, but I don't think
he's here today. At any rate,
um, uh, we'll take a little
break and then come back at 12.
As soon as the food arrives, you
can start serving yourselves
and, and we'll have a working
lunch. Thank you. With that,
we'll stand in resource until
noon.
