Uh, yeah, so let's, let's get
right to it, and we have a
handout and we'll turn it over
to you, Doctor Acosta. Yes, uh,
good afternoon, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
giving us the opportunity to
present the results of the youth
risk and resiliency survey.
I am here representing a huge
group of people that have worked
really hard to put the survey
together plus the students that
took it.
With me here is um um Dylan
Pell. He's an epidemiologist at
the department in charge of this
program, um, technical expert,
he'll be able to answer any
questions regarding the
technical aspect of the survey,
and then Josh Swatik, who's here
to, to assist us. So, um, my
name is Jose Costa. Like I
mentioned before, I am the
director of the Public Health
division at the New Mexico
Department of Health, and we'll
jump right into the uh the
president
presentation, just a little bit
about the uh how the survey
occurs, it occurs every other
year, scientific survey done
with random sampling among
public school students and um in
2023, there were a total of
35,000,720 students who took the
survey. Um, the survey, um, has
over 100 questions. It can be
answered in a on a paper format
or online.
Um, and it, it reviews um
violence, bullying, mental
health, obesity, asthma, like I
said, over 100 questions in
different um domains. I, I have
to mention the partners. We
could not do this by ourselves,
Mister Chair. Um, certainly the
CDC were part of that big
program, the survey adds to the
national one.
the public education department.
And I know they're here. Um,
UNM.
They may not be here, but I know
they're listening. They told me
to make sure uh that I knew that
on the Albuquerque area
southwest tribal Epidemiology
Center, the Navajo tribe YRBS,
the New Mexico Behavioral Health
Services Division, and the
school districts, um, and
schools that were so grateful
that there are partners. Um,
this in 2023, there were 142
high schools and 10084 middle
schools that part
participated in the survey.
Bottom line upfront.
Bottom line up front, compared
to 2021.
The YRRS results, the 2023
showed decreases in many mental
health concerns, including
Persistent feelings of sadness
and hopelessness.
Frequent mental distress and um
suicide attempts.
I don't line up.
Compared to 2019, most forms of
substance use.
Um, alcohol use and nicotine use
have decreased among New Mexico
high school students, including
vaping, prescription opioid
misuse and cannabis use.
Um, turn to page number 5,
please. Um, just, just in terms
of how these graphs are set up
and the um and the uh bullets on
the right side when it says
increase.
Decrease, that is statistically
significant.
So we did not add that to the
bullets, but it, it when it says
increase its statistically
significant um difference. And
we'll start with the persistent
sadness or hopelessness on the
slide, um, you can see on the Y
axis, um, the percent felt
sadness or hopelessness.
Um, at the bottom of the
presentation, the actual
question that the students were
asked, and you can see that
between um 2021 and 2023. There
was a 17% decrease in people in
students, um, responding in the
affirmative to that question.
Slide number 6. The question was
about attempted suicide, and
again, you can see that between
2021 and 2023, and these are
greats 9 through 12. You're in
New Mexico. It was a drop in
those responding that they had
uh considered attempting
suicide.
The next slide, um specifically
now addresses mental health by
sex, and you can see on this
slide again, the y axis is the
percentage, students responding
in the affirmative, frequent
mental distress, and in the
purple girls and in the uh
orange uh boys you can see that
the incidences, um, almost
twice.
As frequent, the difference
between um girls and boys. In
sadness and hopelessness, we see
a similar pattern.
Um, in symptoms of depression
against similar pattern and
symptoms of anxiety, the same.
So, um, girls versus boys, I'm a
higher, a higher incidence, um.
Uh
Uh, mental distress, sadness and
hopelessness, symptoms of
depression and symptoms of
anxiety.
Now when we look at attempted
suicide by sexual orientation
and gender identity again,
students in between the 9th and
the 12th grade. This is on page
8, when asked, um, about, uh,
attempted suicide, a question,
right? Have you thought about
it?
Um, you can see the incidents in
street is 5.9 and in lesbian,
gay, or bisexual, um, almost 3
times.
I
Cisgender versus transgender or
non-binary, we see a similar
pattern.
And on page 9 it it we're
looking at mental health by
supportive peer relationships.
And you can see just to set the
slide up, low peer support,
medium peer support, high peer
support.
And you can see the 3 columns
purple, orange, and green. You
can see the lower, the peer
support, the higher the uh
mental health concerns.
And that's frequent mental
distress. Consider attempting
suicide and attempted and
attempted suicide.
So that that low peer group.
That low peer group certainly is
at a higher risk for um for
issues related to mental health.
Now, a little bit about
substances and.
About a quarter of the
presentation left, just so you
have an idea. Um, this is
electronic vaping.
Like the chronic vaping. And
then here's the question. During
the past 30 days, and how many
days did you use electronic
vapor product.
It goes on to this graves.
That's the question they get
asked.
And so, um, you can see starting
in 2015, about 23% with a
xenopho in 2019 of 33% and now
at an 8 year of 18.8%.
So that is in terms of that
specific question in the last 30
days, have used one of these
products and we've seen a
significant decrease in that
use.
When we go on to misuse
prescription opioids.
Um, and you can see that the
graph there the question during
the past 30 days, how many times
did you take prescription pain
medicine without a doctor's
prescription, um,
So that's, that's the question
that's been asked. You can see
that in 2019 was 11.2% and then
uh in 2023, 7%. So you can see
uh, again a significant
decrease.
Um, you know, people ask me,
well, why don't you have data
before 2019 and um that question
wasn't asked before then.
And then cannabis use, uh, um,
against grades 9 through 12,
they are going back to 2011, you
can see that uh.
Up to 2019 in the um high
twenties.
percent of children using the uh
um cannabis and it has decreased
to 179% in the 2023 survey.
The next set of questions, um,
have to do with the use of
cannabis and certain groups.
And we're looking at our certain
groups at higher risk, um,
And you can see from left to
right, purple to green. If you
have it in color, um, experience
racism in school. And you can
see there's a high in that
group, there's a higher
prevalence of the use of
cannabis, um, experienced
physical dating violence.
You can see that in that group
of, of, of youth, there's a
higher percentage use of
cannabis, and then those that
are exposed to homelessness, um,
have, uh,
Um, I'm much higher.
Um, prevalence of the use of
cannabis compared to those youth
that responded, that live in a
state, have stable housing.
A little bit about the, the, um,
some of the caveats that go with
the YRS um only students in
public schools.
Um, that includes public charter
schools are the ones that are
surveyed. So, um, it's a very
difficult to make any type of,
of correlation um with those
certainly that are not, they're
not surveyed. It's point in
time.
So it's, it's, it, it, it,
things, it, the results um are
at that moment, um, last 30 days
and so we, we have to be very
careful to try to create it, um.
Uh
Relationships with the data that
we have. This is a one point in
time, um survey.
Just a couple of things that you
can see we have a, a website,
um, with that has YRS Y R RS
results. If you go there today,
you will find the 2021 results.
The 2023 will be, will be online
soon.
And then just a couple of the,
the, the programs that um that
we believe
have made a significant
difference in um in these
surveys. One is our um the
Office of School and Adolescent
Health.
Um, that funds the school-based
health centers.
And, and we've heard about them,
um, recently, um,
They are in 59 brick and mortar,
um, facilities and uh another 41
have access through uh
telehealth.
And then the um
The the Title 5 program, the CM
the Children and Medical
Services program partnering with
UNM, um, and providing services
across the state, um, for, for
our youth.
So with that, um, Mr. Chair, I
conclude my, uh, my remarks on
the presentation open for
questions, please.
Just a quickie, uh, did you ask
about fentanyl use this year.
Hi, Mr. Chair, um, we did not
ask about fentanyl in 2023.
We've drafted a question that'll
be included on the 2025
questionnaire.
OK, let's go to the committee
then for questions. We'll start
with Representative Cates, and
we'll move right around like
that.
I, I thank you, chairs, and, and
thank you, Doctor Costa and,
and, and everyone for your
presentation. I can tell it took
a village to create such an
in-depth report and thank you
very much.
Um, were there, I, I, I see that
you have data that individuals,
um, identifying in the LGBTQIA
plus community have a 3 times
higher self harm or risk of
self-harm. And you also have
data indicating that people who
have strong students who have
strong peer support have a much
lower
So
Do you draw a conclusion with
that as in maybe individuals
with LGBTQIA plus do not have a
strong peer support system in
the school age bracket. Is that
a a a acceptable conclusion to
that.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Case, that makes sense, right?
Um, the, these individuals may
feel isolated, um, and, uh,
And make a certain behaviors
that put them at risk in terms
of um
Substance use.
The, the, the issue with surveys
like this, there's maybe a
correlation, but there may can't
do causation, but it would make
sense that that's the case,
ma'am. Thank you. My vice chair
is gonna cut me off pretty soon.
Um, but I do appreciate that.
Then on your last page, you say
there's 100 schools
participating in school-based
clinics. How very exciting we
heard about a month or so ago
that and only one year, every
place where there's been a
school gate place uh clinic
happens that Evan.
increased their graduation rate.
Um, some by small margins, some
by larger margins, but that is
very exciting news. How many,
um, schools are there in the
state. I, I want to know the
percentage of the 100 that we
have so far.
Thank you. Mr. Chair, um,
Madam Chair, we have somebody
here that can help us with that.
Thank you.
Uh
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, there are
approximately 850 schools. Are
you talking specifically about
secondary schools?
Wherever our school bus, I'm
trying to get a percentage of
eligible school-based clinics.
If we're doing them in secondary
high schools, middle, are we
doing middle schools?
Uh, and could you please
introduce yourself.
My apologies, thank you. Uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Greg Frosted. I'm
Assistant Secretary of Education
at the publication department.
Um, it's my understanding that
most of the school-based health
uh clinics are at secondary
schools. I don't know that
number for sure that it would be
a DOH question.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia.
that the chairman, uh,
you know, on your vaping.
Uh, were you looking just that
nicotine?
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna, um, our
expert on the survey question.
So this question um asks youth
as it's written. So how they
interpret the question is how
they answer it. That being said,
we also ask students how they
consume cannabis and when we ask
about cannabis.
One of the options they can
select is that they consumed it
through vaping. Yeah, the reason
I asked that question is because
um
A youth in my district have
raised.
The issue that
The vaping of cannabis.
Is that higher THS.
Levels
Then standard.
Uh
And um
Uh, so that's why I posed that
question.
Um
Is that that they might be in
violation.
Cannabis.
Thors might be in violation.
Of the limitation of THCs in the
In the vaping products that they
sell. Lastly, um,
You know, the school-based
health clinics.
And the public health clinics.
Uh, provide a lot of services to
youth.
Um
And uh there was a closure of
some
School-based health clinics.
And some public health clinics.
During the
Um, Luhan Grisham
administration.
And I was wondering if your
survey differentiated.
Between those youth.
That partook.
In those
A health clinics in regards to
having services.
Early on, and not having
services later on.
Uh
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garcia, I, I don't know if that
data is collected with that type
of specificity. I'll share, I'll
ask my expert here on it.
High Chairman Representative
Miguel Garcia. Uh, we don't have
a question on our survey that
assesses of a child receives
school-based health centers. We
can differentiate students by
the schools they attend, so we
could do comparisons between
kids who attended schools or
school-based health centers
versus those who did not.
OK, thank you, uh.
The merchant.
Senator Lopez.
Centropin Representative Jones.
I don't have any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the information.
Representative Martinez.
I will
recapture all their time,
you're funny. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. On page 4.
It's, it's very, very
encouraging to see.
The decreases in, in a lot of
the mental health concerns. My
question is,
Do you think that that's due to
the reopening of the schools and
the ability for young people to,
to socialize again.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Martinez.
I believe so.
So when you look at um the
effect of peers in terms of
mental health ill issues, you
can see that.
Uh, the group with the highest
peer group does better, so I
believe that's one of several
reasons, others certainly
school-based health centers, I
think that makes a difference,
certainly awareness about
issues, but I do, I do agree
with you that that is uh
Probably significant.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, doctor. Um, my last
question on page 9.
Uh, on your peer relationships.
I'm, I'm wondering if there was.
If there's any way to find out
if
Uh, extracurricular activities
in school like sports, ROTC,
social clubs, does that play
into this?
Mr. Chair and um representative
Martinez.
I believe so. If, if, if we move
to the next step, which would be
peer relationship are important.
You can imagine those peer
relationships and those teams
are significant. But for the
specifics, I'm gonna let um
Dylan responses.
Yeah, it's a, um, we're
considering adding a question
about um out of school time
community activity for the 2025
survey now. We also ask about um
family, community-based
relationships and teacher
relationships already and some
internal uh coping skills.
That's right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the time and thank you
for this information. It's
It's encouraging, um, at least
we're
Moving a little bit forward, but
thank you for all the work that
went into this.
Uh, and I look forward to the
next survey.
And, and the, the survey was
over 100 questions. We we're
just getting the ones that are
significantly
Positive.
Were there any significantly
negative, I mean, not where we
showed it, things are getting
worse.
So we looked at um 6 domains,
uh, sexual health, violence,
mental health, substance use,
uh, vaping, and maybe one other.
Um, and there were no
Um,
uh, increases in concerns or
negative outcomes that were
significant, um, some things
remained unchanged, like
violence issues, fighting and
bullying remains similar to the
previous two years. Um, our
measure of like estimated
obesity and overweight decrease
from 21 to 2023, but it was
still higher than it was in 2019
in previous years.
Um, and some of this is similar
to national statistics too,
which also saw decreases in
mental health, um, in the
national CDC data.
Representative Herndon, do you
have questions? I do, Mr. Terry.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate having this document.
I also want to make sure that
you were aware of the mental
health rooms that were
authorized in 2022 to be in 14
schools throughout the state of
New Mexico. And did you have a
conversation with any of those
schools and whether or not that
those mental health rooms were
helping. I'm going to ask my
three questions because I only
have.
A half a minute.
OK, so you guys have to answer
some fast. And then the other
thing is uh in the rural areas,
there's a program called the
Yellow Ribbon Program, which
looks at preventing suicide and
how was that included as a part
of your program, and I also want
to know if you're aware that the
New Mexico Academy for the Media
Arts, those students have put
together a documentary that's
scheduled to be shown in
December, uh, on their health
and how they're feeling about
their mental health and
wellness.
And one of the people who was
very supportive of that was Greg
Frosted, who's absolutely in the
audience today, and uh help to
make sure that that funding was
available. So please answer
those three questions. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, representative
Herndon, I'll give a general,
and then I'll let Dylan, um,
and, and I, and I have to say
it's um my fault that I've
limited the school-based health
centers. There's so much more
that's happening across the
state that by just mentioning
them, I, I've, I've come up.
short, but there's so many
different programs that have an
impact. Dylan, can you go into
the specifics, please?
I can share some. I know we have
a couple of our PED colleagues,
including Anna Marlow Jeter from
Safe and Healthy Schools Bureau,
who I believe I've been involved
in some of the safe rooms and
for the mental health rooms that
were developed, um, we regularly
disseminate and share this data.
So I'm familiar with the yellow
ribbon program because we have
participated, um,
And giving data to the community
members who who do those
programs, and they regularly use
our data to talk to local
counties about the statistics in
their area.
Um, and then you asked about the
upcoming movie that I just got
an email about this documentary.
Um, and I just say that we have
a suicide prevention program at
DOH, which is, I believe,
partnering in communicating with
them, and that's coordinated
through the Office of Injury and
behavioral epidemiology program.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, I
just wanted to make sure that we
are coordinating all these
programs and that we're looking
at the results of how they are
affecting people and that
Michelle Katz, who is with
respect to the yellow ribbon
program is also in the audience
today. So thank you, Madam
Chair, for that.
Representative Chasey, any
questions?
No, Mr. Chair, thank you. Thank
you very much.
Senators to. Only a comment,
Mister Chair. I think these
surveys are very important, and
the more that we can receive the
information, it can help develop
policy. So I hope that the
department doesn't hold back on
sharing that information. Thank
you.
Senator Pope
No questions, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
several of my questions have
been answered, I mean, asked and
answered. So the one question
that I have left is, do you all
based on this, do you have any
recommendations for us in terms
of um policy programs, etc.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chavez, um,
I would say continue to support
our programs.
I think that is uh
That's very important. And this
is one area where
You could say there's a
relationship to improvement with
the programs. Some people would
say there might not be. I think
there is. And so if you can
continue to support the
programs, we'd be very grateful.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And uh Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, yeah,
this is just the data. I want to
make it clear that we're just
one of many partners and that
all of our, you know, PEDs in
the room, you and Ms listening
in, um.
They're all part of these large
programs, and this what we're
showing here is, you know,
showing the effect of the work
of many thousands of people, uh,
throughout the state. So I, I
think, you know, when you're
looking at policies, it's not
just Department of Health
programs, it's a variety of
programs um that have been
supported by Governor's office
by this body previously, um, and
we're starting to see.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, I refer to
the YRRS a lot um and when I see
that you don't even mention
alcohol use as one of your um
You know, analysis that you're
bringing to forward to us. I'm
really concerned and I tried
going on to through your website
to find anything, um, and it's
doesn't seem to be working
unless it's just because I'm on
an iPhone, but um.
I just get the questionnaire,
um, so I'll try and make it uh
with the um.
Um
Vaping.
I know vaping is going down, but
students are going to other
nicotine use and do you have
that included, you know, such
as, you know, the zen and the
pouches or other synthetic drugs
or tobacco.
Hi, Mr. Chair and Representative
Ferrari, um, we asked about 5
forms of nicotine, uh, hookah,
cigarettes.
Uh chewing tobacco, um, vape
products and
Leave one another. Um,
We did ask about a chewing
tobacco question in 2023. We're
revising the words of our
question 2025 to specifically
include the words in because of
the feedback we've gotten from
communities, um, or other
synthetic. OK, thank you. Um,
can you tell me though why you
didn't include information about
alcohol use, which.
Affect suicide, sadness, um.
And, you know, um, the
hopelessness, you know, all of
these other things, it seems to,
its impacts a lot of these, the,
the editing is my fault. I
should have included that, but,
um, alcohol is actually
decreased also in terms of both
current and use and binge
drinking measures. The biggest
decrease being from 2023 to 2021
among high school students with
the numbers being stable through
20203. Um, but there's still,
you know, higher than we'd want
them to.
still like 1 in 6 kids engaging
in binge drinking, which is
lower than 1 in 44 years ago.
That makes sense the suicide
and.
Things like that that are
Alcohol related. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So just, I
mean, I remember reading
somewhere that vaping was way
down in youth, and I said, oh
yay, but my brain said, big
tobacco is always 20 years ahead
of us, so, um.
There has to be something else,
and of course there is. So I
would, um,
I would like to encourage you
to, to not be quite so specific
because if you only put down
then, then, well, I don't use
zen, so I'm cool, so, um, and
we're never gonna catch up with
big tobacco. I mean, we're
always gonna be behind, um, and,
and I would love if we could
work with the tobacco settlement
revenue Oversight Committee
because we get frequent updates
on what's going on, um, and then
on page 6,
Page 6.
well,
anyone, the one about um being
transgender or, or um
Gender identity, whatever, and,
and we see that their rates are
so much high on page 8 actually,
that their rates are so much
higher than um straight or
cisgender folks, and it makes me
think that every time we pass a
law or even try to pass a law or
bring up something that says you
can't use the bathroom, you
know, you're, you, you're a
female, I mean, we won't get
into the science, but
But those are hate acts as far
as I'm concerned, and they will
increase the suicide rates of
our transgender LGBTQ folks and
so I encourage our folks to not
to
Not be hateful. I'll just leave
it at that. Um,
And then the fact that there's a
two-year lag time. I know how
things work, but I mean, 2 years
in teenage years is a lifetime.
So I'm wondering if we could do,
you know, maybe a mini one every
year or somehow, you know,
somehow not get, not always be
two years behind the curve.
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair.
We agree with you.
That, that we need to be able to
get this information, um.
Out quicker so we can make
decisions. Right now, the survey
is done in paper, and it's also
like I mentioned before,
electronic format. So we, we
will take that back as a, as a
recommendation. Thank you. All
right, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I only had
Oh, did you have something else
to real quick,
is there a way to structure a
question in terms of the impact.
On the you taking the survey.
Regarding the impact um that
they
Um
Regarding the impact of homicide
and violent crime. Yeah, so
there's a wireless steering
committee, which every 2 years
reviews question proposals from
the community and we add
questions based on community
interest. Um, we had, we revised
the question in 2023, for
instance, to ask if you had
brought a firearm to school as
an example of a question that
was added then, because it was
of interest, and, but, so yes,
it's a process to do that. All
right. Thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chan.
And, and I only had one,
Question or comment, whatever.
Would there be any advantage in
including the private schools?
And if so, what would it take?
There's a tremendous advantage
including the number of youth we
represent in the state by
expanding the sample frame, um,
there is like a some scientific
work that has to go into. We
want to have every child who's
in our sample have a non-zero
chance of participation. So we
would need to have a way to
include them. We have offered
some technical support to
private schools who've asked to
just use our instruments to ask
questions to their students, um,
and to help, you know, analyze
and interpret the results, but
that we would always for DOH and
the
They didn't think it would be
good to more representative
data. So have you approached,
for example, the
The archdiocesan Office of
Education about their schools.
I'm not sure if we have or have
not. But, uh, Mr. Chair, so the
answer is yes. If not, that's
the second question, but to the
first,
yes, so that's,
yes, and then the answer to the
second.
I don't, we don't know the
answer, but we will get back and
let you know if there's been
approaches in the past to the
the archdiocese or public
school, private schools, and I,
and I don't know for sure, I
mean, but it seems to me that
You'd be picking up a cohort of
students who
are better off economically,
which might affect the
percentages overall some way,
but I don't know if that would
be up or down. So it, it would
give us some a picture of what
the kids of the state are going
through, not just those who go
to public schools. At any rate,
thank you so much. It's great to
get this report, and every year
we look forward to it, and I'm
sure the chairman next year
will, will be um looking forward
to it as well.
Thank you.
So members of the pizza is here.
When we take 10 minutes to
uh collect and consume pizza.
You can bring it back in here.
We'll, we'll take a little break
for 10 minutes and then we'll
