And you should have that in
front of you. It looks like
this.
So first I would like to thank
Secretary Rodriguez and the
higher Education Department
staff for their collaboration on
this project.
I would also like to thank the
council of University
Presidents, the New Mexico
Independent Community College
Association and the New Mexico
Association of Community
Colleges and their member
institutions for their
collaboration on this project as
well.
So, Mr Chair and members of the
committee If you would please
turn to Page two for a summary
of the report.
You will see that higher
education institutions are
missing opportunities for
increased enrollment and
efficiencies through online
education.
Higher education institutions or
HEIS nationwide, significantly
scaled up online education in
response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Four years later, online course
taking remains a substantial
part of higher education.
With this expansion of online
higher education, state colleges
are well positioned to reach New
Mexico's roughly 120,000 adults
who have some college but no
credential.
Many students drop out of
college because of the
difficulty of balancing work and
school at the same time.
A situation that online colleges
can help on online college can
help alleviate
However, New Mexico colleges are
missing the opportunity to use
online education to fully reach
this population of potential
students.
Furthermore, over 11,000 New
Mexico residents are enrolled in
out of state online colleges
suggesting New Mexico colleges
are being out competed in the
online education market.
New Mexico. Higher education is
also not realizing millions of
dollars in efficiencies with
online education.
State colleges and universities
could save up to $5.7 million
annually by increasing the class
size of lower level online
courses with fewer than 30
students.
Many New Mexico higher education
institutions are separately
purchasing the same learning
management systems to deliver
online courses. Um, which
unnecessarily leads to
additional costs by not using a
shared price agreement.
State colleges could reinvest
the cost savings from these and
other efficiencies into raising
New Mexico's comparatively low
faculty and instructor. Uh,
salaries.
And finally
The expansion of online
education in, uh, New Mexico has
profound implications for higher
education facilities.
Which span 18.6 million square
feet and cost at least $178
million per year.
The number of New Mexico college
students taking all of their
classes on campus has decreased
by 63% of the past decade.
While building space has
decreased by 2%. The result is
that New Mexico Higher education
institutions are most likely
under utilizing building space.
So in the future, higher
education institutions, the
state higher Education
Department and the Legislature
will all need to consider the
impacts of online higher
education on capital outlay
requests and decisions.
And now Mr Chair and members of
the committee.
If you would please turn to page
five. I will present some
background information.
Page five describes how online
higher education has been
increasing nationally for over a
decade, as shown on chart one.
A trend which the COVID-19
pandemic accelerated but did not
initiate.
In New Mexico Online course
taking remains a substantial
part of higher education.
On chart two. You will see that
45% of college credit hours were
taken online in academic year
2223.
Online course taking also varies
widely across the different
higher education institutions in
the state, as shown on Chart
three with some, uh colleges
providing more than 75% of
college credit hours online.
If you'll go to Page six, Page
six, provides an overview of
online course, taking patterns
in New Mexico. Online courses
are commonly asynchronous, which
means that classes are self
paced and do not have a set, Uh,
scheduled meeting time.
On table one. You will see that
students most commonly take
online courses is business,
humanities and social science
Field of study.
Students taking online classes
are also more likely to be
female, older and from a racial
or ethnic minority background.
The next section on Page seven,
describes how students report
appreciating the flexibility of
online classes in national
surveys and that colleges are
planning to expand online
offerings.
And the bottom of Page eight,
discusses how New Mexico State
University recently established
an online global campus, which
has experienced a 158%
enrollment increase since 2019,
which you will see on chart
five, demonstrating the fiscal
viability and student demand for
online programming.
On Page nine.
You will see the report's first
finding as out of state schools
recruit thousands of state
residents. New Mexico Higher
education institutions are not
fully reaching adults without a
credential.
New Mexico has roughly 120,000
working age adults who started
college but did not complete a
credential.
These adults face lower
earnings, employment rates and
labor force participation
compared to adults with a
college degree.
On page 10.
The report describes how the
most common reason cited for
dropping out of college include
balancing work and school.
Research suggests that older and
more experienced students tend
to be more successful in online
courses compared to their
younger counterparts.
Now, if you'll please turn to
page 11, the report describes
how over 11,000 New Mexico
residents are enrolled in out of
state online programs, some of
which are shown on table three.
This is, uh, this results in an
estimated loss of 58 million per
year in tuition revenue for New
Mexico, Higher education
institutions.
The number of New Mexico
residents in out of state online
programs has increased by 79%
since 2015 highlighting the need
for targeted efforts to retain
these students.
On page 12. The report describes
how targeted re, uh,
recruitment campaigns combined
with free tuition have been
shown to increase re enrollment
rates among former college
students.
And with that, Mr Chair and
members of the committee, I'll
turn things over to Sam to
present the rest of the report.
Thank you clean. And now Mr
Chair and members of the
committee if you would turn to
page 13 for the report's second
finding state, higher education
institutions are missing
opportunities to achieve
efficiencies with online
education.
The main cost drivers of a
higher education course are
instructor pay and class size,
regardless of whether a course
is delivered online or online
courses are not exceedingly cost
prohibitive for institutions to
offer. The report discusses how
institutions could collaborate
to offer online courses more
efficiently.
Nearly half of online sections
of lower level courses offered
by New Mexico. Higher education
institutions in the 2020 19 or
fewer students.
By comparison, online classes at
Arizona State Unit University
had an average size of 50
students.
If New Mexico state colleges and
universities were to share
courses so that these lower
level courses reach the size of
30 students. LFC staff estimate
that it could save between 4.7
to 5.7 million as shown in chart
11 on page 15.
While 30 students may not be
appropriate for all disciplines.
The report notes that there were
over 500 classes with fewer than
10 pre school year. Many of
these, such as two sections of
introductory micro rein enua
well with seven and eight
students could be combined with
no loss of instructional
quality.
Resources freed up from more
efficient class sizes could be
redirected by institutions into
raising new Mexico. Salaries,
however, turning to page 16
MS U policy currently prohibits
this type of horse sharing by
blocking main campus students
from enrolling in courses
offered at an MSU branch
campuses.
Colleges and universities also
have the opportunity to reduce
costs for software used to
provide online education
services.
A majority of institutions use
canvas as their learning
management system.
The license fees range from $10
per student to $40 per student,
as shown by chart 12 on the
bottom of page 16.
Page 17.
Discusses how institutions
already have a framework for
joint software or technology
purchases, and that a joint
purchase agreement for canvas
could have saved institutions
roughly $350,000
Pages. 17 and 18 discuss global
N MS US online campus.
As shown by chart 13 on page 18.
Analysis of N MS U Global
financial data shows that it is
a profitable and cost effective
program for N MSU. Despite this
profitability, the state will
have subsidized N MSU Global by
a total of $17 million by the
end of fiscal year, 25.
And if you natural turn to page
19, the report's final finding
is that online education
contributes to low space
utilization.
As shown by chart 14 the number
of students taking all their
classes in person on campus
versus hybrid or online has
dropped by 63% since 2012.
Fully online or hybrid courses,
necessarily person course, as at
least some instruction will be
delivered without a physical
classroom.
However, during the six the
total amount of instructional
and institutions declined by
only turning to page 20.
The increase in online learning
is contributing to low space
utilization at New Mexico Higher
education institutions.
Table five shows that classrooms
and laboratories are universally
being used at a rate well below
the industry benchmark of 30 to
40 hours a week across the
state.
And many of the institutions
listed in Table five with low
space utilization also have high
rates of online learning.
Other institutions do not appear
to collect space utilization
data in a systematic manner.
Turning to page 21.
LSC staff conducted a series of
site visits to four learning
centers and two branch campuses.
These visits, so multiple
instant school hours, aligning
with the quantitative data
presented in Table five and the
63% decrease in fully on campus
enrollment.
LFC staff conducted these site
visits during normal hours of
operation, typically with a
variety of times, and you can
see examples of when you unused
instructional.
Page 22.
And page 23 turning to page 24.
Despite this low utilization,
the state has continued to
provide hundreds of millions in
appropriations and bonding
capacity for new construction at
higher education. New Mexico
lacks space utilization
utilization data can provide
valuable guidance about how an
institution should adjust its
physical footprint. But HED does
not require institutions to
collect space utilization data
nor a space utilization of
formal criterion used to
evaluate capital outlay
projects.
By comparison. Other states such
as Utah, California and North
Carolina, have created space and
institutions and require these
institutions to collect and
report on this data.
A prior evaluation of HD's
capital outlay process conducted
by an outside consultant
recommended that HED work with
institutions.
Turn to page 25.
The absence of space utilization
standards has contributed to
planning documents on file with
a CD consistently failed to
discuss the impact of
70% of plans either failed to
mention online enrollment
entirely or made no connection
between change needs.
I'm not turn the presentation
back over to Clayton. We'll
discuss Thank you, Sam.
And now Mr Chair and members of
the committee. If you would
please turn to page three of the
report, you will find a list of
the report's key
recommendations.
This report recommends that the
higher Education Department
should amend the, uh, the
capital outlay manual and rules
to include benchmarks of space
utilization metrics.
Uh, and that New Mexico Higher
education institutions should
increase the size of online
lower level general education
courses with fewer than 30
students.
And the report on the efficacy
of their targeted recruitment
campaigns for former students
who did not complete their
studies.
And the higher Education
Department and institutions
should develop a statewide
online course sharing agreement
and New Mexico. Higher education
institutions should negotiate a
joint price agreement for
learning management system
services and Mr Chair members of
the committee with your
permission will turn things over
to Secretary Rodriguez for, uh,
the higher Education
Department's response.
I'm gonna have
I can stand.
Just get
Second members as I go ahead and
pull things up, so I can do my
So good morning, honorable
chairman. Members of the
Committee. Thank you so much for
having me here today. I am
Stephanie Rodriguez and I am the
Cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department, and I have been
asked to provide a response
related to the program
evaluation for online education
at our higher education sector.
I do want to note before I
really dive into it that I
appreciate the time and effort
that went into the legislative
finance committees independent
analysis of online education
within the higher education
sector, and I appreciate the
opportunity to
On to you today. So in our
official letter response dated
April 15th you will notice that
one of our opening statements
that is relevant to three of the
core key recommendations of the
program evaluation on Page three
of the document that Clayton
provided for you. We are all
familiar with the fact that
there is a structure of
governance at all of our higher
education institutions in the
state of New Mexico, in which
each and every college and
university has its own governing
board. This structure is very
different and unique than the
public education.
That is able to streamline more
policies to school boards and
local education agencies.
These boards, in addition to
administrators have the
discretion to set many policies,
including policies surrounding
instruction, type dropping, of
course, sections course sharing
agreements and joint price
agreements. However, of the key
recommendations, I do want to
highlight that the department is
very much in alignment with
targeted recruitment campaigns
of former students, um, who did
not complete their studies. This
was a talking point for the
passage of the opportunity
Scholarship in 2022. Many of you
remember those conversations
with me how
Do we hear the story of a new
Mexican who lost their lottery
scholarship or had to halt their
studies because of a health or
family matter?
More than we would like. We all
know that. So that is why
collectively Governor Lujan,
Grisham and many of you sitting
in this very room created and
supported the opportunity
scholarship after the
opportunity scholarship was
established, the department
created reach higher nm.com to
assist all colleges and
universities in the recruitment
efforts. The website is a one
stop shop for new Mexicans to
see if they're eligible for the
opportunity in lottery
scholarships and see what school
would fit them the most in
Additionally, some colleges and
universities did.
Go through the Rolodex of former
students who did not complete
their degree. Two examples are
the University of New Mexico and
Western New Mexico University
and since the implementation of
the opportunity scholarship, we
have seen a 7% increase in
enrollment overall in the state
of New Mexico.
Moving on. I know our department
response is included in your
packets. Today. I'm gonna grab
it.
It looks like this.
And I don't wanna harp on some
of the points too much, because
I know you've had an opportunity
to review our response, which is
in your packet that Clayton
provided. However, I do want to
turn your attention to our
handout, which includes the
online course activity data
collected by the higher
Education Department.
In the table on the first page
After the cover page, you will
see that prior to the pandemic
online courses accounted for
less than a quarter of all
sections held but due to the
pandemic, we saw a dramatic
shift in how classes were
administered.
And I'm gonna wait a second so
it can get up there for you all.
I'm sorry. I'll do that. Moving
forward, Senator. She thank you.
Um, in the table in the first
page after the cover page, OK,
thank you.
In 2022 2023. Approximately 37%
of all sections were online and
40% 46% of all credits attempted
by students were an online
course I do want to divert your
attention to the in person,
however, which is the third
column on the left of both
tables. You will see that there
is still a good number of
sections and credits attempted
at an average of 50% between the
two
On the next page. You will see
that courses are primarily
online versus in person, as one
would suspect our a hands on
programs such as those in
trades, health and stem had a
greater in person presence pre
and post pandemic.
However, there was a significant
increase to online coursework
and business and social sciences
classes, followed by education
and humanities, which was also a
point that Clayton pointed out
in his report. Now on Page three
and four, you will notice
delivery method patterns by
overall student population and
then specific to gender and age.
But on Page three, we can
observe that during the covid
pandemic, 43% of students were
taking classes strictly online
and 42% had
Mix of online hybrid and in
person. However, I'm really
pleased to report more recently
31% of New Mexico students are
taking courses online in 23% are
taking courses in person only.
But let's talk about that mixed
group in the middle and yellow
Currently, 43% of our students
are taking mixed courses online
hybrid and in person You see
higher education institutions,
The ones in this room today are
already evaluating what courses
are better to administer.
Online or in a hybrid mot
modality in which programs
really do constitute being in
person. Additionally, there is a
sign that colleges and
universities are working to meet
the needs and wants of their
student populations and groups
that they serve in their
communities, and some people may
want to do online because they
are taking care of their
Children, and some people are
working part time and may be
able to do some of those in
person classes to Upskill and
Reskill.
Now I wanna turn your attention
to the last page of our handout.
I know. A lot of the discussion
today may be centered on our
capital outlay process and
facilities at colleges and
universities across New Mexico
Within the program evaluation,
There is one key recommendation
that is solely pointed to the
department.
The recommendation states that
we should amend our capital
outlay, manual and
administrative rules regarding
space utilization Metric,
specifically addressing space
and institutional need.
However, we already did that
We're doing that and we're going
in above and beyond that
recommendation as a department,
the higher Education Department
has one of the strongest capital
outlay processes as a state
agency and that is due to strong
policies. Robust evaluations by
the capital projects Division
and committee and our committee
membership ranging from our
colleagues actually at the
Legislative Finance Committee,
in addition to the Department of
Finance and Administration in
the Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department
Additionally many times during
the legislative session, the
executive and legislators
capital recommendations are
closely aligned in higher
education compared to other
sectors. That is because this
department has done its due
diligence in conducting a
capital Outlay. Process review
in 2019 of all of our colleges,
universities and special
schools. The review highlighted
the complexity of systems at our
largest universities and the
simplicity of policies at our
smaller schools related to
Master planning and space
management. From that review. We
updated our manual and
implemented project
prioritization standards to
score and re capital Project
funding request, including
overall space utilization.
Classroom efficiency and
utilization and facilities
condition. Additionally, the
department established three key
guiding principles in the review
of all Project proposals, which
include project needs,
stewardship and, of course,
energy and sustainability. So
what does that all mean? Project
need evaluates enrollment
growth, retention and degree
production. We also examine
online enrollment versus in
person in enrollment, and we
show that to the committee for
their decision making. It also
looks at statewide workforce
needs.
Institution schools and how they
align with the state and we look
at facility assessments. Trust
me. We bug these institutions to
give us all that data before we
make a decision.
Stewardship looks at the cost
The facility condition index
deferred maintenance and cost
reduction in energy and
sustainability does exactly what
it says. What are the cost
energy? What are the energy
saving costs? Are we following
state policies and executive
orders pertaining to energy
efficiency? Additionally, the
higher education institutions
and special schools are required
to have established master plans
that outline future capital
requests and needs they should
be reviewing and updating them
often.
And often times director Honey
now Chief Financial officer.
Honey will always ask them if
their plans have been updated in
all of our hearings, and it's
also important to note with your
support and partnership in these
policies and practice. We both
have been working hard during
the legislative session to
better support colleges and
universities and investments
related to building renewal and
replacement and demolition
funding. And speaking of
demolition. This is relevant to
our department's requirement of
an equal or greater offset of
square footage.
Prior to this construction of
any new facility at any higher
education, institution or
special school in the state of
New Mexico, meaning that for
every building we put up another
one must come down down or be
transitioned to a different use
That is not state funded. So in
summary, we have been working to
right size, higher education,
pre pandemic to now with the
Legislative Finance Committee
who has been part of that
journey and members of the
higher Education Capital Outlay
Committee. Additionally, if you
refer back to the
A program evaluation that
Clayton provided you. You will
notice that those facilities are
facilities on branch campuses
and then at satellite campuses
in Rio Rancho. I want to note
that many of our branch campuses
and our satellite campuses,
actually, um, cater to a
different demographic of
student. The times that they
were visited were during regular
business hours. However, many of
the students in those
communities, rural frontier
communities and in Rio Rancho
are working their families their
their caregiver.
They have families, and they're
actually utilizing those
facilities in the evening. Not
during the day, so I just wanted
to go ahead and point that out
and some of those facilities are
not even funded by state.
They're actually funded by the
institution. So with that in
closing, the higher Education
Department will continue to
collect and review data
pertinent to online education in
the higher education sector. You
have your packet with all that
information from us, and we
stand ready to support colleges
and universities and developing
policies that consider the needs
of students.
Whether that is online in
person or both, and we will
continue to push practices in
relation to space utilization at
state funded colleges and
universities throughout the
state. Now joining me today to
my right is chief financial
officer and former director of
Capital projects Division.
Gerald Honey, who's been working
behind the scenes on many of the
positive shifts that you're
seeing in higher education
Doctor Patricia Trujillo, Our
deputy secretary in questions
and answers, and last I want to
note that higher education
leaders in
Other representatives are in the
audience today to assist in
question and answer portion of
this program since a lot of the
recommendations are to the
higher education institutions
themselves and their governing
boards, So once again, Mr Chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time and allowing
me a response. I will yield back
to you, Mr Chair. Thank you. We
got a questions from committee
members, representative Baca
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation.
Uh, I will start out with a
statement. I think that one of
the we're talking about
opportunities, one of the other
missed opportunities.
Is engaging, more high school
students, you know, trying to
really you know the K 12 we talk
about all the time K 12
communication participation
because we want our high school
students.
Uh, to start accessing that so
that they see college not as a a
different chapter in their life,
but actually an extension of
what they're doing.
Currently, Mr Chairman, we
celebrate with kids graduate
with their associate. Some
schools do that regularly, but
for many other schools, they
don't do that. So if we're
looking at really
You know, increase in the
numbers and really trying to do
this. I would encourage you guys
to look at how we can engage
more high school students in
that process,
Mr Chairman and Committee. I
also have a question What is the
past Fail rate of online versus
in person?
OK, Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. Thank you for the
question, so they're actually if
you turn to page
We find it.
If you turn to page 10 on chart
nine, you will see, Um some data
related to, um the, uh pass
rates for lower level. Uh,
courses at UN M. Uh,
disaggregated by delivery types.
Um, and it it corroborates what
the broader research literature
has indicated. Uh, where, um
older and more experienced
students tend to tend to have
higher grades and higher pass
rates and online courses. Um
Most likely because online
courses require more, uh self
directed learning. Um so
So, uh, that data there and, uh,
the research discussed on that
page. Um, uh uh. And thank you,
Mr Chairman. My my last question
really is, you know as we're
talking, and I and I fully
support the legislative lottery
and the opportunity scholarship
Uh, do we have any idea about
how many students were actually
losing in our first couple years
of college? Those that were
there as far as our
Um, you know, is it Is it 40%
that are dropping out of college
that are not completing it.
Is it 30%? Because I do see that
is this legislator has made a
huge investment in that
education to provide tuition.
And if we is not working and
trying to, um
Make it where our folks are
graduating That money is
somewhat lost. So do we have any
idea about how many
Folks were losing in the first
couple years.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
Committee. Um, uh, in
yesterday's, uh, prison. Um,
there was data related at the
retention rates, and I believe
it's a numbers in front of me.
If you want me to use them.
Yeah, So just so you know, uh,
Mister Chair representative, Uh,
four year colleges and
universities for a full time
first time freshman. Um, we're
actually looking at a 65%
retention rate. Uh, for four
year colleges and universities
and at our two
Sector. It is at 53% in the
overall statewide average is
And thank you and I and I just
wanna say I want to thank you
for your work, but I. I do think
that there's more work to be
done when we're talking about
We want our folks to be educated
to the degree possible through
our local universities. It helps
with the tuition costs and and
really, we need to be taking a
look at what is what's drawing
our folks out to these other
costs. Uh, these other colleges
outside of the, uh state is it
Is it cost? Is it speed of the
course to completion.
And those are some of the things
that we need to consider when
we're developing programs.
For our new Mexican citizens.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
So
My first question is, what is
the demand? I mean, I look at
this chart Table three on page
11. It's about 4000 people.
Uh, that are enrolled somewhere.
Besides a new
OK, so that means the demand is
But I also know that uh,
Southern New Hampshire
University spends about a
gazillion dollars advertising.
So that's why they have
students We don't advertise at
all but
What's the demand?
Overall.
Uh, is the is the market
demanding this or
Are we demanding this?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, Senator? Sheer.
Thank you for the question. So,
um, Table three lists the, uh,
top five institution out of
state institutions. Um, the
overall number of New Mexico
residents taking, um, uh,
College out of state is 11 0
11.5000 about 4000 you mentioned
is is just the disaggregation of
the institutions. The top five.
and, um, And this, uh, is, uh
My understanding primarily a, Um
uh, a student demand driven, Uh,
Trend, as indicated, um from the
national data, and then, uh,
So you know, we talk a lot here
about, uh, you have to have a
degree if you're going to make
any money.
Um
Once upon a time, I was an
interior trim Carpenter.
And I'm sitting at lunch with
two other interior trim car with
the people that built this stuff
in Crown molding, and, uh,
special cabinets.
All three of us have college
degrees. One had a Ph. D.
And yet
We were carpenters.
All three of us had worked in
our field.
All three of us said You know
what?
Thats carpentry.
Carpentry is nicer.
We're not in a big building. We
don't have to drive downtown in
traffic. Uh, it's it's it's
annoying.
And we all made plenty of money.
We were all happy doing that.
So I'm not. I'm not convinced
that you have to have a
bachelor's degree to to earn any
money. I also know that plumbers
and welders make a lot of money
and at least in New Mexico if
you can weld on pipe and you're
willing to weld on pipe in a
sandstorm in 100 degree weather,
you get paid very, very well for
that day.
Or Weld on pipe in a snowstorm
in the middle of the night. You
get paid very, very well for
that.
So
I hate to say everybody has to
have a degree.
There were at least three
carpenters that had a degree and
preferred to be carpenters.
But I look at this. We talk
about the cost of all of this.
Are we really going to reduce?
The number of buildings and the
cost of those buildings.
Because building kingdoms has
been part of higher ed for I
don't know, 200 years.
So, uh, I can't remember where I
saw it. I think it was in C
weekly report.
And if I get the facts wrong,
please Excuse me, but I believe
it was you and M. I think it was
the humanities class, and it
said that that it was $1500 per
square foot.
Did I read that right?
Nobody knows that, Um
Mr Chair members that Mr Chair
members of the committee? Um uh,
that is correct. And, um, uh,
last in 2023, there was a, uh,
policy spotlight on the
increasing costs of construction
materials. And and, uh, how
that's impacted, Um,
construction and the education
sector, um in public Ed and in
higher Ed $100, a square foot
So I remodel houses now because
Even though I have to wear a
tie sometimes like today.
I prefer to drive a table saw
They're just cooler.
Um 50. There's a whole extra
zero on there.
And when you had three highly
paid, uh, interior trim
carpenters doing some really
fancy stuff. We were nowhere
near that price.
Given E. Even with inflation. We
were nowhere near that price,
and we were doing some really
nice houses.
Wow.
So if we do this, we get more
people online, and I'm not
opposed to that. I think that's
a good idea. In fact,
Are we really going to reduce
the number of buildings we have?
Are we gonna close buildings?
Are we gonna tear some down? Are
we gonna build buildings that
are 100 and $50 a square foot?
Not $1500 a square foot. Would
we really do that? Or we just
Pretending we might do that.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, this report
recommends, um, that the
department set a space
utilization benchmarks. Uh, and
collect the space utilization
data. Um, in a, uh, a consistent
and systematic ma matter for all
institutions. Uh, that way we
can, um understand, uh, the the
space usage and space needs, uh
of the higher education system.
And, uh, we acknowledge the
changes that the depo
Department has made to its
capital outlay process. Uh, this
report just recommends taking
it, Um one step further in terms
of, uh, setting benchmarks and
collecting data.
Well, Mr Chair.
Madam secretary.
I think we would be really hard
pressed to say.
That we want less money.
I can't. I just can't even
imagine a single president in
this room saying, Oh, yeah, we
we we could do with less money
for for buildings or even less
money for utilities. Just
because we closed the building.
I don't think I just don't see
that.
So if we go down this route
To save
Millions of dollars.
And we ought to save millions of
dollars. But I just don't
II. I don't feel that happy if
we're going to spend the money
to to advertise
Probably a good idea.
Uh, if we're going to spend the
money to create a good online
Uh, program or at least good
online courses.
Uh, cause I've seen some that
And others that were that were
cool.
Um
Of course, you get the same
thing in in in in person class,
too. I've been to
The classes were like, Oh, my
gosh, Do I have to stay awake
for a whole hour? I can't handle
it.
And others. Why I couldn't get
uh so
So if we're gonna do that,
I think that the offset is we
gotta figure out where we're not
going to spend money.
If we're not going to spend
money on utilities because that
building is closed or gone.
That's good.
Um And if we're not going to
build a building for $1500, a
square foot, we're gonna keep
spending money like that
Represent Chapel.
Mr Chair.
Senator, she
I just wanna be a cowboy. It's
about quality of life. My
question is this.
Forever the state has paid for,
uh, but we did not pay for
demolition A few years back. We
pay for demolition in, uh, did
that policy also change?
Mr Chair. Uh, Representative
Chatfield. Uh, thank you for the
question. Uh, so the higher
education Department, uh
Three years ago, implemented a,
uh, a process by which in our
executive budget recommendation
we are requesting demolition
funding for higher education
facilities. These are based on a
five year plan submission by the
institutions, So that way we are
able to gauge the amount of
funding necessary year over year
and that has been funded
thankfully to the Legislature in
small dollars. Uh throughout the
last three years, so we do have
That, uh, in our in our thank
you that that's good, you know,
and a lot of these older
buildings when you get in there,
you find asbestos and it becomes
more expensive than what you
just
Think about take, uh
Yes. So
The the other thing.
Last year. I think it was
Um
We
We saw that the price of
building a a school building,
almost it doubled.
And, uh,
And what started AAA group
construction in public school
settings.
I wonder and I? I don't know.
Uh, some of your other other
folks out there, so maybe speak
to this. Or maybe you all can.
Where did that wind up? Are? We?
Did We, uh, complete a study?
This is just
Fluffed up or
Is it actual cost? Uh uh uh,
Lumber went really high. Then it
went down. Uh, where are we at
on that, Um, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. Um, so, uh,
there was a, um, a policy
spotlight report on, um the
increases in construction costs
that, uh, you're referencing
and, um, the part of the drivers
of the, uh, increase in
construction costs, um, have to
do with, um the supply, uh, in
terms of labor. Uh uh, you know,
Lack of available, uh, labor? Um
and also the demand for projects
and the influx of, um of, uh uh
uh, dollars for projects. So
those two trends going with each
other, um, that increase in
demand and the, uh, limited
available supply? Uh have, uh,
increased, so, Mr Chair do do We
believe at this time that we're
just going to
Have to
Suck it up and pay.
Twice when the when the
materials are the same.
Mr. Chair. Representative, if I
may, Uh, you know what we've
seen at the at higher Education
Department and with our higher
education institutions is
Every one of these, uh, projects
goes through formal procurement,
which requires, uh, you know, uh
uh, Request for procurement.
As what and
Which which requires there to be
multiple bids on projects and
and one of the things that we've
noticed is, um, every bid that
we have received for every one
of the facilities throughout New
Mexico.
Uh, has been, uh uh, at this
current level, uh, that we are
seeing.
Uh, those costs have not been,
uh, have not fluctuated much, Uh
and and that is And that is
something that we know is is is
an issue and we are working very
closely with our counterparts at
FC to to discuss as well as D
FA.
Uh, but we have not seen
AAA large reduction in costs
back to pre panic levels, and we
know that, uh, that that is
something that we are continuing
to evaluate and and will at this
year as well during our capital
outlay summary.
Represents Syria.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Um on
page. Um so
Are those numbers undergrad or
graduate school mixture? What
are they?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. Uh, that data comes
from, um, a national source that
does not disaggregate between
those. So, um uh, you know,
unfortunately, the data is not
at that level of disaggregation.
Um, thank you, Mr Chairman. So
If the majority so this lottery
or the, um
The opportunity Scholarship. Who
does that pertain to? Is it just
undergrad? Or is it graduate
school?
Mr Chair. It is undergrad
students in certificate, high
demand certificate, Fields,
associate degree and bachelor
degree. OK, so we could say,
maybe most of our our kids
coming in for undergrad are
staying here. But the rest
graduate school where it's not
for
I will say that in addition to
the opportunity in lottery
scholarships were very generous
with graduate scholarships as
well. We have about 10 million
that goes to stem oriented
graduate scholarships. We also
have another 10 million for
social work that needs to be
divided between practica and
scholarships for our students
and then faculty endowments. And
then we have the Graduate
Scholarship fund, which is
funded at half a million. But
once again we have those other
scholarship programs through HB,
two that have those high dollar
amounts.
So, Mr Chairman, we really don't
know.
What these kids are or not
really.
Um, OK, let's jump over to page
19. So if we continue to 2023 I,
I is it. Are we having historic
because of the opportunity
scholarship having historic
enrollments, especially at UN, M
and our bigger institutions.
Um
Mr Chair members of the
committee. They There was a, uh
increase. Um uh, after the
opportunity scholarship, um, but
the overall trend over the past
decade, um has, uh, you know
The overall amount of enrollment
is lower than a decade ago. Uh,
but there's a scholarship
programs. Um, but that's the
aggregate student enrollment.
The trend that, um this report
talks about as well is the, um,
proportion that are taking all
of their classes on, Uh more
students are choosing to either
take some or all of their
classes online. Uh, which has
implications for all aspects of
higher education. Gonzales
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And, uh,
thank you to our panel.
For your information and your
update and
Um, I guess what I I'm looking
at is some
You know when, uh, when we look
at the cost of building or
infrastructure
And then, uh,
With, uh
Modern, you know of online.
And then I see another prong
like a triangle is out of state.
And what does research
Uh, is showing us
So do you feel that eventually
we're going to be more into
online than versus actual
Heart.
You know, having a
You know the cloud the regular
classroom or the infrastructure
on
On construction. Um M, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Um, this report doesn't make a
definitive, uh, predictions
regarding the proportion of
online versus in person.
however, the overall trends over
the past decade nationally and
in in New Mexico have been
leaning toward, um, you know,
increased online. We'll see if
that plateaus. Um, now, uh, at
its current level, but that has
been the and Mister chair if I
can up on your screen.
See that? You know, in Covid, we
did have 43% of our course at
being a mixed modality. But if
you look down to the most recent
year of data that has decreased
by more than 10% for 31% for
online only, I think the
modality that we're seeing most
of is this mixed group, so
students who do online hybrid
and or in person, but we are
seeing decreases to online only
and we're seeing increases in in
person only.
Well, well, that's uh, that's
good to hear that. And I guess
my concern is that, uh
That for New Mexico to be more,
um
To be, uh more online or
proactive.
That we don't have a face that
The out of state takes over, you
know in our students.
And that was because we were not
prepared for that.
But, um, you know, it's an
interesting part, you know, And
then also, um
The point that was made as a
reference to buildings and the
usage of buildings.
Oh, that has been going on for
years and years. You know, since
I've been here of what
Now, the question that I look
at you know, and I'm not trying
to mix apples and oranges here,
but, uh, when I was
superintendent in Taos
I had, uh, almost 4000 students.
And they're down to like 2200.
But they're still paying the
same utilities. They're using.
All the buildings are you know
where there
I. I just look at it. I don't
even know how they can afford
it.
You know, and that's cause
that's just going to
A different direction versus to
go to the actual teachers or to
a classroom.
Or to the actual instruction.
And I. I just think we have to
be, uh, very, um
Very cautious of this. And then
uh uh, right now, uh, it becomes
very political and very
Turf.
You know, I have a situation in
within my district.
Or, uh, one of the school
districts trying to close a few
couple of the schools.
And and it's turning into a war,
you know, but I mostly see this
because
There should just be something
you know if you don't have the
numbers to us.
You know the state can what it
is.
You know, because to to have
something or continuously on the
red, you know, it's not a good
plan, and it's not fair to the
entire institution.
So I just feel that I just being
more
Very alert to this. You know, I
guess would be the word.
And, uh, with that, Mr Chairman,
you know, I think we're in an
interesting times.
Thank you.
Uh, represented Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, always interesting to see
these numbers. Um, since we know
the number
Of students that are at, uh,
attending online, Um out of
state.
Is there any way we can ask
them? Why? Because why would
they choose to attend?
Online out of state when they
can attend online in state or in
person in state for free, almost
free.
Um, And so I'm curious what the
answer to that is And I think
Part of the answer may be that
once they enroll in these
colleges
They can't get out.
They lose their credits they
have. They're in for so much
money there. Whatever the, uh,
whatever it may be, but 11,000
ish.
Students is 11,000. Too many in
my opinion, Uh And so the other
question I have is. How is the
capital Outlay process.
Handled and who makes that final
decision. And can you just
enlighten me? Mister Chair
representative. Thank you for
that question. Um so the capital
outlay process for the higher
education department at a very
high level is we require higher
education institutions to submit
project funding requests to the
department. Those project
funding requests, um, must meet
or must be submitted, uh, to
meet the the criteria in which
we have established at the
department level. Uh, for a
review of
Projects. Once those projects
are reviewed. We have a
committee. That committee is
made up of the higher education
Department. Your LFC, uh as well
has AAA seat at the table.
Energy Minerals Natural
Resources Department, the
Department of Finance
Administration, um, as well as a
chairman, who is a private
citizen who is, uh, very
familiar with construction,
industry and construction
standards.
That committee evaluates and
reviews each of the projects and
a big component of that is the
online in person. Um,
opportunity for the facility
that's being requested.
We are as a department very,
very interested in ensuring that
facilities that are currently
not fully utilized are
repurposed if need be prior to
the construction of new
facilities, and that's something
that we do prioritize and we do
Ask that institutions look at
before bringing those proposals
forward. Once those proposals
are reviewed. They are then
prioritized and then a funding
recommendation by the committee
is made to the department.
Cherry.
Those funding recommendations,
then are submitted to, uh D FA
and, uh to, uh, to Foreign
corporation into the executive
budget request. And so that's
the process by which we follow,
uh, at a very high level that is
the at the high level.
Thank you for that, I. I was
just curious about that wasn't
sure how that was done. And
then, um
Does it take priority if there's
already a project that's been
started.
Um, I know there's some cost
overruns on projects that have
been started in the past. Do
those take priority?
Mr. Chair representative. Thank
you for that question, so the
department has, uh over the past
two years put in as part of our
process. Uh, a ability to
request supplemental funding to
address projects that were
previously funded, Uh, in order
to cover the shortfalls, and so
we do prioritize those projects
as part of our review, uh over
new construction projects, what
we have done as a department is
understanding that
Are more needs that that are
that are present at
institutions. We don't penalize
an institution if they have a
new request and a supplemental,
we try and evaluate both
equally, but we do prioritize
the supplemental for funding.
Thank you for that. And so,
mister Chairman, Uh, another
question is so it's not only
about buildings it's about, you
know, possible, um, flood issues
in, uh, underground possible or
on the ground infrastructure
That's not a building.
So is that prioritized as well?
Mr Chair. Madam Representative.
We we have, um we have two
funding cycles at the higher
Education Department. What is
the general obligation Bond
cycle? Uh, and one is a is a,
uh, severance or general funds
cycle? Uh, how we we prioritize
new construction, larger type
infrastructure projects during
our general obligation bond
cycle, uh, and then critical
health and safety projects are
always a priority for the
department. So if there are
Issues that require attention
quickly. Uh, we prioritize those
projects as part of our review
understanding that the metrics
that we've established still
must be met for every one of
those projects, whether it be
related to enrollment, whether
it be related to workforce
development. Um, but we do have
a safety measure that if a
project is high on the safety
measure, those projects are
prioritized. Ok, Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you for that.
Um, And so is there any way
Track and find out why those
11,000 students are attending.
Somewhere else. Um, Mr Chair
members of the committee, um
That's
Absolutely an area that, um you
know LFC, the higher education
department and higher education
instant about going forward. I
think this this, um you know
highlights. Uh, the student
population, but this report was
not able to, uh, you know,
address or or reach that student
population directly, but that
can be an ongoing area of
inquiry.
I. I thank you for that. I just,
um I, I was, uh, telling my
compadre here that, uh, I was
just watching television last
night and saw an advertisement
for a an out of State university
And I told my husband why would
someone choose that over going
to a New Mexico College? Um or,
you know, two year four year,
whatever. And and I It's just
baffles me that they spend the
kind of money that they do, and
advertising here in New Mexico
and why someone would choose
that. I believe the answer.
Is going to be that they've
already bought into it before
the college wa. Uh, tuition was
free, and, uh and they're kind
of stuck in that. So just a just
a few comments, and I appreciate
the, uh, the answers. Thank you,
Mr Chairman, Senator.
Uh, thank you. Chair and thank
you as secretary to the very
hard working analysts. You know,
I. I just want to say that, uh
of the facilities issues, then
questions that we're talking
about today. Chair. Um, I
actually have AC NM campus in my
district and I border the main
campus and I just want to thank
them for all of the work that
they're doing to make the
buildings even more efficient.
So we're talking about
utilities. I'm sure that there's
and I see a lot of very
innovative things happening on
the campuses there. Uh, but I'm
sure a lot of these buildings
are just really old and
I'm sure they're very energy
inefficient, so the moves that
are being made now by President
Hartzler and her team and all
the work being done at CNN, I
think you're probably gonna
really help to bring down things
like utility costs and
inefficiencies in terms of how
the spaces are used. It seems
also as though they're being
built out. Uh, the one the new
stuff and and even some of the
older buildings are being built
into maybe larger spaces that
can be reconfigured based on
what the needs are, so I I'm
very happy with what they're
doing in our area. At least I
think it's going very well. That
way. I had a
Madam secretary, the the one
thing about these online courses
I think that is really helpful
is when we're recruiting. A lot
of new businesses are coming to
my district. I'm thrilled about
that, but but we also need to
have these, uh, programs utilize
or these these online courses
utilized to train specific skill
sets for economic development
purposes. Um, are we spending
time at all with, uh, the
economic development department
to learn more about Like what?
Specific, um either certificate
or other things can be utilized
through this. This venue of
online to get the
Skill set up to a a certain
level so that we can be more
attractive as an employer or as
a place to relocate your
business. Mr. Chair, Senator.
Great question. We actually have
fantastic relationships with not
only the economic development
Department, but so how we work
with Department of Workforce
salute jobs, and then that is
filled in so that can be used
for that. Additionally, the
Legislature also appropriated
$60 million over a three
programs in high demand fields
on that as far as the Economic
Development Department deputy
Harry here sits on three
separate committees related. I
know we thing, uh, related to,
uh, jobs in the state of New
Mexico that we need in this
sector. And in addition to the
three committees she serves on
for outdoor recreation, creative
economies, and there's one more
that I'm forgetting and she'll
tell me later. We also, um, meet
regularly regarding film.
So film is another sector that
we are worth on building up and
those are regular and then on
top of that the Economic
Development Department had a
report of nine sector areas in
the state of New Mexico that we
need to increase our workforce
and our education pathways into
that workforce and the higher
EDS. Behind me. Um, make sure
that we're keys. Wonderful.
Well, thank you. Chair and
Secretary in the last item I
have is just more specifically
on, um, specific training That's
needed is, uh, obviously these
are online.
Horses that are are occurring,
but we need online cyber
security specialist. So do we
have, uh, that type of
programming put in being put
into the online training
program.
Mister chair. The answer is yes.
and actually the New Mexico
Higher Education Department
recently finished up all of our
common core numbering for
computer science. Which one it
so yes, Many of our
institutions, um have programs
or branch campuses do as well.
Uh, eastern New Mexico
University at R with the Apache
nation there to create a cyber
security program specific to, um
what they Oh, thank you. And,
um, I'm not sure who is here. I
think from Highland University.
I think there was, uh
Cyber attack that I think
brought the whole school down,
didn't it? Um so just, you know,
wanna bring that as top of mind
here? It just seems to me like
there'd be some great
opportunities to learn from that
and the other things that have
happened to develop these online
cyber security. Uh, courses. Uh,
thank you, Chair.
Then it's small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Uh,
evaluators first, Mr. Chair. Um
Just trying to get a sense that
on the sort of leveraging of
online platforms for, uh um,
savings and efficiency and
efficacy. Is there any
disagreement with that
recommendation either within the
department or within
institutions, or does that seem
like
A recommendation that we can
take. Um, Mr Chair. Uh, members
of the committee representative.
Small. Do you mean the, um,
recommendation relating to, um,
uh, shared price agreement.
Um
I. I, um
And and it's not necessarily for
you to answer. Uh I was, I
guess, I, I throw it out there
looking
To the audience for that, uh to
our, uh, our our college and
university also, madam secretary
from your end, perhaps by rule,
maybe there's some cases where
that standard common sense. Way
to go, mister. Chair if any of
these before you can get up
here, um I will say as far as
efficiency is concerned, the
higher Education Department is
all about that, as far as the
facilities are concerned that we
are building at our higher ed
institutions, many of them, um
actually.
They are. Hybrids are newer
institutions. You will see that
a smaller B their technology
efficient and then see they're
also sustainable in the sense
that their energy efficient on
top of that all of our higher ed
institutions have to be, uh,
follow lead metrics or be lead
certified in the state of New
Mexico. So efficiency. Yes,
We're doing it in capital
outlay, and I'd love to send you
a list of some of those
buildings as examples. Maybe
some in Las Cruces actually
would be a great place for us to
share some of those programs
that we're working with to think
smarter.
Right size, get smaller and be
more technology focused.
That sounds great, and it sounds
like so
Looking into the audience in
terms of leveraging those price
efficiencies and price
agreements, particularly from
the online.
That's something that is
They are institutions.
Good morning, Mr Chairman, Vice
Chairman Small. Vanessa Hawker,
executive director for the
independent community Colleges
anything that the state can do
to help our institutions in
regards to joint price
agreements. We are
wholeheartedly on board. We see
that there are many areas in
which we can be more efficient
that the state can help us with,
Uh, I today if you wanted to
speak with any of the
representatives from check
They are here as well. But yes,
anything you can do, please. We
are fully in support of that.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. Um, Secondly, Mr Chair, Um
and
I think this
Maybe as an area of follow up,
but the the area of recruitment
Um it see, it'd be really good
to hear the future hearing.
perhaps how institutions
individually and collectively
are sort of going around the
state.
The real back in these folks who
you know have started their
their, um
Higher education journey,
whether that's certificate
whether that's degree, whatever
it is, but haven't finished, we
we know who they are. It would
be interesting to see if folks
are sort of traveling to
communities. What that
recruitment What? What? That, um
Advertising and recruitment
profile is because that's a you
know, as has been pointed out by
within the evaluation with by
committee members. Madam
Secretary. I know you know this.
Those are our most important and
in some ways, perhaps a place
where, um, when we invest so
much on the tuition side.
Getting that growing. That
pipeline is just essential. Um,
so a point and really interested
for follow up and the more that
we're seeing our institutions
out and about probably, it
seems, uh, going briefly to
something that, um S Armstrong
raised a great sort of
Opening.
Key question. Why are out
Um
The I think the suggestions he
made a lot of sense if you
already started everything.
Is there also, um
You do some of these out of
state.
Degree programs do do those
finish. Ms.
Mr Chair, potentially, And I'll
tell you the reason why, um,
when it comes to the
institutions right here today,
we have to follow really strict
accreditation standards when it
comes to the higher Learning
Commission as far as these, um
online programs, they have
something that they do prior
letter learning credit, So a lot
of them offer that meaning you
can be a working professional
for 40 years in your field, Go
back to school and finish a
little bit faster because you're
getting credit for what you're
actually doing on the field at
that point in time Now, that can
be
Good for some instances, but for
some of our institutions that
are privately funded, they may
not be doing the adequate checks
and balances to ensure that
those credits are indeed uh,
something that they should be
receiving. So that's one of the
examples that I can point to,
Um, Also, if you look at page I
believe it's what page
Page 20 of your report. You will
see the 28. You'll see the
higher Education Department's
response to that with a little
bit more information.
Madam secretary. Thank you very
much for that, Um, great that
you all are thinking about it
and and I'll look to that
response. The it really tracks,
especially knowing sort of new
Mexicans who maybe started out
on that higher education
journey, oftentimes, maybe
stopped in particular to support
their family and working in a
field. Um
As there are ways and especially
if we're being sort of
Out of state comp, uh, higher
education institutions are in
effect, sort of leveraging all
that in state work that
including that employment
history in somebody's hard won
gains.
Through their knowledge, their
If if we're artificially
limiting
That benefit for New Mexicans.
Maybe that's one of the last
sort of
Uh, hurdles that we can either
knock entirely down or sort of
cut as low as we can to thank
you for the response, interested
to learn more and as much as
possible for us, Um
To the evaluators on that, Um,
the graduation time frame.
Um do we sort of a question that
I wanted to ask is, um
You know, having the the online
option does that increase
graduation rates? Maybe in state
we know out of state. If that
has any, um, mister chair
members of the committee. Um so
the, uh, the research literature
on this points to, um, a few
effects, uh, related to online
education. Um, so because online
education Um uh, leans more on
self directed learning. Uh, the
report mentions how, um you
Older or more experienced
students tend to have, uh um
higher, um, grades or, um, uh,
pass rates, but overall, the
overall average online courses
have slightly lower, Uh, grades
or course completion Cause
online doesn't work for
everybody. But online does allow
for flexibility in classes. If
if your class isn't available
one semester in person, it might
be available online. So the
research literature also
associates
Education with, um uh, it does
help, graduation and time to
degree. So there those seem like
contradictory, um, findings. Um,
but but that's that's
Findings. No, no, thank you very
much, Mr Chair. Thank you. You
know, we welcome nuance. And and
we know that the power of the
evaluation is diving deep asking
questions and then being able to
follow up and so I know that
we'll probably follow up on this
again during the summer time and
that there's more to dig into
the effects for different folks
at different stages of life are
gonna be different, and they're
fine tuned State fund
collaboration with our higher
Education institutions to make
the most of this really
remarkable moment the
opportunity exists for folks to
further their
Experience and education improve
their lot in life benefit our
state sort of all
collaboratively, but there's a
lot of work.
Some key areas where it seems,
you know, we have some bright
spots. I. I know there are
others there Center for the
attack on up here more to delve
into Wanna support Madam
Secretary, You're one really
apply.
This new information with our
new funding ability.
Thank you, Um
Let me ask the lady from New
Mexico State. How many out of
state
Students do you have online?
In your system.
Remind me of your name again.
2300 students.
How many are out of state?
Uh, we have less than 10% of
that are out of state 230.
I. I don't know.
I can tell you like when my son
went to dual credit program
right and then wanted to take
online courses.
He was at UNAM Gallup.
And wanted to take a UN
Us in Albuquerque, but he wasn't
allowed to unless he went to the
The student orientation, which
she was in there, the UM student
But then the class was $1800.
And in a you offered it for
$700.
So I don't
I don't know if you guys were
like we're in a free market
society and these students are
very intelligent and very
electronically literate. They're
gonna shop their costs and
they're gonna go. I can go take
an online course over here for
psych and be done in six weeks.
Instead of taking one at N MS U
and I I'm just saying this that
that's a three month class.
And I can get those three
credits in six weeks and be done
with it instead of spending
three months in an online course
to do that, I don't know if you
offers that, but I mean the free
market society that that the way
people are learning.
It is so unique. I mean that.
They can get ahead. They can get
caught up. They can start and
and as a parent if you're gonna
do online stuff, and it costs
you 1800 here. Well, I could
take
Almost
Two classes at NMU and get six
credits for the price of three
credits in New Mexico and and
the parents and the kids are
gonna price up just like
everything else. And if the word
gets out old Grand Canyon
University, which has 1290
students from New Mexico? Well,
their classes are pretty easy
and and they're a lot cheaper.
They're gonna go.
And and they're gonna get their
education where it's fast,
efficient, cheap and easy to do.
And then at the end, they're
gonna come back and say OK, I
have
Whatever number of credits takes
to graduate.
What
School. Do I want my
certificate? My graduation
degree from right and then
they're gonna ship to that
school right? Whether it could
be New Mexico State. It could be
UN M. It could be
Wherever, US C wherever and
they're going to shift those in
credits to get that degree in
the end, that's just the market.
I I've seen. My kids do it, and
I've seen a lot of his friends
do it right.
And and that's where they're
gonna spend their money in
efficiencies in the quicker to
get their education and less
stress.
The online mixed, which is very
interesting to me is because
Covid. We switched to that way,
and they've adjusted right. They
want the social aspects in
college, but they want the
efficiency in in self learning
time that they want to do on
their own. And then you look at
the in campus and you look at
grants. 8080 82% of it of grants
is online. Right? So we're only
servicing the population of
1000 people 1550 right. It
probably nursing students and
grants, But I mean, this shift
is coming right? And every
junior college in in Gallup and
the other ones, they're all dull
credit schools.
And they're pushing those kids
through the school system.
President there.
And we probably graduate, more
dual credit students.
With associates.
Then we graduate.
People getting associates.
In our system.
And that's just the way the
world's working right.
Mister chair If I I may, um I
wanted to also just, uh, respond
to that and let you know that
there's a There's a few things.
the first one is higher
education is at a point where we
actually need to start looking
at new learning models or we're
building in the world in the
critical thinking and reshaping
that and what that looks like.
The second thing is that I
wanted to the question about why
so out of state, um, having
worked in an out of state and
having built, uh, an online
university out of state, part of
It is this. It's con graduate,
The other part of it is the like
the the weekly calls that
advisors make to those who care
that those UN university
students there is also there's a
number of different entry
points that students, uh have
within those. Those are all
things that we at in New Mexico
are really trying to enhance and
move forward. We're doing a I it
as well, but what we need to be
able to do is provide that, um,
because if
Not going to get it from us.
They will actually pay more.
Yeah, Yeah, I'm just
I don't know. I I'm not the age
where I do a lot of that, But I
see the kids around me right?
And that's what they're gonna do
is pass the least resistance.
Easiest, quickest way to get
there. And what degree do I end
up and where do I want to end
up?
I mean, our modeling is not in
the direction
Of where education and higher Ed
is headed. You look at
A SU and I. I just cause I'm
close to Arizona and I spend a
lot of time there you look at
ASU. You look at U of a Grand
Canyon 25 years ago was a little
podunk school that that was in
the middle of Phoenix that was
smaller than the capital, right
and and the mass expansion and
look at where they're at right
and grew. It's amazing to me
that we're
We're still thinking about
building a new building when we
should be building technology
centers and
And hubs and tearing down all
the old buildings and say OK
Um
At my son at 15. We took him to
Embry Riddle for Flight school
and and there was a coding class
and a hacking class there,
right?
Well, he stayed an extra week
cause he wanted to see what
codeine and hacking was about.
right and that's what they had.
And that was
10 8678 years ago. I mean,
I. I
It's no fault, but we gotta quit
thinking like old people. It
At the senior home and start
thinking about
the kids and I. I think I said
that this morning all our hair
is getting gray, and we're all
up here and and the kids are
just changing quicker than we
can match that, And that's when
we meet that. We're never gonna
get those back. Getting students
return is gonna be a decision
they make on their own senator.
Sheer is probably if he returned
to school, he'd probably go
online because he probably
didn't want to sit next to some
kid with ear buds scrolling
through his phone on Instagram
and
Listening to
Somebody on the radio through
through podcast. Yeah, but it
We're not new Mexico is not
changing.
This is the way I see. And this
may my We're not changing this
as our kids are changing.
And Mr Chair. The other point
that I will make to though, uh,
had pointed out is when we look
at efficiencies. The other piece
of that is the marketing aspect
and if we're going to be
competing within our state, um
to the other point that was made
about Southern New Hampshire
University. There's million. I
used to have a $56 million
marketing budget just on my own
programs. We have to also start
thinking about those
efficiencies. Um, versus the
400,000. You know those the
other piece?
That make a really big big
impact, including talent in
human capital on that, and so I
think, as we move forward and
and have us come together as a
state, this is something we can
in doing, Um, so it's It's
something that III I truly rock
and no When we start you off and
built now that transition is
gonna change because you won't
need any more influx of money as
we stood up the capital, and you
got the
Those are gonna be those
professors and those teachers in
those class are are so much more
efficient than any other ones.
How many online classes do they
teach compared to a classroom?
Do we know that difference?
Uh uh.
Senator. It's uh four.
So it's uh they have a four
and then the other, Uh, faculty
either have a two or three
course load so you're almost
double in efficiency online.
With instruction in the
classroom or so.
Uh,
It's interesting to me that we
just the numbers. I mean, people
are gonna shop right?
You can't find it at your
Walmart When you're walking
through, you're gonna order it
from Amazon.
It's no different than
In education. I mean,
This. This is the tool for
marketing, right?
And the minute you be interested
to give you an advertising
budget for online and see how
many How many scroll throughs
and how many connects you get.
Kind of wrap it up.
Uh, Senator any time that you
are interested in looking at our
data when it comes to the
marketing piece or the
committee.
Yeah, I mean,
You guys probably Geo track your
students and you may not admit
to it, But you guys, do you geo
track them to say, OK, they're
going. This is how many people
are in the food hall. This is
how many people are in this
classroom. This is how many
people went to the football
game. You can geo track those
those
Not by name and or by number,
but by
ID on their phone and you can
geo track Who's going where and
who's going? Not where and and
that tells you Where where your
buildings are getting used where
your buildings are not used.
Where you most use is right.
It's just
Time for us to change and and
It's gotta come quicker than we
think it's gonna come
Thank you guys. Thank you for
your presentation. I appreciate
your time, Madam Secretary.
Stay in the hot seat.
It's the best seat in the house,
Mister chair. I don't know about
that.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Thank you so much for
your time in that program
evaluation. I wanna go ahead and
transition us to the higher
education sustainability study,
which is the next point of your
agenda. Uh, Mr Terrell Yield to
you until you want. I'm sorry.
Go ahead, mister Chair. I'm
sorry. I kind of overstepped and
started and then I was like, Oh,
I should probably yield back to
you, Mr Church. I apologize,
but yeah, let's go ahead and get
started. I have it up on your
screen as well in a graduation
cap as well, which we handed out
to you so I will be
Transparent in the fact that I
did go on maternity leave for
four months, and during that
time my team did the due
diligence of waiting for me to
come back before we really
deploy the deploy the higher
education sustainability study
so I can be fully invested and
involved in this study. And
really, um
Be able to consult with the
office of the governor you
members as a legislature and
then also our partners in the
Legislative finance Committee.
So the reason why this has been
a little bit of a slow roll is
my fault. I had a beautiful
little baby girl. I apologize,
but you will see the very
aggressive timeline that we have
in relation to this on the other
side of your sheet, But I wanna
start off with our vendor, so we
did receive a few vendors. When
it came to the RFP, the overall
best vendor with the highest
And a vendor were very familiar
with in the higher education
sector is the National Center
for Higher Education Management
Systems, also known as N, Chen
and just so, you know this
system provides consulting and
technical assistance to improve
the strategic decision making
and higher education
Specifically when it comes to,
uh, our fiscal systems, on top
of that they have over 50 years
of experience and more recently
did a, um
Survey with the, uh, State
Higher Education Executive
Officers Association regarded to
higher education, It's just
Institution support of general
operations. We've been seeing
increases to general operations
not only in New Mexico but
across the nation, and they
successfully received 48
responses from states across the
nation, which is actually a
really high response rate when
it comes to these types of
studies. Um, with that being
said, Um, I also included the
scope of work for you all to
look at now. This study is
really going to dive into a
couple of components. It's gonna
look at instruction in general,
which is the higher education
funding formula.
It's going to see what do we do?
How do we efficiently fund
operations and compensation of
our higher education
institutions? The other thing it
will look at is research and
public service projects. I know
Mr Chair. We've taken a lot of
initiative, especially with you
and your team to have better
efficiency with research and
public service projects, also
known as RP SPS. They're going
to really look at the system
that we've created and see if
that's sustainable If we need to
tweak it a little bit more if we
need to make it better.
They'll be looking at that as
well and then capital funding,
although not directly part of
the higher education funding
formula. Historically, it was
represented in the form being
formula in the form of building
renewal and replacement or PR
and R. As you know, that's been
a separate appropriation that
the last three years we have
been generous to support at our
higher education institutions so
there will be evaluation of
looking at the old valve. Please
don't cut off my head if I have
that number wrong, folks. Um and
then
Looking into the funding
formula now as it stands with
the awards, um especially with
the integration of some of the
things that we have changed,
such as instead of just looking
at stem, hors and at risk in
total awards, we now have
Workforce awards integrated into
that. So if you have a program
that's high demand. We also give
you credit for that award now as
well. So we're really excited to
have NMS on board on the other
side.
You will see that very
aggressive timeline. Once again,
I take full responsibility for
that, Um, we have the
legislative session and I wanted
to do my due diligence and
really reviewing everyone and
making sure I felt comfortable
with the one that was selected.
So we are in the project
initiation and orientation
phase. We finished off the
contract last week. Um, that
took a little bit of work going
back and forth, ensuring that we
had everything we wanted in that
contract. There will be data
collection, um, from our agency
that will be submitted to N
chams on top of that.
They will be serving our higher
education institutions about
funding. Um, specifically
research and public service
projects. There will also be a
peer analysis of peer states or
similar demographic states and
also institutions in the nation
that are the similar size,
scope, scale and models that we
have here in the state of New
Mexico. So high minority, uh,
populations, Pell Grant
recipients. Um, things of that
nature will be looking at Re
Health Sciences Center Hospital.
Attached to it. Things of that
nature. Um we will also be
looking at, uh, a review of the
will also have a survey related
to that we will prepare the
draft report review the draft
report and then revise and
submit before the November 1st
deadline of our budget
recommendation. And then that
gives you enough time to really
look at this report as well. In
January, Um so with that being
said, I just wanted to go
through that really fast to
respect your time, but I now
yield the floor box back to you,
mister Chair.
OK questions from committee
members.
Represent Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Secretary. Could you, um
With regard to the RPS PS, Um
Are our institutions gonna have
enough time? How is that gonna
the study going to affect
The process for planning and you
know, and all of that.
Mr Chair. Uh, that is a great
question. So we worked with this
committee. Um, last year to
really look at RP SPS and
streamline that process and make
it more efficient for you all.
We rolled a lot of the RP SPS
into the ING base for the
institution, So a lot of those
were student services programs
that should be eventually
sustained by the institution
itself. The goal of RP SPS are
to be more so pilot initiatives
or really programs that are true
to the research and public
service.
Uh, with that being said that
guidance did go out last year
will be submitted, uh, doing
similar guidance this year,
maybe with a little bit of
expansion to that as well, Um,
that was done in partnership
with you. They will review that
process and see how that's
working. But as it stands, I
know many members of this
committee have been supportive
of that process. And so we are
excited to keep it going.
However, I'm gonna let director
I'm sorry, Chief, honey,
elaborate just a little bit on
that madam vice chair.
Thank you, Secretary. Mr Chair,
Madam Vice. So, as the secretary
mentioned, you know, we, um as
for institutions to prepare
their RPSB submissions, um, all
the higher education
institutions, uh, were part of
that process and and, uh and we
will the word the study itself
will actually evaluate process
and needed change to to address
that. And madam Vice chair. I'm
so sorry. You also mentioned
Will that affect timelines and
stuff? No R PSPs will still be
due September.
We have a month to review those
and have presentations with the
higher education, So our
timeline will still be the same,
but we will work to support
those institutions to get it
done.
Thank you. Um, thank you,
mister Chair, So I guess one of
the concerns that I have is last
year if I'm not mistaken, Sort
of There was there were no new
RP SPS.
Um, that were funded or it was
very limited. Um and
You mentioned that R PSPs, you
know are good for pilots, So I'm
just concerned how what The
process is gonna be this year.
Um, renew opportunities for RP
SPS.
Mister chair, actually, um New R
PSPs oftentimes.
We only actually approve since
I've been at the agency
approximately anywhere from 2 to
5 New RP SPS as a whole for all
higher education institutions
per year. The reason being is
because we call Saul, a
significant increase in RP SPS.
Um, we went from 100 something
RP SPS to 219 RP SPS, um post
pandemic And so, with that being
said we every single new RPS P
that comes before us, we do
presentations with the
Legislative Finance Committee.
The department of
And administration and our
agency to really evaluate if the
new RP SPS are something we
should support as a state or if
it's something that needs to go
back to the drawing board, or if
it's something that the
institution should actually fund
itself. Um so with that being
said, historically, we have not
pushed a lot through and last
year we did have a few new RPS
PS.
Oh, I was on maternity leave, So
I mean corrected. We did not
push any new RP SPS through,
However, Now that I'm back,
we're definitely going to look
at those new RP SPS and we will
evaluate and have some in the
next session cycle. I'm sorry
about that.
Thank you very much. Thanks,
Secretary. Uh, thank you, Mr
Chair. Madam Secretary. Are you
ready to
Loud answer The question that
I'm about to OK, then I'll ask
it.
So
So San Juan College. Uh, they
were going through a
presentation to the San Juan
County.
Legislative delegation, uh, said
that they are $275,000 less than
they were last year.
And part of that is, I believe,
because of the changes in RP,
SPS and ING, and it
Ended up making less more.
For them.
So
How do we? How do we deal with
that? How do we fix that?
Mr Chair, Senator, I actually
appreciated our conversation
yesterday, and as I promised, I
went and did some homework and
research so as far as the higher
education, uh, allocation of
money that went out the door
this year, higher education
institutions themselves on an
overall 4% increase across the
board in instruction in general
or your funding formula. They
did see a 2% increase related to
that now as far as San Juan
College, with their projecting
is based off of oil and natural
Gas projections, not monies that
were funneled to the state. So
there's been a decrease because
of those projections that they
have at this point in time, but
as far as state appropriations
and what we gave to them this
session, they did see it. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and, uh, thank you,
Secretary for being here. Um,
I'm glad you're
Talking about R PSPs, uh for new
initiatives and ING and so
forth. And as you may recall,
um we did start a, uh, we
Appropriated money. Uh, back in,
Uh, 22 to initiate a new school
of public health based upon the
College of population health at
the University of New Mexico,
and I believe that was funded at
about 15,000,005 to N MS U 10
to, uh UN M, Uh, base based on
that, uh, and to go forward and
the governor approved that bill
to
Get a legitimate school of
public health with one of the
few states in the country that
does not have one.
Um And, of course, uh, the
devastation of all of our, uh
Public health issues in the
state and continue and and
needing to prepare for, uh, a A
what is likely a coming pandemic
at some point and staffing the
Department of Health, so it it
made a whole lot of sense to for
people to go ahead and do that.
So, uh, Tracy Collins, Dean
Collins, uh, is aina population
health did go out and hire 24
new faculty. Um, almost all of
them moved across the country.
Came here in good faith that
this would be a program that
would be ongoing and, um, when
we got the initial, uh, start up
funds, it was that there would
be funding that would in one way
or the other, And at that time
there were a lot of RP SPS be
put into the bill. So, uh, last
year we did put in funding for
11 point. I believe it was $3
Million, which covers the spring
of 25.
Uh, all of 26 and 27, and that
would then create the foundation
where the school could become
certified as a school of public
health. Um, the people that
came, uh, now the grant money
coming in is 4 million. Uh,
because people bring their
grants with them, And so it's
really a a good proposition.
Financially going forward. Um,
uh, I. I, uh
Not sure that I understand and
why anyone does and I'm really
not here to understand that, Uh,
the governor did veto that money
because it was not in the RPSP
or special request. It was
rather put into a house bill two
And so there's a a lot of
confusion and and the reason
that we need to address this
today. Uh, rather than later on
is that the new faculty knowing
That there is not funding.
Are looking for jobs elsewhere,
and they're getting offers
because they're really good new
faculty and so and and in
academia if you start a program
and bring faculty in, um you
essentially have to guarantee
him one more year if that
funding runs out, um so they
have to be notified that the
funding has run out, and that's
this June.
Uh, that's by contract. That's
how it works in academia for
those positions. So, um, the
question is, How will you today
Help me to assure the regions
and, uh Dean Collins and the
faculty that one way or the
other through
or through an RPSP next session
that we will get that funding
Because if they don't hear this
by June
And they will leave.
And that will essentially
preclude New Mexico from ever
being able to have a reputation
as a place to go in public
health in which you know, maybe
we could start a school. Maybe
we couldn't. But again, it would
really stay the reputation of
New Mexico in support of that in
something that is so well
needed. So I'm hoping you have
an answer that I can carry back
to today. Or perhaps you could
directly communicate to the
regions or doctor Zonis are
particularly
Collins. Thank you.
Mister Chair, Senator Hickey.
Thank you for that. I probably
learned more from you right now
than I have from some of the
folks that now what I will say
is as far as this is concerned,
the University of New Mexico and
the Health Sciences center did
not submit an RPSP to our
department by September, 15th of
last year when I was on
maternity leave, Nor did the
University of New Mexico or the
health science Center, um,
support or I'm sorry. I
shouldn't say support. Submit
any information to the
Department of Finance.
Administration for a special
appropriation or a deficiency
related to this program. It
wasn't until December that the
University of New Mexico and the
Health Sciences Center sat down
with my to let them know the
situation, then included a slide
with a bullet point related to
this funding request that they
had. The other thing I will
point out is the fact that they
use the money from a couple
years ago that is non recurring
funding to hire staff at the
institution. That is always a
cautionary tale that we have at
the higher Education Department.
That you cannot use non
recurring funds to support
operations and salaries.
However, with that being said,
your question is, what can we
do? Moving forward? And I want
to honor that question. With
that. Being said there are a
couple options, the university
and the Health Sciences Center
should work with the population
health program in those
researchers to submit a special
appropriation or request,
although once again remember
that's one time funding non
recurring. They can also submit.
Deficiencies to the Department
of Finance and Administration.
If there is a deficiency in
their, uh
There operations right now for
that program. The other option
is submitting a research in
public service project to the
department by September, 15th
and we are more than willing to
look at that and coordinate with
the university and the regions
to understand their
prioritization model when it
comes to those RP SPS
Um The other thing that I want
to say is
I have told the university
Time and time again. I wanna
plan
I wanna truly understand what
this program public health or
population health. Whatever they
are saying, now, Um what are you
going to do? What is your
planet action? I've heard things
here and there, but I have not
seen pen to paper. Another
example is the fact that when
they submitted something to cap
it was for the school of
nursing.
A wing of the school of Nursing
was dedicated to the population
health program, however, through
conversations that have been
happening, I'm now finding out
that the population health
program wants their own new
state of the art facility
related to that in the 24
faculty that they have hired
once again. It's one of those
things where we hear one thing
from one group one thing from
another and one thing from
another. I think the program
would really benefit in the
university in creating that plan
that we could share with the
legislative
Finance Committee so these
members can be better oriented
with what the plan is, and so
can we, and we can also share
that with the governor, Senator
and I. I would really love to
coordinate with doctor zones or
the regents to ensure that we
get that plan.
Uh, thank you. Uh, Madam
Secretary, um, I'm going to
differ with your understanding.
Um, the, uh, I do know, uh, from
several sources at the
university. They have had
conversations with you. You and
I have had conversations about
the school of public health.
Several times, uh, the building
and the program the they did
request that this money be
funded during the summer. That's
my understanding from them.
Maybe you were out. Maybe you
Out and you didn't get it, but
they did request that funding.
Um, the the plan. The plan for
the school has has always been
there. Um, the it It seems to me
that the will of the Legislature
here and the signature of the
governor to start the school
says we want to have a school.
So
What you're saying is well, you
didn't go through some sort of
process and we're not honoring
the will of the Legislature, let
alone honoring the health of the
people of New Mexico and we are
willing to risk the loss of the
faculty.
Because of some procedural and
differences in opinion about
what you were and were not
informed about.
So the you know, all that really
belongs into the past.
Madam secretary, May I have your
attention, please? Thank you,
Madam Secretary.
You have plenty for new faculty
who moved
You have a reputation of the
state at risk.
What are we going to do now?
Four. They have to be informed.
That there is no funding. I
mean, we can go into all this
request, but they they given the
history of this and not in an
attempt to to work something out
In the interim. After this money
was appropriated in the last
session. What are we going to do
about them? Just say OK, go and
then you know here here were a
state that's probably better
known than any other state for
public health and a governor who
was one of the stars.
And
OK?
And and we're saying
Not really.
Just pretending.
So what are we gonna do today to
assure that there that that we
are going to get a very defined
process that is backed by you
and the administration to keep
the faculty here we can argue
all day about they should have
didn't know who didn't Who
didn't? I'm sorry. I have
different information on that
I'm saying the issue today.
Is. Are we ever going to have a
school of public health in the
state? Because if we don't get
this funding out, we will lose
the faculty. We will lose our
reputation and we will never be
able to get a good school.
I'm secretary. I don't know if
you wanna just get with the
executive H that way you get a
well informed response to this
week sometime in
Mister chair. I can work with
the, uh, office and get
everybody
Thank you, Mr Chair
That way Everybody gets there.
Answers and questions and and
it's in a written response. So
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
so much. Secretary.
And
He's the husband of one of my
favorite teachers, So it's
always positive. Uh and Senator
Hickey, uh
Put it on the special session.
Go see the governor today. Um, I
have one question on the study.
Um, I wanna make sure that when
they look at sustainable, they
look at salaries. Uh, we had a
bill and then a memorial for
temporary and non temporary
staff. We have CTE
professionals. Um, you know, I'm
talking to university people.
Everybody does want to keep
tuition down. But there's that
dance of expectation for rising
salaries.
You know, 15,000 not 15,000 an
hour $15 an hour. Whatever it
is, um so I just hope that can
be specifically incorporated in
the sustainability study. That's
that's my only comment. Thank
you.
Representative, Mr Chair,
representative, Uh, so that will
not be part of the
sustainability study. But just
so you know, even though the
House memorial that you did
introduce did not pass. Our team
is actually already coordinating
with folks to collect
compensation data at our higher
education institutions a full
time part time staff and it will
be part of the annual report for
the higher Education Department
due at the end of the Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you so much.
Secretary.
Representing her.
You, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. We know that you are
very good at resolving lots of
issues. So one of the one of the
big issues that's on the table
right now is that Yasi Martinez
was decided and one of the one
of the focal points that came
out of that is that we need to
have more teachers who are, um
from tribal lands and um and
Indian country to be a part of
the education system. So we just
talked about this.
And learning and one of the
things that was missing was the
discussion of how do we get this
online learning on tribal lands
in a stronger manner, with the
broadband being so often? Not as
good as it should be. So my
question is, What role will you
be playing? Do you think and
making sure that we are able to
get more teachers and maybe part
of that is through online
learning, Mr Chair, and Ma,
Madam secretary.
Mr. Chair, Representative. Thank
you for that, Um, we've actually
been partnering with the office
of Brand Broadband on their most
recent report that they're
working on with you all and that
is a component of it, especially
in rural frontier and tribal
communities. As far as
incentives that we've done in
tribal communities specifically
for educators, 520 educators
have received a raise. Those are
our educators, religion
language languages. Um, so they
did receive a raise. Um, but as
far as online learning, it's
hard to do it. If there's
No broadband in the community,
and that's what we're really
struggling with. We're even
struggling with it in our adult
education programming, and
that's why we've been
coordinating with Drew Loveless,
Who's the interim director over
there so that can be
incorporated in the plan? The
other thing that we've done is
with federal relief funding that
the governor received recreated
nodes in New Mexico,
particularly in the Northwest
region, So we have one at Zuni.
We have one at Navajo Nation. We
have one at the University of
New Mexico. Gallup. Um we also
have a partner.
With Navajo Technical University
in Crown Point, and there's one
more that I'm missing off the
top of my head. Um, but we have
been doing that work in the last
year. That was a $5 million
project to get those nodes up
and running, so that's families.
Students from early childhood
and their families all the way
to higher education could access
the Internet to participate in
their classes, do their homework
or do online courses. So that's
an example of one thing we've
done, We can actually follow up
and again, I see the wonderful
deputy secretary.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, I also just
wanted to flag that we're
working with Deputy Secretary
Scott gins at DWS to have a
conversations about how we also
develop the broadband workforce.
And so we I know that we just,
uh, sent out some messages to
all of the higher ed leaders
this week, and that work is
ongoing.
Thank you for those responses,
and Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary as I look at the, uh,
status of higher education
sustainability study and the
person that's in the last
paragraph, says the capital
funding, although not a part of
the higher education funding
formula will be reviewed as it
plays a part in the total cost
of funding at public higher
education institutions in New
Mexico. Is there something that
we need to do as a Legislature
to put broadband back? Uh uh,
better into your
Hands for a broadband as a part
of your capital funding so that
maybe you can al, you can. It
will help you in moving this
forward a lot faster, Mr. Chair,
Representative. Thank you. So
much for the question.
You know one of the things that
that I can say that that for
higher education is
I'll pull it a little closer if
that's better.
Um, thank you.
One of the things that I would
say regarding, uh, funding for
higher education is as we talk
about, uh, funding for cyber
security as we talk about
funding for broadband, and then
we talk about funding for
infrastructure and capital
improvements. Um, it is
important to note that that, uh,
having additional funding in
order to support broadband
individually would be, uh, would
definitely be something that,
uh, that we would highly
recommend only because as we
talk about
Facilities as a whole, and we
talk about the need to address.
uh, water and and sewer
infrastructure at some of our
higher education institutions
and how that is prioritized over
broadband or vice versa, Uh,
specifically in some of our at
some of our tribal colleges and
universities and other more
rural institutions, Uh, it's
important to note that having
that additional funding specific
for broadband would be key.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Well, thank
you very much. And Mr Chair and
Madam Secretary with respect to
learning and the and
sustainability and being
flexible as possible. Are we
requiring teachers to be cored
their lessons if they are
providing these online because
one of the issues with respect
to students is the flexibility
of their of being able to
utilize this online course. So
maybe they can't be there at
seven o'clock at night, but they
could watch it at midnight. I'm
Giving you an idea. I didn't
hear a discussion about that.
And is that a part of the
conversation and if not, why
not?
Mr Chair. I think I have to
defer to the institutions. It is
not a requirement to it is not a
requirement.
We got a quiet hi. Go ahead.
This is we're the committee
Madam Secretary.
Courses are designed. Um, uh,
using a variety of different
modalities and requirements
based on the nature of the
subject material and the design
of the class to get the best
learning outcomes for students,
So some courses are designed
completely asynchronously where,
uh, students don't have to be
participating at a given, Uh,
students don't have to be
participating at a given time
and place and then others are
are more asynchronous where
there are those recorded
lectures. Um, that depends a lot
on both the nature of the
material and the intended, uh,
Um, students in that program and
so something like an education
program where they may know that
they serving a lot of students
who are are remote, or, uh, may
have time and place constraints.
Um
May may choose to have more of
that asynchronous, but it really
depends on on the students and
and the, uh, curriculum itself.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Uh,
Real? Yeah, just to kind of wrap
this up in this study. You know,
everybody in this audience is
worried about what's gonna come
out of this study, right? They
think God, it's gonna lead to
cuts and and it may
The numbers are gonna be the
numbers, right?
And and they're gonna take a
national average and we as
fishing as everybody else, And
are we doing that It's gonna
give us a good basis of what's
happening.
Uh, and how we figure it out
going forward.
In this study. Are we gonna look
at any of the numerous regions
and then and look at combining
those or getting rid of those?
I'll use Mesa lands, for
example, you know, depending on
the day, you know, Ma Land said
they had 1300 students. Some of
them were dual credit in high
school and then 600 in one day
and then
300 another in and so
Are are we gonna get into the
real details of
What's the efficiency with with
the presentation that prior that
says you have 50%.
Um, doing a dual credit mix
during a mix of online in in in
the room. And what's that
number? Gonna reduce the
classroom size and the square
footage is to the university
that's gonna be the the true
true story. If you look at
Grant's 85% of that
That school and grants is
online.
So what? How big an imprint.
What do they need? And what are
those efficiencies in that
imprint that that they know,
need and no longer need that We
don't need to fund anymore. That
Are not taking in.
I think that's gonna be the big
question to come out there. But
are we gonna look at the
numerous order? We all operate
independently in separate Mr
Chair? Thank you for the
questions. Uh,
The study itself will not look
at the governing structure of
higher education in the state.
Uh it is gonna be focused
primarily on the distribution of
funding in the and how, uh, that
methodology or how a funding
methodology works in other
states that are similar to New
Mexico and providing those
recommendations improve our
processes and how we would go
about doing distribution of
funding.
But the the governing structure
can override the Legislature and
say we're gonna increase tuition
right cause the study came out
and said
We should be dead flat, right
and we wanted tuition increase.
And the study may say you need
to increase. You know, 50% of
your students are mixed, so you
need to reduce the the size of
your campus and your imprint and
and you have rooms or facilities
that aren't fully used and
utilized.
And the border regions could
come back and say.
Well, I. I like that. And and so
we're gonna increase tuition to
keep that funding available,
even though the use is not
there.
It's just New Mexico story
that's truer than than true.
It. And so I mean, if the
governor goes around the
Legislature and the study to say
We're just gonna do this,
whether they like it or not.
Then.
Are we really gonna get to where
we really need to be?
Mr Chair. Uh, I think that that,
uh, that the study itself is
going to allow us the
opportunity to have these
conversations. It's gonna allow
us the opportunity Opportunity,
scholarship and be able to path
forward. Uh, the study is
definitely going to be an
important and integral part of
how those discussions start and
and we look forward to it as I
as I'm sure you all do as well,
Uh, you know, to see how we can
start these conversations moving
forward.
I just want to make sure
everything is right. So I'm not
saying this go cut, but let's
right size everything so we can
gain efficiencies and then
And we can spend more money on
marketing on
Good luck and hopefully we'll
get it before October but to do
November so we're gonna be
looking hard in it, but there'll
be some long discussions and how
we move forward. So thank you
for your presentation your time
today.
And Mr Chair. I do want to note
that you do have a tuition and
fees. Chart op opportunity
projections, lottery projections
and an op ed that I wrote in
relation to the boards of
regions and tuition and fees. I
know we're running short on
time. I'm more than happy to
come next week to do those
presentations for you if you
would like or anything you want,
I will yield to you.
OK, well, let you know.
Great.
Thank you, Everyone. Thank you.
All members. Thank you.
We're gonna get into
Miscellaneous committee business
so we can kind of wrap this up.
Charles
TG, uh, includes the January
meeting minutes. Mr Chairman.
We're on tab G.
I move approval second, Mr
Chairman.
Motion by representative Small
second by Senator Rodriguez Any
objection to the motion.
Seen none.
Adopted.
Charles
Uh, Next is on a tab. H. Mr.
Chairman, we have entered into a
small dollar contract with, um,
my Peterson to help her, uh,
with the Medicaid and health
care. Uh, consultation. Uh, rust
toll had done that for us last
fall. We're repurposing some of
that contract and would like to
Increase it to $20,000 with the
committee's approval, uh from
the rest of the fiscal year, and
that's tab number one right,
That's correct. I move approval,
Mr.
Representative Armstrong. Do you
have a question? OK, we have a
motion by represent a small
second by Senator Rodriguez Any
objection to that motion.
See then.
T. I is the proposed committee
calendar.
Mr Chairman.
Um
Obviously with the special
session announcement, um an
adjustment would would need to
be made for July.
Um, one option, uh, that we had
discussed was moving. Those
meeting dates to the 15th
through the 17th.
The 17th would be a half day.
Which would allow folks to then,
uh, come up to Santa Fe, and it
looks like the special session
would start on the the 18th.
Um
And there was a, uh, an option
of whether, uh, to go to Silver
City or Socorro. Um
Because folks would be coming to
Santa Fe. You may want to
consider, um
Seor as as a potential option.
New Mexico Tech has been
reaching out to us, and they're
excited to be able to have the
opportunity. Uh, to host the
committee. Um if if the
committee chooses
So so moving the the meeting in
July at from the scratch in the
18th moving to the
Through the 17th Mr Chairman as
an option or
Maybe not meeting uh, that
particular week and pending it,
uh, to figure out what may or
how long the special session may
be, or
You know what happens with that
and move.
Add some days to
Um, potentially September and
August.
As a as another option, Mr
Chairman, That means what one
second. That means we could
almost be here in committee or
in session the entire week or
even Santa Fe.
But I think there was concern
about capacity and prices.
Gonzalez of was determined. I
think one thing that you have to
look at is so
By then, all the Ah, This is
just a July that all the
committees are starting to run
in the calendars are done.
So moving those dates to
July so we don't have conflicts
in other communities represent a
small thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, I. I think it's a great
point. You know, folks will
draft off of us so
Um, US setting doing the 15th.
It's gonna be a long week, but
it'll frankly give us a leg up
in different and it'll allow
everybody else to end. Socorro.
You know, it's a couple hours
away straight shot.
That their work on petroleum
water seems like
The best of a weird situation
and opportunity, Mr Chairman.
So so then, I. I kind of agree
with that. So then should we
pencil in the 15th 16th half a
day on the 17th.
Is if they're gonna start this
special on the 18th at noon.
Usually when we start that gives
you
Day to go home and do laundry
and
And
no, this would be in Socorro.
Yeah.
The 15th 16th.
So 2.5 days in Socorro.
You would. I'd probably have to
go.
Yeah. All right. I'll stop at
center, Padilla's house. He'll
do my laundry.
Um
OK, So is anybody kind of object
to that. And it may get changed
again in case something gets
changed. Caucuses may happen
other things that could
Could interfere with that. So
can
Where everybody's in agreement
for July, the 15th 16th and half
a day on the 17th is what? Yeah,
and there is one other thing.
Decision point on the calendar
that you could add to that, but
we haven't adopted the calendar.
So we're still in September.
Yes, you are still in
discussion. The other item to
discuss it would be
The location for September. We
had, uh, talked about a a
central location around the
Albuquerque.
Uh, Metro area. There's an
interest in
Having an overlapping half day,
um, hearing
They are meeting in Albuquerque.
Uh, the 18th through the 20th so
That overlapping day for for
members that would want to to
stay on the 20th could work and
we would work on that.
But then the you and M has
offered there was two other
locations through cause they
cost prohibitive.
But you and M is offered to host
the Yeah, I guess, 10, let's
just put it code with LES C.
And that would change that four
day meeting in the 40th in the
morning. Yes, sir. Mr. Just
extend their stay through the
weekend. Uh, and stay for the
Advanced Energy conference in
Albuquerque.
Deal.
Senator, she you have to take
batting practice.
Um see if I understand. So
basically, we remain the same
for September. Other than that,
one day, the 20th. Is that what
I OK? All right. And in
Albuquerque, we're staying.
Motion.
None.
Tab J is just, uh
Review and approval of the
operating budget that will
submit to AD FA on September
1st. This reflects the
appropriation schedule motion by
Senator she any objection to the
motion.
TK, Mr Chairman.
There's a list. Uh, this is the
Senate Memorial Five Task Force
membership, which requests the
LFC to help staff and support as
well as uh, uh, has LFC as a a
pointing authority for some
members. There were also
appointing authorities for the
governor Speakers, minority
leaders. Those appointments are
listed at the top of that first
page on Tab K.
We have been working with the,
um
Senator Lopez, who sponsored the
memorial, as well as the
stakeholder groups.
Who, um, would be represented as
the rest of the task force.
And have a proposed, um
individuals for you to consider.
That are in the a light shaded
on the bottom of the first page.
As well as on the second page,
and that
That would include, like an at
large member, Um Doctor Spigner
who, um, actually lives in
Albuquerque and was the head of
the
Um
Associate commission with the
Children's Bureau for HHS so
national expertise uh, would be
on this, uh, Nick STAIs.
Uh, national expert on juvenile
justice. A former CYFD, Uh,
deputy Director, Mr. Chavez,
who's the CEO of, uh YD? I in
Albuquerque is a candidates are
submitted for your approval. Mr
Chairman.
And just to be correct. LLC
makes no appointments. These
were all exact and leadership.
Well, the leadership and the
executive are the ones that are,
um
On the first page in
And then the ones that are light
covered at the bottom, and the
next page would be subject to
your approval. Uh, to a point.
These are nominations that have
we've worked with different, uh
groups, uh, to make for your
consideration.
OK?
Any questions?
To so moved.
OK?
OK, Uh, Mr Chairman on Tab L.
As part of your, um approval of
our policies and procedures.
Last year, there was a provision
that you added about making sure
that we've got a staff a
staff. Uh, professional
development guide. So we've done
that. And this is a guide for
As to
We've always had
This not necessarily written
down in this form.
Uh, what can you expect when
you're in LFC evaluator for your
first three years in terms of
support, professional
development? Uh, what your
expectations are for your
performance? Um, we put all that
down.
As a career development guide
for, uh, staff going forward, So
we wanted you all to have an
opportunity to review that as an
information item.
Tab M.
We had received a request from a
representative Dixon earlier
this year. Uh, she made a really
good point of, you know, are
there outstanding
recommendations for the
Legislature that our program
evaluation units made?
Uh, that, um, we should compile
and and consider. We've done
that. There are there are more
that, um, are in the cutting
room floor. But these we thought
were the the most pressing and
relevant. Um so
We will, uh, redouble our
efforts to go back through for
criminal justice and behavioral
health related ones to double
check if there are other, uh,
recommendations that are still
outstanding that you may want to
consider as part of your
deliberations as you go into the
the special session, but some of
them
Um, are included in this memo.
So that's just an information
item. Mr. Chairman, one question
on Page six and seven. North
Central dwell that deep into
their
Well, the school districts make
up you know their this is just
north central school districts.
There were as part of that
project. There were statewide
policy and found, um And so
those are really
Those issues.
So as we look at these, I just
wanna make sure that
We're gonna do it.
Statewide or or what North
Center Who's North Central? Tell
me who that is? Well, those
school districts we did a deep
dive on, uh, Santa Fe. I think,
Espanola. Um, there was a couple
of I think P was another one.
And so we did a deep dive in
their governance.
They, um, finances and their
performance.
And looked at that in the
context of statewide, uh, policy
issues and found that not only
were those issues with those
specific school districts, but
they actually were a statewide
foundation was for statute
changes. I just Yeah. Go ahead,
Go ahead.
No, that's Mr Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Um, Senator,
That's part of LF. C's broad
statutory authority to be able
to answer all of government,
including
Targeted on one part of totally
so for we can easily find other
That's correct.
Mr Chairman, Senator, We've done
this in a number of different,
uh, areas of the state every
starting with Albuquerque.
Uh, I think it's gone through
two school districts across the
state.
We should. We should probably
add some other districts. I just
and prior
Times I've seen where they just
target certain school that wanna
make sure we're not portrayed
again on
One school district and not
looking at two or three school
districts.
I just don't know why.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. One of the
things is, um you know, the
Legislature should consider
amending state statute to
increase the maximum
superintendent contract and
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. One of the
things is, um you know, the
Legislature should consider
amending state statute to
increase the maximum
superintendent contract from
three years to four or five
years.
I. I think
Um
That should be a local
I mean, they can they can if
they wanna if the superintendent
wants to be there for 20 years
if the school board allows it
that that would happen, but
evaluated every three
Uh, I think is a good thing to
be to have an evaluation. We
went through a process where we
didn't have really an
evaluation.
And, uh, I. I just don't know
why we're
Why we're even thinking about
that. Uh, I know specifically
for this school district, but
I just think we are
We are pushing more and more and
more to take local control away
from the from
School boards and and I don't
like it.
I
Good
if you increase the length of
the contract.
End of school board decides they
do not want to increase
enormously. The buy out. That's
These are ideas to look at
review. That's why other members
want to add stuff. Now there's
something that you catches your
eye or yesterday in economic
developments, numbers will be
reviewing them.
Their target numbers are so low
so they're easy for to hit their
target numbers that higher
target numbers, right?
They're meeting their metrics.
But when you looked at the
workforce, solution numbers and
the crossovers and the MO deal,
and and target numbers so low,
so it's easy for an agency and a
low target number and say, Oh,
yeah, we're 100%.
And and so I just think some of
that stuff so look at it, and
it's just for review. Now, if
you think there's things to add,
make sure you email them to
charge Charles. Um, let's see
Tab O.
Mr Chairman is our budget
status. Uh, report
We will likely have a pretty
significant um, diversion.
There's
Well, let's ask for a bar. Well,
that seemed to be the trend and
we will. We will request a a bar
to take some of the, um, surplus
and invested in, uh, new
equipment and staff development.
Um
But not all of it, And it's
Partly due to
You know, a small a smaller
agency with, uh
The amount of turnover that, um
so that's where we're at from a
a budget standpoint.
And I and I like to see in in
LLC as you guys move forward is
a lot of technology up.
Maybe instead of a
A white board. Uh,
Smart board.
There's no other technology
driven things that you think we
need to do to create those
efficiencies over there.
OK?
Speaking of ours, Mr Chairman,
uh, tap. He has a couple of
months worth of
Uh, bars.
I don't really have, uh, much to
highlight on this particular
cash balance report on Tab Q.
There are a couple of things to
highlight in the cash balance
report on page
Um
To
The administrative office of the
court has a number of different
I
Uh, projects in place. It's a
big balance at 17 million there.
the other thing I bring your
attention to, um are the
surpluses that are, um
Piling up from higher gross
receipts. Taxes for county
supported Medicaid on Page
three.
Uh, that's sitting in a 26
million. We'll see if there's
any surpluses that could be
appropriated for the next fiscal
year above, which you just
highlighting the amount of
special appropriations that
you're, um, asking DF to
administer. Those balances are
totaling almost $400 million.
They've got a lot of different
projects. This is before even
budgeting the next round, um
from health benefits, um, at the
bottom, right?
Negative 231. But then a
Positive 130 combined. Still
still underwater, Uh, will keep
close tabs on that and when they
budget the supplemental funding
for them
On Page four.
The broadband funding at the do
it, uh, sitting at 100 and 24
million
Let me ask you one question. Uh,
they were supposed to aid from
the mention this there's a bill
they needed to do to transfer
some funding or make it
Given the authority to expend
it, and it didn't get well. I
think there was I need to go
back and review the the specific
legislation, but I think there
is a desire to make some changes
with how do it interacted with
the in the in the broadband? I
just heard that so I just wanted
to make sure I didn't hear the
That there were some
authorization built in to be
spent, and it didn't happen.
OK, so that was the thing I
think they've done that MOU, but
budget wise. Hey!
H five. This is what I was
talking about yesterday.
The patients Compensation Fund,
which funds the medical
malpractice. It's sitting on a
cash basis at 270.
So from a cash standpoint,
there's money in the Treasury,
but they're still having to
increase premiums significantly.
On on providers, despite an
infusion of general fund revenue
because of that actuarial
provision that was put into law.
Saying that they need to pre
fund
Uh, losses.
Um, so that's as you look at
that particular program
something to to consider whether
or not you need to pre fund
those like we mentioned.
Cash basis. Health care
affordability funded 151 million
there was legislation that was
enacted.
Um
And doing the original
legislation and steering 80
million from General Flynn back
into that particular fund. It
would be
300 million starting balance and
Uh, next two items. I point your
attention to is AD OH.
With their general operating
fund underwater.
Uh, Didi waiver, Uh, program
will be spending down the
surplus that they had, um, that
was as a result of an enhanced F
map that we use to eliminate the
the federal waiting list that
one will move over to the new
health care authority.
But
We expect this, uh, fund for the
DOH general operating budget to
come home. Send that they, um,
are projecting
Protective services. Oddly
enough, looks like they might
not be, uh, in their facts,
Protective service and that that
covers all of the cat, OK?
And then the last information
item is the, um FTE report for
all of the agencies.
For April, sitting at 22,500
up a handful from
The previous month.
And up from
Uh, the previous, uh, down from
the previous year Still
Oh, those are authorized up.
Like a little less than 1000. So
some agencies are making pretty
good, uh, progress at at filling
their positions.
Overall.
And we'll have that.
Uh, study on the SPO. Uh,
classification system for the
committee at your May hearing,
Uh, Deloitte's wrapping that up
where they're looking at both.
Pay issues. Um and benchmarking
that
Right now. The preliminary
information that there's uh some
that are, um below market, some
that are actually above market,
But even the ones that are above
market you have to consider
Um
Whether or not pay amount is
still enough to attract and
retain, um individuals, so we
pay a lot better than our
surrounding states for child
protective services, but maybe
not for within the state, but
overall, we're not off.
Um, in a terrible way, And I
think the
The cost of up updating the
salary schedule expensive but
not, uh, too, fiscal years.
Are they? Are they targeting?
Likes the cybersecurity
employees that are young and
barely targeting certain.
An environmental lawyer
Difference compared to, uh, a
lawyer at the
Attorney general's office. We're
gonna see those target.
In those, Yes, you can get down
to that level of detail in the
study. Mr Chairman, we worked
with SPO as well as
To identify.
The other finding will be that
just like what we we found with
our evaluation is our classic
too many different
Positions levels. Um, and
there's a waste system.
So that not only the payment,
but then
The F classifications, right?
Then.
Do we have to clean
classifications before?
Um, there's a way to do both.
Probably at the time. Find out
what secretaries of overpaid
classifications that would be
interesting to think.
That it that that's it, Mr.
Chairman. OK, thank you guys and
Senator Gonzalez.
Uh, Charles with a with a cash
balance.
A certain
That everyone follows or
everyone's like for us to look
at this.
Correct. That's why I look at
the trend.
Um, comparing month over year
over year.
And whether there's some
Uh, significant variance.
It's not gonna answer all of
those questions. It's just gonna
be a little red flag that Wow,
Why is protective services $15
million in the red this month
when they weren't last year and
then at elicits the need for
additional follow up.
So if you're seeing agency
accounts in the red in a
significant amount, that could
be a timing issue, But it could
be another issue of that They
are overspending their budget
and that's a cause for concern.
So that's where I'm starting
Some of those or it could be
that there's a really big amount
there that sticks out and it's
like why is that too much or
not?
It's to me. It's a surveillance
tool for
Years of having done solvency
work. Oh, Mr Chairman, Way back.
With the schools, you know, And
then if you wouldn't below that
Right. There was kind of a rule
of thumb as long as I've been in
LFC was about a 5% for most
school districts, The smaller
ones get up to maybe 15. Per.
uh, there is no hard and fast,
uh, guideline. Their cash
balances are at their large and
then when you consider the state
the sitting at over 30%
That's a lot of money to have
sitting on this. Thank you.
Thank you, mister.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chairman. I
just wanted to to talk a little
bit about the activity report on
the public education part, um,
right underneath it. It uh,
Charles, this is the letter from
you. And and we're talking
about. How, uh,
Really negatively actually about
the four day school week and
the, um
How? How.
There was a study done in
Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Montana,
North Dakota and Wyoming. And
I'm wondering, um as a
committee, you know, we we
signed a letter to the PE D
secretary against the 180 days
and now this is in the report.
So are we.
Are we comparing apples to
oranges in this report, or why
is this in this report?
This is just identifying a
recent study that came out that
Basically a four day week had a
disproportionate negative impact
on academic learning in urban
areas, but not really in rural
areas. So if anything, it it
kind of makes the case for those
rural, isolated school districts
that
Um, in these particular states
that the school districts that
were included that it didn't
have a negative, uh, as much of
a negative impact.
Um, but that when you institute
that kind of policy in an urban
area that, uh kids are falling
further behind.
OK, thank you for that
explanation. I was just curious
because I I know there's 14 Day
school district here in New
Mexico that has a 71 1%
literacy proficiency And, um,
you know, statewide we're at
38%.
So I. I was just curious. And so
I It would be interesting for me
to know how many school
districts in each of those
Um
States are actually
Four day school weeks.
I would like I would just like
some more information. Maybe to
see that Mr Liu follow up with
you. Ok, thank you.
Um, Charles, can you actually
have this study sent to us and
when? What? What's the date of
this study? Yes, I I'll follow
up with Mr Liu about that. Yeah.
If you can send it to all of us.
Thank you Last
Year and a half or two years
ago, There was a large rand.
Uh, study that included that
what didn't include New Mexico
but included some other states,
So there's a lot of
National interest in this terms
of the letter that was sent to
PE D around the conflict in
their proposed rule.
Um, with statute.
In their final rule. They did
address that conflict and and
didn't
48 weeks are allowed.
Thank you for that. Um, Charles.
I am
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Subcomittee, Mr Chairman.
So we sent out an email last
night on on subcommittees and
who wanted to be on water and
child welfare.
And so, uh, I think you guys
check the boxes you wanna be on
There's a lot of interest in
water. I think.
So there's a majority in water,
but you can probably attend both
of you.
Have to probably have some
people attend B, but, uh Senator
Rodriguez has waters. Gonzalez
has water. Senator Bell has
water and Woods has water center
Compos has water, So that's uh
65 out of five senators on
water. Uh, nobody checked. Uh,
Senator she did check.
Child welfare by himself,
And so I kind of put Senator
Hemphill in child welfare.
Also and then so on the House
side on on water. Chatfield arm,
Uh, SA and, um, water.
Represent a small you didn't
have anything. I'll do water.
OK?
The chair and vice chair would
be ex officio for either one of
this is Dixon. Check child
welfare. So
12. There's 12 on water, and, uh
Five on child welfare, but
If you wanna attend, either one
We'll try to get on the black.
Any objection to
OK?
In the emotion before
Mm.
I have emotions and
I think it's like
makes Mo uh, no objection to the
motion. I think that's it.
Um, I would just tell you as as
we get towards in in the cash
balances that Senator Gonzalez
brought up the bars are gonna
get bigger and bigger and more
and more as they bar out of of
stuff to move money.
Out as they started in year end.
So
That's something we're gonna
track because as we come forward
in in LFC
We know that we maximized almost
every agency.
That they can hire that they
have enough money.
There's nobody. I don't hear
anybody out there saying Oh,
they shorted me. 10 million.
They shorted me. 5 million. I
didn't get my FTEs fixed and so
as oil and gas starts to flatten
And the revenue start to to
level off and start to tick
down.
As we move forward in this
budgeting process, I don't
foresee large increases in
agencies, especially small
agencies, because we're gonna
have three big targets this
year. You're gonna have the SCG.
You're gonna have the right and
you're gonna have pay.
And those three things could be
large numbers that
Would require us to change it.
So as those agencies say, we're
short or if they come for Rios
on money that they didn't spend
for two years.
And do that, so as we move
forward, I mean
I have talked to the exec, and
they did send out budget
guidelines already.
And that they're gonna try to
keep them as low as as possible
because the reoccurring dollars
are not sustainable as as we
move forward, because we've had
such massive growth in the last
3 to 4 years.
We'll see where we head from
there.
OK, thank you guys appreciate
it.
