a couple of days and certainly
over the summer to, to do lots
of those things. Uh, if we could
start by some quick
introductions and so
representative you, you, uh,
start us on introductions and
hopefully others are gonna fill
in so you won't feel all alone
over on the far side there.
I just Catherine Cullen, um,
District 57, uh, northern part
of show.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, it's good
to be here, Natalie Figueroa,
Senate District 18 in Al.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Mimi Stewart, District
17 in Albuquerque is the
International District in East
Gateway area.
What a beautiful state we live
in, and congratulations to the
teachers because schools in
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee and those in
the audience and those viewing.
I'm Patricia Royal Caballero and
I represent House District 13,
which is the far southwest
quadrant of Albuquerque. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
good morning, everyone. My name
is Brian Baca. I represent House
District 8 in Valencia County.
Morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, everyone. Uh, my name
is Debbie Serana. I representing
house.
District 21 in Bernal County.
Great to be here again.
Good morning. I'm very happy to
be here too. Jaitaurrola
district House district 16 West
Side Albuquerque.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
everybody, State Rep Joy
Garrett, how Sister 29, uh
Northwest Albuquerque, Berlio
County, home of Petroglyph
National Monument.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, Andres
Romero, uh, House District 10. I
represent the as far south as
you can go in Berlio County and
parts of southeast Albuquerque.
Thank you.
And the vice chair of the
committee very capably. Um, I'm
Bill Souls, state senator from
the Las Cruces area, the
beautiful Oregon mountain desert
Peaks National Monument area.
Uh, welcome back, everyone, uh,
regularly this committee when I
talked to people from other
states about their education
committee, there's maybe 1 or 2
that have any education
background. We're incredibly
fortunate in New Mexico that so
many of our education um
Legislators on the committees
are teachers, uh, which means
there's a lot of expertise in
education and how to move the
state forward and start making a
real difference for our state.
So again, welcome to everybody
coming back, uh, with this
committee, we're gonna try and
start pretty close to on time,
but as teachers, you know, we
all get to talking and stuff
too, but we'll try and, and
start and try and try and keep
fairly close to schedule, um,
John, as executive director,
would you introduce yourself and
your staff?
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, committee, uh,
John Senham, your staff director
uh for LESC and I've got most of
our staff sitting up here, I
think we're missing a couple of
people, um, so very quickly,
I'll, I'll introduce everybody.
First we have uh our deputy
director, Jessica Hathaway.
I'm just gonna go in order here.
Uh, Mark Montoya.
Analyst
Evan Chavez.
Late arrival,
Connor L. Hicks. That's not
true. Connor's been here all
morning helping with all kinds
of things.
Uh, analysts right next to Mark,
Daniel Estupinan.
Tim Bado.
Arman Chaka. I'll give you, uh,
we got a couple new faces and
I'll introduce them more
formally uh during my director's
support in a minute. Um,
Natasha Davalos.
And uh we're missing a uh Alonzo
Baca is here somewhere.
These are, uh,
It kind of does it all for us.
He keeps the, he keeps the train
moving. And then we're missing a
couple of folks, obviously, um,
any Armitage who normally covers
our educator prep.
She's at home.
With a brand new baby.
And uh Marit Andrews also has a
brand new baby. And so we'll
have some some LESC babies,
hopefully that you'll get to see
a little later, uh, this summer.
And that's our staff, Mr. Chair.
Very good. Any other questions,
comments or we can jump on into
things, um.
We've got 2 days today and then
the rest of the dinner rooms
with the exception of the one
right before session starts, we
have 3-day committees, uh, but
today, you know, we're gonna
start right into some things,
but then also look at the work
plan and where we're headed and
meeting places and dates and all
of those things so everybody can
get those on their calendar.
Also, uh, this summer, if
anybody is interested, look for
some of the education types of
commit or of a conferences and
stuff to go to, and I know our
him regularly, there'll be a
conference on something with
education and what somebody from
New Mexico to go. And so if
you're interested and able to
make sure and talk with your
leadership about being on that
list to, to go off. You will
learn lots about education, what
other states are doing.
Sometimes things that New
Mexico's already figured out and
sometimes things that, that we
can come back with some good
ideas to help build our state.
So, kind of look for those to
put around your other uh
obligations through the summer.
Uh, with that, John, you ready
to start your director's report?
Uh, do you do?
Oh, sure, we do have a quorum, I
believe, yes, and so where are
the minutes?
should be behind.
Right behind one.
And so the minutes from the
January 20 meeting, which was
just before we started session.
We adoption of the January
minutes.
seconded by
Vice Chair Rometo, is there any
opposition to adoption of the
minutes.
The opposition.
Seeing none
We are adopted in your agenda.
And then also a motion to adopt
the agenda for today and
tomorrow.
So moved by uh Representative
Tarana and seconded by Vice
Chair Romeo. Is there any
opposition to adopting the
agenda.
See no opposition. The agenda is
adopted.
Now we'll move to the director's
report.
John.
All right, Mr. Chair, uh,
members, we're gonna go over a
couple of documents and they
should be getting handed out
right now, I believe.
The, uh, our post session and
our quick guide. So we'll, we'll
give you, give staff a second
just to get these out to you and
then we'll, uh, I'll walk you
through them.
But I should have said, Mr.
Chan, I'll mention this again in
our personnel update is uh we
are currently fully staffed.
So we're very, very lucky to
have, uh, people in, in every
position that we've got, you'll
see in our work plan, we have an
ambitious work plan. I'll talk
about that tomorrow. Uh, we've
got great people on staff and
Plenty of people that do work.
So very quickly, as you get the,
the handouts, one is, is this,
and this is the, the post
session review, and this is
something that you're used to
getting and have have gotten
for, for a long time now. And
then we'll talk a little bit
about our post our quick guide,
and this is, you'll remember
that we did this for the first
time last after last session,
um, this is going to be a little
bit handier hopefully for folks
who don't follow all the
session. Maybe they're not as
versed in all the legislative
speak that we throw around and
it's going to be
More useful uh to superintendent
school boards, other folks who
maybe didn't track things as
closely.
Um, and we do both of these now
we plan to do this every year.
So the first thing we're going
to talk about is your uh post
session.
I won't spend a lot of time.
On it, but I did want to kind of
highlight, not necessarily the,
the introduction itself, but I,
the
The fact that this session was
sort of a, it was a complex
session.
There were a lot of things going
on, um,
Obviously, the state is dealing
with
Increased revenue, but revenue
growth that is sort of slowing
and flattening a little bit. And
so it allowed you all to think
about um how to spend extra
money that that was available,
while also still being pretty
cautious about not committing
the state to long-term
commitments.
Especially given the sort of
economic situation. So that was
happening.
Um, at the time, and we'll have
an update on Martinez Siazi
today, we were still waiting to
find out from the court about
this most recent motion, and so
the court was still deliberating
and and hearing some arguments
from the plaintiffs and
defendants in that in that case.
So that was sort of looming over
some of the things.
Um, you all dealt with
Legislative proposals around
New governance structures,
because of some of the concerns
around new leadership at the
department, as well as some
mandates that were coming out
from the state and, you know,
this balance between um state
oversight and local autonomy.
Um, and then finally, all the
federal changes that were being
proposed and and we're still
hearing from and you'll hear
from Daniel in a minute about uh
some of the implications of
potential federal cuts, and the
dismantling of the federal uh US
Department of Education, and how
does the state balance its role
in the context of maybe less
guidance and potentially less
funding from the federal
government. And so all of these
things were at play, um, and
you'll, and you can, you can
read about that in that
introduction.
I wanna walk you through
Just the um the format of the
post session, that way you can,
you can flip to any section and
understand how this works.
For every section you'll see uh
the first one on page 5 is
public school finance.
For every section you'll get
some brief context about the
overall issue.
Then you'll see a section on
what you all did.
During the session in this
particular uh topic.
And then finally, you'll have
what we call the road ahead. And
this is some considerations for
you all to think about after you
did the things in the session,
you know what's left to do, um,
if something didn't pass, is
that something that you want to
consider this coming into Rim or
next session, right, so that's
the structure for this for this
entire document is um
Context
What you all did during this
past session. And then what are
some future considerations for
staff and for you as a
committee.
On about halfway through, you
should see a yellow dividing
page.
That and this gets you to page
52 is all our appendices.
And that
Uh, provides a lot of
information about all the
education related bills.
That that were considered during
the session.
Uh, they're organized first by
number, so that's an easy
numeric way to get around
things.
And then you'll talk, you'll see
we walk through the actual
budget language.
On page 61, you'll see a copy of
our high level and then a number
of other uh reference documents.
For you to think for you to look
through. So that's our
Post session, and again, this is
something that we do every year
and should be helpful and sort
of navigating. I know it's a
whirlwind. You all remember all
the bills?
Uh
That's right. By number, by
category, by sponsor, right?
Yeah. Which committee each bill
died in all of those things. Uh,
this is some of you might
remember some of those things.
That's all in here. So hopefully
that's a useful document for you
all as you think through the uh,
try to remember back and or
maybe not.
And then the second document is
this, and I do want to spend a
little bit of time on this one.
This is our quick guide.
And again, we, we, we developed
this for the first time last
year, because what ends up
happening, and you will all get
these calls.
Such and such bill passed.
What does it mean?
Or I hear the sky is falling
because such and such bill
passed.
Right? You get those calls, and
we get those calls. PED gets
those calls. And so what we
thought we wanted to do here was
sort of provide a little bit
more information about not every
single bill that passed, but
some of the bigger items and
help people think through what
are the potential implications.
For the folks who are impacted
by those bills.
And so I'll just start at the
beginning. I won't go through
the whole thing, um, on page 2,
you'll see there's the purpose
and it kind of describes
How this quick guide works.
And then on page 4 is our first
bill that that was actually
enacted House Bill 63, and again
this has um
A standard format across each of
these bills so people can
quickly go to them and
understand some of these key
issues. There's a summary of the
bill.
There's some implementation
considerations because obviously
bills don't include, here's how
you actually do the thing. It
just says do some things.
And so we've put some
considerations uh for each bill
here.
And then for those agencies or
entities that are impacted by
the bill or might be asked to do
something, we try to outline
some of those implications. So
in this case, obviously, for PED
we kind of walk through here
some of the technical things
that might have to happen as a
result of House Bill 63.
And then here's some of the
implications for schools and
school districts.
This was a big change for them.
These are not requirements, by
the way, these are just, here's
how you can interpret some of
this and how you might respond.
Obviously with hospital 63 and
some major changes to the
funding formula. People had a
lot of questions about what does
that mean for us? And we wanted
it to be clear that districts
understood in this case, there
was additional money for most of
them, and here's the intention
of the legislature in, in uh
appropriating those that
funding.
And so, um,
Again, each of the bills goes
through the same structure, a
summary, some implementation,
and then implications for those
folks. Most of the time it's PED
and school districts on page 7,
House Bill 156, you'll see there
are implications for your
educator preparation programs.
That's the bill that um made
some changes to the literacy
requirements in in educator
preparation programs. So,
hopefully this is something
that's helpful for folks as,
again, because they maybe didn't
try.
these as closely as, as we all
did during the session, or they
just had some questions about
what they might mean. um.
After the fact
And then
Uh, on starting on page 15.
We walked through the budget.
And I'll go over, we'll we'll be
using this document tomorrow
when we go over House Bill 2,
and so, you know, you'll
probably leave it here, but if
you take it, take it with you,
please bring it back.
Um, we'll go over some of the
budget and some of the changes
in the budget tomorrow, but this
that section addresses the
budget.
Again, um, on starting on page
20 we're we're really trying to
get a
What is this stuff do? so people
understand what some of these
changes do, and so we go through
each of the approach, some of
the large appropriations.
By SCG by categorical,
non-recurring, we included a, a
brief explanation of what the
legislature's intent was in the
to the extent that we can do
that, and then where there was
specific budget language
in-house Bill 2. We also put
that language here so that you
can track those appropriations
to the language that's actually
included in the budget bill.
And so again, that starts on
page 20.
And goes through each of the
sections of the budget,
including on page 27, the public
education reform Fund.
Again, really, um, trying to
take, trying to eliminate some
of the mystique, if you will.
Of, of the legislative process,
again, um, Senator, Senator
Stewart and I were just talking
about.
All the things that you do, all
the things that we do as staff,
have real people on the other
end.
They're impacted by the
decisions that you make. We
wanted to, we want to make sure
to the extent possible that that
they understand why these things
happened and how it might impact
them.
Um, we plan to send these out.
Every member will get a copy.
Uh, of this, uh, of both of
these uh documents. Both of them
are also available already on
our website and we've um, you
know, let superintendents know
we've let PED know about this.
Um, we'll try to distribute.
To the extent possible to to
folks who who'd like it if they
need a hard copy, but again,
it's available in digital form
on our. Take a look.
Uh, Mr. Chair, if it's OK, I
stand for questions on these two
items first, and then I'll do
our our personal update if
anybody has any.
John, I if you're up for that, I
think that'd be great. My style
of leadership is a little bit
more is, let's discuss when it's
right rather than wait till the
end where we're bouncing all
over the place. So please if
anybody has questions.
About these items, their story.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
just want to thank the LESC
staff for this. It seems to have
gotten better every year so this
quick guide with the uh detail
on all the education funding is
just exactly what we need, so I
just wanna thank you for
continuing to work on this over
the years and making it this
easy and yes, sending it to all
of our colleagues will really
help. So I just want to thank
you.
Representative Gary.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much. My question
is, will you be able to give a
Intentional presentation to LFC
with this same information.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, that's
a, that's a good question. I
think we'd be happy to present
to, you know, I, I don't want to
say almost anyone, but almost
anyone, um, you know, we, we do
get requests every once in a
while, actually, it hasn't
happened this interim, but last
interim we presented this to a
group of R to an REC and the
superintendents that were
members of those RACs and so
anybody that that has questions
about the documents or wants to
get sort of a more in-depth
presentation about some of the
work that you all did during the
session.
Um
Time constraints and all of
those things are considered,
we'd be happy to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, then I
know there's several people here
who are
Voting members of LFC or
advisory members, so we'll also
work to make sure that
Because you send we get stuff.
And then it's like, we don't do
anything with it cause we're so
overwhelmed.
So having a set time to present
it.
would be very beneficial. So
thank you.
Yeah, and I agree with
everything that Senator.
He said this is terrific.
Any, anyone else?
My comments and I kind of leaned
over to pro tem, um, I can see
these two documents sitting on
the desk of my uh local
legislative liaison or assistant
or whatever of the titles are, I
can never remember the right
title.
Legislative district aid, so
when someone calls can very
quickly.
You know, here's the real
information. Here's what it is
without them having to call,
look it up somewhere else. This
is full of the right kinds of
information and the questions
people are likely to ask about
it. Uh, also, I very much
appreciate all the budget
highlights and, and where things
are and gives us a great start
for this interim on starting
where the budget is, um, and it
could be quite an interesting
budget year with concerns about
the, the federal monies and uh
the
trying to deal with all of those
and making sure that people
recognize that.
We can't take the money out of
education. This is what's going
to build our state into the
future. This is the area that
needs to be protected, probably
more than any other because if
we short funding in education
now, we're gonna reap those bad
benefit those bad outcomes for
years to come. And if anything,
this is the time to, to
reinforce solid education as a
way of building the stadium into
the future. And so this provides
a great starting spot for all of
those and
appreciate particularly
colleagues that are on the
Finance Committee and voting
ones this, you know.
I know you all do, but make sure
that we're fighting for
education for the kids.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments about?
No
Do you continue on. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I should have started
with a huge thank you to staff.
Um, they, they work really hard,
you know, they come back after
this session when everyone else
is thinking we don't want to
think about the session anymore.
Uh, they spend, uh, you know, a,
a solid month and a half putting
these documents together and
making sure that uh they're
usable for you and for the
public. Uh, so I just want to
thank the staff, they did a
great job in putting all of this
together and, you know, they
make, they make my job pretty
easy and and make us look pretty
good.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, with that,
I'm gonna give a quick personal
update, and I'm going to put a
couple of our new member, our
new staff members on the spot.
They didn't know this was
happening. Um, I'm gonna ask a
couple of our new staff members
to come up, introduce
themselves, uh, tell you a
little bit about themselves,
doesn't have to be too much.
Uh, but just so that you get to
know who they are and why
they're here, um, and then if
you've got any questions, we can
do that.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Evan
Chavez, and I'm happy to
introduce myself.
I am an enrolled member of the
Napo Nation and I have been an
educator on the Neville
reservation for quite a while.
Uh, so I spent part of my life
teaching um in Crown Point.
Lakes, uh, church rock, you
know, communities that I'm
familiar with.
And I've also spent time as a
researcher at institutions, um,
so very much studying the
problems see problems,
challenges.
That students like myself face
here in New Mexico.
So I'm very excited to be part
of the LESC team and it is great
to meet every one of you.
I should say, Mr. Chair, that,
uh, Evan will eventually have a
full-time policy block, uh, as
most of our analysts do. But as
I said before, we've got a
couple of folks on leave, and so
he's kind of filling in in a
number of places for us,
including educator, uh,
preparation work, as well as our
literacy work and kind of
wherever else we need, we need
some things to to happen and so
we're, we're very fortunate to
have him.
Hi, um, my name is Arlo Luis
Menchaca. Um, I grew up in
southeast New Mexico. I went
from being a Hobbs eagle to um.
CNM sunk to a UN logo during
undergrad, I studied psychology
and philosophy. I just finished
my master's of Public Policy a
couple of weeks ago.
And um I love New Mexico and I'm
just here to serve this day in
whatever way I can.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Arlo is
technical, uh,
position is research assistant,
so you might remember we had uh
Manny served as our committee
services as well as
receptionists, um, you know, you
might be surprised to find out
that we don't get a steady
stream of people coming into our
office every every week. And so
we decided to to repurpose that
position and uh in addition to
doing some committee services
work for you all, he'll be
coordinating all of our
meetings, but he's also going to
be lending a hand on the
research side. So, um, research.
providing support to analysts as
well as as as we are, I kind of
see our research assistant
position as a
Stepping stone, I guess, to, to
analysts. We want to grow more
policy analysts in our state, I
think, um, most of us who work
on your staff can tell you that
we didn't even know these jobs
existed as high school students
or college students and kind of
stumbled into education policy.
We'd like to be a little bit
more intentional about that
work, and so we're excited to
have uh another young person
from New Mexico who cares about
education and uh wants to work
in education policy, um, so
we're really happy to have.
The.
And then finally, Mr. Chair, um,
and they aren't here today, um,
but, you know, at our June
meeting, we'll introduce to you
our, our summer summer work.
We're gonna have, uh, again, one
teacher on special assignment,
who will be working with us.
He's a teacher uh in Rio Rancho.
And we're also gonna have uh an
intern.
And so we'll introduce both of
those folks to you in June, uh,
as I said earlier, we have a
pretty ambitious work plan.
And we're gonna need all the
hands we can get, uh, to, to get
that work done, and so we'll be
excited to introduce those folks
to you, um.
Next month.
And without
Um, Daniel's a little, probably
gonna be a little upset cause he
wasn't ready to start at 9:35.
He was ready to start at 10, but
he's, he's ready to go, I think.
Thank you. And yeah, well,
Daniel's coming up, uh, many of
you I know were at the education
summit hosted by the Hunt
Institute about a month after
session was over, uh,
We had 35 legislators there, I
think was the count that I had.
Which was wonderful and got to
share lots about education and
particularly with some of the
legislators who aren't on the
normal education committees, and
so I think it was very valuable
for them to see and understand
and learn about the issues and
challenges that we have in
education, uh, for those who
were there, the Hunt Institute,
their plan is to host that each
year for us, about a month after
session, and if you found it
valuable, please make sure and,
and that your other colleagues
know that it's.
worth attending, and the Hunt
Institute essentially covered
the full cost of everything for
everyone. They, they do things
very, very well. Um, anybody
else wanna make any comments
about
That
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for that,
um, actually, I, I thought they
did an amazing job with that. It
was a time.
For us to have conversations,
you know, and to really discuss
some of the issues without the
formality of this and, and Mr.
Chairman, one of the, the big
things that I appreciated and
what is some point like to have
as part of this interim session
was we were able to have lunch
with the educators, and we sat
there and we discussed some
issues.
Um, and really ask them, what is
it that you need. Many times we
sit up here, we think we know,
but when we hear it from our
teachers, from our
administrators, it helps us to
Um, kind of lock in to, to what
we need to do, so I, I was very
impressed with it. I wanna
thank, you know, for those who
attended and for those who
didn't, um, I think there's an
opportunity in the future, but
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And for
me,
The takeaway on the importance
of consultations with the PED
secretary and the military
planning unit.
Um, which hasn't been a robust
because of so many changes in
COVID.
That really taught me a lot
about that has to be in place in
a very intentional way.
Any other comments?
Anything? If not, before we get
started, we have a couple of
other people who have joined us.
If you all would please
represent block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. Sorry, I was uh
late. I'm jumping between
radioactive and hazardous
materials Committee. So good to
see you, uh, John Block House
District 51 in beautiful
Alamogordo in Otero County.
Great to be here.
Senator
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
Candy Spence, state senator,
District 32, which encompasses
Roswell, Midway, Dexter Hagerman
like Arthur Cottonwood and
Arusia.
Glad to be here.
And represented a lot of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
name is Rolata. I represent the
House District 34 in southern
Donana County.
Thank you. I don't think I
missed.
Anyone else?
Daniel, are you ready?
Always ready.
Mostly
please go ahead.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Daniel and I cover
public school finance for the
LESC. I'm gonna come right out
and say it. I'm from Donana
County, and I am not used these
con wood trees. And so my
allergies are raging today. So I
have er X, I have my Kleenex, I
have my water here. So just bear
with me as I get through the
presentation in one piece.
Uh, so we are now on item 3 of
your binder with the document
titled Federal funding for
Public Education.
I'll let you find that.
See if you all have it.
fantastic.
So, uh, many of you have heard
in the news or from your
communities about the
fluctuations in federal funding
that are impacting uh every
state, every community in the
country, and many of you all
have brought those concerns to
us at the LESC to our colleagues
at the LFC.
Uh
And as a response to those
fluctuations in funding, uh, you
all also have established a
federal funding stabilization
subcommittee, uh, that is
co-chaired by our LESC chairman
Senator Soles, and that
subcommittee, uh, I think is
being envisioned as a central
body that can focus on the
impact that federal funding
fluctuations are having on the
state and to assist uh some of
your other permanent committees
and preparing our collective
response as it states.
Uh, to those ongoing federal
actions.
Uh, our director John Senna, uh,
provided a pretty presented this
part, uh, this PowerPoint to
that subcommittee yesterday, uh,
but the first meeting of that
subcommittee was focused on
providing a pretty broad
overview of federal funding in
general. And so we're bringing
the same presentation uh to you
all here at the LESC uh to flesh
out some of the nuances and
details of what we're seeing as
staff at the federal level as it
relates.
To uh K-12 education
specifically.
So, the goal of this
presentation, uh, is to build a
common foundation of context,
uh, here in our committee at
LESC around where we are as a
state when it comes to federal
funding, uh, and we also want to
talk about some of the potential
actions we may see at the
federal level that could impact
us here in New Mexico.
Uh, I'm gonna preface that by
saying,
Upfron that we likely don't have
all of the answers to the many
questions that you all may have.
Uh, about what's going on at the
federal level. Uh, we can
usually as staff only really
speculates.
On what, based on what we're
seeing in the news, uh, based on
what we're hearing from our
colleagues at national
organizations, our colleagues in
other states. And sometimes
really just speculating on what
we think may be the ultimate
goal, uh, or the outcome that
the federal government is
looking for.
Uh, but this first presentation
on federal funding, uh, it's our
commitment to you all that we as
staff, uh, plan to monitor
what's going on at the federal
level, uh, with federal funding
and help to make sure that we as
a state are prepared for
whatever happens, uh, in DC.
And a lot of that work will be
internal here at LESC among your
staff here at LESC. It'll also
be collaborative with our
colleagues at LFC, uh, the
federal funding subcommittee ED
and our other partners across
the state, uh, so that we all
have a common understanding as a
state about what's going on, uh,
about both the issue.
And the potential responses that
you all may pursue in the next
session.
So with that, we're going to
turn to slide 2.
Of the presentation.
Uh, where we have some
background information on the
amount of federal funding. New
Mexico has received 4 public
schools in the last decade.
Uh, you'll see that our federal
funding was pretty stable from
FY 14 to FY19 with the largest
portion of that funding coming
from or through Title I A.
Idea B.
And school meals.
Uh, starting in FY 21, you'll
see a large jump, uh, in those
tan bars or the bars in general.
And that jump was largely due to
the federal pandemic uh relief
money that we got stay about
$1.5 billion total.
Uh, and we show that in the tan
column.
Uh, those 10 columns and the
columns in general are going to
come down pretty significantly
in FY 25, and then completely
zero out in FY 26 as that
federal funding expires.
Uh, and we should overall revert
back to something resembling the
historical trend line for K-12
federal funding, somewhere
between $500 and $600 million
year over year.
Uh, for context on the scale of
that funding, uh, you all
appropriated $4.5 billion to the
SCG in FY 26, uh, so that's
600-ish million dollar
historical threshold before the
pandemic.
Uh, it's about 1413, 14% of that
SEG amount.
If you turn to slide 3.
We have an overview of the
largest sources of federal
funding that flows to our state.
And this this data, uh, our
estimates from the US DOE state
tables.
Uh, this table doesn't include
every funding source for every
federal grant that we get, uh,
like Esther or competitive
grants that flow directly to
districts or charter schools or
nonprofits. Uh, it only includes
the largest funding sources uh
that are set up in federal law,
uh, like ESA or I, so you'll see
the largest funding streams here
are Title 1A.
At $147.6 million.
entitled to a at $18 million.
Idea B at $110.1 million.
School meals at an estimate, a
preliminary estimate of $202.5
million in federal
reimbursements and impact aid at
$111.4 million.
We're gonna talk a bit more
about few of these large uh pots
of money. Uh, but if you turn it
slide 4.
We wanted to talk about first
about uh that the proposals that
we're hearing uh from DC for
K-12 public education funding
and policy.
Uh, so the administration
submitted a preliminary budget
proposal, they're calling it a
skinny budget, uh, to Congress a
few weeks ago, and they had a
few proposals for redesigning
some of the funding streams and
changing some of the funding
amounts for programs.
Uh, either just preliminary
preliminary proposals, uh, right
now, so it's all fluid in DC
pending congressional action,
uh, but we still wanted to
elevate and provide you all with
this context.
Uh, on what may happen either
this year or in the next couple
of years.
Uh, first, they proposed flat
funding for Title I, and we'll
talk more about Title I in a
bit.
They also proposed flat funding
for idea, special education in
general, uh, but they also
proposed consolidating some of
the idea programs, 7 of the IDEA
programs into one funding
stream.
They haven't said which idea
programs those would be, or what
that single funding stream would
mean for us as a state, but
that's what they're floating
right now.
And then the last bullet, uh,
the administration is proposing
to consolidate about 18 formula
and competitive funding sources
into one funding stream and
cutting $4.5 billion
Aggregate from those 18 formula
and competitive awards.
Uh, again, they haven't said
which programs those would be,
or what that single funding
stream would mean for us as a
state.
Uh, the administration is
required to submit its full FY
26 budget request to Congress in
early June, I believe. And the
final appropriations will, of
course, depend on congression.
So we'll see these topics come
up throughout the summer as the
current continuing resolution
that is funding the government
expires on September 30th, 2025.
Uh, and operating parallel to
that, uh, continuing resolution
is the reconciliation bill that
just passed the house either
last week or two weeks ago, I
forget.
Uh, and that's gonna have some
pretty big impacts on areas
outside of K-12 education, uh,
like Medicaid, SNAP, and uh very
much higher education.
Uh, and the federal funding
subcommittee is tracking that
reconciliation bill.
Uh, so now that you all have
that context, we're going to
talk about the largest funding
streams.
Uh, that come to our state,
starting with Title I on slide
5.
Uh, most of the slides in the
PowerPoint are structured in the
same way, uh, where we list the
purpose of the funding source on
top.
Uh, we list some of the
allowable expenses uh for that
funding in the middle.
And then we have a section at
the bottom that I called uh
staff highlight, where I mention
uh some considerations we'll
have to keep in mind uh our
staff and you as members uh
throughout the year and in the
coming years.
So for Title One,
Uh, New Mexico has a preliminary
award to districts and charters
of $121 million or FY 26.
Uh, and that money supports
low-income students uh
throughout our state.
With programs and services that
could include uh credit
recovery.
Counseling and instructional
materials.
Keep in mind that federal
funding is always supposed to be
additive.
Uh, it should only be
supplementing what schools are
doing with their local money.
And so these are extra services
for students.
Where staff highlight this is
pretty important. Uh, we
mentioned the need to as a
state, develop a state level
mechanism for distributing block
grants.
Uh, we've heard a lot of chatter
in DC in the last couple of
years and again now this year,
about the concept of block
grants, uh, where the federal
government would no longer flow.
Title One money through the
current. I think there's 4
equations in federal law, uh,
They flow the money through
those equations in exchange for
receiving the money, uh, schools
are required to report on how
they use the money to support
low income students. So there's
requirements uh for how you use
the money. There's reporting
requirements for how you report
back to the federal government.
Uh, the proposal or the general
idea of a block grant that's
floating in DC right now is that
instead of using those four
equations that are currently in
federal law.
Uh, the general idea of a block
grant is to reduce the
regulations and requirements
that come with accepting that
federal funding.
And the goal of the
administration, the goal of a
block grant is to empower you
all as a legislature, uh, with
autonomy in deciding how you
want to use that money.
Uh
And so, that general idea of a
block grant, uh, brings 3
questions to my mind as your
staff at LESC.
Uh
If block grants are the
potential way forward this year,
in the coming years.
One
What do you all want to do with
that money? That's
The, the primary question, uh,
to ponder, and once you decide
what you want to do with that
money.
To how do you want to push it
out to schools, what funding
mechanism do you want to use to
actually distribute this money
uh to districts, to charter
schools.
And 3
What does the accountability
conversation look like for our
state without those federal
requirements.
Uh, we've already heard, or
we're already hearing from our
national partners and other
states and national
organizations about the
distribution conversation of
that funding, and a lot of that
chatter is around using the
poverty indicators of our public
school funding formulas to push
that money out.
Uh, and because of House Bill
63, and the changes to the at
risk index, uh, we as a state
should be positioned starting in
FY 26, uh, where it's possible
to push that potential block
grant Title One money out.
The districts and charters in
ways that account for different
levels of poverty in different
districts in different charter
schools.
Uh, that could have some
disruptions, especially for APS
that uses their own local
formula to push out Title One
money to their schools, uh, but
I think overall, because of
House Bill 63, uh, we're in a
good place, or we will be in a
good place, uh, when it comes to
the distribution conversation
around a potential blocker. So,
I said all of that because I
wanted you all to know how many
layers there are to these
conversations. It's not just
about the question of
Hi
In funding, uh, we're also
having to grapple with staff and
you as members with
Any changes in the funding
mechanisms, uh, that will have
to be to be prepared for as a
state. And with those changes in
funding mechanisms could also
come fewer federal rules and
regulations, and that may circle
back to you all.
In deciding whether we as a
state want to maintain certain
protections for certain
students, uh, that were
historically enforced or imposed
through federal law or
regulation on slide 6.
We have title 2A.
And this has an FY 26
preliminary award of $14.9
million for professional
development, like uh
instructional coaches, salary
differentials, and supplies for
learning sessions.
Under staff highlight.
We wanted you all to be aware of
a court.
Uh, that's causing a lot of
conversation across the country.
And that has to do with the
continuing resolution that
Congress passed in March, I
believe, that continuing
resolution is funding the
government. I've mentioned this
before, until September 30th,
2025.
Uh
When Congress uses the
continuing resolution to fund
the government, they usually
attach what's called reporting
language to the bill, and that
reporting language has a rundown
of the funding that is
appropriated to each program.
So it would typically
historically say Title 2 A X X X
amount of money.
Title to be X X X amount of
money, and they go down from
there.
Uh, in the current continuing
resolution that funds the
government through September
30th.
Uh, Congress did not include
that reporting language, and
they didn't fully flesh out the
funding amounts for each program
in the bill.
Uh, instead, they said Title 2.
X X X amount of money.
And so because they didn't
specify how much money goes to
Part A, how much money goes to
Part B, uh, the administration
technically has the authority to
move money within the title.
Uh, depending on the priorities
of the administration.
So again, uh, multiple layers of
the conversation here that goes
just beyond, uh, did we get cut.
Uh, things are overall a little
hazy with Title 2A right now,
but I think this is funding that
people across the country are
generally talking about
generally concerned about.
On slide 7.
We have Title 3A.
And this has a preliminary FY 26
Award, uh, $4.7 million to
support proficiency in English,
essentially English learners.
Uh, through professional
development and family
engagement and instructional
materials.
Staff highlight, uh, this is the
one program that I think we
could generally say is the most
at risk.
Uh, in a potential revision of
funding.
Uh, because the Office of
English Language Acquisition has
been mostly hollowed out at
USDOE and the administration has
said that they want to uh
completely terminate Title IIA
and its funding source.
I think here,
I would generally say that I
feel somewhat comfortable.
Um, with where we are as a state
when it comes to how we fund
English learners, and how we
navigate a potential post Title
II scenario.
And a lot of that has to do,
again, we're going to keep going
back to it.
House Bill 63, uh, because
starting on July 1st, uh, for
the first time in our state's
history, we will have a separate
factor in the SEEG uh that
generates units for current
English learners, not only them,
but also students who have
exited EL status in the last two
years. So starting in the next
fiscal year, about $125 million
will flow to districts and
charter schools through our new
EL factor in the SCG.
And just like Title One, we can
use that new factor in the SCG
to backfill this potential $4.7
million.
If we end up losing it, and if
you all want to end up back on
slide 8.
We have a few of the other large
funding sources for public
education, like Title 4A, $10.6
million for improving school
conditions, Title 5.
The
$3.4 million for rural
education.
And Title 7A.
$111.4 million for impact aid,
uh, to districts and charters
that are on tribal land, uh, or
federal land in general.
On slide 9.
Uh, we have ID B.
And this has a preliminary award
for FY 26.
of $84.1 million for special
education personnel and
contractual costs, and
professional learning.
Uh, staff highlight.
Uh, the general proposal from
the federal government has been
to consolidate some of the
programs covered or created
through idea.
Uh, no one really knows what
that means, and no one knows
what what those programs would
be.
Or how it would be designed.
Uh, but a lot of the concern
that I'm seeing from our
national partners in the
national conversation.
is about the potential that all
of the idea programs are
consolidated into one pot of
money.
And that money is pushed out by
the federal government in a way
that bypasses the rules of
protections established.
Through idea.
So again, like Title One,
The goal is to give you all as a
legislature, more flexibility
and autonomy with how you all
choose to spend those federal
spend dollars.
Uh, and that could mean reducing
the federal government's
requirements and oversight.
That apply to students with
disabilities when we receive
that federal funding.
And so because of that,
The question I'm pondering the
question we're pondering a staff
at the LEOC.
is whether we as a state,
Feel comfortable with the
statutes and the rules that we
have for special education, and
the capacity that we had at PED
uh to do a lot of that work.
Or is it a space that you all
feel as members, as staff, and
we really need to hone in on to
prepare for a potential scenario
where federal rules and
regulations around special
education would be scaled back.
And this is a conversation that
we'll have in the interim and in
the coming years.
Flight 10.
Uh we had school meals.
You all pass the healthy
universal school meals program
in 2023, uh, that requires all
students have access to a free
breakfast and lunch at school.
Uh
Long story short, this is a very
expensive program that is
heavily reliant on federal
reimbursements.
Uh
The federal reimbursement is
projected to reach an FY 25, uh
The federal reimbursement is
projected to reach an FY 25
$202.5 million.
Uh, with an additional $48.8
million that you all are
spending on the program in the
general fund or from the general
fund. Uh, in the past few years,
you all have directed us as
staff, both at LESC and LFC.
To really maximize federal
dollars when possible, and
school meals was one of those
programs where we did that, and
we're now heavily relying on
federal reimbursements, federal
money to sustain that program.
Uh, in the third bullet point.
We haven't really heard any
proposals from DC uh that would
directly cut school meals
funding.
Uh, but we have heard a few
rumbles, not a lot.
about the federal government
potentially wanting to change
the community eligibility
provision.
Uh, for school meals, which is
basically just a percentage of
students in a school who have to
be low income to exempt the
school from collecting household
um, if that threshold is raised
through statue or a change in
federal rule.
Uh, that could have a cost to
the state.
Other factors include the
reconciliation bill, currently
in Congress.
Uh, night bill includes changes
to Snap, changes to Medicaid,
that could reduce enrollment in
those programs. And if we do see
reduced enrollment in those
programs here in New Mexico.
That's gonna affect how we
directly certify uh students'
income.
And that could have a cascading
effect on the school meals
program that could increase
costs for the general fund.
Uh, so now that we talked about
the funding streams, we're going
to talk a little bit about what
has already happened at the
federal level that is impacting
New Mexico on slide.
11
Um, the first we have on the
list, it's not an exhaustive
list, there are other things out
there that we just didn't
include, um,
$12.3 million that was rescinded
from Esser.
Uh, Esther was those uh federal
COVID relief dollars that we
got.
Uh, a few years back.
The government under the Biden
administration initially gave us
an extension to use that
funding.
Uh, the Trump administration
then revoked that extension.
And we lost our remaining $12.3
million.
The last I heard on this ER
money.
that the courts had blocked the
administration from revoking
them from from revoking the
extension.
Uh, for the states that were
plaintiffs to the lawsuit that
challenged the cut to the
extension.
And I believe New Mexico is one
of 16 states that was party to
that lawsuit. Uh, so we were
granted relief.
And the court basically said the
federal government needs to give
us more notice. I think like 14
days' notice next time.
Initially, they gave us about 3
minutes.
Uh, the email came out at 4:57
p.m. and they said, you have
until 5 p.m.
Use the funding.
So the court said, we need 14
days.
I haven't heard anything beyond
that, uh, from the court or from
the federal government.
Uh, next, we have the t-shirt
quality partnership program,
which had a loss of $5.1 million
that supported residency
programs.
Uh, there was a whole Supreme
Court case about this grant
being cut.
Uh
And long story short, the
Supreme Court said the
government can cancel these
funds.
Uh, so now we have 68 residents,
teachers, and administrators who
were impacted by lost stipends,
coaching and mentoring.
Uh, that money initially flowed
to a nonprofit.
And we've heard from that
nonprofit that got the award
cut.
Uh, they've asked PED about
accessing some of the grow, uh,
funding for educator clinical
practice that you all passed
either 1 or 2 years ago, if
there's any money left over.
Uh
There may be money left over,
but that presents its own unique
problem for us as a state,
because this was a nonprofit.
Doing a lot of that work, and
PED has to follow the same
process they do with all below
the line funding. Uh, the awards
are competitive, and they can't
predetermine the entity that
receives the funding from the
program.
So that's a wrinkle for you all
to think about as you're
thinking about potentially
backfilling some of this funding
that was going to districts to
charters and to nonprofits.
And last, we have school-based
mental health services.
Uh, where we lost $5 million
even for behavioral health
programs at Silver Consolidated
and Central REC.
Uh, if you were here with us,
which I think most of you were.
Um, and you came to the LESC
meeting in Silver City. You may
remember the superintendent
showed us around his high
school. He showed us their
student wellness room, uh, you
all met the staff member that
was there. You ask questions.
The room was where students who
are in crisis or who or who just
need a safe space. That day, I
think the staff members said
that 2 students had had a crisis
that morning. It was like 10
a.m.
Um
This is the grant that pays for
that room and for that staff
member that you all met.
So with the loss of that
funding, the wellness spaces are
currently at risk at Silver
City, along with 18 positions,
and at Silver City at 8 at
Central REC.
And on Friday, last Friday, we
heard about a pretty small uh
grant for special education,
that may be at risk, but we
don't really have any more
information to share.
Right now.
On slide 12.
Um
This presentation has been sort
of doom and gloom.
But I wanted to start closing
the conversation with a few
positive points that I think are
worth mentioning about where we
are in New Mexico.
Uh, unlike a lot of other states
in the country, you all really
double down on your financial
support for public schools in
the last session, you all
increased the SCG by 7.8% to
$4.5 billion.
An increase of $327 million from
FY 25. Uh, that is a very large
infusion of funding that we are
already seeing being used at the
local level, uh, to respond to
their chronic needs or chronic
challenges, and some are already
using that extra funding, uh, to
backfill to uh transition some
of their federally funded
positions that were
Uh, being cut.
Uh, you will also double down in
your targeted below the line
investments and professional
development.
Uh, targeted compensation and
at-risk students, uh, especially
those large three-year
appropriations you all made
through Perro.
For maths attendance, and
on-house students.
And I've mentioned it before in
the presentation, but we're
going back to hospital 63.
Uh, I was talking to Tim
yesterday about so many
nonprofits, so many other
states. Basically in a panic.
Because they're panicking about
their public school funding
formulas, not being responsive
enough to potentially support
English learners, potentially
support low income students,
support professional development
and basic program, and they're
all talking about how do we
create EL factors in our.
In our formulas. How do we, uh,
codify some of these protections
for English learners in our
state statute.
And I'm not worried.
Because with House Bill 63,
Uh, we strengthen our state's
capacity to react to some of
those federal changes that we
are already seeing that we will
most likely see.
In the next few years, because
we're currently reducing our
state's reliance on federal data
and federal guidance.
Uh, when we proposed House Bill
63 to you all last interim, we
told you, one of the goals of
the bill was to move away from
using federal Title One data in
the at risk index, and to
replace it with our own data
here in New Mexico, and you all
did that by passing House Bill
63.
Starting July 1st, uh, Federal
Title One data will be repealed
from the SCG as the indicator
for poverty in the SCG.
We're going to replace it with
state income tax data with
public benefits data and with US
census data.
They were not completely
independent from federal data,
but we're very much so moving in
the direction of
Uh, data, basically data
autonomy.
Uh, and the, and the risk index
I mentioned before, may be
critical for us as a state when
it comes to data governance, and
we'll be in a much stronger
position next year, and we are
currently uh with using Title
One data in the SCG.
With House Bill 63, you will
also created that new English
learner factor in the formula.
Uh, but that bill also created
the first statutory guidance
that we've ever had as a state,
uh, for how funding should be
used to support English learners
specifically.
So if we see the elimination of
Title II funding where we see
some revocation of federal
protections through rule or
statute, uh, or federal law, or
English learners. Uh, we now
have a good foundation in state
statute to build on when it
comes to English learners.
And with the changes to staffing
at the US DOE.
Uh, being able to collect high
quality data and use it in ways
to effectively measure student
performance or student
achievement. It's gonna be
really critical.
And the evaluation models that
we're currently building, that
PED is currently building for
your multi-year grow
appropriations.
Uh, could be good in state
models that we think uh may be
good moving forward.
Overall, I think on this slide,
I think we made some pretty
good, strong statutory moves
that could strengthen our
ability as a state to respond to
some of these federal changes or
the funding or changes in
statute or rule.
There's obviously more work to
do, uh, but I think we're ahead
of a lot of other issues when it
comes to some of these.
On slide 13.
Uh, we have some budget
considerations for you all to
think about in the interim.
Uh, yes, we're seeing federal
funding scale down in some
areas.
And many of you all may be
wondering what role you have.
As individual members and as a
body, and potentially helping to
fill some of those gaps that
those cuts are leaving.
As you do that, we as staff are
going to start to deliberate on
a framework.
We could use to evaluate our
response, your response to a
lost federal funding source.
In that conversation should
ideally begin with evaluating
the impact that funding is
having on student outcomes.
Uh, whether the funding is
supplementing.
Uh, a state appropriation.
And in what ways that funding is
additive to stay appropriations.
So I think about Title II
funding for professional
development. There is a federal
title 2 funding flowing to PED
blowing to districts and charter
schools, but you also have
professional development funding
in house build 2, that's
recurring.
So
Two separate streams of money
doing.
The same general concept of
work.
Uh, in diff through different
lens.
Um
Next, we determine whether a
grant should be backfilled
because it's having a very
specific impact on specific
communities that you all want to
see continue, which is
fantastic.
The next question for you all to
consider after that will be,
should that backfilling be
non-recurring.
Or recurring.
Uh, is it something you want to
see sustained in the short term,
or do you all want to commit to
a recurring expense.
And last we mentioned this in
the previous life without the
loss nonprofit funding, uh, but
there may be statutory barriers
to backfilling grants that were
awarded to specific entities.
And on slide 14.
Uh, we're closing with policy
considerations.
That talked about each of these
already, but broadly.
I think we need to start
thinking about the specific
functions and guidance that
we've historically relied on on
the federal government.
Uh, and whether you all should
consider codifying some of those
protections.
Uh, and requirements in statute
or through a rule.
Um, for us at the LESC, this
means a focus on special
education, uh, which is always
going to be a big topic for us,
obviously.
Um, state level accountability,
which I talked about in the
conversation around block grants
for Title One, and what that
could mean.
For us in a world in which we're
not bound to as many rules and
regulations from the federal
government.
And of course, that data
governance piece that I think is
going to be critical and
important in understanding how
students are performing in our
state.
And a lot of that is gonna mean
really focusing on strengthening
the capacity of our agencies in
measuring student performance
that obviously means PED, uh,
but we should also think through
what it means for other agencies
and state government and whether
there's areas for potential
cross-agency collaboration or
data sharing.
So, we have a closing slide.
On page 15.
I wanted to close by saying the
federal landscape is pretty
volatile right now, as you've
seen throughout the PowerPoint,
and there's not a lot of clarity
in what's happening right now at
the federal level, or what could
be happening later in the year,
in the coming years. Uh, but
your staff here at LESC is going
to be tracking this throughout
the interim. We'll be
collaborating with LFC with DFA
with PED with the federal
funding subcommittee. In doing
that work and drafting proposals
for you all to consider ahead
of.
a session.
Uh, but hopefully after this
presentation,
Uh, you all have a good
grounding of where we are with
the federal funding and public
education.
Um, and where we may be headed,
not only in terms of the funding
itself.
Uh, but also in terms of broader
policy considerations.
That does it for me. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, um.
Some of the things we're here
chatting is
Your information is so good and
detailed, please plan on giving
us an update on what's happening
at the federal level, how it's
affecting New Mexico each month
because things are happening
quickly and just so that we're
well prepared and and
knowledgeable about how these
are going to affect New Mexico,
uh, and
Hopefully, I mean, similarly,
you were at lots of the meeting
yesterday on the federal
funding, uh, interim committee.
That
Yeah, lots of it is the sky is
falling, maybe, and it's kind of
like we ought to have hard hats,
but don't panic. You know that.
Make sure that we're paying
attention to what's going on and
prepared for it, but don't
overly panic and change the
whole world right now until we
know which things are actually
going to affect New Mexico and
how, and have real discussions
about
Which areas we ought to backfill
and we need to and, and move
forward to make sure that our
students and our citizens and
children in particular are being
taken care of. But we are open
for questions. If anyone
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, John, for the, I'm
sorry, Daniel.
For the detailed um information.
So, just like everything I've
got questions, I'm gonna be
right to the point, OK? So, Mr.
Chairman and Daniel, I
definitely understand about idea
B.
Part of, there's a number of
factors within the IED or IDEA
funding maintenance of effort is
one of those that we are gonna
have to take a look at and for
you guys don't know, maintenance
of effort means as far as the
balance between federal funded
programs in the district's
obligation to spend near the
same monies every year to year.
So maintenance of effort isn't
come into play when we look at
idea.
Be funding.
The other thing, Mr. Chairman,
with special education is we
need to talk about uni units
generated and specifically about
ancillary units, OK, when, when
I was running special education
many years ago, I think 20 years
ago in 2007, there were many
more ancillary categories.
That counted or generated units,
OK, including, like right now,
we could count counselors now as
social workers, now you have to
have a certain thing. So as we
take a look at this fund.
The generation of units and
supporting ancillary units is
going to be a big part of that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the other
thing that uh we talked about
with funding, OK?
It's really, I want to focus
about cash balances, OK? Now,
the one thing about it is we
talk about legislative intent,
right, and legislative intent
for many of us, my colleagues
because we have made huge
investments.
Into education.
But those investments were not
to grow your cash balances at
the rate that they have done.
And I mean, you know, I think
that that's when we talk about
it, yes, I understand the need
for cash balances, but when
we're talking about cash
balances of 25, 30, 40%.
That means that money was
targeted towards kids or towards
students, programs, teachers.
isn't reaching our desired um.
Intent. Uh, Mr. Chairman, also
the other thing about is we talk
about reductions in funding.
But part of that equation is
also a reduction in attendance,
right? When we talk about losing
student enrollment because
student enrollment for these
districts is money.
And I think that that's another
part of that. It's part of the
equation that I hope that we
address through the interim, as
we talk about attendance and
re-engagement, getting the kids
a reason to come back to school.
Making sure that we cannot
address learning, we cannot
address anything if our students
are not coming to school. Mr.
Chairman, the other thing that
I, I want to talk about is the
engagement with um LFC and
PSCOC. When we talk about cash
balances many times they say,
well, this is for the RFR
process.
Or this is because the grants
haven't been out and have not
been received by a district.
And so it's, if we are not
getting
Are the requests for
reimbursement RFR sorry, or
we're not receiving um our
grants, and I can tell you that
the idea, Grant.
Did not come out until late
spring, and it usually came out
earlier.
And if that's why the, the
districts are having to use cash
balances or maintain higher cash
balances, and those are things
in our control that we need to,
and that's where the grant
distribution comes from the RFR
process.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, when
we talk about LFC, it, it hurts
me every year. We talked about
and many of my colleagues, we
talked about.
Engaging and having a place at
the table for the last couple
years, many of our colleagues
here tried to get a raise for
our ancillary and support staff.
We've made a huge investment in
teaching staff, we'll get to
that point and there's no money
in the budget.
So I think that we need to have
a place and get our priorities.
Communicated early.
Uh, into the, into the budget,
and also like I said before,
with PSCOC, the capital outlay.
If districts are holding on to
funds that were targeted and
directed towards students, and
they're having it for that for
capital projects, whether there
be their district chair or
otherwise, then I think this
committee needs to be engaged in
the PSCO PSCOC process.
Because we need to make sure
that we're not
Money that's targeted because I
think it addresses a couple
things.
Money that's in cash balances
isn't addressed in the Ozzie
Martinez lawsuit.
So I think that that's really
something that we need to look
at it, and I do agree with you
about the grant distribution.
And as we go through this
interim, I'm gonna be really
asking questions of PED and
their finances to find out is
how this money and how our
districts are, are receiving
this money and are being
reimbursed for expenses upfront.
So, I know that's a lot, but I,
I can't, I, I gotta agree with
the
As far as Senator Souls, uh, I
appreciate the update and I
appreciate the work of the
staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representing.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
this. Um, so bringing and yet
some hopeful points report.
Really appreciate it. My
question and this might even be
to Chairman Souls, who's the
co-chair.
Of the federal
Funding stabilization
subcommittee.
How, how is that being looked
at? Like, are there regular
meetings?
From the various analysts.
Uh, that they are presenting
this information to us and LFC
and that federal committee.
Is there a working group of
analysts and staff members who
are
Um
Monitoring all of this because
obviously it affects LSC, it
affects the specific federal
funding committee.
How, what's the structural
organization to track all of
this.
Changing stuff that we look at
Google probably changed in the
last hour.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garrett, I'm going to be
extremely honest with you. I
think one of the biggest
challenges we have is as a state
right now is that we don't have
a comprehensive formal structure
or collecting lot of this
information for responding to
that, uh, to those changing
issues. We now have a structure
for responding the federal
funding stabilization
subcommittee, but we as a state,
I don't think are talking enough
between agencies, uh, between
agencies.
within agencies, and so I think
moving forward in the interim
for this year, we're gonna be
trying to build that partnership
with LFC why I mentioned it. Uh,
a lot of the work will be
internal here at LESC. We're
going to be very intentional
about collaborating with LFC,
uh, with DSA especially with PED
districts and charter schools, a
lot, a lot of the information
that I have in the PowerPoint
came from where you all see it
from the news, people calling
me, people emailing me.
Uh, seeing Supreme Court cases.
And so that shouldn't be the
case, like we shouldn't be
finding out some of these things
through the news. Uh, we need
some formal rigorous process
within the state that we're
currently building.
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
I could just add a couple
things. Uh, Daniel's right that
that sort of overarching
structure may not exist. I think
it's, it's starting to form, and
I think part of it is because
it's so new and people are
reacting. Obviously we have the
new subcommittee that's meeting,
uh, in talking to Clinton, who's
the staff member sort of uh
coordinating those meetings,
yesterday's meeting especially
was sort of ground setting, if
you will, with the intention of,
of diving a little bit deeper
into each of these issues as we
go along. Um
I think the more that that
happens, the more communication
and collaboration is going to
happen, uh, DFA secretary
mentioned yesterday that they do
have a working group among
agencies. So state agencies are
working together uh to talk
about these, um, but there, but
it did come up in yesterday's
subcommittee meeting about the
need to include not just the
agencies, but some of the
municipalities, all the other
folks that might, as Daniel
mentioned earlier, see some of
these ripple effects. They may
not be necessarily uh
cuts to to particular pots of
money, but they're going to be
impacted as some of that rolls
out if it does happen. And so to
your, to your question and to
Danielle's point, we, we
probably do need to think a
little bit better about how we
formalize some of those
conversations, they're probably
happening a little bit sort of
in parallel right now, and we
can definitely work uh with
other legislative staff and at
least as far as education is
concerned, uh, PED school
districts and other folks to
make sure that we're getting
consistent information and also
providing consistent information
to you all.
Thank you so much for those
honest um fluid.
Situations because obviously in
the excellent LAOC presentation.
You're continually reminding us.
That we're gonna have to
consider this from a policy and
a budget viewpoint. So thank you
for being on top.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and being on that committee,
we're still figuring it out, uh,
but it meets for a couple of
days a month.
Throughout the interim, that I
know from the presentations
yesterday, LFC has a point
person to track the federal.
We've got a point person to
track the federal. I'm sure most
of the
The agencies within the
administration have somebody
who's tracking how that is going
to affect that particular
agency. I think your point is
very well taken that all those
white people ought to be meeting
almost on a weekly basis to see
where there's the crossovers for
it because it's not just direct
federal dollars, but when a
program is cut, it may increase
the need for social services
somewhere else, and there, there
needs to be a discussion about
Those and how it's affecting
real people, not just how much
does it change a number on a
piece of paper.
Senator is out.
Our students succeed is parental
involvement in this. What are we
doing to
This that issue.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Center. I don't
really live in the family
engagement, uh, piece, but I
know that you are making some
really strong investments in
areas like attendance, which I
think is very connected to
family engagement, uh, you all
