With the agenda we're going to
do some introductions and i'll
start at the right of the table
mr chairman thank you thank you
all for being here beautiful
area got here yesterday it's
some right around town uh some
merits my mom's family was from
goods either shranch outside the
vegas so we spent a lot of time
here while I was kid as actually
raising on tony to call round
town called
which was original language for
the connectors language that
never completed being made but I
recently sold a rap so i'm no
longer telling me she goes don't
work out what happens I don't
have any cattle and don't want
to have more at the cattle but I
live in southeast new mexico I
believe what is needed in the
language everything we do
protects new mexico and it's
heritage so I appreciate being
on this committee thank you.
I don't think I can follow up on
that you'll come back and get
your cat with high good morning
represent stephen lord allow his
love coming up here i'm in
burning of county torrents
county and I have got five
language in my district absolute
love it love learner but the
history in the culture in this
one of my absolute favorite
committees to be unso thank you
for having me.
What he mister chairman antonio
master sub street senator
district twenty six from berliel
county that were sight of
obviously it's a just a joy to
drive to vegas and now see
starbage and peak and
my folks are from biggest as you
know mister chairman my dad went
to west and our highlands
graduate nineteen fifty nine
frank masters.
When are the other
representative garcia the
ranches are three score and
me these three dollars the state
of cator say can include a last
part as history cast the last
year that I would care care e
there
are going in corporate the
condolent when I leo
thing over some broadway and
oriented the me these three
thousand sound broadway as soon
a common stuff to see that board
was premium from medical and I
would get polished premiums
immediate antennas may he gone
off and I would currently e
partner throughout either the
time behind boring continued the
watching connect normally gonna
love someone of tracking some of
them but a lot cast that system
the circumstance and mean
said the central scene quentin.
Eloquent somewhere real is
someone at the risk at risk of
year
three school of appear the most
single melachrist the lamir said
and mean and thus thus those
mail says in but I at three
months and now I think that
three time yours but I saw run
restaurants and that three
school there are no political
right political repeals you lose
then the one I e and and similar
support when much was annuals
you look or some more say all of
course east and was in those
barriers to con was blue color
comma mosa it's stins and tower
e sky deal west sky bewest slb
on the system this year on those
answers
eighteen and five year locate
for your garage a year home
i'm one of the founding members
of this committee established in
two thousand and three it was my
legislation that created the
committee and my junior funding
that funded the committee and
here in this area i'm within the
answer strong that holdings on
my familiar my great grandpa
great great grandpa doesn't
allow one day was my sale was
i'll continue your which is like
a mayor judge
when stephen kerney came in and
this area
in eighteen
in eighteen thirty six I mean I
eighteen
uh eighteen forty forty five
and
uh
my grandpa peter version was
born in some week where
which is now known as story lake
and it was here in us were goes
where general corney declared
that new mexico was now part of
the united states and he did it
right on top of the of the roof
and my great great grampa's
house here in the place of your
hand.
And also he took out his bible
and he saw in my great great
grandpa one day of my sa as
their first official of the new
territory
well that time the military
occupation I also have roots in
the summer that while.
Through the sarah through the
lot best and through the my
assess great great grandparents
one day the ones my s lived in
some again before he came into
las vegas and have found it last
week as an eighteen thirty five
uh it was not the first attempt
to settle last way of us there
was an effort in eighteen twenty
three by said
but the commentaries kind of
chased out the in those final
settlers and they went back to
some eagles at while which was
there there are their home grant
but again my great great grandpa
eighteen
thirty five resettled last week
and it is what it is because of
of him
even though my great grandpa was
sorn invisible in courtney
there was a couple of force that
were established in the area
and down they would trade with
the merchants here in us i'm
credit
what happened is that some of
these soldiers started the
abusing our hispanic in those
final women so my greater grampa
being on condom I ordered told
the merchant's not to sell to
the forts on credit
and shortly after that uh they
burnt his mill
is more lina here in some week
will us cause that's where my
great great grant by had as
grissmilling is forum earner's
grandchild anymore to san our
hosting which is just east of
romero will so it's important
kind of understand that history
you know I still have some of us
on the state legislature come to
being in this because of our
are ancestral in the edge that
we are what we are you know and
i'm continuing in the traditions
of my great great grandpa you
know and him being an electoral
official at that time.
And me being an official going
on twenty seven years in and of
january first i'll be the oldest
state rep in the house
so i'm looking for
yet to yeah he thought
thank you mister chair is always
an honor to be on this committee
and kind of sure what the hint
there
thank you representative we want
us the ice single tumble good
morning I am state senator
leohard meal and native son of
the especially valley and
senator of senate district five
which includes los alamos reary
by sound of all in santa fe
counties and with that today
we're going to move on to the
first item on our agenda and
before a collect president worth
of new mexico senators to
connect
good morning mister chair
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here and to have
everybody here in the audience
i'm list of an extent it
district thirty nine I do cover
parts of ah send me gal county
currently i'm representing parts
of six counties in january that
drops down to four sen megall
santa fe torrents valencia a
tiny bit of a berniel and quite
a bit of lincoln right now thank
you very much.
Thank you and before we will
violent new mexico highlands
university has provided some
refreshment them a continental
breakfast that you're more than
happy to help yourself to
throughout the meeting feel free
to stand up if you'd like and
help yourself to there's
something to drink are you and I
want to welcome uh president
worth up to the front of new
mexico highlands university.
Good morning president worth.
Good morning and thank you for
everyone being here we are
grateful for the history
representative here i've been
here for six weeks I think this
is started my seventh week I
come from the state of boring in
i'm originally a canadian and
been working through the west
coast here previously i've
worked at southern organ
university where I got to serve
as the easy the vice president
with who are the current
president is there's rick bailey
some of you may remember wreck
uh as the former president
northern mexico college he is
now with some organ and I get
the pleasure of working with
him.
In my previous background i've
served as a cf v p f a a vice
president of student affairs and
roman management and that's been
throughout oregon to stay the
washington and state of the
value and I am overjoyed my
family and I live here in las
vegas we have twin daughters
that are sixteen they're going
to robertson high school and
they have been welcomed by the
community it's been fantastic
and we we love being here
I went I know i'm scheduled to
be on their for an hour my gift
to you as I will not use that
full hour
so that you can get to the
important work of the agent of
the this committee and thank you
for the work that you do
briefly do I I got a week and a
half ago I did a state of the
university address where we've
laid out a fairly aggressive
agenda for how we can continue
to grow and help islands
universe to be responsive to the
needs of the state to the needs
of the community into the needs
of the people here i'm going to
outline some of those
for you I won't go into great
detail you'll hear more about
that as we work through the
student state of sessions but
first informer somewhat you want
to know that we are as a
university and I as the
president i'm here to serve uh
we hear to serve our people here
in the mexico and we couldn't be
more happy with the joys that
comes from college awareness
college graduation and student
success so I am here to serve if
there's anyway we can do that
please let me know.
First and foremost I want to do
to picture in your mind a simple
triangle there's three points
that the triangle that we focus
here in highlands the first
answer the three points of the
triangle are one we are
regionally responsive to we have
academic and we strive for
acting the mcs than said three
we have a culture of opportunity
here and I wonder just briefly
touched through those with some
of the initiatives on track that
really in the center of that
triangle with regional
responsive academic excellence
and culture opportunity at the
center is our students.
Everything we do is for them for
their features success as we
transform lies which will then
transform the economic and
social mobility of them but also
of the state so we we take that
responsibility very seriously
and regretful for that so I
mention that the aggressive
agenda first and foremost on
regionally responsive
we value and know and recognize
that the statement in mexico in
the region are is our primary
market we
have built and are continuing to
build and will build more
partnerships with uh the state
last week as the matter of fact
we were meeting with the
secretary of cyfd day to get
that right the acronym says
child family youth suit whatever
the acronym is I apologize as
well as the sector of her
education to build a new
certificate program for to
better train the social workers
that are already working for c f
ID c f e.
Um and so we are going to stand
that up and start that in
january so we'll have better
train social workers the state
has identified new mexico hounds
university and the school social
work as a center of excellent
and so we're continued to work
with the state in the number of
areas.
One of which the way are proud
of the
next gohan's university is one
of the original hispanic serving
institutions federally
recognized by the federal
government governance government
we have an aggressive agenda who
become the premier hispanic
serving institution what that
does it allows us to provide
hook
to apply for and receive federal
grants to help our student
experience not just for a
hispanic insurer count students
but for our students so we are
going to become a premier
hispanic serving institution
on top of that there's another
federal designation called the
native american not nontribal
serving institution and nancy is
that after him that'll also
allow that to better serve
native american students and
students who identify as being
from our trades and privileges.
So we are nine percent of our
population that demonstrates a
cornerly we will to get that
federal destination we need to
be at ten percent so actually
i'm going to be heading out to
farming ten and we're going to
have better representative
representations with her tribes
you may have seen as it came in
across the street here we fly
many international flags what we
don't do but we'll be started to
receive is we have a goal this
year to fly all the flags over a
native of our trouble nations
and our prevalence and so all
all the all the saternations
will be represented here at the
new exponent's university we did
that at a previous school and
i'll never forget one of the
students who saw their flag
flame just feeling that they're
finally represented here so
something simple the symbolic is
so important in so many ways so
we're going to do that and we've
started to receive some of those
flags already
we also going to improve our
community engagement in the
month and half i've been here
i've heard too many times that
highlands has been a bit of an
island in the community there is
not going to be the case anymore
um one of the things that we're
doing amongst many is starting
monthly forums community
engagement forms and so we are
opening up campus to the
community and the number of ways
the first of which will be
october twentieth um as tomorrow
from five thirty to six thirty
seven ish we have of our nine
athletic programs we have seven
new coaches and so we're going
to because athletics is such a
community engagement opportunity
we're going to allow our coaches
in the community to get to each
other better i'll be there and
as well supported that for every
month we're going to have a
community form
i've been appointed as a member
of the last vegas city council
economic economic development
committee
looking to improve the economic
development outlooks here in in
the area
okay so enough of
regionally responsive culture of
opportunity I think there's an
opportunity to reset our mindset
here in house in high education
generally but also here in new
mexico house university uh to
often with regional
institutions.
Throughout
we have a oh we're not the big
score that's okay the big
schools are great we have a
different mission and we're
gonna own and we're gonna
embrace that mission with an
opportunity might set so there's
a number of things that will go
through
with that.
With that culture of opportunity
first of one of the first of
many things that we're going to
be the kind of most welcoming
institution for our students
many of our students are first
generation.
Many of our students don't know
how to navigate the bureaucracy
of of a college so we're going
to start early in elementary
school in middle school and high
school to build relationships
with their students and their
families that way when they come
here they'll they're used to us
and they're used to asking for
help or knowing here who to go
to so we're excited about that
uh that we also have a lot of
opportunity to apply for more
federal state grants uh we're
working where in the silent
phase of a capital campaign.
To raise external money to
support the mission of the
institution
but that's the that's
but much smaller than some of
the bigger schools really with
our them that base but we're
going to leverage the many of
the folks who have are vested
interested in success to be able
to do that with programming from
them
I mentioned athletics we have a
long history of athletic success
here at highlands university
that were proud of we're looking
at expanding some of our
athletic programs women's
wrestling men's a women's golf
we have a golf course here that
we owned we're looking at better
utilizing that to create more
opportunities for students to
come
at regional institutions in real
athletics is it's an unrolled
initiative maybe the students
who aren't able to go to bigger
schools sometimes don't go a
college or go out of state we
want to keep students who have
an interest in still continuing
in their athletic journey but
still do that here they would be
going to college often times or
going to this college if they
didn't have the athletic
opportunity but we are going to
be responsive in our budget
control to make sure that those
opportunities are revenue
positive
okay
new york's accounts university
was also just recently
recognized a nationally as a
first generations forward
institution so what that means
is we have a number of
opportunities and programs and
services that help first and
students we've been recognized
for that that allows us to
continue to learn and grow with
another consortium of
institutions that are generally
first generation serving
institutions we know the value
of what college education do for
for multiple server generations
so we're excited for that
academic excellent to the next
ingo angle corner of the
triangle.
So i'm trying to rash because I
know I said that we would do an
hour or less i'd less than an
hour so i'm trying to get
through this I appreciate
sometimes I get a little bit I
talked to quickly but first the
foremost are academics and
learning is the core of the
institution why do students
generally attend an institution
first performance for the
academic program and so we're
going to make sure that our
programs of high value has
success with high rigor and high
expectations are students expect
and demand it.
Secondarily the academic mission
of this institution in this
region is to serve the labor
market needs of the area so we
will be incorporated in a tool
called lacast which looks at
current labor market demand
looks at least program
opportunities so how many
graduates in a field and a line
and make sure that our programs
are serving what is needed here
in this area so we're very
excited about that data informed
tool that will be joining.
Would you have a new number of
new programs that were working
on the next fall will be
starting our doctor of nurse
practitioner program that'll be
followed by we're in steps to
create a doctor of education and
even program a doctor is social
work with our senator of
excellence in the state and
needs here also an online basis
the social work degree
we have a number of
collaborations with new mexico
state one of which is a masters
to phd and forestry as you can
tell couple years ago with the
angel peak hermet speak angel
fire angel canyon fire
a lot of this area has been
impacted greatly by the by that
fire and so we have both an
opportunity on their academic
programs and throughout our
forced institutes and our
watership instructs to rebuild
this area
I think i'll move to the next
i'll talk a little bit about
budget stability and
transparency
as we operate as an institution
are guiding value is our revenue
is greater than equal to our
cost.
And we are stewards of large
largely we are largely funded by
state funds but sixty percent of
a revenue comes from the state
of new mexico we are wanting to
be good stewarts of that and
make sure that anything we do
revenue is greater than to our
cost
to that end we have a new
institutional budget committee
shared governance is the thing
here at a new mexicans where are
factory are students are
involved in the decision making
and that includes the decision
making the knowledge of whether
current budget situations are.
Each of those individuals are
budget offices will have
authority in accountability in
autonomy to operate within the
budget parameters.
One of the grilled call things
that might
uh it have been of interest to
this committee is we have
started an initiative to come
become the first public
university in the nation to
become zero net carbon uh
operations to do in a carbon
we spend about a million dollars
per year and are electricity
bill imagine what you can do
with the million dollars for
student support we spend about
six hundred thousand dollars per
year for natural gas bill
imagine what you can deal with
that money to help our students
and our faculty continued after
the programs that change lives
so we've met with the the firm
that helped the county been
earlier
identify at twenty fifty goal of
being a net zero carbon
operations by twenty fifty will
have an aggressive goal to do
that ourselves through
partnerships with the state with
federal government and uh with
pya
other entities in the utilities
in the area.
So i've told the story so I
apologize to lose who've heard
before in the room we were doing
this at um with rick bailey in
in oregon when you think of or
again what do you think of.
Rain lot of rain you don't think
of solar
we started this initiative in
oregon and it's possible to
become
creative on energy so here in
new mexico where we have more
abundant opportunities and son
particularly I think we can beat
oregon we will beat them
so we're pretty excited about
that
okay and they just finally just
a couple of focus areas that
will continue to work on um
again we're going to fly the
flags of all of our travel
nations and publish
we're going to work on enhancing
our community engagement through
forms that participation I am I
am out in the community I attend
about everything I can with
rotaries with sporting events
with my daughter's activities
with city council we were the
county commission
working with the hospital area
in the group and we're just
we're just out and about trying
to make islands at a more
interactive place.
Let me just mention the also the
golf course property we have a
number of acres where the last
biggest golf course anyone
played the golf course recently
come and out and try it's that
it's in great condition uh the
group that is running that for
us it's a partnership between
the city the county in the
university were extremely proud
of the partnership we are
finalizing some work on the
feasibility of building new
homes here in the area there
it's been a number of years
since there's been new homes in
the area.
Almost seventy percent of her
faculty don't live in las vegas
because largely because of the
lack of opportunities with homes
so we have got the initial draft
from a feasibility study that
can show that shows that we can
support an additional hundred
and seventy five single family
homes on the gulf course a
hundred and twenty multi family
apartment sell homes on the gulf
course with an additional eighty
seven thousand square feet of
commercial retail opportunities
along mills available at which
front of the gulf course so
we're excited for that we're
excited to work with the county
in the city um in the state to
develop that and bring kind of
re energize
las vegas as we we have an
aggressive enrollment strategy
here to bring students back to
campus we are five hundred and
thirty beds for student
residents also five hundred and
sixteen of them are fall
into we have a couple of older
buildings that were going to
work to demolish in make better
multi matter use buildings out
of what we either have or what
we don't have.
That way we don't have a student
resident has its only funded by
the fees that we charge our
students so we could build new
resource but we'd have
astronomical fees for students
which couldn't which with them
wouldn't be able to afford to
live in.
So we're going to change the the
way that we do I see the
residents house and do mixed use
facilities so we can faculty
staff we can have academic space
in the in the in the buildings
uh to better utilise the land in
the space that we have here.
Uh finally two quick things we
have met with the santa fe
community college present met
with a number of folks in two
comparison santa rosa we're
gonna start a northern mexico
education consortium so myself
northern new mexico center for
community college the school
districts here the
superintendence I have been out
meeting with many the super
tenants we're gonna communicate
more and talk about the
challenges that are students and
families are facing in going
through this journey to higher
education it's a will be able to
better identify and work through
the obstacle seller students
that may have made me not have
so i'm excited for that and
they're finally we are we have
the ability to support this
community as we recover from the
fires in the floods
I met recently with an uhm some
individuals here with the mayor
to be to create a long term
water strategy here so we're
excited for what comes from that
so that's a little bit about
what we're and I think is an
aggressive agenda for us and
there's a lot more details there
I try to rush to many of that so
we could get some time back to
you but it's too many questions
or comments from the committee
mister chair there are when I
head over to rep
I change senate
that's the network
thank you a doctor will fire
appreciate the presentation like
said earlier of the area you're
talking just now talking about
your housing around the golf
course are you as looking for
federal assistance or.
We have similar problems and in
our area the sitting county got
together I do construction and
they were given us a five
thousand dollars for the lot per
lot after occupancy we had get
the certificate of conceived
before we got but it was also
reduced in a deal the rate of
cost for infrastructure
we didn't get to keep the money
basically dropped the value of
the lot by that amount i'm just
wondering if you guys are
looking into any of that or if
you've found federal sights of
help thank you mister chairman
and inserting us yes we are the
stage of where it now is we at
the towards the end of the month
will receive kind of the final
feasibility report which allows
us to then scope the project
next step will be the financing
power and so any federal
assistance any programs in the
state programs that will allow
us to
progress that project further
will will explore and if I may
that we may follow up with you
with for more in some for
information about your
experience on this chair we also
have to hand out audience but he
people are draft or.
Sure
yeah i'll need you to come up to
the might can introduce yourself
for the
rental
visit
and observer to send on the
president of the last biggest
language
who currently owns is a
highlands
okay so this isn't it if you
have something to add to the
conversation but we're not
taking questions now I I just
wanted I just want to know who
is going to keep ownership of
the of the
of the golf course.
That was it
they get mr chair and
the university owns the land
currently and I don't know what
it will happen in the future
that as we explore opportunities
I think everything's on the
table
thank you.
This chicken
unless champ topic
I know what you appreciate that
you're looking into a long term
water strategy but month and was
here you talked about see why
and their needs for work force
last session.
Uh.
The.
We had a committee meeting that
they're in their talking we went
and gave a couple of us gave two
hundred thousand each to be able
to help get a training for
social workers and I don't know
if you would have doctor a's
professor there at eastern
doctor out of this colleague he
might be worked visiting with so
that way we're not having to
reinvent the will it's it's very
important that we get people in
the area that are willing uh
that the funding to out there
we've got to really get
opportunities will see even the
schools are hospitals there's
place when usually search social
workers and like the idea that
you would have I think right now
basking house out of potels and
each of the new mexico with you
guys helping on that I think we
have a lot of option get people
in the work force I just want
through that out there because
it's worth us to invest in that
very very needed in the world
for house just one person a
month mister.
Thank you so much senator
representative garcia.
The.
Gracious similar chairman and
thank you mister president for
their presentation that was
outstanding
you know in terms of the plan
that you lay down and kind of
the projection for the future
for this university
i'm really excited for you
in terms of
what you laid out I think that's
what we have been warning from a
president at this university to
king a really engagement and
pursue so thank you for that
and
a couple of things
last time we were here last
year.
The president is a presentation
and I am mentioned the rough
writer museum that had shut
down.
So what the president committed
to was allowing work studies
students to
a operate the museum instead of
having it closed so my question
mr what is the starters of the
sooner participation and keeping
that museum open
thank you for the question is to
chair mister at a great question
I don't know the status of that
I do know that we are expanding
federal works to the
opportunities to do everywhere
in the community so we'll have
more opportunities there but I
like to do is get a status
update for you and send that
back to you before III would
just be speculating at this
point okay thank you for that
and if you could
give your contact information to
our staff
person
a mark and he'll kind of
then
share that information with all
the community in terms of that
status also mister chair
you
you did a very commonable thing
in terms of of portraying arm
the flags of the kind of nations
and local governments
in the campus where are they
so mister share mister garcia
that the plan is for those to be
flown at the centennial part
which is just across the street
here as you come outside the
county to build it let me
make a suggestion
we have a twenty
eight
units of government
traditional.
Land based
historic
language communities and as we
know the the spanish landground
was the main
lantenur structure in the colony
there was no other lantender
structure up until after the
mexican american war of eighteen
forty eight
when the treaty was saying then
you had different uhm
kind of
structures in terms of
land development and ownership
but before the mexican war the
main means of populating the
calling.
Expanding the colony was through
the spanish language structure.
And as of two thousand four mr
chair these grounds were given
political center vision
standards equal to a university
school board
from this party accounting
government and these language
have a flag.
That represents their heritage
and their answer and I want to
suggest to you that if you have
students from these languages
and you have many here some your
little bill and on chicago.
The old japanese though which
is.
Non existent you got the last
way guys.
You got the
the healers
then grant recently established
books and division mister chair
into a twenty twenty three.
The organized.
The sun I was thinking.
You know um
and i'm probably mister chair
kind of leaving one out.
Um but you we have just in this
area.
When we have other languages
throughout your new mexico and
central new mexico.
And I think there will be really
great.
You know it really wouldn't
still pride in the store.
And say that he's representing
his community his language
community or her land
recommunity that motivational.
You won't believe.
You know the students that.
There are bilingual that
continue with the spanish
language that continue with
their own traditional innovative
span or economic traditions
those make your best students.
We leave it online
you know and if we can do
anything to kind of faster than
promote that we want to do that
so mister chair i'd like to see
those and grants of those
students that come from a loan
ramp flying over your
son is a chair.
You know six years ago
and maybe seven
we were here.
And you had just lost your you
only all be gym.
The.
And shortly after that not even
two months won't buy and there
was a young chicana from here.
On a way to st affair to deliver
her baby because you don't have
the resources here anymore and
what happened to that young
chicken she graduated died in a
car accident.
Two lives.
You know because we don't have
the resources you're mister
chair to kinda offer.
Those opportunities for.
For women.
In terms of child birth.
And so mister chair there is
a need to kind of promote.
Help professions.
As of.
Ten years ago.
Maybe a little bit more.
You have close to fifteen or
twenty positions.
Here in the area.
How many do we have now.
Those.
You know and i'm proud to know
that on my goal
has been wildless practitioners
will ran for public office and
came short.
But
you know
there's also a night I need for
mr chair.
For
help practitioners that have to
deal with substance use
disorder.
I don't know what the percentage
is here in some of your county
mr chair but the percentage in
gregory was county in terms of
family members.
That have one or more
family members.
In a substance use disorder.
Scenario seventy five percent
families.
In our and
some county I think maybe those
isn't quite that high but we
still have a substance used to
sort out here.
You know as we do on telstra
near.
In the predominantly canadian
counties.
And.
So I think there's
ample opportunity for the
university.
To look at providing more
behavior health professionals.
You're doing a good job of
social workers is which are you
always done a good job social
workers thank you branches
throughout the state that
specialized in social work.
You know that are producing
excellent social workers
in our leadership of this main
campus
you know but we have other needs
regarding the health experts.
You know that can.
Build that safety net mister
chair.
There are.
Mainly disabled and there are
substance use disorder
individuals so much need.
And you know mister chair.
During the martinez
administration that behave or
health network in our state was
obliterated.
Be headed.
In his taken us.
Up to the ear up to here up to
this year to cannot even not
even get to that point.
When we went through that
process.
And
so there's definitely a need
mister chair for for that
lastly.
The university needs to restore
the royal program.
The rodeo.
Program.
Highlands was foremost.
In this day and even in the
country in having an excellent
role your program.
You know and down the culture
traditions of some migrant
county
is that rural.
Kind of
livestock
grazine.
Cowboy.
Culture
you know that's always been with
us
in fact the first come boys were
the chicanos here in the
southwest
you know everything that the
white combo has is it is a
tribute to that she can help
in in the terminology.
The chaps
other the chapara
you know the spur the hospitals
you know so you know I need and
you had a really good program
here run by my second cousin.
Daniel garcia.
You know whose father was
outstanding convoy new mexico in
his fifties.
They were garcia.
They were at the larger in his
fifties he was getting.
Recognition as all star cowboy
someone who are fifties getting
even bend or you know a pulled
up weeds
certificate certification for
all star all around comboy
you know you need a restore
rodeo program.
You know and and I don't know
you know no I came up I mister
chair
I did a a master's program here
when I graduated from eastern.
In so many three and.
You know language is real
significant real important
mister chair.
And
that was my
my major my focus was spanish
emergency in education.
And
and I think the university it
would be who the university was
to chair to the kind of restore
and expand
educational programs that
enhance portage language
learning.
Especially amongst native new
mexican chicago chicago
children.
And I say this because I look at
my own community and I did a
study when I was working on my
masters in ninety two in terms
of a free score.
An idea of a research through
the public school system
interest of data mister chair as
to the language.
The language
fluency of chicago students in a
risk on.
Then I found that forty five
percent passed by lingo
eighteen percent fluent
and we had a large percentage
almost thirty percent that only
new words in spanish they didn't
understand a conversation they
couldn't carry on a
conversation.
You know and the language is so
significant.
The promotation.
In promotion.
Of a culture.
You know and without that
language as its fees.
We just become a hyphen eighteen
american
you know and are and that's not
what america is
in austin america's based on
outstanding fundamental
indigenous cultures.
Uh
cultures are in terms of.
And individuals I came from a
board run.
And cultures that evolved
from here like the chicago
culture
you know were not spanish would
not mexican were indigenous new
mexican inflator dne proves that
some of us have upwards of sixty
percent.
Indian blood and us
so you know I make that page in
terms of language everywhere I
go
and
so but I wanna applied you
because
you're the first person at
president from highlands come
before this committee with a
really
dynamic vision I like that.
You know what you're doing with
the gof course is a test that
meant to that.
Because it's addressing mr chair
kind of
needs
the go on met and you have
opportunity here with the golf
course to address some of needs
so
thank you mister president thank
you mister chair
thank you representative of the
senator masters
thank you mister chairman thank
you mister president thanks for
a seen hire
snap
your job at the time but
congratulations fantastic so as
you know I mean in addition to
running the university.
You can become a student history
this town is is incredible it's
it's dodge city in tomstone
rolled into one here it's it's a
quinn essential western town
was the largest town in.
That the turn of last century in
new mexico
and played a key role the
leadership of some of our
countic plate key and wonderful
role in in developing the
constitution of the set of
mexico and insuring the right
in order to find all spanish
speaking people it can't if I
didn't estate constitution but
but also keep in mind um but I
don't think we'll ever go back
necessarily to just the because
of internet because of.
Online classes and things like
that but you may want to look
mister chairman look at this
though.
Via in roll these.
Back in the day who lived in
vagues you know the there was
three thousand college kids in
this town living here spending
money it actually was a big part
of the economy you know a
generation of
sort of hope we can reach those
those nineteen seventy nineteen
eighty levels but any student
who lives here and goes to class
in person adds to the economy as
to the byron sea of the of the
town city mister president want
to thank you for up and thank
the leaders party for the
leadership with regards to the
golf course u and m in my home
town owns all kinds of their
sitting on all kinds of land of
the you know it's a corporation
right so they you know it's a
savings savings account or
whatever it does nothing for the
local economy it has nothing for
jobs it does nothing for the
future so some of the regions
now are looking into the let lan
holdings of UNM and maybe
leasing leasing and doing
creative things so that so
there's economic growth on those
lands the petition the
legislature and successfully got
up taxi permanent development
district in the southern part of
the university by the stadiums
and trying to do some cost
so keep that in mind but I
appreciate the university and
the university leaders and the
biggest leaders working together
city county and university.
You know with the two two school
districts I mean if all the
leaders in biggest just talk to
each other which is hard we have
to times in santa fe but we
pretty much talk to each other
and get a lot of stuff done and
then the lastly.
Just be conscioned as this is a
great place for nineteen twenty
year old kid to go to school so.
A lot of students in albuquerque
go to you and emerging him and
they don't succeed for whatever
reason they're living in home
they don't click the switch from
high school to college.
But if they were to come here
they would be surrounded by
you know
students their own aids that are
going in the same direction
you're so definitely retail to
our current getting its our
cricket kids interest to go to
state eastern western highlands
so so anything we can do to help
the enrollment and help the
university sixty thank you thank
you mister chairman thank you
any other questions or comments.
Seeing that I have a question is
respond just real business I
think working with the sitting
accounting that initial study on
the golf course the new homes
development there would bring an
estimated five point six million
and additional tax revenue just
for this area so we're excited
for the potential there and
agree with you whole heart of
these to reach out to all the
correction area anywhere with we
can be within the take a gas
to home is great but you want to
be a little bit far the way so
you don't live in the appearance
basement either way you're going
to school or especially after
you graduate so thank you and I
do want to make a comment that
may situate and distributor will
you appreciate it will send you
confirmation but we have a
interest school of education
program we do have a cultural
linguistic training program for
our educators to be fluent in in
different cultures and in
language it soul will send you
more information about what
we're currently doing there so
just could come into the comment
so thank you mister chair.
Thank you and president were if
you talked about cyfd and the
certificate program timing up
with new mexico highlands
university will students abroad
and that program be doing an
internship where they'll get
university credit while they're
working with the yfda and big
mentor so the the thinking is to
chair those are already in
progress what this program is is
a professional development for
their existing staff saw one of
the needs that they identify was
their current staff in a
retention issue for their staff
is as they've you this are very
complicated situations where
student or students uh prefer
young professionals going to
very complex life situations be
dealing with children back and
forth with parents parents being
in and out of different
circumstances.
One of the one of the feedback
that we received from the ifd
was there not feel as trained to
get into the situations right
off the bat so will be the be
providing this certificate for
their existing staff to be
better trained to better enhance
and then have them be retained
better in their chance well
that's that sounds great that
will help them go through that
career pipeline into my insuring
that they're they're trained up
no just want to thank you as the
first generation college stood
up myself and you talked about
the reset of a mindset with the
opportunity mindset and ensuring
that kindness plays in a major
role in the colleague in the
university and i'm really happy
to hear that and happy to hear
that you're going to start
building a relationship as early
as elementary age I think that
ensuring that students don't see
a campus as something for end
with something familiar and part
of your community you're going
to see some great success now is
a north daniel I can tell you
that in our area and reariva
county a number of teachers when
I went through espinel of public
schools who educated break in
mexico highlands university a
premier education spot for
educators and I want to thank
you for keeping that going and
with that president with I have
no other questions but later I
won't take yourself you with you
that I want a text to president
bailey and tom he's missing out
by not staying in your mexico
thank you mister thank you for
your time and for your
hospitality and with that I want
to move to the next item on the
agenda we're going to be getting
an update from the water loop at
alcohol treaty division and
general metal common up with
members of your stuff
and you are joined by my good
friend the deputy ag billion
minutes.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee billy minus
deputy attorney general with a
new mexico department of justice
i've been before you you all
the some of you and other
representative capacities but
now with the department of
justice who's branded from the
mexico attorney general's office
with me today is in rica romero
he's the division director for
the treaty of got a little bit
her dogo treaty division here
that we have at the mexico
justice we're here before you
this morning to provide an
update talk about some of our
staffing room the process of
staffing up identifying key
issues that they the division
can address from our
jurisdictional level and so
we're happy to be here with you
this morning and without all
turned over to mister romero
thank you mister chair members
of the committee of billy also
wanted uh acknowledge staff
person in the audience today
at lisa brown lisa she's our new
staff attorney assistant
attorney general excuse me at
the treaty division
so again it's it's a it's an
honor to be here I think I was
maybe a month into this position
last year when I presented as
well
it seems like it's been longer
than maybe nine ten months are
but it really only has been that
that many months since I started
I want to go over a few things
as billy mentioned talking about
our are a staffing security we
have as I mentioned a lisa brown
started with us about a month to
go she's a new assistant
attorney general lisa brings
with their some expertise having
worked with the state engineers
office on water judiciations
at least as also a farmer in
coralis which I think is
important for this for this
division to have some of that
personal experience are not with
us today unfortunately as
recorder down he is unable to
tend to day because of a family
issue
but I think most of you know
that record is going to be
retiring at the end of the year
and so we are we have had a
couple of interviews and we hope
to start recorders.
Replacement beginning in october
so will have a program
coordinator in that position.
And then we will have two
attorneys starting with us in
september at the end of
september we have two honors
attorneys the honest program at
the department of justice i'm
offers position to attorneys
that are where we can graduate
recent bar have been admitted to
the bar and there will be on
staff for a year i'm so we're
really hoping to build the
capacity of the treaty division
and not only in the long term
but in the short term especially
with those two additions.
And you know one one thing to
that I want to sort of point out
in terms of building capacity at
the treaty division
this is probably the most staff
that the treaty division has had
in its existence you all
remember assistant to in general
novel sellers are which I know
from I I didn't get to meet
novella but I you know have have
watched your presentations to
this committee before and and
certainly capable I may think
part of the issue with uh with
novella's position was that she
was also taken away to do other
things work at the department of
justice and and so far
are turned general has committed
to to staffing this treaty
division and I can tell you that
i'm working on treaty division
matters
full time lisa also uh is is
working on treaty division
matters and will be doing the
same thing with the
new attorneys that start in
september so I think you know
not only are we building
capacity in the short term and
long term but it's important to
kind of acknowledge that people
are interested in this work
you know it's not always easy to
find individuals who want to
work solely on the second
language issues but but they're
out there and so you know it's
taken some time but we're we're
on our way to have a very strong
team coming up in the next in
the next few months and and
currently as we have it now.
Um and you know i'll talk a
little bit about the community
government's attorney act in a
minute in terms of one of the
things that we've been are
engaged on with the language
council uhm but again it's you
know we're we're
we're hoping that you know what
we're doing at the treaty
division in terms of the honors
program putting it out there
that at the department of
justice you can at least start
out on working on particular
issues and of positions open up
at the department of justice
there may be opportunities to
continue
you know we're not part of the
community government's attorney
act right now but again just
wanted to to put that as a place
mark that we're certainly
working to attract new recruits
or interested in these issues
um so I believe a mr edwards and
his staff had passed out some
information on one of the
initiatives of the treaty
division that I want to
highlight which is a training uh
we have had one training and
house so far yes and sorry let
me pull this out here so.
We have again just you know I
know this is
this this just goes to show
right again that we're trying to
really create a place that the
department of justice for the
treaty division and so you'll
see a flyer here that has
information about the treaty
what a little bit although
treaty division you'll also see
a
small pamphlet related to just
the work of the department of
justice and i'll talk a little
bit about interagency
partnerships in relationships
where building at the tree
division but I do want to
highlight a packet it's a
program agenda poland grand and
the security training program
and agenda from friday july
twelfth twenty twenty four
we held a training and house I
want a highlight the fact that
the treaty division is in
operating in isolation and I
think that's one of the
strengths of the treaty division
house right now is that we're
not trying to solve problems on
our own
you can see all the different
partners that were involved in
this training from the telstra
and what uh conservation
district new mexico language
council the secure commission
the second association the
interstate stream commission uh
and a local partner with the
telstra value secure association
we hold this training up for a
couple of reasons one is that
you know it it had been some
time in it had been sometimes
since we had engaged with
a elected officials at the
treaty division on on a
consistent basis and so the idea
here was to engage our local
partners in our state partners
to hold the training gear toward
elected officials to talk about
issues that are office
department justice has a reover
like the meanings active up and
records act but clearly there's
a lot of other things at
langrance in the seconds are
doing uh so we had you can look
at the program but we we had a
presentations on electronics
taking us we had and on by laws
and compliance
it was a long training almost
all day we had close to a
hundred participants actually a
little bit more than a hundred
participants the majority of
which were elected offers from
officers from a.
Second language
we're going to have a part two
coming up in september part two
thousand and is going to be
focused mostly on testimonials
from a second language those
elected officials
one of the
some feedback from participants
was that they wanted more time
to to talk about their stories
as elected officials from these
entities they also wanted to
have an opportunity to engage
at some of the technical
assistance providers so the
afternoon on the thirteenth of
september will be just for more
one on one and small group
engagement between elected
officials that is in landgrounds
with technical assistance
providers.
Yeah.
The other couple of other
initiatives
that the treaty division is
taking on is you know one thing
that we've heard since was
inside heard since i've been
there and I think you'll all of
you have had these presentations
before and in particular i'm
thinking of the antunical
language in terms of law and
forcement uhm issues right so
theft of natural resources
you may or may not have heard
from the secures in terms of the
difficulty they sometimes have
at lawn forcement and
distributed attorney's
prosecuting easement violations
I brought us up with the
attorney general and he was very
interested in our office
especially because we have law
enforcement we are law
enforcement agency to actually
provide a training to local
district attorneys on
enforcement issues and as well
as local law enforcement so we
will be holding a training that
date hasn't been determined yet
but we will it it will probably
be at the end of september
october and then lastly in
september and and this goes back
again to the idea that we don't
operate in isolation from all
those excellent technical
assistance providers and others
that have been working with the
seconds and language throughout
the state for
probably you know a court of a
century is we are going to
convenient leadership conference
with those key stake holders so
you'll you'll hear from we'll
hear from the second association
from the language council from
the commission
and other another folks just to
have a small group to start
thinking about strategic
planning in terms of a second
language what are the resources
they need not only now but you
know a decade from now to to
continue uh preserving these in
these these institutions.
The other thing that we're doing
which takes up quite a bit of
time
with the department of justice
the treaty division is
historically we've served as
council to the new mexico secure
commission it's actually in the
new mexico secure commission
statute that our office shall be
the legal advisor to that
commission and also with the new
mexico language council
uh you know again not not to
well let me put it this way in
the past we've heard from both
of these public bodies that
attendance at their public
meetings and being legal
advisors to them has been spotty
inconsistent
we're not we're not doing that
anymore where we're there at
every meeting in fact will be
there at the either one of those
bodies public bodies causes will
pick up the phone and and work
through any legal issues that
they may have so between the
time I started in october and
now we've we've held between the
commission in the language
council uh close to sixty
separate client meetings we
consider them our clients and so
we've had not only attending
those monthly meetings to
provide a legal legal guidance
in council but worked on various
matters with them
between meetings in the case of
the new mexico secure commission
I I can highlight some of the
work that we're doing with them
but that includes executive
committee meetings and other
meetings with
government stakeholders like the
forest service uh in state
stream commission and and in
other other agencies.
To highlight some of the work
that we've been doing for the
new mexico language council uhm
we have helped draft comments to
the community governance
attorney rule making that took
place and i'm happy to answer
any questions about that rule
making where the act
we've also provided some
guidance on on documents to help
language qualify for the
assistance fund and we've also
helped with guidance comments on
the traditional use bill which I
believe is going to they're
hoping that will this is the
federal legislation we're hoping
that it'll be hurting committee
by the by the end of the year
we have outstanding language
council requests and I don't
want to forget those but you
know we we have been asked to
look at provide some guidance in
opinions on on language and
their ability to offer
scholarships to the airs
we've also been asked to look at
water rights and judications and
language and how language
investment involved in in water
at educations.
Uh as I mentioned we've already
you know we provide a guidance
on the traditional use bill and
anticipate that we'll continue
to do that for the council and
then we've also been asked to
contribute to the council and
mexico associations guidebooks
i'm i'm sure most of your
familiar that they have produced
guide books to help to help a
secure and language of elected
officials and compliance with
the laws who will be
participating in in in producing
those guide books
for the new mexico secure
commission
as I mentioned earlier we've
we've been in the commission is
take it is taking a more active
role in terms of how they're
engaging with with state
agencies on issues and federal
agencies and so we've had
meetings with the industry
stream commission on on
infrastructure issues including
uh whether there's a way for the
uh energy stream commission to
facilitate actually contracting
directly with a contractors when
the seconds have infrastructure
projects we've heard from
various secure stake holders as
a huge ordeal to try to
manage those funds because then
they get audited but there may
be a simpler solution at the
interest extreme commission so
we're working with with with the
industry string commission on
that issue um we've worked with
standing ears of office and on
having this engineer present to
the commission on some
constituent complaints and
concerns in particular up in the
lobble creek will handle a royal
honda area up in touch and then
with the four service we've
attended some meetings with the
commission and also with the
council
on on trainings to us for
service employees and also
coordinating notice to impact
secures when there's a federal
project that my impact them
as I mentioned the second
commission under our are
guidance they're producing some
internal guidelines and code
conduct again to try to have a
little bit more structure for
that commission
we're also monitoring or or
trying to have a discussion with
the stated engineers office on
some issues that were presented
to the commission a few months
ago.
Including uh distingious
processing of water transfer
applications involving a second
square applications have
proceeded despite commissions
not having approved those
transfers.
And we've also been asked by the
commission and uh at the treaty
division we've been asked to try
to coordinate a stakeholder
group to discuss disaster and
fire disaster and and
and.
A disaster working group to kind
of understand what has worked in
what hasn't worked in terms of
the disaster response are mostly
honest state level.
In addition to to that work or
the tree division is monitoring
both litigation and polish
policy issues involving the
seconds and langrants
for example is it's been brought
to our attention that there are
a couple of active cases and
litigation involving language of
the monzano language currently
is involved in in a challenge in
a legal challenge challenging a
delinquent taxil in which the
monzo language purchased
property but ah someone has come
out and and claim that the
process was not followed and so
it's an individual contesting
that uh delinquent tax sale
we're monitoring that we're also
monitoring a lost in the euro
honda river uh which is a
dispute over over a certain
section of common lands.
Oh more recently we been
monitoring an adjudication in
calculate you know we we had
heard that subfile default
judgments were being issued in
california and so we wanted to
make sure that some of these the
four judgements that were going
out we're not going to be in a
wiping out entire second.
We're also at a as a result of
the last committee meeting these
meeting in espinola we heard
about the lagoon and the complex
were monitoring that that
transaction as well and and
we've had some
discussions with with the
tiramaria language.
And then lastly you'll remember
that at the beginning of the
year the first situation in
general they came out a turn
general opinion that came out
from a train general tourist was
an opinion about preliminary
approvals the stage near use of
a climate approval so we
continue to monitor the what are
you sleeping act as the
engineers
use the preliminary approvals
which fortunately we haven't
seen anything for the last
several months
two more things and and then I I
think I will turn it over for
questions so the other thing
that the treaty division does is
we we address complaints and
concerns that come in from from
the public regarding the second
language
and we have
as a you know as part of the
meetings that we've we've held
we've had twenty three
constituent meetings so you know
when when we get complaints we
we it takes us time to work
through the issues it takes this
time to get further information
from the complainants and then
part of the process at the
department of justice generally
for example in the government
council accountability division
is to reach out to the public
body and sort of get their side
of the story you know we treat a
second language or I do at the
treaty division slightly
different I I like to have in
person uh meetings with the
elected officials to get their
side of the story so it just
takes time to work through those
complaints and and concerns
there's you know when I again
started in october
they were already several there
were sort of on the docket that
we're trying to resolve again
some of them are more simple
than others others really do
involved much more complicated
policy and legal issues and then
the the only last thing that I
would you know just in terms of
what I in these again ten months
or so that i've been here.
Uh one highlight two sort of uh
I guess needs right that i'm
seeing one is a need for
mediation services I I think
that a lot of these issues uhm
you know really do require
mediation we try to be an
objective voice at the treaty
division the kind of look at
both sides but I I do see that
there's a a serious need for
some kind of mediation services
that that really a second
language could take advantage of
either if it's disputes between
the seconds themselves or
disputes between parcels in the
second or the language areas and
and the language themselves.
And then I I call this in me but
really it's again just
highlighting the fact that
continued partnerships are just
invaluable uhm you know we we
don't we we try to get all sides
of the story i'm at the treaty
division when it comes to issues
and we have to include our
partners and and when it comes
to solutions we have to include
our partners on those so it's
it's a it is a need and will
continue doing that at the
treaty division
there are a couple of other
items that i'm prepared to
answer questions for the
questions come up but I I don't
want to take a more time that I
need to uhm.
Billy is there anything else
that you like to
nothing else for me mr chair
thank you
thank you mister
thank you that will go to
questions i'll start up with
representative
germany.
Gracious and because for your
presentation and um mister
himinis.
Please your meeting for the
first time.
You know.
When old torres was running.
For attorney general.
You know you had kind of
some fairly good competition
especially mister.
And
as I looked into our tourists'
background.
I realize that
the that he'd probably be the
more more competent.
In terms of addressing
water a second issues and
langrade issues for a simple
reason that he married a chicago
from the speaking innocent
language at
and then his father is unless I
can get over in the real one
though you know that's you know
has been he's been bare amount
and kind of leading some of
those a second struggles are for
them for the better you know
they achieve some really good
victories and in terms of
sustaining those are security
and but around this really built
the
the division
you know i'm i'm really amazed
that he's really put funding
into the division and he's hired
quality individuals you know
for those positions and there's
nothing but good that's gonna
come from the division from now
on you know some i'm i'm glad
for that and the
mister chairman
you know one thing that the our
language have difficulty dealing
with.
And I don't know how the treaty
division can help.
In terms of
reach some
samples of
equity.
Is
when some of these tribal
entities
are take ownership of prior
command.
And that's that's a real
difficult issue for language.
To deal with because they feel
that their hands are time.
They can't do anything.
And the
initial came up at our last
language in committee meaning
mister chair with the santa cruz
another.
You know that's the that's kind
of a
for short the kind of
chimograph.
And.
Um.
In the other organizing and.
Though probably have everything
in order to.
Kinda leap into the.
The
x and um exercising their
political subdivision they are
standards.
But the thing is that they feel
learn
they feel that they've
been slapped in the face mr
chair.
Eh.
The sun that was a look on your
language
was not fully confirmed.
The the
another was the
the corner private land claims
or the surveyor general but
they only confirm mr chair the
agrarian plut.
And the message that.
That's around to my own and some
of the cruise
in or are basically became part
of the federal domain.
And then at one point it became
blm.
Well recently mister chair.
Milam soul three hundred acres
to the ok a winger.
And that really upset the
langram because they were never
notified that there was that
sale pending.
So they didn't they didn't have
import interest of protesting
that.
Because that blameland that.
Is former common lands of the
center cruise electronic.
So in that problematic.
Because
chicago langram errors.
Hit the no barrel with our
private brothers and sisters.
You know but
and
this is kind of a recurring
and
it's problematic
because there is no voice mr
chair in terms of the landground
in a saying we haven't lost our
claim to this land.
You know we want to do
everything in our power to kind
of
regain control of this common
man.
You know under our portfolio.
And
uh but on stuff like this
happens a kind of just shots the
book mister.
You know and i'm upset that the
federal delegation didn't do
anything as well.
To bring that to light.
But hopefully in others better
ways of kind of.
Oh dealing with these land
sales buyer but or brothers and
sisters.
You know the of former common
ends and mr chair you know
another example is that terror
maria
the terror maria had five
outstanding license that
stretched for about thirty five
years.
And mr chair
they lost each one of them and
these are basically parcels.
That fell into the hands of.
Um england ranchers.
And the way that the angle
ranchers got him is through.
The catering ring.
Something for read.
These recommendations that were
stolen mister chair by
thomas catron in the south of
their ring.
And they dived up the common the
thing is mr chair that
yell there a money or language
errors never sees occupying
these plans.
In fact up to the late fifties
they were still pulling in call.
They were still
in all grazine.
They were still
pulling down beavas and posters
in lanya
and property that
some.
Rich texan owned
and many of these never settled
never rude in in their land.
One mister chairman makes it
complicated
is that the heat ideas are
buying up those large parcels.
Of those five lawsuits.
They've currently have three
under their possession.
These are lands that the
terminals fight tooth and nail.
In that the courts determined
that they were
and
they ruled against the language
airs in any of these five cases
and are and we can this is this
is important for the.
For the ag to understand cause
this is a a clear cut keys.
Of the corruption of the legal
system.
In these five cases mr chair.
One case overruled the other in
terms of the decision.
So in the first case a judge
ruled this way
in the second case a judge ruled
this way that countered the
decision of the prior court case
and it was on and on and on and
on
the court contradicted
themselves time and time again
in terms of their decision
you're not to where it wasn't
mister chair it wasn't
systematic in terms of keeping
with the la.
You know and
so I want to bring that to your
attention because it is
problematic for us language
leaders.
To kind of
deal with this because it's well
uneasy
and you know that he got he as
mister chair used to come to
these meetings.
And in a when I was chair of the
committee were coach you know I
took it as as a friendly thing.
But I don't know if they really
have all two your motors mister.
You know in terms of
what they were planning to do or
or just what they wanted to see
what the the level of
organizational ability and
political might that there are
maria no ran hand.
I don't know.
But that is.
That is an uneasy feeling and we
can
and mister charles.
You know when we have to deal
with our tribal brothers and
sisters.
On
them purchasing.
Our common earns that we fight
too far now to say.
In our arm and mr chair
the country default issue.
That's a real arm that really
opened the pickles area.
Mr chair representative correct
that's one of the tribute
terrorist that was educated
readjudicated by this to
engineers office uh the
judiciation started.
It's been a while now but they
finally got to the point where
they were starting to you know
send out offers and and get
consent or tonight we did get
confirmation
that you know the the pretty
horribles in my mind actually
isn't coming to for issue that
the process actually looks
really really good are in terms
of engaging with the parcels
to make sure that they're
responding but I think it just
highlights again the treaty
divisions you know we want to
take an active role in in
understanding how judiciations
are proceeding especially when
it comes to a secure
presentation and language.
Yeah well thanks for the traffic
clarification.
And nicely mister chair.
You know you're right on
on the mediation the issue.
I think if there were some type
of mediation process the local
another company she would have
been resolved three years ago.
You know and we're already going
on seven years.
You know there's though it is
just a matter of personalities
within the game and fish.
Mr chair that's kept that like
another company from being
transferred to the terrible
language.
You know and mr chair and this
really this heartening because
that there are many us.
Once they got the bid.
By the the game and fish board
under martinez administration.
You know so i'm i'm grateful for
the governor and the game and
fish board.
For having the four sight to say
look.
We're going to breach a damn on
this and you language if you can
do better.
Here it's yours.
So from the very good goal they
had a plan they already lined up
legislators to help on the
capital outlet.
To make that that thirty seven
acres late through seven acre
late you know a a gem of
northern new mexico.
You know destination site of eri
for media.
You know that once they'll just
breathe that fresh and look at
those huge mountains and they
see an outgoing buyer right now
and then.
You know and.
But then it's nice.
The game of fish director mister
sloane mr cherry address on
agenda.
That wasn't in light with the
original decision of the game
and fish board.
To transfer until the like the
terror maria give them every
opportunity to make a go out of
that lake.
And they put stumbling back
after stumbling back to where
they.
With dumpling the cfasses.
And mister chair and just and
look at the water rights in
terms of their inability to
really sell out the rotter right
form.
Fully because maybe they'll can
use it mister chair down the
road so there's all these
excuses but I think that there
was a mediator that kind of
had the party's negotiate.
Instead of them the did the
demand be impriced by game in
fish on we're gonna do it this
way
and this is our own
will be it won't get it done but
which governments counter mister
chair to what the money I feel
that they need to adequately.
Operate that late you know in in
a whole somewhere so so thank
you for looking at that and
exploring that cause I think
that is very meaningful down the
road
does that mediation so
thank you mister chair
thank you for the bigger.
Could I say so there's that it
amounts to us.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you gentlemen beyond and also
keep in mind this brown it comes
from the pain as class of ninety
eight
so
you go but no thank you at the
arts are great and like a
person regards to you mentioned
we're really really happy that
trade general
are emphasised this division and
for your guys as were because it
is touched or.
There you know I think one of
the only divisions that's in
statute if not the only but on
appreciate the
the pamper that you passed out
in the wording the wording was
it's very kind
of the say.
The essentially the communal
benefits were lost through the
federal government's land title
confirmation process you know
there was them which is correct
I mean the law is not going to
back coming.
You know the court a court
battle is not gonna not gonna
end well but I think up but you
did mention something about a
like one of your charges is is
legislation or lessly
legislative policy because
there's some some stuff we have
to decide hopefully the next
couple three years one is if a
language word of purchase a
jaycent land is that land
communal or is that land simply
owned by the legal entity in the
simple my legal opinion is that
it's be simple but but the
benefits from that new newly
acquired land.
You know would go to a communal
community benefit
and then also with regards to
the bilas one has been I mean
thank you for the marvelous
program you guys put together on
the twelfth as tremendous is it
mister chairman is it video
archive by chance
mister chairman instead of my
assessors it is so we do have I
don't know if it's live at the
moment I was working with our
communications
trying to upload the videos
obviously pretty large because
there's a for the event but yes
we do have video recordings and
we want to make them publicly
available so people can can
watch are some thank you mister
chairman thank you because I
would definitely want to see
the.
It works up on the by laws
because one thing this committee
should ask itself as do we want
a kind of boiler plate.
By laws or or a kind of us a
strong skill at all governmental
structure in state statute you
know do we want all the langrans
to have five commissioners or
whatever or do we want a grant
in state statute the the
deciding mechanism for a
language you know should it be a
majority or should it be
unanimous you know stuff like
that.
Or should we
you know obviously they don't
have to all be the same but do
we want to provide just a
general general governmental
structure that that that would
work and then lastly mister
chairman
what's tough is that speaking of
courts and and our economic
system communal land is
completely foreign two.
To our capitalists just in so
so some glance language errors
may want to use the land to
build their own houses and and
live there in a beautiful way
for their kids and ranked others
may want to lease it out to make
money to benefit the errors
others may want to use the land
in its historic
purpose
which would be good for the
soul.
But if I were to go to a bank
and say hey I want to buy a
house can you lonely the money
a bank at report for land you
don't mean um what bank is
gonna.
What collateral is that language
so I think i'm
what what I may propose or see.
Is within the economy
development department some type
of button and it could be in
your division as well as
some calcume some type of
economic development director
there is there is it has an
understanding of obvious
economics but also
an understanding of communal
land and and what that meant in
spanish law what that meant in
mexican and now new mexico law
and how langrant leaders can
obtain access to capital to
develop that land regardless of
how they want to develop that's
key
so it's the power to decide the
power taxes capital in the power
to to utilize latland for the
benefit of the errors in the ers
and the airs airs because we are
doing iron manages about the
past is as much as anyone
we have to care more about the
future it's the both the future
and how does this land benefit.
Are the errors into the future
thank you mister chairman miss
mister thank you gentlemen
thank you mister chairman I
respond just real briefly please
so an on the center of my
assistant on a couple things so
on the by laws so you know there
are provisions of statute that
help guide sort of the template
by laws that both language
council end the new mexico sick
a second association have direct
I think probably at at least for
the second as I would you'd have
to check with our two architect
that the council but.
I would say ninety nine percent
of the seconds have adopted a
template by laws that again has
been veteran through various
attorneys to make sure it's
consistent with the loss to
there are similar to like the
corporate statue to new mexico
with a non profit statutes you
know it can tell you what is by
default required and then kinda
leaves open other things the
second language statutes are
similar in that way so there has
been quite a lot of work on
model by laws for both language
in the second just wanted to
make sure that you were aware of
that and in terms of you know
accessing capital I I know that
the council and again or two or
two letter would be the person
to ask about this but there have
been there is a bill proposed in
the last session and then now I
think there are communications
with mf on getting access to
capital for language I don't
know the international people we
were you know again we're
working with the council on when
they need some assistance from
us will be happy to provide that
but I I just wanted to make sure
you were also aware of that
proposal thank you thank you
mister chairman
thank you senator lopez.
I thank you mr chairing
presenters
I I was looking through your
hand out that you had here on
the training
this is good this is good
information and good process and
I think there's a lot of not
just the ossetians and
landgrounds but there's a lot of
organizations that need to have
this type of training mister
chair
and I think
for what
I started in my est is just
mentioned with regards to you
you know
if you have like a boiler
template you know for.
Whether a second language in
such as a political subdivision
how they should guide in such
I think for us to put numbers in
such and statute we need to be
careful without just because the
others different communities and
different participation if you
put a set number as it is
sometimes hard to recruit
volunteers to do a lot of things
in community in such so I think
we just need to be very cautious
and doing that
but I do want to mention
that I
and it is not off I guess i'm
from what we're talking mister
tear about specifically language
and are circules but langrans
today
is that the attorney general
staff is say hope would be
looking at how
new mexico's oversight rate with
regards to nonprofits because
it's a whole other conversation
about in
fhc's federally qualified health
care centers and other non
profits where we don't really
have I think state oversight as
to what they do
and I know here in in committee
we've talked about what the
added sour of how artists are
that they're.
Ts have to be crossed and i'll
be I started in order for um our
language especially to have
access to money rate
besides I would hope that you
take that word back also to the
ag's office and we talk about
oversight of non profits because
there's a lot many that I know
work just I can talk about five
who really need some oversight
because they're not following
which should be done
so aside from that mr chair.
Um I I would hope that you are
office to is looking into the
whole issue about
how
new mexico maybe needs to make
some changes and what we could
do
about providing access to money
suspecially capital outlay
as you know when legislators
give money and I see give we
allocate dollars to
different.
A communities across the state
it's not specifically that the
money goes to them but they have
to have money and hand to do the
work up front and then the state
reimburses and I think that's
the biggest you when we talk
about capital outlay and how
local communities they can use
it in an especially in our than
as you know in our communities
not everybody has a chunk of
change available if it comes out
of the somebody's pocket which
everybody has to pull their
money in order to pay for.
Whatever it may be
I I think that we've introduced
some legislation in the past
mister chairo to try and and
change that
anti donation clients issue but
I think that's an impediment
that we have a net new mexico
the state government and working
with maybe your office
specifically when we talk about
landgrounds but other entities
of how we change it
because I know we get deemed a
lied about how much capital
outlet is still sitting there
but when you ask local
communities especially for our
landgrounds to come up with the
chunk of change in order to get
reimbursed it makes it very hard
and when we talk about our
native american communities is
still hard for them too because
night you know if you talk about
the dene
not there really a chapter house
has access to dollars either so
there's there's some things I
think that we need to look at
mrperiod chair and I know it's
been testimony that we've heard
from many language over the
years it's hard and why would
you go from money and ask for a
capital outlay which would add
value for the land in other
necessaries for our communities
to continue to thrive if you
know you have to pull it out of
your own pocket so it's just a
concern I have mister chair and
I know there's some legislation
I think coming up this year to
try and do that again but I
would hold mr chair that your
office under the attorney
general also be looking into
this cause it's it's
it's a big concern and I think a
big impediment from many of our
communities
and then last but not least I
noticed that you mentioned on
here too where it said september
thirteenth is the next training
and house that you have what is
on the agenda for that mister
chair
mr chair and senator lopez so on
the agenda for the next training
is on september thirteenth so
we've kind of gone through
various iterations and i'm very
I i'd like to be collaborative
with all of our partners and
especially the presenters and so
we were gonna try to do
something similar to what
occurred on july twelfth which
was kind of a very.
Can a nuts and boards here's
some concrete advice and really
just a time was very compacted
so instead we're going to focus
on testimonials from a various
language on natural resource
issues so I have two presenters
lined up at the beginning to
talk about the historical and
and cultural practice of
langrents in the seconds is
being natural resource managers
and then we'll talk about some
will have some testimonials from
language in the seconds that
have had difficulty despite and
only having that customary in
historical practice of being
natural resource managers the
fact that it's in statute that
they also do some of that
management they're still having
a hard time
managing natural resources and
so block here some testimonials
from uh I think
donald i'll have to come back on
that one but we do have a couple
wouldn't want to secure one
language will also have a
presentation from uh the eighth
judicial district attorney's
office donald gayogus is a
former da up there but he was
really
III knew him from work that I
partnered with him on where that
district attorney's office was
pretty aggressive in in
enforcing especially a second
matters
but will have a presentation in
terms of how his office at the
time and now under market small
toyota how they investigate an
enforce against a natural
resource theft or a second
easeman violations and things
like that
and then we'll also have a
testimonials um
from a second language on i'm
trying to think about the second
part i'm sorry I wasn't prepared
for that question even though
it's like i'm working on it but
the latter part of the afternoon
is like I mentioned we're going
to have a long period you know
an hour and a half just for a
second and language elected
officials together have that
kind of listening session here
what they're concerns are we're
going to try to keep it
manageable in terms of smaller
groups
small groups to talk with some
of the technical assistance
providers with our office and
any of the state agencies that
want that one I tend.
Mr terri appreciate that sounds
like a good meeting for the
language group to go to also mr
chair
obviously opportunity for us to
learn more and less but not
these mister chair I always
appreciate even though it is
state laugh for us to make sure
that we do have bilingual so I
appreciate you presenting a
where we have i'm at least one
of the items were spent
translated into spanish
mister share we also have the
program in spanish but we didn't
quite lengthy so we didn't know
I appreciate it but it's always
good to see mr chair could not
everybody doesn't in spanish
nobody translates shouldn't be
seen spanish thank you thank you
mister thank you senator
representative lord
thank you mr chair expert quick
question can you give me an
update on the month on a
landground
where we're that sat if there's
anything new anything updated on
that mister chair and and
representative of lord so
so we're just monitoring it so
we're not a party and and we're
not representing into the
parties but but just my
understanding is that the.
The private party that was
contesting the the link when tax
sale had filed emotional to
basically try to dismiss the
language because the filed a an
answer are proceed and
purportedly on rural requires
that an entity have an attorney
file so there's sort of a
technical potential violation of
of a rule and that's that's
where it's out right now so it's
just in the primary stages.
Okay so it's based on that
technical violation is that
correct potentially mister
chairman representative yes.
Thank you that's all they have
thing.
The.
Thank you for that
i'm sorry mr charge I just
remembered in response to
senator lopez's question about
the other part of the training I
I don't know how I could forget
it cause it's really I think
it's one of them really going to
be one of the most interesting
panels is that we and this may
even get to represent of
course he has a tengentually get
to his concern so we're gonna
invite on the santa cruz base in
the santa cruz an individual
from the sanitary's language in
the asset is there don boost us
most of you probably know him is
a farmer he's an air and board
member of the santa cruz
langrand but he's also an active
secure pursuant to and and a
commissioner but he will we're
trying to do is we don't want to
just all kind of be dooming
gloom for the asset is in terms
of oh yeah there's lots of
funding out there
just go get it he's also going
emphasize the importance of
partnerships in a couple of big
grants the sanitary's basin is
receiving that included county
partner has been a support
partners even tribal partners in
getting those grants so he's
going to be talking about his
his arm success on receiving
those or you know applying and
and again the partnership aspect
of it so that'll be one of the
other pieces.
Thank you senator stephenics
thank you mr chair i'd like to
go back to the
question that representative
lord asked and isn't not the
role of the landgrand council
to.
Advise and prepare the land
brand errors in moving forward
with anything that might.
End up in court or require an
attorney
mister charian center staff and
it so I I would deferred to the
language council in terms of of
what their role is in providing
legal services to to land grants
but my general understanding is
that they they do have a legal
services contract and I think
that that contractors
is I I think they have a lot of
language requesting assistance
through that contract they do
have a process and III again
would differ to our total in
terms of how how that what that
process looks like
but you know again I I think
it's one of these things where
sometimes they're they're maybe
the funding for but sometimes
things come up are pretty
quickly and and i'm not sure how
the council would but adjust
that but I would differ to our
too long on that question and
and i'm sorry but mr chair and
and center just have any in
terms of their statutory role I
mean I think
you know their statutory role is
pretty broad in terms of of
providing assistance to
community language and so I I
think that's where they operate
in terms of providing that kind
of legal assistance through a
contract so thank you for that
response but mr chair i'm also
reading from your brochure in
fulfilling his statutory role
the treaty division provides
legal council to two governor
appointed bodies that new mexico
landgrand council and the new
mexico sake commission so if
here advising it would seem to
me that they would then have the
information to pass on to the
remembers
mr chair and standards just for
handics of the attorney client
relationship between our office
and those two public bodies is
is just that an attorney client
relationship so we we would
provide advice to the council of
the council asked for
advice on a procedural matter
like in this case and then they
were somehow privy to you know
relationship with the months on
a language that would be
something that they could pass
on to them.
Um but are relationship is
directly with the council and
the commission so if they asked
us for advice on the particular
procedural issue or a legal or
policy issue then we can
certainly do that between the
attorney and and client but our
direct relationship is with the
council questions they bring to
us.
Thank you representative of
garcia thank you mister chair I
want to address a concern that
sent a lot as raised and
our total can you come up to the
mike
you know
sender lopes raised the
insurance capital out me and
she mentioned that the
that there there is like a
reimbursement system to wear
she mentioned that line went up
to have the money a pan in order
to kind of
process the the request my
understanding is that nine
grandfather under a disbursement
process.
Not a reimbursement
so can you can you respond to
that are total
and the difference between a
disbursement and a
reimbursement.
If you can introduce your
software to offer the webcast
yet yes mr chairman are to
rochelet time that I with the
new mexico language council um
mister chairman representative
serious correct there's a DFA
over the years because of some
of the issues that we've had
with
small local governments like
landgrands being able to access
those capitality dollars through
your reimbursement process has a
established which you referred
to as the dispersement process
it's not an automatic in order
for any community to.
Partaking the dispersion process
they actually have to put in a
letter of request and also
become pretty standard now and
typically the department of
finance administration will
approve those of there are still
some challenges with the
dispersement process just based
on some of the rules that they
have essentially once it's
approved in a landground then
draws down on those funds they
then fall under which is noticed
the five day rule and so they
have to have those dollars
expenditure from their bank
account within five days if not
it's an audit finding and so
sometimes that becomes a
challenge depending on the the
type of project are particularly
like for example a land
acquisition making sure that you
have the closing dates for
within those five days can be a
challenge because there is no
guarantee as to when the money
will be dispersed so it kind of
goes to the fares are request
for payment and I get send up
the chain to
the administration to service a
division and then those warrants
get pushed out and and learn
against canada any entity just
has to sort of watch their bank
account and then wanted hit they
have five days so it does
present some challenges and then
as it relates to the junior
monies or what we freak you all
refer to as the junior dollars
operating money's that is in a
dispersement that is a straight
reimbursement process still and
so there are challenges for
communities that maybe don't
have the coffers to be able to
utilize those funding in this in
the matter that they can with
dispersements on capitality
thank you for that are today is
the stay up there for one more
no mister chair at our center
closely I mean that are on
espanola meeting last month
santa cruz on your direct
presentation in terms of them
striving
to achieve a product of
subdivision service and I was a
copy channel
that they were a political
subdivision based on house bill
to sixty eight and in the twenty
twenty three election
that automatically brought in
something was an account yeah as
as well as the other twenty.
Seven twenty eight entities and
the according to our total that
building not include
santa cruzila on yard so
I want to request for mark to
draft the bill for this upcoming
session and I think senator
harami alluded to that doing
that discussion but I
was sort of recharged
but that so I don't want to make
sure that we have we have that
blue request for for that though
for that process and I don't
know if we are not to there are
two as the way
it's not a cruise electronic was
not included
uh
so that you could just briefly
kinda mention that and wait we
got our kind of come accession
and sure mr chairman
representative see
the santa crisi like any other
sort of back in two thousand
after the two thousand four
change I think around two
thousand six are they starting
to kind of organize and
really sought to sort of be
recognized as a as a you know
the government unfortunately
they were fortunately for them
they were able to organize and
had one election but then they
kind of fell off and and sort of
became definite I had had no
more elections since that time
so in two thousand and twenty
three when we were working on
two sixty eight they didn't act
surely have a recognition board
and so they were they weren't
included in the legislation but
we we have been working with
them and informed them that they
would need to request that
recognition in forty nine one
and they're they're well aware
of that they were successfully
did hold on election and sort of
followed all the requirements
under the statute and so we're
happy to sort out help them
continue along that path and
that journey into this next
legislative session.
Thank you for that
in advice just wanted to say I
also appreciate the brochure
that was out and on september
thirteen night after that you
uh interview representative
garcia he's walking history of
landrams he knows so much about
the history of every language I
would say and I I tease them
when I call the theory of
landgrounds whenever I have a
question he doesn't only have
the answer he has historical
knowledge and so he said it
before that this committee is
enlarged part because of his
efforts and I think having him
recorded and hearing his story
is important for not only the
archives but for his knowledge
should be put in to an area
where we can all access it and
publicly want to think
representative of gracious
production brings to the landrad
communities and to this
committee and so with that and
the guidebooks I agree that we
need to continue to work
together i'm happy to see that I
think yours are in here because
I secure the landgrams go hand
in hand and so people have
always heard me say we're
stronger together and all of
those partners in this book can
show that we're stronger
together media simple I believe
is definitely needed when you
start to filled phone calls or
meetings of people who are still
passed you need to insure that
there's the mediator who can
listen objectively to both sides
and help to immediate in areas
because in some cases i'm in
places where we can't help
there's litigation that's
happening people don't want to
hear that you can't get him to
litigation but mediation would
definitely help and then the
last thing is billy it was good
to see you here his mother and
my mother are vesties and so I
centered the selfie to tell her
I wish that they were both here
and with that if there's no
further questions we're going to
represent of christian.
Yes.
Okay i'm sorry
you know and become this
mediation
could the could the use some
junior funding this coming
session to kind of
address that
mr secure representative see I I
probably differ to to billy as
has been debited in general
whether that be helpful
yes sir certainly mister chair
represented garcia at something
were put together budget right
now so something we can go back
to our policy folks at the at
the agency and definitely look
at a more comprehensive approach
to that maybe there is an
ability for us to find the
mediation services will have to
do a little bit more research in
our graph that's a feasible ask
for us in this the next session
not many numerous or chair
the space session we had like
projects of a hundred sixty
thousand on the house side the
senate probably differently but
if we have junior funding among
your commitment as of today you
know
if it's a hundred and sixteen
with our minimum is for
mediation service I saw for
kicked out of mine in terms of
when you prepare in the budget
and actually this is mediation
for ingrains yep.
Thank you for that and so with
that the next order of business
would be lunch we're going to
break ten minutes early for that
