Got an adjournment planned for
Wednesday for Friday at noon.
At one.
Yeah, so, um.
Lot, lot to do before then.
Let's get started right away and
the first item, of course, is
our welcome from the president
system Chancellor and president.
Oh, you want to do the
introduction first? I'm just,
I'm just, I was going to wait
till a few more got here. So
let's, let's go ahead and start
with the, with the welcome and
then we'll, we'll, we'll have
other members join us by then
and we'll have more to introduce
themselves. So Dr. Johnson,
would you please?
Thank you.
OK.
You have to turn that icon on.
Yeah.
That it? There we go. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, um,
First, good morning and welcome
to Portales. Welcome to Eastern
Mexico University, uh, so my
name is James Johnston. I have
the honor of serving as the ENMU
system Chancellor and the
Portales campus president. And
certainly our pleasure to host
the committee and, and welcome
you to our campus and hope you
have a opportunity to enjoy the,
the area and and the beautiful
campus that has been here for 90
years this year, um, as a brief
introduction to ENMU Portales. I
just want to take a moment to
provide.
An overview.
I am used is the 3rd largest
university in New Mexico and the
largest regional comprehensive
university, uh, since 1934, ENMU
has served as a prominent higher
education resource for this
region and New Mexico. Our alums
have made and continue to make
significant contributions to New
Mexico, the country, and the
world. We continue to see strong
enrollment numbers. As of this
week, uh, we do year to date
comparisons every week and
sometimes that's like watching.
The stock market minute by
minute, but we settle out at
about the 20th class day, but uh
our fall 2024 semester credit
hour production is up 10.1% over
this time last year. Our
headcount is up 7.4% over this
time last year, and our
retention rate is at 2% higher
on a larger cohort, the the
court started last year, so
strong numbers and we continue
to see that growth and provide
that higher education access and
opportunity. Our housing
And this is something I think
has been a conversation about
the residential experience. Uh,
we are currently at 758 on
campus, uh, our housing
assignments, uh, year to date
comparison we were at 604 this
time last year, and we began the
last academic year with 638, so
we're up 120 over this time last
year residential students, uh,
with a couple of weeks to go.
Uh,
our mission combines it and
engaging and learning
environment with current
technology to provide a rich
educational experience in him
you serves students of
traditional age, adult learners,
and organizations through
undergraduate and graduate
programs, and you'll hear more
about those in a moment. Uh, our
university is where tradition
meets affordable tuition and
flexibility meets fulfillment.
We seek to make a difference in
the health care access for our
region for
New Mexico and for the nation
and to provide a brief overview
of our health and human services
programs, I would like to
introduce our provost and vice
president for academic affairs
Dr. Jamie Lorenz, if I may.
Welcome Dr. Lawrence.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, it is indeed our
distinct pleasure to have you on
campus today and uh we greatly
appreciate the opportunity to
share with you one of my
favorite topics, and that is
eastern New Mexico University.
Um, and, uh, also to include a
specific overview of the health
and human services focused
programs offered at ENMU.
As indicated by Doctor Johnston,
we are the largest of the three
regional comprehensive
universities in New Mexico, and
this past fall, we served around
5400 students, and that includes
uh around 4100 undergraduates,
and then 1300 graduate students,
and we served those across 4
academic colleges, and more than
90 degree options. Uh, we do
anticipate having even more
students this next fall.
Uh, I think it's also important
that although for you to know
that although we serve students
from across the nation and
internationally.
The majority of our students do
originate from New Mexico, so
about 75% of our students are
from New Mexico. We have another
15% that are from the region
primarily the western part of
Texas, etc. and then the
remaining 8% are spread from
across the US and we have about
2% of our students that come to
us internationally. So we really
truly are focused on serving the
state and this region.
Consistent with our role as a
regional comprehensive
university, we offer a broad
array of baccalaureate degrees,
spanning the gamut of
agriculture, arts, business,
communication, education, film,
health sciences, languages and
literatures, the STEM fields,
chemistry, biology, math,
computer science, um, social
sciences, criminal justice,
psychology and sociology,
theater, and then our pre-pro
National degree programs
including pre-medicine,
pre-pharmacy, pre-law, and
pre-veterinary science.
We also offer a selection of
master's degrees that complement
our baccalaureate programs and
serve the workforce needs of the
state and region, including
programs and options in
anthropology, biology, business,
chemistry, counseling,
communication, education,
English, and then the health
fields, uh, CDIS nursing, and
our most recent addition to our
graduate program, Social work.
As regards our health and human
services focused programs
offered at you.
These are centered in our
Department of Health and Human
Services, and that department is
located in the College of
Liberal Arts and Sciences, is
comprised of four separate
programs. We have an emergency
management program that really
is a a degree completion program
that provides pathways to the
baccalaureate for students that
are completing emergency
services degrees, etc.
Uh, communicative disorders,
nursing, and social work.
It is the largest department on
our campus with 26 faculty, 8
staff, and over 800 majors.
The department also generates
more than 20,000 semester credit
hours annually, which represents
approximately 18% of the
university total. So our efforts
within the health fields is a
major part of what we do here at
ENMU.
It is also a growing department
with a number of majors and
graduates increasing by
approximately 15 and 12%
respectively over the last
couple of years.
Now the success of this program
is a result of a dedicated set
of faculty who are committed to
providing a quality educational
experience and facilitating the
success of their students and
profession.
As well as an except exceptional
leadership team, several of whom
are here today. And so I would
like to take this time to
introduce Doctor Mary Ayala.
Who is the dean of the College
of Liberal Arts and Sciences.
Doctor Adrian Bratcher, the
chair of the Department of
Health and Human Services.
And Doctor Melissa Moyer, the
director of our social work
program.
These are the individuals that
are there day to day making sure
that we serve our students and
meet our mission.
So, uh, at this time, I would
like to turn the podium over to
Doctor Bratcher, who will
provide an overview of our CDIS
and nursing programs.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for giving us the
opportunity to highlight our
health and human services
programs here at Eastern New
Mexico University. We do have
some amazing programs as Doctor
Lorenz just gave you a brief
overview, but I would like to
focus on a couple of them
specifically for you, so you
have a better and greater
understanding of them. At Anna,
our Health and Human Services
Department, as Doctor Lawrence
mentioned, has 4 programs.
Within it. The first one that I
would like to, uh, highlight for
you is the nursing program and
our nursing program here at NMU
features both a BSN Bachelor of
nursing, and an MSN, a master's
of nursing program. These
programs, uh,
Have 4 faculty and 1 staff. So
we have a total of 5 individuals
who service that program.
Within our bachelor's program,
Both bachelor's and masters are
asynchronous and online only.
The primary goal of using and
utilizing an online program is
not something that just happened
with COVID. That's something
that we have been doing for many
years. Prior and also now. The
primary reason for that is our
students who come into EMU. Most
of them are full-time working
nurses. They are in the field,
they are practicing, and they're
In the trenches. So having an
online program allows those
individuals to come and really
further their, their goals in
life to become better nurses and
to become better healthcare
providers. At that bachelor's
level, the RN nurses come in and
can actually complete their
degree. They can complete a
bachelor's degree. And then that
allows them to serve as better
nurses and also to, um, promote
The latter within whatever
healthcare facility that they're
working in. Primarily, our
nurses who come in and do the
BSN New Mexico residents, uh,
they just can't come into
Portalis. So if you notice on
our handouts, one of the, the
primary features at the top of
each of them says purposefully
different and we are at NMU
purposefully different for, for
a reason, and that is to really
meet the need.
of New Mexicans and to meet the
needs where, where they are
within our state and, and the
healthcare that needs to be
provided.
The next feature at Nu within
our, um, nursing program is the
MSN and that's our master's
program. The masters of nursing
is designed to allow nurses to
become nursing educators, and
within that education component,
they can then around the state
further educate other nurses as
well.
So that is a great feature
within our master's program.
We do coordinate with both
Riodoso and Roswell to, um,
allow their associates programs
to then come right in to the
Portales campus and complete
that secondary degree.
Recently, uh, we did receive
some, some funding, which is
great, and we appreciate that.
We received a $1000 endowment to
support our faculty salaries. So
we're very appreciative of that.
We also have some research and
public service funding that
helps us annually work and
provide scholarships for the
students in New Mexico who
cannot otherwise afford to come
back in and pursue those
degrees. So we do appreciate
that and want to thank you for
that.
I will say within our nursing
program, we have, uh,
Seen a recent increase in those
attending and coming back and
that in large is we're seeing
our numbers come back following
COVID. In COVID, we saw a little
bit of drop of nursing students
primarily because they were
Otherwise occupied and they they
couldn't attend school at that
point. So we have seen a great
increase in fact, about 67%
increase in our bachelor's and a
39% increase in our our master's
students.
Uh, the second program I would
like to highlight for you is the
communicative disorders program.
The communicative disorders
program features 3 degrees. We
have an associate in speech
language pathology. We have a
bachelor's in communicative
disorders and a master's in
communicative disorders.
The associate's degree in speech
language pathology is a very new
degree. We have added that 2
years ago. Within that, our, our
goal was to help reach out into
our rural communities in New
Mexico and provide assistants
who could go out where
otherwise, uh, hiring a master's
level speech language
pathologist might not be, uh,
available. Um, we do have a
need, one of, one of those needs
is that we see and
29% proposed projection of
increase in need for speech
language pathologists between
2020 and 2030. New Mexico is
also going to see that. We have
a large population of speech
language pathologists who are
going to be retiring. And the
healthcare and the needs is not
going away. So we need to be
providing that education to
refill our, uh, profession as
well as a and
Be able to supply that 39% need.
Our associates, students would
be able to complete a two-year
program and go right out into
the workforce.
Um, I will say just little
proponent here that a little
thorn in our side, if you will,
is that in New Mexico, we
currently don't have an SLPA
license.
So we are, um, at the state
level, really working to try and
get that license hopefully this,
this, um, session, it will be
going forward and we will be
able to get the SLPA license.
Through and a licenser for the
state. Um, given that right now,
we have a lot of the New
Mexican, um, individuals who
would like to come and complete
the program. And we do have
students coming in. In fact, we
have 24 students right now who
came into this new program.
Unfortunately, if they graduate,
right now, they cannot be
employed in New Mexico. They
will have to go and seek
employment elsewhere because we
don't have the license for them.
So we would really like to, to
get the license in order to keep
these folks where they, we want
them to be in New Mexico.
Um, our second degree is our
bachelor's degree with our
bachelor's degree, we can do
speech language pathology or
audiology and both fields and
practices are super important to
our state in that speech
language pathologists serve a
wide variety of individuals.
We also then have our master's
program where students can come
in and then go out and work into
the field at our master's level,
we have some great opportunities
that we really try to absorb
within the state and that is
internships and practicums. Our
students actually complete, um,
114 practicum sites in New
Mexico over the last year, so
that means our master's level
students go out to 114 different
locations in New Mexico.
And serve New Mexicans. This
meets a need that otherwise
isn't met, but also helps
prepare and educate our students
here at NMU.
It's a great opportunity that we
utilize and work back and forth
with our other speech language
pathologists across the state.
We have approximately 115, um,
minors, 25 majors, 30 graduates
over the last year and
approximately 204 students total
in the communicative disorders
program.
So we are really working towards
meeting the need and, um,
working towards not only with
our student population but also
our community. We do have an
on-campus clinic. It's the
speech and hearing outreach
clinic where we serve our
community, but we also serve all
the surrounding areas. So we
have individuals if they cannot
travel and come into our clinic,
we also do telepractice and we
meet those needs that way. We
have some of our students who go
out to one of our rural
communities.
Brady, New Mexico, where they
provide all the services within
that community who would
otherwise not be served. Our
students, we have a cooperation
with the Mescalero Apache, um,
tribe where we do services for
their, their community and
their, their children who
wouldn't have services
otherwise. They actually had
about a a year where their
children had no services before
we created that co op with them.
So we are trying to reach not
only a local span of individuals
who we can, um, train our
students with, but also provide
services to try and provide a
healthcare need.
Um, so within that, there's a,
there's a lot going on, as you
can see a lot for us to be
excited about. We have a very
top-notch clinic here on campus
that we continue to build,
continue to serve, and our
students are really working
towards being better for New
Mexico. So purposefully
different is a good thing. It is
not just something that, um,
we're out to, to be different,
but we are different for a
reason and trying to meet.
needs of our New Mexico students
as well as communities. Um, our
third program that will be
highlighted today will be by Dr.
Melissa Moyer. She is our social
work, um, director. So I will
turn the stage over to her.
Thank you.
You're fine.
Good morning.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, thank you for
allowing us to present on our
program today and, and welcome
to the campus. I would like to
introduce with me, um, our
master, our graduate field
director, Doctor Carolyn Tollett
is up to assist with any
questions you have about
internships or things of that
nature.
I trust that this committee is
well aware.
Dr. Moore, they're working on
the roof at apparently the
hailstorm damaged the roof and
so
It's something we'll just have
to put up with all day. They did
offer to have them not work on
the roof for 3 days, but that,
that's not a good idea, I don't
think so. Well, we appreciate
you. We are well aware of that
hail storm.
We have vehicles and roofs being
replaced all over town.
So thank you. I trust the
committee is well aware of the
social work profession and the
benefits educated social workers
provide to our workforce. But I
would like to take a minute to
break down the social work.
Program here at Eastern. So
going off of the one pager that
you have been provided first, I
would like to talk about the
funding our program receives.
Currently, the title for funding
is set on a three-year rotation
and contract set by the New
Mexico Children, Youth and
Families Department. The funds
we receive are based on their
penetration ratio, which right
now this year sits at 48.7%.
This is important because
publicly it is shared that the
universities are funded at a 50%
rate and previously we were
funded at 75. But the way this
translates when you take that
and apply it to our budget, our
program just at Eastern and I
can't speak for the other
schools, but I'm sure they could
provide you this number quite
quickly. We are funded at a 31%
rate. As an average over the
last 3 years, and that's only
been raised because the
penetration
ratio increased by 1% since year
one of the contract.
Historically,
yes, are you going to explain
what penetration ratio, yes. So
penetration ratio is figured by
the number of children that have
been taken into protective
custody by CYFD that are title
4E eligible. This is where the
state receives federal dollars
to assist.
In the expense, if you will, of
providing for those children. So
right now, CYFD is stating that
48.7% of the children in their
custody are 4E eligible, which
means over half are not.
When I worked for the department
several years ago, the ratio was
configured based on 5 criteria.
Things I'm sure you've heard,
um, Mr. Sale talked about
several times, minority status,
sibling group, children under 5,
severe behavioral or emotional
needs. Many children who've
experienced child abuse or
neglect absolutely fall under 4E
standards. And the way this has
been raised historically is
through university agency
partnerships and training.
That Mr. Saly provided to
educate their staff so that when
the custody orders are drafted
by investigators, they are sure
to account for that statement.
It was something I was trained
on many years ago.
I have been in communication
with Melissa Soto, who is most
recently running or overseeing
the 4E program at CYFD and she
has shared that there have been
some changes to that, and I
think it would be helpful to
look into that if we are looking
to increase that rate because it
does translate to federal
dollars supporting our child
welfare system and our social
work education.
So along that we
had the opportunity to award 6
stipends at the undergrad level
and with our new graduate
program, we wanted to start
conservatively, so we asked for
two and I'll explain that. Over
the last, we looked over the
last 5 years on average we had a
potential of offering up to 30
stipends. We interviewed 19
students out of those 30 in the
last 5 years and only 16
accepted. The other three
declined.
And just in the last academic
year, we did interview 6
students and only 50%, 3
students accepted the stipend.
What we also deal with on this
end and what we're seeing a
trend of is that students who do
accept the stipend opt partially
through the program to step back
and repay the stipend early
rather than commit to 18 months
of employment. It's CYFD.
We have explored this and do
interview our students as they
exit our stipend program, and
many of them take a very
politically correct. We're very
proud of their professionalism,
but even when we dig a little,
the consensus we get is they
decided to go in a different
direction. And what we found is
they're entering adjacent
agencies.
Agencies in Chavez County, such
as La Casa or, um, yeah, or
Cassa or Wings for Life,
agencies that are child welfare
serving but not protective
services within New Mexico. This
is important because other
states such as Colorado use 4E
funds to not just serve
protective services staff or not
to just fund, but they also fund
and support the supporting
agencies that could provide a
of preventative measures.
So
with those recent trends, we
tried to be conservative and we
just asked for an increase to 2
MSW stipends for our new
program, which I'm proud to say
we did fill.
Um, part of that is one of our
areas of concentration which
I'll get into in a moment, is
Children, Youth and Families
Department.
So the next thing I'd like to
talk with you about is our
endowment money. We did receive
$900 through the $500 million
endowment that was set aside for
social work education and we use
this to fund 4 full-time
faculty. I am very pleased to
say that we have 3 already in
position ready to go, and we had
offered to 1/4 who was to be in
campus in 2 weeks, and that
faculty member let us know two
weeks ago that they've decided
to stay where
They live and we are in the
process of interviewing another
individual this week to
hopefully get them on campus
this fall.
So those 3 positions have been
able, we've been able to staff
our MSW program and field
directors as well as an
assistant professor.
The next we have is our
endowment scholarship. Eastern
received 1.9 million to fund
through an endowment graduate
stipend scholarships.
We looked at this as an
institution and assessed our
student population and as Dr.
Lorenz and Bratcher have shared,
we do primarily serve New Mexico
residents, so I was really
excited when I looked at the
numbers yesterday. 54% of our
cohort in the fall will have
their tuition and fees
completely funded for their
first full academic year with
us.
We actually even have more
students that we could offer it
to if the restrictions weren't
quite so tight. Just as a quick
refresher, you must be a New
Mexico resident. You must also
be in New Mexico high school
graduate. I definitely
understand the design around
that. But if we rewarded people
who already work in our state
and encourage them to increase
their education and stay, that
is an option.
The other thing we have run into
is we do have several GED
recipients who have been New
Mexico residents their whole
life. They're wonderful
practitioners, they're in the
field, but because they didn't
graduate from a New Mexico high
school we could not award it to
them.
So we talk a little bit about
our purposefully different. Our
coursework is delivered online
asynchronously, and
synchronously just to break down
the speak of academia
asynchronously is the idea that
an instructor is lecturing live
on campus, students in front of
them, but creates a lecture that
our program requires distance
education students or those not
able to attend for whatever
reason that at that class
session.
To view within the week it's
done.
These delivery methods are based
on the type of curriculum. For
instance, our field education
maintains as a synchronous. It
is a direct connection and we
bring the students together at
the same date and time every
week to debrief from their field
experiences and receive their
supervision.
We went to a distance education
platform.
To reach more rural communities
with residents in need of
training and a community in need
of social work services our
prior director for anyone that
ever got the opportunity to work
with Miss Patricia Saylor. She
was amazing. And I remember
working for her as an adjunct
faculty, and she was so excited
we had students in jail.
And we were one of the first to
help provide a licensed social
worker to that community that
hadn't had one and who knows how
long.
So there are elements of our
program designed to bring
students together on a regular
basis with respect to the cost
and limited resources some may
have and through, and we do this
through the use of virtual
meeting platforms scheduled
trainings on campus and
on-campus events. So our
students are intentionally
brought together several times a
semester. So they still have a
sense of connection and
networking because a lot of what
we do, I joke with our students
all the time, Social work is
A 4 year trade school degree. We
are readying you to get out into
the field and really practice
your craft. You need to have
colleagues. You need to make
those connections through your
field with your professors.
So the program promotes a strong
community engagement and
investment through our student
orgs, as well as faculty hosted
events such as community food
drives and community and agency
level change product projects.
Here at Eastern.
We emphasize and we talk a lot
about student success. And I
believe our program models this
with faculty engagement with our
students. We have a solid
retention rate, just over 80%
for the last 5 years, and it's
been consistent like that for a
really long time.
But more recently, I was very
curious about the 20% what
happened to them. And so last
year I did run the numbers and
an additional 15% did complete
their undergraduate degree here
with us at Eastern.
And we did, I believe our
program contributed to this by
supporting our students, helping
them identify because social
work isn't for everyone, but
that doesn't mean that college
isn't for you, and it doesn't
mean that you've started this
endeavor to never finish it.
So 96% of the students who
entered into our social work
program at Eastern, left with a
degree in hand within 2 to 3
years.
So nearly 3/4 of our BSW
students complete within 4
semesters or 2 years. This
places them ready to enter the
workforce in 2 to 3 years, and
this is important for a lot of
reasons. So what I'd like to do
is talk to you about the
difference of a baccalaureate
versus a master's social worker
and what we do in the
communities.
At the BSW level, I think this
is really an unsung hero when we
talk about our social work
workforce in the state. There is
a lot of focus.
On the need for clinical social
workers. But I do believe that
this neglects the consideration
of a great workforce in an area
of need. Generalist social
workers are those working in the
field. They are assessing
clients. They are connecting
them with services and they
provide the follow-up to ensure
service delivery is addressing
the need.
This workforce has a greater
footprint, and while clinical is
important, the need for social
workers at this level,
especially in areas like
Children's medical services in
the hospitals and especially
child welfare, is very, very
high. Our program, the
Baccalaureate, is 19 years old.
We were accredited by the
Council on Social Work Education
in 2005. Our current number of
program students is 125. Our 5
year
is 130 per academic year. This
is just those that the program
accepts. The university reports
a number in the mid 160s, which
places our program large at
national standards.
The graduates for the last
academic year were 53.
And over the last 5 years, 197
in total.
Our program also offers
coursework and supervision for
students interested in their
laid act.
Through an LSAA track. A lack is
a licensed alcohol and drug
abuse counselor.
And LSAA is a licensed substance
abuse associate.
Here, students complete field
work with supervision with the
foundation of substance abuse
work to ready them for their
licensure at the LSAA level.
From there, they do have to go
on and receive an additional 2
years of supervision in the
field, but we created this
program because there was
quickly recognized we had one
lad.
In the Curry Roosevelt area and
we are looking, as many of you
know, to bring in this
behavioral health facility
focused on substance abuse and
how are we going to fund that?
LSAAs can do a lot for us and
without existing late acts. We
can't build new la acts. One of
our faculty members went out,
designed this program, Ms.
Grossendorf, and she went on to
receive and she went on to get
her lay deck so that she can
provide supervision to not only
our students but community.
Providers that may need this so
that they can get their license.
Now, moving on to the MSW.
We are offering 3 areas of
specialized practice clinical
clinical military and children,
youth and families.
These were intentional. Clinical
is the beast. Every social work
student comes in and they think
they want to do specifically,
they just want to do clinical.
We have a close relationship
with Canon Air Force Base, as
well as our squadrons that have
moved over to Kirtland, and
we're down in Holloman. The
state has great military
representation, and we wanted to
support this, so Eastern went on
to become one of the 9,
accredited programs to offer
clinical military at the MSW
level in the country.
In addition to that,
I was a little surprised to find
that our state no longer offered
an MSW concentration in child
welfare.
This is my passion. This is
where I practice. I have a lot
of love for CYFD. I know that's
a interesting thing to say, but
I do believe it, um, and so
definitely children and families
was a natural leap for us, and
that's why I was so excited to
see that we already were able to
get some momentum with our
stipends and we can support our
students.
Just to kind of explain why it's
taken us a little minute to get
this up and running. After
pursuing state permission for
our program, which we did
receive this past December. We
then had to turn our efforts to
get permission through the
Council on Social Work
Education, of which we received
in March.
We cannot accept students who
would be eligible to test for
licensure without their approval
to begin. We received that in
March. We waited conservatively
to make sure that we would
receive it and we started
recruiting in April. Full
accreditation is a three-year
process, but any students that
enter our pipeline from March
forward will have their degree
honored and grandfathered in by
the Council of Social Work
Education, they will be entered.
They will be able to test for
licensure and enter practice
without a hiccup.
So let's see here, the program
itself, I said, is in a 3-year
accred process and it's not
scheduled to receive full
accreditation until 2027.
When we did begin recruitment in
April, we went with social
media. I had to go talk on the
radio.
And we had other internet
advertising. We have amazing
communication department here
that helped us out through
Google. Our first cohort begins
this fall, and we have accepted
35 and have enrolled 33. We're
pretty excited about that, with
just 3 months of work and and
knowing we're out there. Of
those, just as a breakdown, 64%
of the class is clinical. 15%
are clinical military and 21%
are
Children, youth and families.
We have intentionally selected
faculty and adjunct faculties
based on their area of practice
to support those three areas.
Students that enter in with
their BSW in hand from any
accredited institution can get
their master's in one year. This
is not special at Eastern. This
is at any accredited social work
program in the country.
So when you look at this and we
say workforce ready and as early
as 1 to 4 years. That's where
that one comes from. The 4 years
can come from those students
that are interested in part-time
status.
A full MSW here is 60 credit
hours. That's on par with the
other programs in the state and
really throughout the country
and it's a 2 year full-time
program.
So I want to talk a little bit
about our partnerships.
We are always looking to partner
with community and state
agencies to meet the need. We
currently have partnerships with
AmeriCorps, which are providing
paid internships for students
interested in rural practice in
New Mexico and with the four
county behavioral health
consortium offering paid
internships for students
interested in working with
clients in need of substance
misuse support as well as in
rural schools. This is huge. We
are supporting students paying
for mileage and other things
paying for their time.
To go out and serve our smaller
schools such as Grady, Dora,
Elia.
Our MSW students are also able
to take advantage of the
expanding opportunities program.
We just learned about that this
year through PED for paid
internships and clinical
employment in the schools after
graduation.
Recently, the program also
partnered with the New Mexico
Corrections Department. Aging
and long-term services division,
and of course, the New Mexico
Children and Families
Department. The big thing we
push with our students through
our advising is securing their
employment.
And we do believe that we have
built partnerships with
corrections and aging and
long-term services more in the
last several years because we
know these workforces are in
need of social work support. We
held a virtual job fair for our
spring graduates, and I called
it speed dating, and we had HR
professionals from each of the
entities come present to our
students, provide rapid hire
information because they would
be graduating in 2 weeks. It was
so popular. We had so many
students show up.
the agencies thanked us and the
Department of Health has asked
to be included in on our next
one. So we're very open to that.
So our BSW program recently
received junior bill monies to
create and deliver a child
safety training support.
To support law enforcement and
child welfare staff in the field
when making emergency removal
decisions. We received $200,000
to design a child safety
curriculum. We did complete that
and have that ready to go for
this fiscal year, as someone
with a really strong background
in child welfare, this is a
delicate time when it comes to
child safety and these
individuals need all of the
support they can get.
Doctor Tillette and I will be
delivering this training in
areas of the region in the
coming year and determining
through data collection and
analysis whether this increases
law enforcement and child
welfare staff confidence in
these situations as well as
cooperation between the
agencies.
So I hope I have shared enough
to provide a glimpse into our
program, and I believe that we
have built a strong BSW and will
continue on in this work, in our
MSW program. And with that, are
there any questions?
Well, very good. Let's see,
committee members' questions.
OK, we'll start here and and
come around to you,
Representative. Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, uh, for the, for the
information that you provided,
so
um you, there there was a I
think you talked about the
stipends being a little
restrictive. Um, do you have a
sense of how many, uh, um, in
terms of numbers would, would
qualify for the stipends if the
restrictions were not lifted,
but maybe eased a little bit. So
that was in reference to the
endowment scholarship money.
Yes, um.
We would be able to award an
additional 15 to 20%.
So we would be closer to the 75%
rate.
Just for our existing cohort. We
have several students
identified.
OK.
Those restrictions
Were they in the law? We need to
change the law.
OK. And then, and then I just,
um, the other, uh, question that
I had in terms of um.
The numbers that are.
repaying their stipends. Um, I'm
assuming that that's not just
happening with the students from
Eastern. It's happening with
students from the other schools
of social work as well.
Chavez, unfortunately, the
universities meet, um,
periodically with the help of
the Social Work consortium. Um,
and that is an issue through
NMSU and MHU as well as Western
New Mexico University. OK, and
then a follow up question to
that, Mr. Chair, do the students
give any
recommendations in terms of
improving their placements at
CYFD?
Those that we have received are
loosely related to
The lack of supervision and
support that they receive in the
field,
um, some of them are workplace
culture.
Uh, we've been high caseloads,
uh, they're witnessing burnout
in the field and they're seeing
their future.
And I, I can't fault them for
that. Um, we, uh, as the schools
of social work have tried in the
last couple of years to change
our approach to maybe ready our
students. I don't want to say
harden them, um, because that
gives the idea, it gives the
impression this is hard work and
that doesn't, it's exceptionally
rewarding work, and I think that
we can do a better job of
recruiting and reframing what
these, what these stipends
offer. I just.
Right, no, yeah, no, it, it is,
it's, it is rewarding work. I, I
actually worked as a CPS worker.
Um, under the consent decree and
it was extremely rewarding and
ended up being there for 10
years.
Almost 10 years, um, was a few
months short, um, OK, and then
the last question that I have is
do you have a demographic
breakdown for both your um
social work program and the
nursing programs. Not with me,
but yes, we do keep that data.
OK, I would love to have it.
Sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just to follow up on that line
of questioning,
one model some universities have
developed around the country is
to have their own unit with
their own supervisor embedded in
the agency. Is that something
that you're possibly so that the
supervision would come from a
university faculty member who is
also then part of the agency
years ago when I did mine, it
was at a mental health center
and that's the way it worked.
There were
8 of us supervised by a
Faculty member who worked at the
community mental health center
and we, we took cases, but he
supervised us and we were like
additional staff, an additional
unit available in that county.
Would that be something you
could try? I am aware of that
approach, and I think it's
amazing. It would require a
pretty robust, I know it's a
popular word, but it would
require a really big and
healthy, um, children and
families area of specialty. Also
the
decision to embed a faculty
member would be above my pay
grade.
So I can't, I'm, I'm not allowed
to, you know, say that we would
do that.
Yeah there are states currently.
Yeah, they are in practice.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I guess when she
was saying about my pay grade,
she looked at me and
you know, it, it does come down
to funding and funding lines and
of course our primary mission is
the education of students on
this campus, etc. Uh, however,
if there were discussions in
terms of how to fund such
positions, and there was a
possibility of some sharing of
the, the cost, etc. with that,
that would be something that
would be of interest and could
work for the university. It
would really take CYFD wanting
to do it.
I mean they've got to be open to
that and but I mean I can't see
any downside to it for them,
but see you had a follow-up
question you wanted to
Representative Kates.
Uh, it was uh for Representative
Chavez's question, um, and I,
and I might have missed the, the
clarification. I, I understand
that um the
The scholarships you had
individuals that were not
eligible because they received
GEDs, so that is true for a
lottery scholarship. It's not
true for an opportunities
scholarship, correct?
No, this is more related to the
endowment scholarship, the 1.9
that was specific for MSW
students.
And the way we interpreted it
and the way the universities
across the state have, and I
think there's been some
discussion, um.
Where HTD has said, well, we can
go this direction or we could
interpret it this way, but if
it's not clearly outlined, we
can't assign those funds and the
two restriction the two very
concrete awards are related to,
they have to be a resident here,
and they have to have graduated
from one of our high schools. So
this is for the master's level,
yes.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee just to follow up on
that, it is specifically in the
language of the bill and the MOU
that we have with AGD and hence
we, we don't feel that we can.
Uh, have any choice but to
follow exactly what the letter
of the law is.
But, but it is something that
this committee could recommend
as a piece of legislation for
the upcoming session, I would
hope we pick that up.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, and
that was my follow up to my ask
my other questions too, and, and
thank you. Um, thank you for
bringing it to this committee's
attention as well. This is um.
Uh, the kind of fix. That's what
you can do, bring it to the
committee's attention.
Um, I, I had some questions for
your previous presenter as well,
um, SLPs, don't they, for an
SLP.
Does it not require a doctorate
or is it still an a master's
level.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
representative, as members of
the committee, the doctorate is
not an entry level degree. The
master's degree is the entry
level. So when a student
graduates with a master's
degree, they sit for Leishenger
and competency boards and then
they can go right out into the
workforce. OK, so with the
master's level, and are, are,
if, if we had um
The position of SLPA, it still
would not be eligible for to
build towards Medicaid, correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, as well as
members of the committee. That
is correct. Right now, they
cannot in the state of New
Mexico, Bill. Uh, there are
other states in the US that do
have different laws in place
that do allow the SLP to bill
the SLPA, excuse me. However, at
this point, the way we have the
licenser proposed and set up
would be that there is a
supervising SLP that would
actually bill for those
services.
Services would not go unbilled.
They would be billed just under
the license of the supervising
SLP.
Thank you, um, Sharon. Thank you
for that clarification. So
that's a lot like uh a lot of
our behavioral health models,
um, or we have the licenser
providing supervisory hours, not
supervisory hours towards um
providers own licensers as an
SLPA, it's permanent supervisory
hours, but it does allow to
multiply your workforce, um, so
in these other states.
The SLPA is billable, but it is
still not billable under
Medicaid, is that correct? Or is
it only under other states
billable, eligible to be billed
uh for either state agencies or
in private insurance.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, and, and
committee, that is correct. It
would be under the Medicare
component, not Medicaid, um, in
some states in some situations,
it depends on how they're set
up. Of course, every state has a
different makeup for their
Medicare and Medicaid, um,
within certain billing sites, if
you will. Um, so some in some
school based systems is where a
lot of times we see.
The SLPA is working and really
influencing the workforce.
And in most of those settings
where states can bill, of
course, then it's, it is able to
be billed, um, under their state
Medicaid components. So there's
a a lot of differences and a lot
of um changes that are taking
place and one of those pieces
and components is that at the
national level, the American
Speech Language Hearing
Association has created recently
a certification for
SLPAs, so it's not just a
certification at the master's
level, but they now have that
associates, um, level or
assistant level as well.
And so with that and every state
putting that into place with
their license. That's also
helping to pursue the billing
status.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Sherry. I mean, you, you and
I have had many discussions
about how to incentivize um.
Uh, supervisory hours from
licensed practitioners, um,
because there's little
financial, uh, incentive for uh
nonprofits or companies, um, I
like the idea of CYFT is a state
agency maybe having cohorts of
different cause SLPs are used uh
pediatric SLPs are used greatly
at uh with the population that
With CYFT. I mean, it's not just
speech, it's swallowing and,
and, and, and, and breathing,
there's a lot of things that are
related to the SLP, so thank
you. That's why the relationship
you're trying to develop with
the Department of Health is so
crucial because the FIT the
family infant toddler program,
and the
what do they call them
children's health, children's
children's medical services,
both are opportunities for, for
your both of your.
Graduates to work or not your
graduates, but your students to
work in
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters, doctors, if I
ever get my PhD, I want you to
call me doctor too. Um, so,
You explained everything very
well, and I appreciate that,
but, um, one of the things that
I had, you said that 3 quarter
of your students that were
involved in the social work
program or graduating.
Correct.
Can you repeat? You said 3/4 of
the student, so the three
quarters of our students are
graduating within 2 years. So if
you have 100 students that
signed up for social work, how
many are you graduating?
So when you look at the
graduation number versus the
number that's in the program,
you're looking at part time,
you're looking at early
declares, so some of those
students will come to us, some
of them they freshman year, and
they stay with us and then we
weave in their general education
alongside.
Those that enter into our
program are retained at an 80%
rate. We track them student by
student data. And so that's
where the 80% came from the
three quarters of our students
are the ones that are coming in,
and we are getting them in and
out within 4 semesters. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenter. So, um,
I keep hearing the word burnout.
And I've heard it for 2 years,
and they do get burned out and,
and I did hear representative um
Chavez talking about how
rewarding the work is, but from
the rewarding side to the very
emotional side and trying to
find that balance. Is it more
rewarding than it is emotional
and burning them out.
You want to know my opinion or
what
um.
I think it is more rewarding. I
will tell you I worked and I am
sure I can't, I don't want to
speak for Representative Chavez,
but when I worked at CYFD there
was a community.
There was a collection. I worked
there with people who were
nearing the end of 25, 30 years
of service. Those people are
rare, few, and very far between
now. You have people that are
going in and they are leaving
within.
2 to 3 years, and that's a long
term.
We are encouraging our students
to stay, to stick it out, and at
some point it comes as
We have to as social work
educators pose an ethical
question to ourselves. When we
are educating them on self-care
appropriate supervision, and
professional code of conduct and
ethical standards, and then
we're encouraging to stay in an
environment that is not modeling
that for them.
From what we are receiving back.
So I think that yes, the work is
absolutely rewarding. Is it
emotional without a doubt, but I
think with the right level of
supervision.
It will help you navigate the
emotions you're going to feel
through those very challenging
times. And that's where
supervision is key within child
welfare.
That's a different soapbox.
For me. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, presenter. I just,
you know, I keep hearing that,
uh, that burnout and how many
more social workers we need and
I try to find the balance and I
was placed on this committee 2
years ago and uh I am an alumni
of ENMU and my background was in
fire and emergency management.
So now that I've been placed in
this committee now I'm trying to
figure out, you know, I, I hear
our folks, uh.
Talk about how we don't have
enough social workers, and I've
seen it in the field.
And I was a paramedic for 25
years, so I saw it in the field,
but, um.
Whenever we would call CYFD and
they would take over, then I
didn't hear about it again and
now I'm getting to hear about
the the other side of things and
the burnout, and I've seen it
in, you know, paramedics get
burned out as well. And you
know, there is a lot of
rewarding work that happens, but
there's a lot of emotional work
that happens too and what could
I have done to save this person
or this child and I'm trying to
find that balance of the reward
versus the emotional.
side and if somebody goes
through too much emotion.
Do we need to inject them into
more reward to keep them from
burning out. Just, just throwing
that out there and then, um, as
far as your bachelor's versus
your master's program. So if I
was, if I was coming out as, uh,
and, and obtained my bachelor's
degree.
What's the incentive for me to
get my master's? Is it a big
increase?
So for the for the workforce
across the state or within child
welfare within the state.
You typically can command more
income.
There's more income and
employment opportunities. The
state focus is really on
clinical work.
And that's why I really wanted
to emphasize the importance
because if we're looking for the
worker bees BSWs are really
where it's at for a greater
impact.
And that's where a lot of our um
child child welfare workforce
used to come from.
Um, at the MSW level though, at
a clinical level, you, you have
more billable opportunities, um,
schools, for instance, are
seeking out clinical level
social workers instead of
generalist level.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and the
only reason I bring that up is
because.
I worked for EMU and Iran their
fire and paramedic program in
Ridoso, which is a gym of a
college up there, I'll tell you.
So, um,
Students these days, they wanna
know how much more money am I
gonna make? Do I want to become
this or do I wanna become this
and whenever you say you can get
your bachelor's and make this
amount of money, or you can
obtain your master's and you can
obtain this amount of money, or
does that master's just open the
key to another door to get in.
That's what I was kind of hoping
to, yeah, and I think a better
way to emphasize or to answer
that would be the virtual job
fair we talked about. The
agencies came in and talked to
students about entry level wages
and our students were shocked at
a bachelor's level to know that
they could go work for the state
of New Mexico starting out at
the low to mid 50s as a social
worker, when we tell our, our
bachelor's level social workers
that, um, you're not here for
the money. You're not going to
make, you're not gonna make a
lot. It's, it's challenging
work. It's like, well, but
everyone has
To pay, and I can absolutely
respect that. And so,
I think we can do a better job
in terms of educating our
graduates in terms of what's out
there for them.
If they were to enter the field
now, get some years under their
belt, and then if they wanted to
progress in their field, get
that graduate degree later
because many are rolling from
bachelors straight into masters
now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent, before we go to uh
represent Chancellor, did you
want to say something about that
Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I
would just like to touch on one
part of Representative
Vincent's, uh, question about
burnout and uh the, the
emotional care. I I've been
involved with uh health care
either directly or or
peripherally as I am now for
about 37 years, uh, what I and
one of the things to focus on is
Uh, they attract healthcare
providers is a personality type.
I think there's a compassionate
part of your, your personal
values. What I see in terms of
burnout and more of late, we saw
it acutely through the pandemic
of um their compassionate
individuals, but when you don't
have enough uh healthcare
providers, uh, when I have to
work 60, 70, 80 hours a week.
Uh, it doesn't matter how much I
love my job, there's a physical
limit to what we do and the
reason I want
To bring that back because it's
an important part of what we do
as a university and, um, nursing
is probably one of the highest
profile of the healthcare
providers. I don't ever remember
a year where they said we have
enough nurses. It's there's
always been.
Some of these pathways, maybe we
get to that shortage, which then
addresses the the burnout part
of your, of your question. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
and yeah, excellent point and
and and what Doctor Moyers
mentioned the need for a
A community of, of, of people in
the field who are supporting
each other. That's not possible
if everybody's off working 60
hours on emergencies. You're not
even in the office with them for
more than a few minutes, and
that's in passing as you refill
your travel mug with coffee on
your way out the door, so it all
fits in. I just want to share
yesterday, Representative uh
Kates and Representative
Thompson and I went through a
tour of that new CYFD facility
where they're
Housing teenage boys that
previously were being housed in
their offices because they had
no foster families that would
take teenage boys and, and with
us was the county office manager
for Bernlio County and
I, I said, gee, that's great to
meet you. How long have you been
with the department? Well, I'm
one of the old timers, she said,
I've been here 5 years.
You know, the thought that a
county office manager would have
worked her way up and in 5 years
become that's unthinkable. I
mean, when, when, when
Representative Chavez and I were
working and see Children's
Protective Services, county
office managers typically had
been there 15 to 20 years. They,
they had a whole institutional
archival memory of, of, of how
to handle situations and what to
do and, and, uh, but, but the
turnover has just become so.
I mean, it, and it just feeds on
itself. It's hard to attract
people into an organization
where the other people are on
their way out the door as you
come in. They do a rapid hire
and in and hire 50 people over a
weekend, and by the time they
get him into the offices, 50
people have left from the
various offices, so they're in a
real difficult situation, um.
I just wanted to mention before
I go to Representative Thompson
for her questions that we got a
text from um Rachel, I forget
her last name at Rachel Garcia,
who's our LFC staff person along
with Nathan Ekberg for this
committee from the legislative
finance staff and uh at the next
meeting, she's working now on
it, they'll present us with a
report on how to improve the 4E
program and the stipends, I
think.
Both of those things should be,
they're working on a report on
this because this is crucial.
We're not going to turn CYFD
around until we start getting
more people in in there and
there's no way to turn it around
that I can see without making a
much closer alliance with the
university programs, the 4 that
exist now and hopefully a new
one at UNM that we're trying to
get off the ground because we
definitely need coverage
statewide of these programs
representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for your present. I'm
gonna be a little bit all over
the place cause I'm interested
in everything, so, um, I heard
talk about speech and language
assistant and getting licensed.
Where does NISA, New Mexico
Speech and Hearing Association
stand on that, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. NISA
is the New Mexico Speech and
Hearing Association, and I
actually work with NISH. I'm on
the SLPA ad hoc committee
actually.
Um, for NISA and we are right
now in the process of getting
the bill proposed license bill
over to the licensing and
regulation. So it's.
Right there. OK, so Mr. Chair,
so they, they, they're on board.
They're, they're not gonna
oppose it, OK, that's what I
worry about when somebody tries
to get in a new, uh, level, the
ones who were up here may have
issues with that, so that's good
to hear, um.
Do you have a music therapy
program here?
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, we do not. Did you
ever?
Not that I'm aware of.
So I've been here 22 years and
not that I'm aware of. OK, OK, I
was thinking I'd heard that
somewhere, so in terms of your
um MSW specialties with the
clinical clinical military and
see why children, youth and
families, specializing in one of
those in no way limits where you
can practice, correct, correct.
It just provides you with a
field experience that is
tailored to that, but you still
get the clinical access and your
license is clinical, OK.
All right, thank you, and Mr.
Chair, while we were, we were
talking up here that you need
300, 3000 hours of, of
supervised practice to be an MSW
L I S W L I.
So that number is, I know it
translates to 2 years
postmasters. I had to run that
race, but, um, yeah, in terms of
the graduate in terms of the MSW
hours required it's 900 total.
Their education and that's why
BSW graduates can do it in a
year because they get to count
their field hours from their
undergraduate experience. OK, so
Mr. Chair and presenters, um.
Mr. Chair said that the 3000
hours is one of the higher hours
required when we, we are have
higher hours than some other
states. Do you have a, and it's
just your opinion, your feeling
that it would.
Behoove us to look at at if we
could decrease that um if that
would be damaging to the
practice if it could help us. I
mean, we're never gonna catch up
at the rate we're going, so
we're trying to look outside the
box in terms of things that
could get people maybe not.
Just as prepared but prepared
enough to get out into the real
world.
So my opinion.
This is my opinion and not that
of eastern New Mexico
University.
Um, so when you graduate with
your MSW, you are eligible to
test and there are many, many
things you can do with an LMSW.
You can command more pay and a
higher billable hour is an LCSW
or LI is our state confuses it.
I've been both over the years,
um.
When I tested for my clinical
license, I was fortunate enough
to have established a connection
in the community of an existing
LCSW who is willing to provide
my supervision and I worked
alongside and met with him
weekly and we staffed cases for
2 years and then I sat for my
licensure exam.
Since that time, the regulation
board has required anyone who is
interested in supporting the
profession, I myself as a
clinician would have to go take
a test or take a small online
class. I think it is in a test
in order to supervise others so
that they may get their clinical
license. I think it's
interesting that we are
requiring clinicians in the
field already with a rigorous
professional demands to go on
and do an extra thing in order
to fuel this in our state.
And I'm not sure where the
decision was made. I don't have
the, the understanding of the
RLD's.
You know, decision tree on that,
but that was a significant
change that I think impacted
because when I got my clinical
license, it wasn't something I
was going to use. I worked a
child welfare. I wasn't
delivering clinical services at
that time.
I just thought this would be a
really good thing to have in my
back pocket, and it was honestly
it was a mentor I had made
through my field placement there
at CYFD who really said, you
know, if you have this
opportunity, you should do it.
Had I not done it, I wouldn't
have the window now.
All right, thank you for that.
And then I have, um, I'm just
going to tell committee members,
take notice if you get here on
time, you get more time for
questions, so, um, as the, as
the, uh, timekeeper, um, just
to, just a reminder. So this is
a question from Representative
Herndon, will you, OK, um, will
you ask Doctor Moyer if she will
explain how internship
opportunities are selected,
would eastern consider having
their students serve as
turns in mental health rooms
that are being established in
public schools around the state
to help students who are
experiencing mental health
challenges or substance abuse or
addiction challenges in their
young lives.
So I am going to answer this
question in part, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, and
then I'm going to defer to our
field director who is
conveniently sitting right
behind me, um.
Our field site placement
selection is based on the
opportunity for students to
Complete either generalist or
clinical social work in that
setting and also receive
supervision by a social worker.
So,
If you want to expand upon that.
Yes, um, what was the first part
of that question I wanted to
internship opportunities are
selected. OK, yeah, we have to,
um develop agreements, um, legal
agreements between the
university and the
Just turn yours off and
And the agencies that are um
selected. So we, there's an
understanding that they will
provide um a social worker or
someone with a similar degree,
um, to provide that supervision
while a student is placed cause
the number of hours students
have to get at internships it's
pretty high. It averages to like
a part-time job, 16 hours a
week, essentially for the entire
time they're doing their
internship.
So it's a supervision component
that is the biggest key, um,
students.
have the freedom and flexibility
to
As long as it's within their
educational level. So for
example, BSW students need to be
focused on generalist work as
Dr. Moyer had explained earlier,
and they would work.
In schools in in the child
welfare system, there's a lot of
different places that students
can do internships. Um, in the
MSW level, it needs to be when
they're in their concentration
and it doesn't need to be
specific to where their
concentration is, which could
include mental health related
services, just like um the
question had asked in the
schools, they could sit in those
rooms, they could provide that
crisis. Um, counseling, um, they
have to have that supervision
though they are not allowed to.
Essentially be let out on their
own.
Does that answer the question
for me.
I don't know if it I'll take
care of here in just a minute.
So I just, um, Mr. Chair, I just
want to end by saying I hope you
get the message from us that we
are desperate, um, and that we
are open to out of the box
solutions. So please do not
hesitate to come to, uh,
probably any member of this
committee with an idea, I mean,
it may be half baked, it may be.
Um,
but we can, we would love to
hear it cause we, we some of us
have been doing this a long time
and seemed to be kind of out of
fresh ideas, so, so, or it feels
like we've done everything and
nothing has worked, so we'd like
some further input. So I'm
encouraging anyone here or
anyone who's listening to, you
know, if you have ideas you
think are a little too far out,
they might not be. So thank,
thank you so much for your
presentations and your work.
Thank you.
Uh, then I have a few questions
of my own, so I'll go right into
those.
Um, I, I, I just think it's
fascinating that you all are
also training latex.
And, and, and, and what a
tremendous need there is in this
state for that particular
Uh.
One year and out, one year and
out and able to do some work,
uh, thank you for that and, and
I, I would hope that a lot of
the other two-year programs
around the state begin
developing laid act
concentrations. This is a huge
need that we really could build
on.
Um, what, what's your capacity,
Dr. Moyers, for growth. Uh, how,
how big can your program get?
Uh, do you think?
I know cause you just, I mean,
in, in 3 months, you, you, you
attracted 3335 applicants
admissions, not applicants, but
admissions,
what, what do you think is the
real potential? Could you, will
you be able to reach and and
half of those.
will be one year they'll get
their MSW in one year, a certain
percentage, but was it about
half? Yes, from memory it's
about half and I could.
To help out their um the rehab
facility down there in Roswell.
We just haven't seen them
trickle to our side, um, in
terms of capacity of the
program, um, uh, Doctor Lorenz
has been in.
A great support and an excellent
communicator with this, and I
think that the way we would, the
way we anticipate growing and we
do have the capacity to grow as
we would bring on adjunct as
needed until the numbers
stabilize and then we would look
at exploring more full
timelines. Um, it really becomes
a question of
Quality of instruction, and the
ability to support our students.
We, I don't think as an
institution we have a desire to
just grow massive and lose our
mission.
Great, um,
I, I, I, I just want to
emphasize for the committee how,
how important it is that they're
accepting
directly into 2nd year of the
MSW program, graduates of any
BSW program that, that really is
an important step to take
because uh for somebody to
commit to a two-year program
while they're possibly still
trying to support a family and,
and, and, you know, work in
another agency or have another
job becomes extremely difficult.
But if they could get it done in
one year and actually probably
it amounts to 9 or 10 months,
that would be such an
attraction, I think I think
that's a great, I wish all the
programs would do that.
Um,
And the stipends that you're
getting from AmeriCorps and from
the military, uh, one, and from
the behavioral health
consortium, um, I was gonna ask,
uh, either Doctor Lorenz or you
to talk more a little bit, just
a little bit about the current
status of that consortium or
maybe it was the, the
chancellor, we appropriated last
year, 100 million, I think, $10
million for the construction.
And not for the, which is not
going to build a hospital, but
that'll get you going and how
much more do you need and and
how can we help with that and
what else is going on with that
consortium. If you could give us
an update on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, we,
uh,
Higher education was involved in
that uh consortium of
Almost from its from its
beginning and part of our
support of it is through, uh,
the social work and, and the
providers that that we can
create a pipeline for uh the I
I.
Going off a memory of from our
last meeting and we were talking
about the, you know, a site
selected and uh looking at the
the construction part. Uh,
there, there are a number of
moving parts to to that
consortium into that facility,
uh, the, the providers at
different levels, so I, I can
bring get in more information to
you about the specific needs of
uh the, the consortium of that
effort, and happy to to forward
that to you. I believe
Our next meeting is actually
tomorrow we we do a virtual
meeting. So uh if, if there are
specific questions or things you
would like me to ask, I'm
certainly happy to take that
and, and bring back additional
information for you. Just if
there, if there's going to be a
legislative ask, it would be
good for us to know about it and
and start drumming up some
support for it. Um, the need is
so enormous, and I know Hobbs is
trying to develop their own
psychiatric facility at an old
empty hospital that they that
they purchased and uh um
The the need is enormous and,
and we just have to start
getting serious about it because
we've been talking, talking,
talking about.
Resources and of course
Manpower is one of the the key
resources, but also just some
programs, some actual physical
facilities are also part of the
the need. So that would be
great. Um, I, I, um, um,
I, I'm just trying to refresh my
which of the four counties? It's
not curry though. Curry's not
one of them. For yes, it is, um,
so Curry, Roosevelt other.
Qu and Queen Debaca,
and Quy is Tum carrier.
Good. OK, so Curry is part of
that. That's great. Yes, thank
you, and I, I, I don't know what
else to say. Anybody else have
any follow-up questions? I
really appreciate the
information, the hospitality,
the being willing to host us for
this event. We really wanted to
to firsthand experience what
what's going on in the eastern
plains and, and you've certainly
given us a great start to our 3
days of meetings here. So thank
you all very much, all of the
presenters appreciate it.
a great deal. Thank you. Our
pleasure, Mr. Chairman, and I
would say to, to, uh, Vice Chair
Thompson question outside of the
box, part of what our effort has
been in in my business to be
great community partners and in
a, in a big piece of that is, is
through things like the
consortium or areas where we can
uh provide a service or be a
partner, so some of that is
that, um, my, my.
that never, never done before,
kind of a response and uh that's
perfectly OK with me. I don't
mind being the first and some of
my folks here have heard me say,
you know, the, the really cool
thing is you're the first and
sometimes they really terrifying
thing is you're the first, so,
but we're happy to do that and
we'll we'll certainly bring
that, bring that forward. So
thank you and, and we hope you
enjoy your time here. Great, and
you've given us some ideas for
some legislative initiatives
that would be very, very
interesting to follow. Thank
you. Thank you so much.
So, um, let's go ahead and have
the committee, those of us who
are here and the staff
introduced themselves and we'll
start with you, Representative
Vinson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um my
name is Harlan Vincent. I
proudly serve District 56, which
is Lincoln and Notero where all
the fires and floods and all
that stuff is going on right
now, but a fun fact is this is
my old stomping grounds and I'm
actually from Clovis, and I was
born and raised there and um
it's, it's good to be back and I
can't wait to go over to Taco
Box and get me a free holy
burrito.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Did you play ball at the
Eastern?
I did not. I moved to, I
graduated high school in Clovis
and then I moved to Lincoln
County and started a career in
fire. Oh, OK, great, good.
Representative Cates, would you
introduce yourself? Thank you,
Chair. I'm Representative
Kathleen Cates from District 44,
which is all of Corrales parts
of Rio Rancho, and the northern
part of Albuquerque.
Um, Eleanor Chavez, I represent
um House District 26. It sits on
the west side of Albuquerque.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Liz Thompson House District 24,
which is in the near Northeast
heights of Albuquerque. I have
Uptown in Win Rock, um, and my,
my first, um, knowledge of
eastern New Mexico was when I
ran in a state track meet here
as an 8th grader and you had,
they had cut all the trees way
back, so there was absolutely no
shade and it was really, really
hot and our coach thought we
needed lighter shoes.
So if you didn't run fast, the
bottoms of your feet burned on
the track, so it was kind of an
incentive, but kind of a
disincentive. So I'm happy to be
here.
Yeah.
And we'll ask Xander Dawson to
introduce the staff who were
here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, yes,
uh, the chair said, I'm Xander
Dawson, and I uh staff this
committee and I work for the
Legislative Council service. Uh,
I have two other colleagues from
the legislative council service
here. um, Andrea Lazaro and
Grace Balder Ramos, and then we
have Leo Gonzalez over there who
runs all of our uh AV and IT
stuff. And then we have Nathan
Ekberg back over there who is
from the Legislative Finance
Committee joining us.
And um just to come in about,
about the legislative Finance
Committee staff, they're
actually 6 members of the
legislative Finance Committee
staff who are supportive of this
effort of our interim committee
work. And so
Every meeting we have reports
from them.
They, they're on, as you've
noticed when, when Rachel
contacted us right away, they're
listening in to the meetings and
following on what's going on.
And so we're trying to make the
work that we do in gathering
information on health and human
service issues tie in more
tightly with the work of the
legislative Finance Committee,
which is where the budget gets
prepared and it's been
frustrating in the past that so
little of what we have
identified as
needs and priorities gets into
the budget because by the time
we finalize our work, the budget
is pretty well finished and, and
so this is our effort at trying
to
Feed it in earlier and, and to
get some of those ideas
incorporated into the actual
document that comes out uh and
that we
Hope that the legislature will
pass.
Um, with that, we'll go to our
next, oh, let me introduce
myself. I, I forgot to do that.
I'm Jerry Ortizino. I'm a, a
state senator for District 12,
which is downtown Albuquerque,
the boundaries actually have
changed considerably District 12
in January will be up in Rio
Rancho and uh Taylor Ranch on
the far northwest part of the
county and, and in Sandoval
County, my district will be, uh,
the numbers being transferred to
a brand new district.
That's created up there. My old
district will be divvied up
among 6 other senators. Uh, I
will be retiring at the end of
the year. That's why I did not
object to that particular
evisceration of my district. Um,
and I'm a social worker by
training, so I, and he worked
at, I got my start in in social
work as a child protective
service worker and adoption
worker of foster care worker,
and then, um,
What we used to call social
worker fors. I don't think they
exist anymore. We heard the
other day that social workers,
uh, make up 7% of the CYFD staff
these days. When the consent
decree was lifted in 2004.
I'm repeating myself here, but
it's something that I think just
bears saying.
When we finally got out from a
20 year process of being under
federal court supervision of the
Department for our inadequacies.
And we cleared it every single
child welfare position in the
state was a licensed social
worker.
And as soon as the federal
The court lifted its oversight,
we started backsliding until we
reached the point now we're at
7%.
And it can be done, but it took
20 years to get there. It's
taken 20 years now. It's exactly
20 years since the consent
decree was lifted to get back
into the trough, and it may take
another 20 years to get out, but
we've got to. We just absolutely
have to get out.
So thank you for the work you're
doing. It's essential to the
improvement of the entire field
in the state but also to that
particular department it's
crucial.
And with that, let's go to
Philip. Uh, we heard from you
last summer. I think we were all
eager to hear from you again,
how things are progressing and
how things are not progressing.
Both, both equally important.
Thanks Mr. Chairman. And now
that you're retiring, if you're
looking for work, we're always
looking for social workers in
Carlsbad, so.
Also before the NMU crowd
leaves, we do paid internships
for social workers, BA and
master's level, so love to talk
to you guys about that, but I've
got to do this first. We'll talk
to you later.
Uh, but thank you for having me
back. Uh, it's a great pleasure
to, to share with you guys and
partner with you guys in, in
trying to make things better for
the people of Carlsbad and the
whole state of New Mexico. I'm
Phil Houston. I'm the executive
director at Lifehouse. I founded
Lifehouse 8 years ago. Um, we
provide mental health and
behavioral services to a large
portion of the state, but we're
headquartered in, in Carlsbad.
Um, and I'll go into some of the
details of that later. I'm also
a member of the board for the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Providers Association.
Uh, congratulations to, to Mr.
Chairman for winning our
Lifetime Achievement Award this
year, the Nancy Jo Archer Award,
and so we appreciate all the
work that you've put into the
behavioral health system. Um.
I also, you know, my, my
presentation last year actually
did really make some progress. I
brought up an issue around detox
pharmacy issues, and
Representative Jones introduced
a bill that was sponsored by
Representative Thompson and
Chavez as well as Representative
Catherine Brown, uh, who's in
our home district and that even
though it didn't get a message
from the governor still uh kind
of move the conversation forward
and brought attention to the
issues, so I appreciate the work
that you guys do and the support
that you've given us in that,
um.
I'm also excited tomorrow,
Maggie McAllan will be
presenting on the data project
that the providers association
is doing, and that's something
that Lifehouse is a part of. Um,
you also hear later today from
Nick Bucas with BHSD and Dana
Flannery from Medicaid who both
helped me with the information I
need for this presentation and
in the work that we do, so we're
glad to have such great partners
all around the state.
Um, you know, our, our mission
really has been at Lifehouse to
change in a significantly
statistically significant way
that outcomes around behavioral
health and substance use in our
area. And we feel like the way
to do that is building a
continuum of care with that
fills as many of the gaps as
possible. Um.
And that's really what we've
tried to do and I won't go into
too much detail because of time,
but we provide detox, rehab,
sober living, intensive
outpatient, outpatient
counseling, peer support, case
management, family support
services, the primary care
clinic, um, as well as some
other outpatient services that
we do, um, to try to have that
full continuum of care, um, and
we've built that mostly over the
last 3 years, uh, really we
started just doing sober living
in it.
It's been great to be able to
meet the needs in our community
and and grow so rapidly. Uh, and
it is possible for that to we
have a lot going on now since
the last time I talked to you
that I want to update you on
real quick. Um, one is that
we're going to be one of the
first, we are one of the first
provisionally certified CCBHCs.
We're on track, uh, in January
to be fully certified as a
certified community Behavioral
Health Center, which means we're
providing a whole array of
outpatient services.
Including crisis services that
um meet that federal standard,
um, do encourage you guys to
support CCBHC and the funding
that needs to go with that for
that to be a a robust system
that really ensures that
communities that are served by
CCBHCs have a good array of
services to meet behavioral
health needs that, um, is often
lacking. With that, we're
starting a few programs. One is
our mobile crisis program which
we plan to launch.
Next month, um, we're we're
right on the cusp of launching
that for the whole of Eddie
County where we will send out
teams of, of our staff that have
been specially trained to
address behavioral health crises
and we've worked closely with
local law enforcement and first
responders, and they're excited
to have that. Uh, we've expanded
our outpatient case management
and CCSS programs. We're
starting an AT program, act as
assertive community treatment.
It's to help give holistic care
to people with serious mental
illness to keep them in the
community
rather than being
institutionalized or
hospitalized. It's uh the
highest level of care that we
can offer without becoming a
psychiatric facility inpatient
wise.
We've started construction and
will complete by the end of year
construction on two more sober
living homes, which will bring
us up to 48 sober living beds
that we're able to offer. Um,
we've expanded the RS program
which provides peer support
services in the Eddie County
Detention facility, so that both
group and individual services to
help people be prepared to
transition out and it also gives
them a connection with our
agency so that right when they
get out, they're already in our
system, easily able to transfer
to other services and help them
get back on track.
Uh, through a county grant, uh,
we've started an overdose
response program so when there's
a non-fatal overdose in our
county, we're working on a
system so that we're able to
respond to provide support to
the individual and the family as
much as they're willing to
receive. Uh, we got a grant to
do housing for, uh, it's called
the Fresh Start program through
BHSD, um, where we provide
housing support for people in
opioid recovery, uh, to give
rental assistance and, and
support for six months.
We've expanded our our MAT
program to include long-acting
buprenorphine injections. We're
starting in adolescent IOP IOP
program in the Carlsbad High
School. So when a kid uh has a
problem with substance use
rather than getting suspended
and sent home. We want to have a
program that they can
participate in in the school.
So they get the services they
need and they're not just left
at home to probably not get
better with the problem. Uh, and
then we've also made a contract
with our hospital. Hospitals
became required to provide
Espert, which is screening brief
intervention and referral to
treatment for individuals that
come in presenting with a
certain level of mental health
problem and we've contracted
with our hospital to provide the
brief interventions when folks
score that way. So we have a lot
going on, a lot of things that
we're doing in the community,
partnering with a lot of
agencies, um.
Just really to to try to make
the outcomes better in Eddie
County and in our surrounding
area, and we feel like it's made
a big difference to have this
continuum of care available in
the support from you all in the
state as well as our local and
federal partners has been
helpful in getting that all
going.
You should have a.
A set of slides of PowerPoint
presentation, um.
I'm gonna kind of use today to,
to explain what I, what I hope
will give some solutions to some
of the issues that we face in
the the system and how we can
fund and better provide
substance use treatment in
particular, um, and so you guys
all do have a copy of that? OK,
great. Um,
Aim is the American Society of
Addiction Medicine, and they
provide a standards for levels
of care.
That are nationally recognized
in all of the regulations in New
Mexico are built around these
levels of care categorizations
that AA promulgates, um.
And so, the first thing is to
understand the, the really they
have 4 levels and then recovery
residents that they provide and
who they serve. So the, the
fourth level as you'll see at
the top of your sheet is is
hospitals or what they call
inpatient care, and that's
really people who are
experiencing a significant
psychosis or having serious
medical problems related to
withdrawal or intoxication that
it's not necessarily a treatment
level of the substance use
disorder, but mainly of the, the
medical.
issue that's preventing them
from engaging in treatment.
Um, level 3 is for those who
have a moderate to high risk of
substance use that could cause
harm or loss and that they
require a need for 24/7 support
to provide the safety stability
and the, the commitment to care
that they need. And that
language is straight out of ASA.
If you go to level 2, these are
the intensive outpatient levels
of care. This would include um
IOP and PHP partial
hospitalization. And that's for
folks that have low to moderate
risk of substance use to cause
harm or loss and a need for
clinical and services multiple
times a week. And so I think,
before I get to the rest, I
think you guys would agree that
these level 2 and 3 are areas
that we desperately need and
where we expect a lot of our
efforts to be focused if we're
Adressing the opioid and really
the alcohol epidemic that we
have in New Mexico.
Um,
Then in level one, you'll see
this is
Basically typical outpatient
therapy could be group an
individual, and it's for those
who have a low or very low
likelihood of use that would
have a negative but a serious
consequence. And they're able to
prevent use without intensive
services. So an important level
of care, but maybe not where we
see the biggest need.
Um, and so just to understand on
the next slide what Lifehouse
provides. We have, we're not a
hospital, but all the other
levels of care we do touch on.
And so level 3.7 is medically
managed residential, and that's
where our detox is. We do, we
have 24 hour nursing, we help
people through the process of
withdrawal from mostly alcohol
and opiates, but other
substances as well. And then we
have our residential treatment
center where we have 32 beds,
which is a 3.5 level um program.
And then you go down to level 2,
we have IOP. You actually can
offer partial hospitalization
unless you're a hospital in New
Mexico, which is something we
should probably fix because it
really doesn't have anything to
do with being a hospital. It's
just in the name, but um.
Good place to update our
regulations, but we have 16
beds. I mentioned that we're
opening an IOP in the high
school, which will add another
16 spots and then we're also
opening a second adult IOP, um,
and so that's that second level
of care. And then we offer all
kinds of outpatient and group
counseling, um, and then also in
the recovery residency, which
isn't really something that's
new to AA. It's not something
currently funded by Medicaid,
uh, in our state or anywhere
else as far as I know, but we
have 6 sober living homes
including sober living for women
with children, um, and the
housing programs that I
mentioned earlier and across all
those levels of care we offer
some other things like peer
support, uh, CCSS and craft,
which is the family support
element of the program.
So that's kind of what AM looks
like and what our continuum of
care looks like and just to get
a feel for the recent increases
in approach that we've taken to
building the provider network is
what I kind of want to look at
next and um I think there's a
general feeling that we've
dumped a bunch of money into
behavioral health lately. Um,
that it's been significantly
invested in and
My first point, and you'll see
this on the next slide is we
actually haven't.
Significantly increased the
general fund spending to
behavioral health. If you look
at the state general fund, and
this is out of House Bill 2 and
LFC presentation last month, but
um they didn't use the graph,
but I use the data. If you look
at the state general fund
spending versus what we've spent
on Medicaid behavioral health
out of the state general fund.
We haven't even kept track with
the growth in the budget on
average and so I think.
We've used the word a lot and
confuse that with actually
investing in the system a lot
and um I think that's an
important point to understand.
But, but I want us to understand
also the time that it takes when
we do invest to to build things
up, and I'll get to that towards
the end of my presentation. Um,
if you go to the next, the next
slide, and it shows how the rate
increases have affected the, the
different levels of care. And
I'll just point out kind of
where we sit as Lifehouse. We're
the largest residential
provider in the southern half of
the state.
Um, even though we're not in the
highest populated area. There's
no larger uh 3.5 level rehab.
Uh, where the primary provider
of behavioral health services of
all kinds and really the only
provider of substance use
services in Eddie County. Um,
but only 45% of our residential
clients come from Eddie County
because we get folks from
obviously a lot from Hobbs and
Roswell, but all the way across
the southern half from Las
Cruces, Demming, Silver City,
Lordsburg, I'll send a lot of
people to to us because even
though we're 5 or 6 hours away,
we're the closest.
rehab in the state to them often
or at least the closest that has
availability. Um, and we've,
we've grown rapidly. We're
fairly decent sized agency in
the last 3 years we've created
about 80 jobs in the behavioral
health field, um, and so we've
done a lot of work. I, I
mentioned to you guys last year
when we talked about these rate
increases that I thought this,
the big increase that we talked
about would affect our agency by
about $70,000. And it turns out
I was wrong. It ended up being
$80,000 but still I think a
less than what you may have
hoped would would get to us as
as providers and the type of
work that we're doing. But if
you look at the next chart, you
can see kind of how the, the
rate increase last year went.
Um,
So the hospital around the
corner from us is whose data I
looked at. They're about a block
away from us. They were
considered an underserved area,
so they got about a 20% across
the board increase, um.
For-profit hospital that LFC
says they have a 6% profit
margin, which is 6 times at
least larger than ours. Um, they
got about a 20% increase last
year. I, I'm not familiar enough
about what happened in FY 25, to
tell you what hospitals got, but
I think it was very targeted and
I'm not sure how it affected our
hospital, but that's not very
relevant. Um, level 3 care, um,
which is where our detox and our
rehab are, this is, as I'll
remind you, for moderate and
Severe substance use patients
where, you know, their substance
use creates a significant risk
of harm and loss in their lives,
and they need stable, safe
environment to get better. Got 0
increase in either year from the
uh.
The raises to Medicaid and part
of that's because of how RTCs
are structured and I'll talk a
little bit later about a
solution to this, but we're
paid, we turn in a cost report
of what our expenses were in a
previous year, and we don't do
this every year.
And then we get paid, they take
the amount divided by the number
of bed days that we provided and
pay us that exact amount.
And so we get paid what it used
to cost to provide the service
is how residential treatment is
provided, um.
So that's why and it's so it's
not a fixed rate, it's different
by agency, and that's why in
across the board rate increase
got left out. Um.
If you go down to the IOP, the
intensive outpatient level of
care.
It, like many other special
burial services got a 4.6%
increase in the 20 FY 24
increase,
um, in FY 25, it'll get whatever
is left over after the.
Increase those codes that have a
Medicare equivalent, which is
largely outpatient, which uh is
next to outpatient codes, so
this is for those that have very
low or low risk of their
substance use being disruptive
to their life, got a 29%
increase on average in 2024 and
Medicare doesn't have an
inpatient, I mean an intensive
outpatient uh uh code. It is
not.
See, Medicare is designed for
services for a different
demographic than those that
typically struggle with
substance use and
When we indexed to that, we
amplify that bias, uh, to, to
our system. Um, if we were to go
to 150% of CMS, which the
language in house to those past
says that we can go up to 150%,
um.
That would be another 25%
increase to that level of care
that wouldn't affect any of the
other levels that I just
mentioned.
And then recovery residency, as
I mentioned, is not something
funded by Medicaid. Um, so if
you go to the next.
Slide on there. It shows kind of
in a graphic way what this looks
like in FY 24.
And you'll see that.
Level 2 and 3, the areas that
serve those with moderate to
severe substance use needs that
could disrupt their lives, uh,
was very far left behind. You
have to understand for us, we're
competing against.
Level 4 for our nurses and our
facilities and we're competing
against level 1 for our
therapists and other behavioral
health staff and you can imagine
that um,
That puts us at quite a
disadvantage when, when they can
pay that and and we don't get
those increases and so if you
look at FY 25, the scale is
actually doubled there.
And I put some question marks
and I'll tell you why in just a
minute, but if the rate
increases go as we expect them
to go, you'll see that.
We're still significantly left
behind. We did get about a 7%
increase to our residential
treatment rate, which means that
in the previous year.
We had to have lost that it cost
us more than what we were
getting reimbursed to to provide
the service so that now our rate
can be increased. And there's no
back pay for those things that
cost us more. Um, so that's why
there's an asterisk there, but
you can see.
It's a pretty disproportionate
way that it's been applied to
the system and I think that that
that's something that, that we
need to be aware of. Now, the
first thing that I really want
to encourage you all to do, the
Healthcare Authority is not set
what the proposed rate increase
will be for FY 25. That's will
become effective in January.
That's what was passed in House
Bill 2, and you'll have a chance
to to speak with Director
Flannery this afternoon and you
guys may know Secretary Amijo
and be able to encourage.
them to make sure that those
increases are even across all
service levels, including
special behavior health so that
outpatient care isn't
prioritized. What we're starting
to see is outpatient, if you're
an independently licensed
provider, you can do really well
to go see outpatient clients,
and so why would you stay in a
behavioral health agency that
provides other things and from
the LFC report that was provided
last month, we know that the
greatest amount of services are
going to outpatient and they're
going to the.
The highest end economically of
the Medicaid group and the
expansion bracket, and so what
we've expanded is paying for the
most, uh, the least needy both
Financially and behavioral
health wise is who's gotten the
greatest benefit from the
increases that we've made so
far. And so I would encourage
you to encourage them in and the
rate increase that they're about
to propose to make sure that
it's equitable across all levels
of care.
I think the second thing that I
want to bring out and this
illustrates why kind of the the
patchwork and piecemeal approach
that we've taken to behavioral
health has created some
imbalances in the system. Um,
when, you know, our outpatient
gets served, so or gets such a
big increase, it makes it harder
for us to retain those in other
places. Last year, there was a
few million dollars allocated to
CYFD for social workers. So if
they increase what they're
paying by 15 or 20,000.
They take it and then, you know,
corrections gets bonuses a few
years ago for it. Education
before that, and so we're just
passing people around and not
addressing the whole system, and
I think the, the core of the
system where people will find
care for the longest amount of
time is in the provider network
and that's where we need to
build the system the most and,
and have the provider network
serve those other agencies. I
told you how we work in our
jail, our school, and our
hospital and a a strong provider
network.
can help and can better oversee
and supervise behavioral health
services. Um,
I'll go on to the.
The last 2nd to last slide real
quick. And I just want to run
through this um briefly to
explain what it's like for us to
start a program. Uh, one of the
issues, you know, we've put
money in the system, how, why,
why don't we see more of a, a
result and so we started our
detox program, um, and we still
haven't
Would they complete detox and
then make it back to us
successfully because of all the
logistical problems and the gaps
in care there. So in fall of
2021, we started to fundraise
for the and begin the
renovations in the winter and
spring, we renovated the space.
We started hiring and training
our staff. We started launching
it in 2022 in the summer in
July, we provided our first
services, um, you have to
provide 6 months of a service
before you can become
CFAccredited, um, or, or apply
for
Accreditation with CAF which is
required to be providing any of
the level 3 services in New
Mexico, so winter 2023, we
reached that point. We realized
that there's a discrepancy
between CAS requirements and New
Mexico's requirements for the
medical director. We had a
psychiatric nurse practitioner.
Carr said that wasn't OK. We
spent a couple of months going
back, back and forth with them.
Ultimately they said, no, you
have to have an MD on the books,
which, as you can imagine an MD
with a behavioral health or
substance use specialty in
Carlsbad, New Mexic.
is not.
You know, just looking for work
and so it took us several months
to find someone in Albuquerque.
Um, so that's the summer of
2023. So then we can finally get
scheduled with Karf which comes
in October of 2023 and December
of 2023 were approved for three
years by CAF. In January, we
begin the process of the rate
setting, as I mentioned, all
every program gets a different
rate based on costs. So we
started that process in January,
um, in February, we actually had
to reapply to BHSD because the
application we had made to
provide the service in 2022 was
lost and
could find it. Um, and then in
2024, we had to resubmit that
application because the portal
didn't work and some of the
documents were lost in April, we
submitted the information to the
rate setting company, uh, the,
the, the contractor.
In May they were waiting on
responses from the state to give
us the rate. In late June, we
finally got the rate, so I know
what the rate is, but as of
today, uh, we still don't have a
letter for that Medicaid rate.
And then it takes about a month
after we get that letter to get
a new Medicaid number for the
service because it has to have a
separate Medicaid number and
then we send that to each of the
MCOs that would then add that
service to our contract, which
is supposed to take 30 to 45
days, but.
Doesn't always happen how it's
supposed to. And then we provide
the first service and it takes
as you, you know, 3 to 6 weeks
to get paid. And so we started
and made the commitment to open
our detox program and mid-2021
and we're on track if we're
lucky to get our first Medicaid
payment for that in December of
2024. In that time, we've been
receiving a rate through the
state, um, that's about $100
less than what it cost us to
provide the service.
So
we expect that by the time we
start getting paid, it will have
cost us about $500,000 to start
the program and in our rate
setting process those startup
funds were denied as part of
the, the cost that would be paid
and so, um, that's, it, it takes
time to start a program. It
does. There's a lot to it. It's
not easy, but we've done things
to make it more difficult and
more timely, uh, more time
consuming. And so, really, I
think the, the third thing I
want to ask you guys and and
there's a
List of the things I'm, I'm
asking of you guys, but I think
we need to change how we pay
residential treatment. Um, I
think there's a really good
solution for it, but.
First of all, I think when
someone's accredited, they
should automatically be
recognized as able to provide
the service and shouldn't have
to do additional application
processes and site visits and
the CAF process is extremely
thorough and laborious and costs
several $1000 every few years to
do it and should be adequate.
Uh, and then secondly, I think
we need to get away from a
cost-based report where we're
getting paid what it used to
cost us to provide the service,
which is always gonna be behind.
Um, currently we have to bill
every claim for residential
treatment twice. We bill
Medicaid for part of it and then
we build a state, a room and
board fee that I told you guys
about last year that's still at
$50. Um, but I think if we took
that $50 room and board free,
moved it to Medicaid and got a
3.5 times match on it. We could
raise residential treatment
rates by.
$150 to $250 a day.
And put us in a much more
sustainable reimbursement model
and would give us a flat rate
that's much cleaner. It would
save us and the state time and
money. And so, uh, I'd like to
ask you guys to help us to
advocate for that as well as
trying to take a systemic
approach to workforce
development improving the system
and
Also encouraging the HCA when
they do their rate increase this
year to, to make it equitable
across specialized behavioral
health services as well as those
things that Medicare does. So I
really appreciate the
opportunity to present to you
guys today and I'd love to
answer some questions.
Just if you could clarify one
thing before we go to the
committee,
um,
Have you taken your
recommendations to the Medicaid
advisory Committee of are they
familiar with this too, or, or
is that something that we would
also need to bring up to them
not to the committee, uh, but
like I mentioned to you guys,
I've talked with both, uh.
Nick Bs and Dana Flannery about
this and and they've been very
willing to talk about these
things, so, um, I've approached
it from that side. You're
essentially you're asking us to
lend our voice to what's already
a petition that's already been
planted with him.
OK, great.
Members of the committee.
Lots of good, good suggestions
and solid information.
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. What is mess?
And I'm sorry it takes so long.
Um, for you to get all this
stuff taken care of.
Um, I did have some questions in
terms of the some of the
programs that you talked about,
um, one of them that really
piqued my interest was the.
Um,
Program that you have started up
for um kids in high school and
working with the with the
schools. Can you talk about that
a little bit more in terms of,
you know, numbers of kids that
you're looking at and um, you
know, what are they presenting
with?
Yeah, one of the things, Mr.
Chairman, that we're hearing
regularly from our community is
that substance use among
teenagers is on the rise.
They're encountering more and
more often, uh, a lot of it is
around, uh, marijuana, the
vapes, marijuana vapes, they're
catching a lot, but also
fentanyl is making its way into
the schools and into.
Teenagers, um, our plan is
currently in we're finalizing
the details and we plan to have
this going this fall semester,
um, would be to have essentially
a classroom where we are all the
time or at least every week
where students that are caught
with that rather than being
suspended and and sent home
where it's not going to help
their substance use problem
could receive treatment and
maybe still be able to attend at
least some of their classes,
maybe their core classes, while
they're receiving the help that
they need and the support that
they need.
Um, this is a kind of a pilot
project, so it's very, very kind
of experimental. We're trying to
figure out, we have to navigate
some of the rules that the
schools have to follow, um,
because schools aren't really
designed to provide.
Treatment and we, you know,
we're trying to figure out a way
to to model it so that it
doesn't disrupt their education,
but they can get all the
treatment they need.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and is that for
um high school students, or are
you looking at middle school
we're currently doing this just
at the high school. Um, we've
talked with the school system by
doing it the alternative high
school as well, um, it really,
after we do it as a pilot
project, we'll see how it goes.
I mean, I think there's
certainly a degree of need for
it in the middle school level as
well. Um, but at the main high
school is where we're going to
have the largest population to
work with, and we think we can
keep a steady group of of
students in the program to see
If it's sustainable and refine
the process. And then my other
question has to do with the
residential treatment beds. Are
all your beds full?
So Mr. Chairman, in our detox,
we have a capacity of 12 and our
average bed, um, since this is
8, but detox is, I mean, it has
a lot of turnover, uh, both
because it's a shorter service
and because a lot of times when
people start experiencing those
symptoms, they're decide not to
continue on our residential
side, our capacity is 32 and our
average is about 27, but.
More or less we're full, but our
waitlists aren't long.
So there's, there's that margin
is just kind of the turnover
that's constantly happening of
people coming in and out that.
It's just the nature of both the
population and the length of
time of the service, OK. And
then the other question that I
have too is, um, Mr. Chair, in
terms of uh substance abuse, are
you seeing an increase, you
know, you said you, you
mentioned marijuana and
fentanyl.
But it
Are you seeing fentanyl on the
rise and sort of taking over,
um, marijuana being replaced
with that or how's it, how does
that?
Looking,
well, Mr. Chairman, we're seeing
a lot of polysubstance use,
probably more than ever before,
where they're using multiple
different substances. We see a
lot of mixing with met and
fentanyl. We see marijuana on
board and probably the majority
of our patients, uh, but usually
that's not the main diagnosis,
the presenting problem that they
get, um, our detox, it's about 2
to 1, alcohol to or sorry
fentanyl alcohol.
Um,
In our
residential program, meth is
still the prominent primary
diagnosis, so fentanyl with his
prom as it is, is not, at least
in the residential treatment
side overtaken meth as being the
most common. I will say we
tested some fentanyl that
someone brought into the
facility when they entered detox
the other day and it didn't have
any fentanyl in it. It had
kratom and xylazine in it, and
so, um.
What we see is we don't know
what people are really taking
because the pills look like
fentanyl, but until you test
them, you don't really know what
they are and people are
reporting to us more and more
regularly that they're smoking
30 to 50 fentanyl pills a day
and so it's.
Pretty significant in in the
detox side what that requires as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's huge. It's a lot.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I was,
as you were talking, I was
thinking back and I don't know
how far back, hopefully not too
far about them doing some water
sampling in high schools and,
and cocaine showed up to be the,
you know, what the, the highest
prevalence, and that just seemed
really out of whack to me. I
mean, for one thing, I at least,
uh, it's still expensive, um, so
do you have any sense on, on.
This was in the high school. So,
um, you talked a little bit
about it, about cannabis still
be, you know, being kind of the
underlying, but what, what do
you see in terms of high school?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, I think
often the kids that are getting
involved in drugs beyond
marijuana aren't staying in the
high school and so I think you
have teenagers that are using
those, but they tend to not,
they, if they, they do, they get
expelled pretty quickly, um, and
so that creates a problem. And
so I think what you see in the
high school are drugs that are
Um, I, I guess can be used while
participating to some degree in
school, um, unfortunately, and
you know, we, we do still see
some cocaine, you still see some
over the counter uh opioid
pills, you see benzos, uh, kind
of any of the prescription
things that kids can get a hold
of, um, but by and large,
alcohol and marijuana are are
huge problems in the schools. I
mean, if you look at the most
recent study from the state
epidemiologist, it's about 40%
of senior.
have been drinking regularly and
more than a third of them have
been smoking marijuana
regularly, um,
and, and that's in the, you
know, the surveys that they fill
out and so I have to imagine
it's a little bit worse than
that even so it's pretty
prevalent among teenagers, um,
just with, with alcohol and
marijuana, which we know are
both developmentally problematic
and.
And then certainly you see some
of the higher.
Uh, intensity drugs as well.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
I'm gonna do a little plug for
the raising the alcohol tax. We
haven't raised taxes on alcohol
in New Mexico for over 30 years.
Um, and we, we know from tobacco
studies that the one way, the
best way to,
um, keep kids from using tobacco
products is price and so by
increasing taxes, we decrease
the use of tobacco products by.
Youth and I would, I would
assume that the same would be
true for alcohol, you know, the
teens, most teens don't have
unlimited resources and uh so
just throwing a plug in there
for Representative Ferrari's
alcohol tax because I'm, I'm a
big supporter of that too. Thank
you so much for the work that
you do and all these things for
us to, to uh think about for
days to come. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Hickey, we'll just go
right around the line here. Do
you have any questions?
And welcome, by the way. Thank
you.
Good to see everyone.
Uh,
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Uh, Phil, thank you for doing
all that you've been doing and
your patients uh is phenomenal.
I know the issue of getting the
pay structured correctly and,
and now we just continue to run
into bureaucratic issues within.
Um, the, the new HCA, um, and
Somehow.
If this is a priority and if the
governor's, uh, uh,
Desire and, and, and the
legislature's desire to get a
handle on crime, competency, and
so forth, you'd think that the
HCA would want to say, yeah, we
can do this, um, and that's
certainly been a, a problem for
a lot of us who saying let's do
this correct, but part of doing
this correct is getting centers
like yours, you know, no more
bureaucratic delays, some sort
of rapid mechanism, otherwise
I
Uh, entrepreneurial folks, and I
say that in the sense of you're
going out and taking a risk and
putting this together, um, who
also want to address these
issues are going to get
discouraged. So, uh, I just want
to point out for the record and,
uh, the executive branch and HCA
is listening, um, the, uh the
Uh.
The harm that's being done,
people not getting services,
that's doing harm and hopefully,
we will figure out how to speed
it up. So I just want to thank
you for your patience around
this. I think it's been 2 years
since you've been bringing this
since we started the increase in
payments and it still isn't done
amazingly, um, so, uh, anything
we can do, Mr. Chair, as a
committee to reinforce next time
we meet with
The healthcare authority. Um,
we've got to get this fixed.
This is.
Oh, she is great. OK, thank you.
Yeah, I know Nick's here, great.
So let's get it fixed today.
Um, great. I'll stick around for
that. OK, absolutely, I'll,
I'll, I'll be a facilitator for
you. Thank you. Um, the, um,
Folks that you have in
residential, how long are they
in residential, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chairman, typically it's
still 30 days, um, it's
difficult to get approval for
more than that because that was
kind of the, the rut in the road
that was set in the system for
so long, uh, that MCOs and, and
in private insurance companies,
both are resistant to go beyond
30 days.
Um, that's like me, Mr.
Chairman, and Phil saying, oh,
let's go back to the 1950s.
Um, most
It most residential treatment
programs identify 180 days.
180 days. I mean, not just with,
with partial coming maybe at 90
days and what have you, but that
is the standard of care and the
uh Senate bill, uh, to 73
parody.
Requires commercial, essentially
to exceed to the standards of
care, which are written by the
the addiction, uh, societies and
associations, um, that in
commercial, they have to follow
that. State law says that
Medicaid has to follow that. I
don't know if it's in the
contracts because we had so much
change and maybe, uh,
Uh, Nick can help with this,
but, or, or, uh, Danny can help
with this, but a lot of these
things under Nicole were
supposed to be written in the
contract that it would parallel
the commercial. Nonetheless,
state law says they have to
follow, um, the, the Medicaid
has filed state law, and this is
state law. So, um, you know, my
sense is, is that why you've got
30 days and 30 some odd people
if you really stretch this out,
you'd need much more, but again.
How are you going to be able to
do this if you aren't getting
paid?
How are you going to build up
capital if you're not getting
paid?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'll say we
have one full-time person that
just does prior os for
residential treatment, and we
don't, uh, usually it's just a
matter of not having the time
and money to fight the denials
for extended time. I mean, um,
it, it's very laborious to to
try to fight those things and
uh.
The process and a lot of times
we've already either given the
service to the client or they're
waiting sitting there waiting.
And so, um,
It's usually not worth the fight
and we take the 30 days and,
and, and stick with it. The
other thing I'll say the way
that we've gotten around the
longer term is with our sober
living and using IOP, which is a
good combination, but I do think
often there needs to be an
intermediate step at least or
longer time in that care to
really do what's clinically best
for the patient, but we often
have to settle for what we can
get paid for, uh, that again is,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
And that's so unfortunate to
hear here. I, I'm imagining, and
I don't know if you've got any
way to measure, um, what I call
the washing machine effect is
the recycling. Uh, people who,
the, the probability of people
with just 30 days of inpatient
and particularly, I mean, if
they're in a great, uh,
Sober living in IOP maybe, but
again, the data is showing, you
know, 180 days in
inpatient to partial to then IOP
and, um, intensive.
Uh
Or I mean, basically for someone
to have a chance of sobriety, I
know at the Gateway Center,
they're talking 18 months of
living in a situation where
there is constant reinforcement,
uh, loosening as it goes, 18
months to have a chance at full
sobriety and without that 18
months, it's the washing machine
and I would love to see if
you've got some data on how much
washing, uh, you're doing, um,
over and over.
Again and comparing it to
standards where it's longer and
I know that Bernalio County is,
is looking at a number of those
things, uh, as they use the
gateway center, so I'd encourage
you to, um, do that. And Mr.
Chairman, if we might, uh, we
should have the MCOs come and
present to us why they are only
doing this old standard and
essentially, uh, uh, make this
bold statement, violating state
law.
I mean they are violating state
law.
And we should call them out on
violating state law.
So I, it'd be great if in the
future we could get the MCOs to
come and talk specifically about
how they're dealing with uh uh
addiction issues. So, uh, I got
a lot more questions. I'll ask
them offline for you, um, the,
uh, just this one last one for
public is, um,
In what you're doing, Peak is
doing
Berlio County Gateway Gallup,
Las Cruces, the AOT program
there.
Is there any coordination
between you all and do you, do
you, I mean, I know you have a
behavioral health provider
association meeting once a year,
but are we sitting down and
coordinating who's doing what,
where, because I don't see a
plan for this statewide.
Uh, maybe there's one, but I, I
just haven't been familiarized
with it and it would seem to me
it needs to come from the
experiences that I'm sure you
talk to each other, but could
you just give us some insight
into that as we look at trying
to again meet with the governor
and the legislature both want to
do, but how do we have the
resources in the plan to put the
resources in place in terms of
what our standards of care.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, um, I'll
respond to that and a couple of
other things that you said. I, I
definitely think there is an
absence of uh strategic approach
to how we've taken this on, uh,
that is unfortunate. I will say
I've coordinated with all of the
other providers that provide
detox in rural areas about the
detox pharmacy issues and we've
been working together to find
solutions, um, but I also say
there's only like 3 or 4 of us
because it's so difficult to do
in our state.
That
You know, why would you start
it? Um, we've been offered the
opportunity to start in other
communities and I've just told
people we can't afford to do it,
um, until the system works
better, um, the provider
association does provide a lot
of coordination and
communication, coordinated
effort, um, the work they're
doing around the data to set up
for CCBHC and things like that
is helpful, um.
But
Really, because on the provider
side we don't control the
funding and the regulation. It's
hard for us to drive the
strategy. I do hope that as
strategy is developed, providers
will be brought to the table
because often, um, strategies
are conceived in Santa Fe and
then where the guinea pigs for
them later and we could have
saved everyone a lot of trouble
if we were on board from the
beginning and I do appreciate
the times when we have been
included in, in some of these
discussions, but I do think uh
strategy is critical for us to
be successful at this. Just
A couple other things. I mean, I
think really with the washing
machine, uh, what we find is,
right, we get more of that for
people that just do detox and a
little bit less if they just do
our DC and a little bit less. So
the longer they're in the care,
the less that happens. I think
really the cost of that gets
borne out by the state and CYFD
and the corrections department
and things like that, that's
where we really pay for those
things emergency rooms and, and
so, um, we're not saving money
by not keeping.
people in RTC, but it's somebody
else's problem, um, and so
sometimes that becomes the, the
driving force. Um, and also with
the authorizations, you know, a
lot of times we'll get
authorizations for 14 days at a
time or all right, we'll give
you another 5 days and then you
have to do the process again and
it becomes, you know, what's
worth the the fight and, and the
hassle to and what's the
likelihood to actually get
anything else, so we kind of are
at the mercy of the, the payer
system sometimes.
For that, so
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm going
to go back to Representative
Thompson for just a follow up on
this, and then we'll go on to
Representative Kate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
joined the, um,
Uh,
echo artificial intelligence in
healthcare, um, there, their
first call on last Friday.
And one of the things that
they're looking at trying to do
is to have AI help with prior
authorization. Um, so you
wouldn't have, I mean, the, the
thought, the hope is that you
wouldn't have to hire, you know,
5 more people to do prior
authorizations if they can
figure out a way to use AI kind
of.
Playing the insurance game, um,
right along with the insurers,
um, because a lot of time is
wasted and the results are great
when you, when you have to go
through prior off, so just
something to keep our fingers
crossed for, um, needless to
say, I was kind of, um,
overwhelmed by all of the AI
stuff, me not being a, a real
tech person, but the, the the
the thought of something to
fight back against the insurance
company's prior authorization is
exciting.
To me. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, the uh we're
about to bring online some AI
tools for our clinicians in in
session that helps speed up
documentation and and write the
note, the summaries of the, the
session for the, the clinician
to reduce documentation time and
have better documentation of the
whole session if they need to go
back and look at it. We'll be
bringing that online in, in the
next month, um, and we did
jokingly talk about getting AI
to do prior authors for us, so
hopefully the technology is
there soon.
It strikes me that maybe CYFD
could begin exploring ways to
use AI to, to
Just get the right words into
the case records so that the 4E
penetration rate
would jump appreciably and bring
in the resources we need to
expand the workforce.
So I may not be the demon that
I'm afraid it is.
Representative Cates.
Uh thank you, chair, and, and
thank you again, Phil, for your
presentation. Um, you are, are
always a great presenter and
full of so much um wonderful
even terrifying but wonderful
information. So thank you. Um, I
just wanna go over, I'm gonna uh
follow my vice chair and kind of
hit a bunch of things. I, I do
like this echo idea for uh
pre-authorizations, uh, just to
capitalize on that. I'm not
unsure why what do we need to do
for the MCOs to consider these
requests emergency requests
because you're not, you're not
asking for PT work, um, this is
an emergency for these types of
services to be able to expedite,
um, the pre-approval. I also
don't understand how some
People are getting pre-approval
for 14 days and 30 days. I agree
with Doctor Hickey, Senator
that, um, you know, that is
against the standard of care. I,
I completely support having MCOs
here, but I would like to have
the state agencies who review
their RFPs to be here as well,
because why are they not holding
them accountable. Um, uh, when,
when I fill out an RFP, there's
a process where I have to
provide
follow up that I am meeting my
requirements and I am held
accountable and I don't
understand, uh, why that is not
in there, um, uh, and, and I do
as well, uh, agree with Senator
Hickey that the standard of
care, I mean, I've never, I, I,
I talked to other states.
Nobody's doing that I've talked
to are doing 30 days.
They're, they're, uh, I mean,
the very least is 90 days. It's,
it is 180 days. It is 18 months.
I just talked to a couple people
who spent 12 months, um, I, I
also wanted to mention, uh,
carf, so I know that this is a
different services, but still,
um, you know, gone through the
state and and gone through MCOs.
So through the developmental
disability waiver, car
used to be a requirement, and I
think maybe in the mid 90s
because it is so expensive.
To be able to go through the
state rewrote the standards and
said that you have to have a car
uh certification or go through a
state audit every 3 years per
se, and I think there was cause
they were trying to expand the
services. I'm not sure why they
didn't take that verbiage over
to this as well because you're
absolutely right. If you are,
especially.
If you're able to maintain a 3
year certification for CAF and
not have to do it every single
year. I mean, we're not gonna
have a better quality standard
there,
um
Mr. Chairman, if I could answer
that real quick, um, the state
doesn't have regulations for
this, the AM levels of care
internally and so that's why
they've deferred to to carve
and, and frankly, that's
probably better that we have
Of the standard, the carf cost
actually is built into the rate
and so that part.
Doesn't necessarily create
additional expense. It's, it's
the startup cost before it that
becomes a challenge to deal
with, but I think it's the lack
of a regulation, um, that, that
does that. If I could just go
back to your previous point,
really what AA recommends is a
flexible system where you move
people freely between levels of
care as needed. Um, so that if
they show the progress to step
down, you move them down and if
that doesn't work and they need
to move back up and you can and
freely do that. But in
kind of fee for service model
and prior off model, it's almost
impossible to have that kind of
flexibility. And in most places,
you don't have the continuum
that we have at Lifehouse to be
able to move people freely like
that. I do think in the the
billing manual that was put out
for behavioral health for
comment earlier this year, you
have both that language from AA
that specifically calls for a
flexible level of care and at
the same time in the section on
Medicare and Medicaid, it allows
that they have these, you know,
step, uh, therapy required,
they're allowed to.
pose these different
requirements that are
antithetical to the best
practice of AA. And so I think
we do have to decide internally
it conflicts between the two,
which we're going to, to follow,
um, and so I think that is an
important thing that we figure
out how do we provide a good
continuum of flexible care that
is driven by the patient's need
in progress, um, rather than
something driven by kind of
these other ways of determining
level of care that are driven
by.
Cost in insurance.
Thank you. uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and so does AM
When you're, when you have these
flexible levels of care, uh, is
one of them that an individual
only received 14 days of
treatment?
I think it's
Unlikely, Mr. Chairman, that
that would ever be the
recommendation.
Exactly, thank you. Um, I, uh,
also, it was must be my
misunderstanding. I thought you
reported that the state is not
accepting your carf
certification that they're
asking for other types of uh
information and documents which
is now making it labor intensive
that you're going through both.
Did I misunderstand what you
just reported, Mr. Chairman.
They do recognize car, but there
are additional requirements in
addition to carf that are
placed.
That
In my opinion, are unnecessary
because of the thoroughness of
carf that create delays in
administrative problems for both
us and the state.
Yeah, one last question, Mr.
Chair. Um, the other facilities
you're planning.
To
Open or they all within
The Carlsbad area?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, we have
one of our current sober living
homes is in Artesia, and part of
becoming a CCBHC as we do a
community needs assessment for
our entire kind of catchment
area which is Eddie County, and
we have a lot of interest and
support from the community of
Artesia to expand our services
there and so we're looking at
what we could provide, um, at
least some services in that part
of the county as well. And so,
um, we're expanding a little bit
beyond just Carl's bed into the
rest of the county, but.
We don't have any current plans
to go beyond that at this time.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair, we, we
did have um.
We, we have had reported at this
committee where the behavioral
health programs are at least
providing centralized data so
that as a social worker I can
see where there's an open bed in
the in the state and be able to
find it. That data bank is
supposed to be operational,
although I'm sure it is not
staffed to the level it needs to
be staffed, so I'm sure it has
flaws in it, but we do have a
centralized database.
Or or at least for the open beds
per se, um.
Uh
And so,
Do you see and and I, and I
appreciate you answering
Representative Chavez's question
about, you know, what is your
vacancy rate? Um, your open
beds, um, and, and, and you, and
I understand it's not, it's,
it's humans, so there's
flexibility there. I get it, but
um, we've had a very conflicting
information about whether or not
there are beds available
throughout the state. Um, and so
I'm trying to get a sense of
there's
Um, what I hear from you is
there are not beds open for any
length of period of time is that
uh an accurate depiction. Mr.
Chairman, I think it depends on
the level of care because
there's different availability
depending on the level of care.
I would say just based on my
sense, um, for detox, if, if you
can get to Albuquerque or Las
Cruces, uh, our facility often
we can we.
Take same day admissions, um.
I believe in Gallup they're
often able to as well. You can
if you're looking for RTC around
the state for substance use.
We probably have the shortest
wait list, um.
That I'm aware of and.
Often it's a multi-week or
longer waitlist to get those
beds we do use and maintain the
open beds platform that the
state has, and I would say that
the the issue there is it hasn't
been widely accepted and used by
all facilities or other referral
sites and some of that's because
they haven't accepted some of
it's because it, it's a little
bit.
Inconvenient of a software, um.
So it exists, but it's not
widely utilized, so it doesn't
really address the need, um,
until it's being used broadly
enough.
So I think in general though,
there is a lack of beds for
treatment compared to the need
in our state. I think that's
safe to say.
Thank you, Representative Cates.
Did you have any questions,
Representative V Vinson?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and lots
of good questions and most of
them have been answered, but,
uh, Senator Hickey brought
something up that is intriguing
to me, so.
The standard of care when you
have a license in its state law.
And there is a standard of care.
What is the, what's the
punishment of someone that
doesn't.
Go with standard of care in a
facility like yours.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, uh,
So, we have a lot of licensed
professionals that are
responsible to their boards and
we often do have to question the
situations we're put in with
availability of meds and, and
things like that if that would
challenge someone's license, um.
There's a conflict between what
we can do and what what we the
patient needs and what we can do
sometimes. Um, but I would say
in general, um,
If we're not authorized for
coverage of the continued
treatment then.
That liability doesn't fall on
us typically once they leave our
facility.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Hickey, you wanted to
come in on that and on the
general issue of state law not
being followed.
Uh, thank you.
Excuse me, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and just, I, I think I can
answer a couple of things that
have come up, and Phil, if you
have comments on this, uh,
under, uh, Senate bills 273 from
23.
Uh, there people, again, this
directly applies to commercial
under the OSI. The OSI is hired
4 staff to begin to enforce the
law, 273 and national, and there
is a link between OSI and going
to 3 departments, um, HHS down
to CMS. So if an infraction.
is reported and CMS is bound by
law and to report out annually
all the infractions that occur
in regards to federal law as it
applies to mental health parity.
And so there is supposed to and
the staff are working on how do
we make that link, um, cause
technically it's a CMS
enforcement issue, uh, in the
federal government, there are
penalties for the
Uh, violating entity. I can't
tell you off the top of my head
what they are, but there are
penalties and, and that's how it
would get enforced, but in 273,
there is no prior authorization.
Someone just walks in and then
when you get them, you, you
notify the insurance company.
The insurance company cannot put
a prior authorization in place
for services that someone seeks
out directly.
Again, this comes back to and
something we need to and I'll
I'll come up with a suggestion
on how we enforce this on the
MCOs through the provision that
at the end of the MCO's
contract, it says they must
follow state law. So we'll we'll
have to get some legal reading
on that so that we can do, uh,
the penalties and so, uh, there
are federal penalties. They are,
they are in place,
um, there
Our penalties that by regulation
as the OSI pulls it together and
again, if we had more staff in
the OSI. I can tell you in
Illinois, under their mental
health parity that have
violation of this in one
instance is a $500,000 fine and
they've enforced it.
Governor Pritzker has enforced
it. And so we, again, because
we're so shortchanged on staff
and so forth, in theory, under
the OSI who has authority over
commercial and again this gets a
little fuzzy as we get into
their authority having to follow
state law, but we need to, we
need to draw those lines and
establish that precedent, um,
and under I mean violations of
regulations by the OSI can
indeed lead to
$500,000 or more penalties. And
so for us to really get this
working, I mean, there's nothing
like an insurance company having
to face, you know, a series of
these. It's per instance, you
know, a $500 fine. Yeah, that'll
go through the courts, but we
need to get that.
Precedent established. So there
is a means to do this. We need
to do a little more work on
enforcement, but literally, um,
now if you had someone who had
commercial insurance and uh they
got turned down by the insurance
company. That is a violation of
state law, and we can go after
them directly. But again, I
doubt many of your folks have
commercial insurance, and that's
why we need to tighten this
link. So thank you, Mr. Chair,
but there is punishment
available. So real quick.
Mr. Chairman, uh, we actually
did have a, a commercial patient
recently that had that happen.
But the way it works if we don't
get a prior author or contact
them first we start providing
the service and then when we
bill it, they deny it and they
say it didn't meet medical
necessity, and we get a very
vague answer and then we do an
appeal and they said, well, it
still doesn't meet medical
necessity, and they're not
required to give us any thorough
explanation of why that is and
so it becomes very difficult to
challenge those things when you
say, well, no, it does, and they
say no, it doesn't, I mean.
It's hard to make progress
there. Um,
if I'm so thrilled to hear about
this one case.
We need to have standing in
court if this individual and you
were willing to go back and go
to the OSI and say here is a
blatant violation of state law
and, and what you described is a
blatant violation of state law,
because they can't use their own
standards anymore. It's written
into both federal and state law.
They have to follow association
recommendations on medical.
Necessity. So, uh, I, and I, you
know, this is another thing you
and I should talk about, and I
will alert the people at OSI
that you may have a case that
gets adjudicated and I think
Superintendent Kane would be
thrilled.
To do it because again, we, they
all have to learn that there's a
price to be paid in violating
law. This is a clear violation
of law. We don't have to go to
CMS or whatever. So let's do the
link up, but we've got to have
standing. I don't know that you
can have standing by yourself
without the potential patient
also, uh, making the complaint,
but the law is there for them to
enact and and drive a fine.
I think Mr. Chair, if we sent
the bill for the services
provided to the client, they
might be motivated to.
But their insurance didn't cover
that might help motivate them to
be participatory.
Yeah, because traditionally, if
we provide services, we're not
billing it to the patient if we
get a denial, we just.
It's not going to help their
situation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll
talk.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Vincent, uh,
another question. He just
answered it. Thank you very
much.
Um, and I had a few questions
first,
thank you, Phil, for,
you know, demonstrating just how
Community which has a uh an
agency that's willing to provide
the real continuum of care can
meet the needs of of that
community, although maybe if the
state provided a little more
help, it would, it would be a
lot easier, but you're doing an
incredible job there. I had a
couple of questions and some of
these you I think answered last
summer and I've just forgotten.
There used to be in Carl's bed a
facility that took in women and
children called the Springs.
Have you absorbed that?
Or is that still separate from
you?
So the facility used to be
called, uh, maybe it was
originally springs, it was
Crossroads more recently, um,
when Carl's bad mental health
was a part of the state audit
that happened in 2013. It was
closed down. There was a group
that worked to get, um, Junior
Money and other funding that
Representative Brown was a part
of that helped.
Get, get funding for that and
we've absorbed a new program
called Avalon that provides
residential treatment for women
with kids. I, I will say it's
just another way to understand
where the system's at.
This coming year as we bring
CCBHC online and all the things
we've done will be the first
year that the amount of services
billed by dollar matches what it
used to be before the audit
happened.
11 years later it'll be 12 years
later, um.
Will have just broken even and
that doesn't adjust for the
inflation that's happened since
then. And so when we feel like
we've invested a lot, we, we
don't, I think, always consider
how far we set the system back,
particularly in certain
communities like ours, um, and
what, uh, you know, starting
back from scratch is a lot
harder than building on
something that exists and so
that's kind of what we've had to
do. Um, could you explain just
in, you know,
So that we can understand what
it will mean to your agency to
become a certified community.
Behavioral Health Center.
Sure, yeah, Mr. Chairman, what
it's allowed us to do because it
has a different payment model
that allows you to include all
the costs necessary to provide
an array of services. Um, that
there are certain things in a
fee for service model that just
kind of get left out. And there
are certain services that are,
you know, preferred over others
in the way it kind of rates have
historically happened. And so
this kind of eliminates that
kind of preference. So you're
able to provide the whole array
and build the staffing for all
of it into that.
rate that you get paid. Um, and
so it's allowed us to, to, to
catch up on some of our
administrative staffing to
expand our outpatient case
management and therapy services
to bring our pay up to
competitive levels nationally so
that we can try to um recruit in
the therapists we need to meet
the access standards. It's
allowing us to start our AT
program and and do things a
little faster than we would have
been able to do uh in a, in a
fee for service model and then.
Hopefully if CCBHCs are well
supported and funded in the
state, it'll allow us to
continue to respond to the needs
of the community in a
comprehensive way in the future
so that we're always a little
more ahead rather than playing
such catch up. And is that, is
it Medicaid money?
CCBC once it becomes billable is
funded is billed through
Medicaid.
And, and so you can build
through the whole, the full
range of services.
Case management being and
outreach so those would all be
funded, but it will be 3 to 1
federal money coming.
To pay for it. Yes, Mr.
Chairman, that's correct. It,
it's all um within the federal
match once it's the billable
services and the and the way the
prospective payment model works
is you get a flat rate
regardless of what the service
is and so case management gets
paid the same as a crisis
response call. And the idea is
that it averages out and allows
you to provide the whole array
and doesn't give preference to
certain parts of the system.
It, it, it's such a sensible
approach. I'm glad we're finally
adopting it, yeah.
Um, do you do, uh,
medication-assisted treatment?
Mr. Chairman, we do, um, we
provide.
We mostly, so in our detox we
use a lot of buprenorphine for
the fentanyl detox, um, in our,
the treatment beyond detox we
have mostly used the long acting
injectables including Vivitrol
and Sulocade, uh, and there's a
new buprenorphine one as well.
It's a long acting injectable,
correct. So, uh, most of them
are 28 or 30 day cycle and you
so you don't have a compliance
issue and you know.
You don't have to monitor and
and you don't get the peaks and
valleys that you do by taking a
dose multiple times a day, so it
gives a more consistent
experience for the patient.
And we've found good response to
all of those medications for
the, the people that it's
indicated and though it doesn't
replace the need for treatment,
you know, in most cases,
individuals with that are coming
to us with significant substance
use problems. It's a secondary
diagnosis to an underlying
mental health or trauma related
diagnosis that has to be treated
for them to really get well.
To me it's always been the the
assisted is the key word in that
medication assisted treatment.
The treatment is going to be
what you provide um
opioid settlement money, are you
getting any of that? Mr.
Chairman, a grant from the
county for the opioid settlement
money that they received, and
that's helping us lay the ground
for a crisis triage center. It's
paying for the overdose response
that I mentioned earlier, um,
some training costs as well as
uh we hired a community
education and engagement staff
person, um, through that.
fund
And, and then finally I just I
just want to say, you know, it,
it's so.
I guess frustrating is the word.
It's it's just so curious that
that we're hearing from you.
That there are now methods
including getting to be a
certified as a community
behavioral Health Service
Center, um,
for, for paying for the services
once they're up, but the the
real problem is how do you get
up? How do you get, how do you
get started? That is what we had
appropriated $200 million to the
behavioral health services
division to help with for the
startup for the getting started
and to find that none of that
was spent, was such a
A body blow.
And, and, and so, you know,
we're going to get into that
this afternoon, but that was
precisely what we had a general
fund appropriation to the
Behavioral Services Division to
help programs get up. We know
that once, I mean, this is what
the governor is counting on
apparently because she didn't
ask for any new money for
treatment for court-mandated
treatment in her plan, but she's
counting on something paying for
that services, I suppose that's
Medicaid.
But if you don't ask for startup
money, if you don't have some
way to get people off the
ground, it's almost impossible
to
You know, you're, you're, you,
you've done it over 5 or 6
years, slowly building it up and
getting a lot of local support,
but you can't build a statewide
system relying on that, and
that's what we were hoping for.
I'm hoping that they spend the
$10 million that we've given
them this year to help get
something up and going because
it's ridiculous to go to the to
the legislature and say, well,
now we want you to have court
mandating treatment.
And there's no treatment out
there.
You don't have, I mean, even
though you have a short waiting
list, you have the shortest one
in the state. Most communities
have very lengthy waiting lists.
I, I, I, I'm just, I'm just
really puzzled with the governor
thought was going to happen.
If we had actually done what she
had asked for. I know what I
think would have happened. They
would have wound up in jail
awaiting an opening. They would
have just filled up the jails,
Mr. Chairman, I will say our
residential treatment wait list
is fairly short. Our outpatient
counseling waitlist is about 90
people right now and so.
We don't have a short wait list
across the board. It depends on
the the program and the service,
and that's really just a matter
of trying to recruit uh in the
workforce report, as you guys
know, we're behind on mental
health, but we have about 15th
as many available in our
community as you have in
Albuquerque and so, you know, I
mean, you probably hear about
how hard it is to hire a
therapists there so you can
imagine in Carlsbad, what it's
like for us to, to try to do
that. I will say, and I'm not
sure where all the funding pools
land, but we've several of the
programs I mentioned and for
CCBHC we have
received some funds from BHSD
for startup that's been
beneficial in some of those
programs, so, um, and we're
always happy you can always tell
him to send us as much money as
you need to get rid of to start
things and we'll do you can
start a lot of new things.
That's great. Yeah, we need it.
Well, I also want to thank you
for giving us 3 very specific
clear things that we can work on
and uh we'll include them in our
And our work plan for this year.
Thank you, Phil. Thank you for
your presentation and thank you
for the work you're doing. It's
an example that we, we, we, we,
we start, we're starting to see
a replication of it around the
state. It's really exciting.
Thank you. We have public
comment from 3 people who signed
up for that.
Uh, Shane Sandridge.
Yes, uh, come on up and use the
mic here. You have 3 minutes to
say whatever's on your mind.
And he'll be, he'll be followed
by Ellen Pines, and then online
net Dean.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and esteemed members of this
committee. My name is Shane
Sandridge. I work for the Cineor
Foundation. Uh, the Cyor
Foundation, uh, we help people
suffering, um, with dependency,
we have 10 facilities in Texas
with 500 beds and we have one
facility here in Farmington with
50 beds,
um, we are looking to expand and
invest.
In New Mexico, um, we see a
significant need and we have
resources that we'd love to put
to use in New Mexico. Uh, what
I'm offering is just a, a tour.
You know, if, if at any time
you'd like to tour our facility
in Farmington, see how we help
people, see how we do business.
We'd love to have you. Also,
we'd love to, to sit down with
you offline and just learn from.
You get some guidance of where
the need is and what you're
hearing from constituents. We'd
love to be part of any solution
trying to help people, but um I
just wanted to introduce us and
we'd love to have a relationship
with everyone and learn from you
and um also I'd like to say, um,
you know, I appreciate all the
work you do. What clientele do
you deal with?
We deal with adults. Adults, um,
inpatient, outpatient detox, um,
also prevention too.
So that that's what we offer
and, and you take Medicaid. We
sure do, yeah, and we take it's
majority in in Farmington, it's
majority Medicaid, and we have
our waiting list is weeks on
everything.
So, um, are you, are you looking
at Albuquerque as a possible
site, correct, we sure are, and
we do more, um, I know you
mentioned startups, but we
would, um, we also look at
acquisitions too. Um, we, we
know how to, how to run these
businesses and, um, stay afloat
and help a lot of people, so we
look at acquisitions.
Um, but what I can do is I'll
send, um,
I've sent you my information
before we, we've communicated
online and I'll I'll send
everybody my information and we
just love to be a resource, and
we just love to, to learn from
you all and just see where the
need is and maybe a chat about
how we can help more people.
Thank you. Yeah, that's great.
Thank you.
Um, Ellen Pines.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and select
members of the committee, um, I
appreciate those of you who are
here today, being here today.
Uh, before I get to what I
really came up to talk to you
about, I just wanted to add to
um uh the response to the
chair's question about, um,
intensive outpatient programs in
Medicare, um, Mr. Houston is
completely correct that
traditionally those have not
been covered, but that has
changed and I actually just
learned about this.
From an email I got this
morning, um, IOP is now covered
in Medicare effective January
1st of 24 pursuant to the
consolidated appropriations Act
of 23. Um, so I learned that
just in time to tell you that.
Uh, the real reason I came up
here is to talk about something
related to crisis triage
centers. I expect that you all
don't follow um the healthcare
authority's regulatory proposals
very closely and I wanted to
make you aware of this. They
have proposed changes to their
behavioral health services
regulations out and um one of
those changes um relates to
Christ's triage centers and is
um rather troubling. Um, you all
will recall that in not in the
24 regular session, but the year
before that, 23, um, it was
Senate Bill 310, I believe,
which was sponsored by the chair
and Representative Gallegos, a
change for crisis triage centers
to allow involuntary
admissions, and the purpose of
that as was extensively
discussed as the bill went
through the legislature was
allow police officers who picked
up people experiencing a
behavioral health crisis to be
taken to a crisis triage center,
even if they didn't explicitly
consent to it.
And the reason for that change
was that,
um.
Only if you give me lunch, Mr.
Chair, um.
The reason for the change was
that if they can't go to the
crisis triage center, they go to
the emergency department or to
jail, neither one of which is an
appropriate place for a person
in behavioral health crisis, and
it also meant that the cops had
to stay with them if they took
them to the ER they have to wait
with them, which took them off
the street, dropping them off at
the crisis triage center allowed
the cops to be freed up and the
person to be in a self-safe,
welcoming environment.
Instead of an ER or jail.
The change that HST, excuse me,
HCA has proposed to make is that
these admissions to the CTC, the
involuntary admissions would be
for people who had been found to
be dangerous to themselves or
others under the mental health
DD code, so they would not, as
it's written.
It appears to say you can't drop
off somebody who has not been
found dangerous, which was the
express purpose of the bill, but
you can use them for involuntary
commitments under the Mental
Health DD code, which I think is
a perversion of what you did
when you passed SB 310 and
It's going to be problematic.
Because if these facilities are
seen as part of the machinery of
involuntary inpatient
hospitalization or even
outpatient hospitalization,
they're not going to be that
safe and welcoming option, and
people will be discouraged from
going to them when they are in
crisis. So I want to make you
aware of that. I I submitted the
comment period ended last
Friday. I submitted comments to
HCA on this. I hope that the
language will be significantly
changed in the final version of
the rule, but I wanted
To be aware of it because it is
a troubling change. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you. Thanks,
Ellen, for bringing those both
to our attention.
This is
Yeah
Wow
Is that what is there like a
tornado coming or something?
Mr. Chair, uh, Ms. Pynes, thank
you very much for making us
aware of that. Could you send us
that section of the proposal in
your comment
I would be happy to do that.
Thank you very much to Xander
and if you could just so that I
fully understand and and as well
as your commentary. Thank you.
Thank you, if I could just add
one footnote to that. Um, this
particular change is really
problematic, but taking a look
at the role of crisis.
Triage centers in the larger
context of crisis stabilization,
I think would be something
beneficial for this committee
for the HCA, um, the
legislature, because, um, Sam's
substance abuse and mental
health, um, Services
Administration, the federal
agency has issued guidelines for
best practices in crisis
stabilization and
We're not in compliance with
them, so taking a look at that
system might be a worthy thing
to do.
Samsa regs as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Ellen, and, and for
your presentation, please share
lunch with us. We have it back
there. There is, I'm told
there's enough lunch for
everybody here, so please don't,
don't hold back. It's in that
little room where the where
where Owen is now heading to
eat.
So now we have 3
people by
dillydallying here we've added 2
more people to a public comment.
Nat Dean, we'll start with you
online.
3 minutes.
Mhm
Thank you, Nat. Next we'll go to
Mike McMillan.
Thank you, Mr. McMillan. Um,
Did you have a lot of puzzle
brows here. So if you could send
more um information on this to
Xander, um, and he's pretty easy
to find under LHHS. So please
send us any documentation or any
emails or anything else that so
that we can kind of start to get
at the bottom. Thank you.
Uh, next is uh James Brown.
Um
Um
Thank you, Mr. Brown. I
appreciate your, your
presentation. We did have a
presentation on psychedelic, uh
uh therapeutic treatments in
Albuquerque two summers ago,
yeah, 2 summers ago. So it's,
it's not a, a new topic, uh, we
would definitely be, I think,
uh, interested in hearing ideas
for a possible legislation in
that regard. Uh, we have one
last uh public comment, Martin.
Senator Hick.
Observation on the last speaker.
OK, and then after, after
Senator Hickey speaks, uh,
Charlie Marcus is going to make
public comment as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just, uh,
a group of people didn't meet
with Secretary Allen so that he
could comply with the memorial
asking for the state to study
the appropriate therapeutic, uh.
Treatment of various condition
with uh
psycho psychotropic,
psychedelic, whatever, um,
including psiloide and MDMA and
a number of things and I don't
know, we can ask him tomorrow
where the state of that paper is
and I know that the University
of New Mexico has added a new uh
addictionologist, uh, working in
This area to the family medicine
department, so things are moving
forward, uh, and I, I think
we'll hear from you and them at
some point, how they're looking
at trying to expand that uh
through Medicaid to diverse
populations as well. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Charlie?
Mr. Marquez.
Uh
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for allowing me to step up and,
and say a few words. Um, we
presented before this committee,
we being the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority, or I'm
sorry.
New Mexico healthcare
Association, uh, and we have
been working with the, with HSD
and the soon to be healthcare
authority, uh.
Oh, OK. I, I thought it was
January, but anyway, um, we've
been working with a group,
Behavioral Health Solutions and
what they're trying to do is
introduce a methodology for
treating these individuals with
substance use disorders, uh, in
a nursing home environment.
They've done this in, I, I think
6 other states, um, Washington,
Oregon.
Utah
Colorado
And I think Arizona.
And so, um, yes, and Nevada,
that's what it was. And they,
they have a proven model where
they, they've acquired um.
A set of professionals, uh,
psychologists, psychiatrist.
Uh, and, and then nurses. They
also then come into the nursing
home and they train the
individuals on how to deal with
these, uh, these types of
situations.
Now, depending on, on the
situation, there might be a
nursing home that has possibly a
locked unit that that's the
place that they'll put them in,
um, they could have other
arrangements in other nursing
homes, depending on the set of
individuals they're going to
deal with. And so, anyway, we've
been working with appropriators
talking with again, uh
healthcare authority, um, and,
and trying to get this
introduced, we had some hurdles
to overcome.
Um, but the initial uh request
is for, uh, I believe 105.
And we then with a Medicaid
match can turn that into 6
million. Now what that addresses
is 100 beds for 365 days.
So, so it's not 100 individuals,
it's 100 beds, so people would
cycle in and out of that. Um,
anyway, that's a concept that
we're working with and again,
we're working with um
Specific legislators and to try
to get the appropriation. What,
what's the name again of the
it's.
Behavioral health solutions is
the organization.
And they are the ones that have
worked in these other states.
And uh Bill Trecy is the person
that came and presented before
you, and he's glad to come back
again, uh, if you'd like. So
anyway, uh, it, it's something
we're working with, something
we're trying to introduce, I, I
think it's, it's a good model.
What it does is it takes people
out of the hospitals, uh, which
is very costly and it actually
shows a savings.
Uh, so, uh, and, and we have all
that documented and we can make
that available to all of you.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
And with that members we're
going to break now for 45
minutes for lunch, we'll resume
at one o'clock.
The public is absolutely anybody
here is welcome to share lunch
with us. It's in the room
adjacent to us. Anything else,
any other announcements and with
that we'll stand adjourned for
45 minutes.
Yeah
