No matter how big the school is,
it's great.
I mean, you sit down and eat
breakfast at classical music you
really don't want to hurry
through that.
Well, OK.
We didn't have anything.
Well, we don't have space for
her.
He's right here that represents.
All right, folks.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started here. Good morning. I
hope you all are well. Um,
again, welcome to our LSC folks.
Welcome to Triscoll Heritage.
Um
The school that I've taught at
now for 10 years, school that
we're very proud of, hopefully
you enjoyed um this morning with
the music and food. Um, I would
just like to take a moment
before we formally get started,
um, to thank who have been truly
our hosts, um, Kathy and
Priscilla. So, Kathy, Priscilla,
if you would stand.
Good
Yep.
They cooked breakfast for us.
They helped organize basically
everything we've done over the
past 3 days here at the Trisco
Heritage, um, and it's community
schools coordinator week so all
that and it's homecoming week
for the school. So, um, despite
all of that, they were able to
be such fantastic hosts. So
members have been thanking me
for the school stuff. I just
teach here. It's really these
folks that do all the work. So
if we could give them another
round of applause.
And then Jessica with APS who
used to be our activities
director here at Aha as well who
helped organize this on behalf
of APS, uh, she must have left.
Um, but we also have our student
council, um, in the back
directly in front of me if you
all would please stand.
A fantastic group of young
leaders here at the school.
Thank you all for, for
everything this week and for
being here this morning. Um, all
right, so we're gonna go ahead
and get started with our joint
LESC and LFC report on below the
line funding. So, please,
Daniel, Sonny, good morning.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you all for
being here today. Uh, my name is
Sunny Lou. I'm the public
schools analyst for LFC. I'm
joined here today by Daniel
Esupian, who is the finance uh
analyst for LESC and we'll be
working from this joint report
here.
I'll start off by saying I I'd
like to thank, uh, former
director Gwen Waterman and
director John Senna and all the
LESC staff for their
collaborative work on this
report. It is truly a joint
report and I also want to thank
the chairs for giving us the
direction to work together on
these types of activities. Uh,
it's, it's certainly a very big
topic and a lot of funding and
it all affects education, so it
only makes sense that we're
doing this together. So,
We're talking about below the
line programs today.
To give you sort of a broad
definition. You can see this
blue and red chart on the first
page. We typically define below
the line programs as those
initiatives or pilots or
programs that PED has that
aren't statutorily defined,
right? There's no formula, there
are really no guard rails.
They're simply just line items
in the budget that authorize the
department to do things like a
literacy institute or out of
school time programs.
Um, those are essentially things
that the department has a lot of
discretion to use that funding
for.
And historically this has been
part of the budget even before
PED was PED during when there
was a school board of education,
there were also below the line
programs that were requested and
appropriated to that, uh, board
at the time. So it's really not
a new thing. It's been around
for a very long time. But what
we have seen is that there's
this very bureaucratic process
that happens when you create new
programs. It takes time to stand
them up.
And they're mired in whether
schools want to participate or
not. There's access to these
funding issues.
And sometimes we just don't get
money out the door as the
committee has heard here today
this week.
But there is a time and place
for it, right? There is
certainly a room where you need
to have some sort of innovative
pool of funding that can allow
new ideas to come to life. And
some of these programs that
you're very familiar with like
pre-kindergarten started off as
below the line programs. They
took a long time to develop,
scale up, and after you had done
so many evaluations and studied
it extensively. You decided to
make it permanent, right?
Something that wasn't just a
pilot, something.
That just wasn't a program,
something that almost every
school is participating in
today.
So there is a place where these
programs can exist. I think the
thing that you need to consider
as a legislature is how do you
want to be strategic about how
it's used, how much goes into it
and how you evaluate it for
success.
The Martinez Yazzi lawsuit. The
court actually looked at some of
these programs because the state
used it as a defense to say,
look, we're doing these
programs. They're showing some
results.
You know, this is our response
as a state to some of these
at-risk student needs, and the
court said, well, that's not
true. Some of your programs are
too small to make a difference.
You're not really reporting on
progress on some of these
programs and they disappeared or
come online.
Very ephemeralally. So there's
really no consistency in how
you're doing these things, so
really what you should be
focusing on is not how much
you're spending, but how you're
spending it. And is it showing
any results?
She turned to me to page 2 of
the report.
You can kind of see a bit of a
history in that first chart.
Of how much funding those bars.
Has gone to these below the line
programs, you know, very small
in the very beginning of the
century and
Jumping all the way up to over
350 million.
In this current fiscal year and
you've paid through it, paid for
it through many different
sources.
Many recurring general fund
appropriations, but also a lot
of non-recurring appropriations,
which has really caused you to
reevaluate every single year
whether or not you want to
continue funding these programs.
You've also seen these, the
number as that green line shows
of appropriations going up and
down, and that's largely been a
function of whether you have a
new secretary at the helm, or
whether you have revenues
available to provide
programming.
And a lot of these were cut
during the recession, cut land.
Governors got into their 2nd
term, and there is less
confidence from the legislature
on the department's ability to,
to execute on these programs.
But a lot of those individual
appropriations are very small,
notably coming from House Bill
Jr. You can probably count about
30 of those appropriations this
year, solely to House Bill
Junior. And once again, each
time there's a new initiative,
the department has to stand up a
whole process to try and get
that money out the door.
On the last page, page 3 before
I hand it off to Daniel.
Are some budget considerations
and policy considerations that
we would like to bring for you
today. Just thinking about the
strategy that you wanna.
Employ for these below the line
programs.
We think of these programs as
fitting into 4 big buckets.
Interventions, innovations, base
operations, and non-recurring.
Interventions are what we would
call things that have a lot of
evidence and research behind
them. They're tried and true.
These types of interventions
really should be.
Funded, but the focus should be
on fidelity. You know, are they
doing it to Fidelity based on
what the evidence says. And are
they getting the outcomes that
we need and we would recommend
potentially including these in a
more recurring fashion so that
schools aren't debating whether
or not these programs will be
here tomorrow and that they can
really focus on implementation
and how to do these programs
right.
Innovations.
These are programs that sort of
had this emerging evidence
around them they show promise.
We don't have a whole lot of
understanding on how effective
they are, but they might be
worth
Evaluating for some time and
seeing if they can be scaled and
if they actually have good
outcomes for students.
And you've actually stood up a
new mechanism for that now that
you have the capacity as a state
to do this, to grow fund, which
provides for multi-year
appropriations, but also has a
sunset period whereby you can
say, all right, we're gonna give
this a few years, see if it
works, and then see whether it
should be classified as an
intervention. So you have a real
opportunity to leverage that for
some of these programs.
Base operations some programs
really are just personnel.
You know, if you have this $400
million non-recurring
appropriation and it's paying
for people, then it really
shouldn't be a non-recurring
appropriation. You're
essentially setting the system
up to
Basically present the fact that
they were underfunded when in
fact you were funding through a
non-recurring appropriation for
something that
As budgeteers is really a
recurring cost, so we need to be
very careful to look at how PED
is budgeting some of these. If
they're using it for personnel,
if schools are using it for
personnel, it should be treated
as something that's part of
their base operations and not as
like a one time pilot.
And last but not least, there
are really actually funds that
are non-recurring studies,
capital outlay, equipment.
Those things can be funded on a
non-recurring basis and they
should. And
I want to close with the fact
that above all this, we really
need a lot of collaboration
between the executive, the
legislature, stakeholder groups
to make sure that we're all
rowing in the same direction.
And
In that way we can actually see
some of these programs.
Build up to the success that
they promise. And with that,
I'll turn over to Danielle to go
over some of these individual
line items.
Thank you.
All right, good morning, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, uh, my
name is Daniel, as Sonny
mentioned, and I cover public
school finance for the LESC.
We're not gonna walk through
each of the four accountability
reports that are included in
your packets, and I want to know
that each report was drafted by
a different analyst at the LESC
and they're all here today if
you have any questions on their
specific report.
So each of the reports are
designed to provide you all with
the information that you need
and the context that you need,
uh, on how much you all are
appropriating to specific
programs, what that money is
being used on and the impact
your appropriations is having on
student outcomes, so that you
all can make informed decisions
for FY 26 on where to continue
investing and how and the
secretary will also provide more
information on some of these
programs during the PED
presentation.
Uh, we at the LESC want to show,
also want to show our
appreciation to the strong
partnership that we have with
LFC staff and with you all as
members, and we're looking
forward to continuing to build
on that partnership, uh, and
improving outcomes and
opportunity for the students in
New Mexico.
And as part of that partnership,
uh, we want to let you all know
that we've built at the LECA
District dashboard where we have
an overview of each district's
assessment results, graduation
rates, budgeted expenditures,
details on the teacher workforce
and facility conditions because
a lot of that data on our
district dashboard is going to
complement the data that that
you all are gonna see in the
accountability reports and the
link to that dashboard is now on
the LESC homepage.
So starting off on page 4 of
your packet with the document
titled Healthy Universal School
Meals.
In 2023, you all decided that
every student in Mexico should
have access to free meals at
school regardless of their
income in support of the idea
that a student cannot learn if
they're coming to school hungry.
And so to ensure universal
access to free breakfast and
lunch for all students. You all
appropriated $41 million in FY
25 to the universal school meals
program, and that money is used
to reimburse LEAs for the
difference between the federal
free meal reimbursement.
And the price that is incurred
by LEAs for each specific meal
they serve to students and you
can see that represented by the
purple bars in the budget and
expenditures graph.
So this program is very much
designed to prioritize using
federal funding first.
Uh, because we want LEAs to be
using those federal resources
before they draw down on state
money.
You can see it in the graph, but
one thing to point out here is
that PED budgeted $330,000 of
your appropriation for
operational costs at PED and as
Sonny mentioned in his
presentation, those recurring
expenditures are not something
that we that we want to be
seeing, being supported with
non-recurring money. And so
we'll be looking into whether
it's more appropriate to have
those expenditures embedded in
PED's operating budget.
If you look at the section in
the center, you'll see more
schools are also qualifying for
community eligibility as a
result of a federal rule that
was passed after you all passed
Senate Bill 4, which means that
a school has more than 25% of
their students, uh, that are
below 130% of the federal
poverty line.
And that designation is critical
because those schools don't have
to collect federal meal
applications from their students
and it allows us as your staff
to more accurately project the
cost of funding the program as
more CEP schools means less
variability in the projected per
LEA cost of the program year to
year.
If you look at the graph on the
right hand side, you'll see that
your investment is resulting in
more students accessing free
meals with a 13% increase for
free breakfast and a 7% increase
for free lunch.
And we expect those numbers to
grow modestly in FY 25.
But unfortunately, since the
program has only been in effect
for one full year. We don't have
data right now to show whether
free meals are impacting
proficiency or attendance, uh,
but assessing that impact is
going to be a goal, a long term,
medium to long term goal of both
the LESE and the LFC, uh,
especially in how the free meals
impacted food insecurity
throughout the state, as well as
broader academic outcomes among
all students.
In the meantime, however, staff
recommends you all continue to
fund the Universal school meals
program with recurring funding,
and at a level that is adjusted
for increased participation. And
we also recommend that you all
transfer $200,000 from the
program to the PED operating
budget. So they have the staff
and resources they need to
adequately implement the
universal school meals program.
Moving on to the summer literacy
Institute on page 5.
In the last few years, you all
have made an intentional effort
to censor literacy as an
overarching focus of your
investments in public schools,
and you've done that through
pretty significant investments
in structured literacy.
And for those that aren't
familiar with structured
literacy, it's essentially an
evidence-based approach to help
students learn to read and write
proficiently, and you will also
hear referred to as the science
of reading.
In the last few years, you all
have had a goal of ensuring each
elementary teacher is trained in
structured literacy, and you've
continued to do that through a
$14 million below the line
appropriation in FY 25.
But in this year's session,
however, you all took those
investments one step further by
appropriating $300 million to
the summer literacy Institute,
and that institute was intended
to provide students with
targeted and small group support
with the goal of narrowing the
gaps in reading achievement
among the among the groups cited
in the Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
As you can see in the charts on
the left hand side, uh, Petey
spent a large majority of the
money that you all appropriated,
almost all of which went to
contracts.
So of the $30 million that you
all appropriated, $17.2 million
was used so that ATA services
could hire temporary literacy
instructors.
And $8.4 million was used at the
Southwest RAC could also hire
literacy instructors, as well as
purchase curriculum and
resources for the program.
If you look at the chart in the
middle.
You'll see that your investment
in the structured literacy in
the summer literacy Institute
resulted in the hiring of 1,053
literacy instructors and the
participation of 9,533 students,
which were uh just below the
goals that PED had established
for the program, but there's
still some pretty significant
milestones in such a short
period of time.
On the right hand side, you all
will notice that this is the one
program in the packet that we
don't have a metric for whether
it's working, because we don't
have that data right now, but
when we look at similar programs
around the nation, uh, they've
usually had a positive impact on
narrowing gaps in in reading
achievement among student
groups.
But even though we don't have
that data from PED right now, we
will have some ways of measuring
the impact of the program, but
because PED provided assessments
during the program using
dibbles.
Which if you're not familiar
with Debbs, uh, it's essentially
designed to measure whether a K8
student is acquiring the
specific skills they need to
learn to read.
During the program, a student
was assessed once at the
beginning and once at the end to
measure whether they saw growth
as a result of the program.
And so we at the LESE and LFC
generally support that approach
to measuring student growth, and
we're looking forward to seeing
the results, uh, but if we end
up seeing any measurable gains
in reading achievement because
of the Summer Literacy
Institute. We're also going to
be looking into whether those
gains were sustained during the
following school year.
But like a lot of pilot programs
really being thorough and
evaluating impact is gonna take
time.
But as we do that evaluative
work in the next several years,
we still believe uh that
continuing to improve student
achievement and literacy is so
critical to the success of
students and our success as a
state that we are recommending
that you all continue funding
the summer literacy Institute
with $30 million in below the
line funding, while ensuring
that there are some reporting
outcomes attached to the
program.
Moving to page 6.
We have CTE programs.
Which you all funded with a $45
million non-recurring
appropriation in FY 25.
Uh, your appropriation to CTE
programs is used for 3 main
initiatives, including the CTE
pilot project that you all
created in 2019 as the first
dedicated funding source for CTE
programs.
And this program is designed to
complement federal funding
through grants directly to
districts and schools will also
supporting and scaling CT costs
that may not qualify for federal
funding.
So to put this into context, the
state receives just over
$1,010,000 in federal funding
for CTE programs. So your
investment as a, as a body, NCT
is pretty substantial in
comparison.
But as a note, the pilot
project, the pilot program
expires in 2026.
Beside the CT pilot project,
your appropriation also supports
innovation zones.
Which is a PED created
initiative intended to provide
professional development,
technical assistance, and
programming to reimagine and
improve the high school
experience, and this funding is
also awarded directly through uh
through grants directly to
districts and schools.
And the third initiative you all
support is work-based learning,
uh, where students have an
opportunity to gain occupational
and career skills, apply
classroom learning in a
practical on the job context and
prepare for the demands of the
modern labor market in ways that
help those students earn
credentials in high school, as
well as build interpersonal and
technical skills.
And this funding supports
work-based learning both during
the school year, uh, but also
through summer internships
offered by government entities
throughout the state. So we as
staff know that both the LESC
and the LFC are deeply
passionate about ensuring access
to high quality CTE programs,
and for good reason, because if
you look at the graph on the
right hand side, you'll see that
CT concentrators or students who
are taking at least 2 courses in
a single CT pathway or
graduating at
higher rates than all other
students, even though, and we
see that trend even among the
students who were cited in the
Martinez Yazzi lawsuit.
So based on the graduation rates
we see among CTE concentrators,
uh, we know CTE programs are
having a significant impact in
improving student outcomes and
their engagement with school.
And we also often hear students
themselves report greater
engagement in school when
they're involved in those CTE
programs.
If you look at the budget graphs
on the left, you'll see that a
large majority of your
appropriations for CTE programs
were budgeted or expended in
both FY 24 and FY 25, and the
large majority of your
appropriation for CTE flows to
schools through the pilot
project.
And for innovation zones.
The rest of your appropriation
largely supports the work-based
learning program, some
contractual money that supports
innovation zones, as well as
some support for CTE student
organizations, and $105,000 in
staffing expenses at PED.
If you look at the graph in the
center, you'll see that CTE
programs are popular among
students with just under 70,000
students participating in the
CTE program each year and the
numbers pretty consistent.
One interesting thing to know,
however, is that the number of
CT concentrators seems to be
increasing pretty significantly,
and you see that jump in the
orange bar between school year
21 and school year 22.
And remember those CT
concentrators are the group that
we are seeing strong graduation
rates among and so we're
encouraged to see that increase
in uptake taking place.
So again, we know there's a
strong interest in supporting CT
among both LFC and LESC members,
and that interest is warranted
by the success we're seeing with
CTE concentrators.
But moving forward, however, one
area of focus for staff will be
determining the most responsive
ways of funding those programs
because until now, you all have
supported CTE programs primarily
with below the line
appropriations that LEAs then
supplement with operational
funds from their SCG
distribution.
But as Sonny mentioned in his
presentation, if a below the
line program is both
evidence-based and we're also
seeing strong positive outcomes
for students. Those are
conditions that could
potentially warrant schools
using their SCG funding to
sustain that programming over
time.
And so for that reason, for FY
26, we are recommending that you
all appropriate a portion of the
$45 million appropriation to uh
for CT programs to the SCG.
With the focus on the portion
that supports the CT pilot
project. So that flows out
through the formula and can be
used in whichever ways are most
responsive to local communities.
Meanwhile, we are also
recommending that a portion of
your $45 million appropriation
for CTE programs remains below
the line as we uh as we continue
to evaluate the fidelity of some
of the programs we mentioned in
the presentation, especially
innovation zones.
And part of that work is going
to focus on which specific CTE
programs and efforts are
yielding positive outcomes for
students, not only just during
high school, but also beyond
high school.
And we're not going to wrap up
with the family income index on
page 7 of your packet.
The family income index is a
pilot program that you all
created in FY 22 to do two
things.
First, it creates a methodology
for identifying poverty in each
public school using income data
from state tax returns, public
benefits, and the US census.
And second, it allocates
additional funding to individual
schools based on the
concentration of poverty in that
school.
And so once the concentration of
poverty is in each school is
identified the appropriation
that you all make to the program
is then used to allocate funding
to the schools with the highest
concentration and those
appropriations that totaled $55
million since FY 22 with $100
million in FY 25.
And that money is often used at
the at the discretion of school
leadership as long as they
comply with the general guard
rails that you all have embedded
in statue, which say that the
money must be used for literacy,
math, and at-risk interventions.
Unfortunately, uh, despite the
good intentions of the program,
we've seen a few challenges uh
that have contributed to the
large amount of unspent money
that you all can see on the left
hand side graph,
one of the reasons for that
large amount of unspent money is
that the money flows directly to
the school and some school
leaders are just not accustomed
to having discretion over such a
large amount of money. And so
there seems to have been just a
lack of local capacity at the
school site level to
intentionally use.
That money in a strategic way.
Another challenge is that PED
was a bit delayed in issuing
award letters, which is a
broader issue that that they
that they're working on, but
that delay in budget authority
simply didn't help schools make
those spending decisions in a
timely and strategic way.
And that resulted in money being
left unspent.
Of the money that was spent,
most of it went to salaries and
benefits for counselors, social
workers, teachers, educational
assistants, and a range of other
personnel.
A large amount of money also
went to supplies such as
textbooks and computers, and a
smaller portion was spent on
contracts.
And these expenses to us as
staff, signal that schools were
using this supplemental money on
basic operational needs rather
than targeted interventions.
And so, based on the LESE's
framework for measuring student
growth in the graph on the right
hand column.
We found that in school year 23
students in schools that
received an allocation from the
FII did not see significantly
more growth in literacy or math,
then students in similar schools
that did not receive an FII
allocation.
And so based on all of these
findings, LESE and LSC staff
recommend that you all sunset
the family income index pilot
program.
At the same time, we are also
recommending that you all, uh,
continue to use the programs,
the FII's methodology for
identifying poverty by embedding
it as the indicator for poverty
in the SCG.
And the LAC will hear that SCG
revision proposal at its October
interim meeting in Silver City.
And as if Mr. Sherman, thank
you.
All right, thank you so much for
the presentation, Sonny. Just
Mr. Chair, one last thing behind
all those is a high level
showing the uh LLC, LESC
executive and the final House
Bill 2.
High level for your reference
and if you really.
Want to
Draw a line.
On line 57.
We would consider everything
above that, above the line and
everything below that, below the
line. So there's a below the
line program that we didn't
cover in detail that you want us
to dive into, we'd be happy to
answer questions about that, but
this is, so you have a list of
what's currently happening
today. Thank you, Mr. Chair, we
stand open for questions.
All right, thank you all. So we
have a pretty big group if we
can keep questions, answers
concise, please, but first on my
list, oh, the music too that may
go off periodically.
a 2 minute warning, so folks
that are new, it's 2 minute
warning for students to get to
class, and then it'll go off at
the final bell, meaning that
they're late after that. All
right. So I have a Senator Paddy
at first.
OK, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much
and thank you for the
presentation, everybody. Uh,
just had a question, uh, a
couple of questions on the grow,
um, appropriations to PED, uh,
work that's done. Do we have any
data that tells us, uh, what
percentage of them actually go
from below to above or uh the
throughput, anything like that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senate
Majority Whip, are you talking
about moving from the grill to
above the line or, yeah, to an
actual program is there any
throughput data that you can
tell us?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senate
Majority Whip. The, uh, original
bill for the grow fund had these
accountability provisions tied
to it to sort of ensure that at
the end of the three year
period, there would be enough
information for you as a
legislature to determine whether
those programs
Made it into a recurring basis
because this is the first year
of that growth fund being
allocated. They have 2 more
years before we make a
determination on that. So
nothing has been determined on
that yet. Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, I just want to
point you to the high level row
rows 194 through 201. That is
where your appropriations from
the grow are located in an FY
25, you all appropriated $60
million for
clinical practice, which will
include paid student teaching,
teacher residency programs,
principal residency programs,
and you also appropriated $15
million for special education
differentials. OK, thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair, and I'll, I'll be
as quick as I possibly can. So I
spent some time with the, uh,
uh, you know, this being in my
district, very, very proud of
the school. Uh, I spent some
time with the student council
this morning that that you
recognize, Mr. Chairman, when we
started. And I thought one of
the leaders in the student
government had an excellent
question, and that was around
Services for behavioral health
uh in, in the, the public
schools. Is there anything
currently I served off and on on
this committee for the 12 years
I've been here, but I, you know,
I've been more on the finance
side of this, uh, the last
couple of years. Is there
anything, uh, that's guaranteed
on uh in the SCG for behavioral
health services for mental
health services for public
schools, but not just the
students, but also the, the
staff and the teachers.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Senate Majority Whip the at-risk
index has traditionally been the
main vehicle for that, although
it's, this is sort of the
challenge in what when you do
transfer things into the SCG is
how are their accountability
measures in place to make sure
that for those specific services
that districts are spending
their funds for those purposes,
uh, other than that, you know,
there was a below the line
appropriation in the prior
fiscal year for Bha.
Health services and the
department is receiving some
federal aid for that as well.
OK, I appreciate that. I just
feel like if monies fall into a
large bucket for a number of
things, then, you know, sort of
it's whoever's in charge at the
moment that, you know, where
that might go. I really hope
that we can focus more as a
legislature on the behavioral
health for our students. I think
that is just, I know we have a
lot of support for that, but
it's also for the teachers and
the staff as well. Uh, one last,
Mr. Chair, uh, so you can move
on. I think this is Mr. Esenan.
I don't know if you can answer
this one or not. So I was
fortunate enough to sponsor the
legislation that created the
universal free breakfast and
lunch.
I'm very proud of that piece of
work that I've been able to,
I'll talk about that for the
rest of my life. Uh, I'm just so
proud of it. Um, but the
question I have is, uh, on, on
the appropriations that we've
done here, do we have any data
that tells us what percentage of
the school districts have
created relationships with local
farmers and ranchers, because
that was really one of the big
pieces. So, so when I did the
2017 measure called the Hunger
Free Student Bill of Rights. We
moved it over now, as you know,
and put the word healthy,
hunger-free Student Bill of
Rights for that very purpose. Do
you have any, can you tell us if
any
Relationships have been created
on that front.
Mr. Chairman Senator Padilla, I
don't have any context on that,
but Connor on our staff has been
interacting very closely with
local communities on that same
topic, so here he comes.
Hello, Mr. Chairs, members of
the committee, uh, yeah, so I
don't have we don't have
specific data on that.
I will say, uh, throughout this
past interim I've undertaken a
lot of, um, interviews with
various school food authorities
throughout the state.
And what we do know is that, uh,
many of them have been working
and are quite enthusiastic about
developing those relationships.
One of the challenges they're
having is that in some of the
more arid parts of the state,
there aren't a lot of producers
who can provide fresh fruits and
vegetables. That's one of the
challenges they have, uh, sorry,
it ran up here. Thank you. And
then in addition to that, we're
also knowing, uh, I also note
that.
They're finding that the extra
cost related to local producers
is at times a hindrance to
really embracing that part of
the law. I appreciate that,
Chairman, and, uh, last part of
that is, so, you know, the
projection at the time was that
there would be an additional 31%
for the breakfast meals that
were served, and 29% for the
lunches served. So that
additional is that still holding
true that that percentage
increase has happened if you
create those relationships?
With the, with the local farmers
and ranchers and food producers.
So there should be the money is
where I'm going with that, so.
Mr. Co-chairs, Senator Padilla.
So there is that additional $2
million for New Mexico grown to
support people creating those
relationships with local food
producers incorporated Mexico,
New Mexico ingredients, uh, but
I don't have specifics for you
on that at this juncture. OK,
that's fine. If you wouldn't
mind getting me some of that,
I'd appreciate it. Thank you,
chair.
Represent B
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
uh, I will be brief. You may not
actually have some of my
answers, so.
Um,
On the program some uh literacy
Institute.
We talked about uh 10 we had 900
or 9,533 students register.
How many of those attended and
actually finished the program.
What was your attendance rate?
If not, you can get, I mean,
Daniel, like I said, if you, if
you can't, I don't want to
waste, we can, we can get back
to it, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Baca, I don't
have that data right now, but
the PED secretary will likely
present on that same topic and
she might have data on that, Mr.
Chairman. The question I would
want to say is also how is that
measured the effectiveness of
it, what tools used and how are
we judging or determining
effectiveness of that
investment, um.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Baca, uh, PD is using the
Dibbles assessment, which I
mentioned is designed to uh uh
assess whether students are
acquiring the skills they need
to learn to read and write
proficiently and so that
assessment was provided 2 times
during the program, once at the
beginning and what's at the end
to measure whether the summer
summer literacy Institute had
any impact on reading
achievement among those
students.
We don't have that data right
now to show whether it was it
was impactful, but we will soon,
I hope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
other
Question is, and, and it's about
the actual building of the the
center, and it is $30 million
but that's also at some point in
time I want to know is how many
FTD does that come with because
that will be a reoccurring cost.
And so when we talk about
budgeting, that is a reoccurring
cost.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'll go
briefly to CTE and uh I believe
the number you guys said was 45
million was budgeted.
Um, and I also heard that only
half of that actually restart
schools.
Um, I think, Mr. Chairman, and,
uh, Chairman, um.
I think that what's one of the
concerns is that the legislature
continues to fund.
Public schools
At a very high level.
My, my question, my point is
that much of that level or much
of the money that we're putting
is not reaching our school
sites.
And, and that's something we
need to point out because Mr.
Chairman, I will talk in
Um, we'll point out that in
every instance and everything we
have here, we have people
spinning off money whether it be
PED whether it be RECs, Mr.
Chairman, we do.
One PED.
Correct, Mr. Chairman, is that
correct?
That they will make their
request for personnel and
otherwise.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, but also it
seems like with every fund that
we put in here for schools,
they're actually growing and
they're using some of that fund
to add additional staff. And and
as I said before, I understand
that we understand the
administration part of it.
But when we're talking about
making a huge investment to our
kids, those kids up there are
the ones that need the money.
We don't need to be growing and
we don't need all these other
people spinning off that. I
understand that there's some
costs, but we're looking at half
of our costs.
are going out to other things
and not make it to our schools.
I think this committee needs
just take note of that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Good
morning to let me get this a
little closer. Good morning to
the staff and everyone. Thanks
for your work. I just have a
couple of quick questions, Mr.
Chairman. On page 5, let's go to
the Summer literacy Institute. I
guess I was just taken aback a
little bit by the fact that we
had appropriated $60 million
last year, uh, for this, we did
$30 million for the building
that the uh executive wanted and
then, um, $30 million for the
program and I know it was.
Quite a contentious issue
because, uh, it didn't seem like
things were quite ready yet to
proceed and so when I chaired
the um the committee for capital
outlay, uh, we were in very deep
discussions as to which should
come first. Do we want a
building without the program or
do we want the program without a
building or shall we wait a
little bit to proceed with any
of this? Well, the outcome was
that um she got both. The
governor got both the building
for $30 million and also the
Program for another 30. That
being said, um, we look at under
the category and thank you. I
love the way you did this. You
broke it down really easy for us
where it says what you need to
know, and it says that PED has
not yet provided requested
information on this program, the
implementation part and also the
effectiveness, do they not have
even a plan for this or um where
is it? Because there was such a
rush to get this 60 million in
there. So I was wondering
Why or have they said when it's
gonna come or what their plan
is, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, the, uh,
department under former
Secretary Romero had indicated
that we would have results
around this time. Uh, I think
the department is working on
compiling that whether they have
Be able to receive that yet, but
as soon as we do, or if the
secretary wants to give you more
insight during her presentation,
I think we're still waiting on
it.
Thank you very much and for the
sake of time I'm going to move
quickly to the next page, page
6, and that is having to do with
career and technical education
and, um, on the right where it
says, um, is it working on that
chart there on the right. Um, I
just wondered, uh, it says that
it is unclear, uh, if PED's
career technical education
program is even contributing or
having an effect on the
graduation rates, um, and it's,
it's proven that it when you
have CTE programs, a significant
increase the higher. I mean,
then increase the, the
graduation rates and they become
higher. So I just wondered why
it is unclear is that the data
not there or are they presenting
what we need to figure this out?
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Senator, it's a good
question. So as you can see, the
number of CT concentrators is
going up. And we do know from
the data that these students who
take more than one CTE course or
of the sequence of them have
higher graduation rates that
that much is clear. Now we have
not seen an articulation between
the programs that PED is
providing and whether that's
contributing directly to that
increase in concentrators. It
could be, but we have
No indication on whether that is
a one on one direct
relationship.
See, OK, thank you. So maybe
time um is what we need for
this, or, um, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, the, there are 3 pieces
that Daniel described about this
program. One is just like,
here's amount of money per
student. We're just gonna flow
it out to all these districts
and charters, and that's the
next gen piece, which is about
$14 million.
The other piece is 11 million
which to represented Baca's
point is like, you get 200,000
here, you get 700, 750,000
there, large chunks to very
select few districts and they
may be reimagining how their
courses are designed to create
those concentrator pathways, but
we have not received any
information on whether that's
actually happening. So there's a
lot of different um components
to the CT.
that haven't been directly tied
to other more CT concentrators
or.
Completing programs is that
answer your question? Yes, it
does, Sonny. Thank you very
much. It seems that there's
quite a bit of inequality here
in the way this is being
distributed out there, but thank
you so much for your work, Mr.
Chairman. That's all I have.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Also,
my question had to do with page
6 on the CTE and I was wondering
how
Who picks what CTE programs are
going to be in the school and if
Whoever's picking the CTE
programs, work with the
community to see what the need
is.
Mr. Chairman,
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Vincent, as saying described in
his presentation, CTE programs
are funded through a below the
line non-recurring
appropriation, and that means
that a school, uh, if they
express interest can apply for
one of the three programs that's
currently provided in the CT,
uh, appropriation packet, um, if
they expressed interest in the
next gen pilot program, they can
apply to that program. If they
expressed interest in the
innovation zone funding, they're
gonna
Apply to that innovation zone
funding source that answers your
question.
Uh, and Mr. Chair,
Representative.
I, I've met with a few
superintendents who have been
participants in this program and
they indicate that.
It's very hard to get industry
partners to come into buildings
and to provide some of these
experiences. There's also a lot
of limitation in particularly
rural areas where there may not
be a lot of industries or
businesses that can provide
those experiences and in some
industries where their employees
are making 6 figures getting
those type of qualified
professionals that come into a
classroom to be a teacher is
extremely um difficult, and so
they often are limited.
To serve the goodwill of the
connections that they have in
their communities, uh, in
developing those programs and a
lot of them, particularly in
rural areas, rely heavily on
online type of experiences to
try and give access to their
students to these programs. So
it's, it's very limited. What is
very interesting though is there
are certain districts that are
close to institutions of higher
education that also have
infrastructure in place for
these programs, and we're seeing
a lot more of these partners.
Ss develop or as you've seen in
the Southeast, private
enterprise coming in and
standing up facilities and
infrastructure for these
programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and you
just answered my next question
because in in my area, we do
have a very robust CT program at
our higher ed facility and uh we
have, for example, like the
welding course we have people
that, uh, are manufacturers of
certain equipment that are
wanting to fund the whole thing,
bring in all the free equipment
and I just think that it would,
it would benefit our students to
be able to.
Work on the dual credit.
Program possibly, and, um, go
with, uh, our local university,
but thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Woods,
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very nice facility here. Thank
you for inviting me.
What I worry about with the
below the line funding, it is a
short term.
Funds
I stopped by the T and carry
schools on my way.
Uh, to Albuquerque. I represent
11 school districts.
I stopped by Toot and Carry and
talked to them a little bit
about some of their special
funding that in one in
particular was a special funding
for a mass specialist for the
middle schools that they
qualified for.
In 2 years, they brought that.
Criteria up.
And the complaint was,
That that was defunded.
And now they qualify for one for
their high school.
And in their management.
starts
They needed to keep that
specialist in the middle school.
To keep that program going to to
bring in the newest innovation
possible to those teachers
because as you know, we have
teacher turnover and we never
have.
A teacher forever, forever.
So
My question to you is, and I've
heard this on other programs
also, we started a great program
and then we defund it.
And, and I know that we're
trying to evaluate each one of
these programs.
But sometimes I wonder if we get
to the superintendents and, and
ask them what's working.
Even though the numbers may show
that, that it's not the
improvement we want, how do we
know it's just turning the
corner?
And I know it's a that's a
question for the specialist.
Um,
I worry a lot about starting and
stopping programs, starting
hiring staff and then not
funding staff in the long term.
Uh, we put so much money out
here and, and you look at these
below the line programs.
And I think the way I understand
it, Mr. Chair,
Is that school district has to
apply.
For these
Some of these things need to be
moved up and let
Those districts
Decide where they should spend
that money.
And how they should either we
hire managers in the school
districts or we don't.
And does the local school
district manager know what his
school district needs. He knows
those kids better than anyone.
I know I'm just
Complaining
And I apologize, Mr. Chair, but
these are the things that school
superintendents bring to my uh
forefront to me, and I think
that we should be addressing
them.
Are the superintendents
adequately being listened to?
We have, we have turnovers of
those superintendents too. We
have to keep training them too.
But there should be.
What consideration given to the
management if we want adequate
money spent. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Munoz.
Thank you. Sonny, do, do we know
what the unspent dollar was
below the line for the last 2 or
3 years.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, the
Reversion from this previous
fiscal year was about 500
million from the public
education reform fund. That was
our projection at the time, and
that was how much you were able
to budget for this fiscal year
25, uh from that unspent amount.
There are other appropriations
that were general fun
appropriations below the line
that I believe you received a
report on, but I'd have to
filter it for those public
education initiatives,
particularly.
So about $50 million from the
reform fund and how much was put
in the reform fund in that year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I believe it was
100 and.
83 million.
About
One third of it
2 to 27% wasn't spent.
And then
On, on the public reform fund.
Have we ever thought about
changing that to like how to
grow, grow is, we'll give you 3
years' worth of funding.
Right? And we want the
performance measures for the 3
years and then decide if we want
to put it in inside the budget
or above the line I guess you'd
call it in this.
Have you ever thought that
process and how, how we want to
do that.
Mr. Chair, I think it would
actually solve a few problems if
you could have a mechanism like
that if you wanted to do
something like grow. Part of the
reason what we've heard from
schools and why they have rising
cash balances is because you're
waiting for those reimbursements
to come from PD PED is concerned
that these appropriations won't
last year to year, and so what
we've seen for the very first
time through Grow this educated
clinical practice appropriation.
Is that PD is able to budget for
3 years ahead. And so they're
able to get those awards out
faster than they used to, and I
think that sort of delay in
timeline shrinks and so schools
have more of a runway.
Institutions have a runway to
Spend the money and then report
back ideally, um, what the
outcomes were. Now I think
there's probably a special space
for using the public education
reform fund, uh, because we have
an LESC.
Right, there's a lot of
additional focus from the
legislature on education
programs in particular. So as a
vehicle for another type of grow
mechanism, I think the public
education reform fund could be a
potential opportunity for that.
I mean to leave someone 50
million short, right? I don't
know where the 500 came from,
right? Let's say it was in CTE.
Right? And we know we want to
grow CT, and I think the
legislature has made that
decision. The literacy Institute
is another one, right?
If we put 90 million in there
over a 3 year period and said,
OK, let's let's see what the
real outcomes are at the end,
right? and targeted.
I'm just saying these. I'm not
in education, but CTE.
We know we like the literacy
that's going to make change in
and, and what other programs
that we want to fund for big
dollars over a longer time
period, I mean, because
non-reoccurring money is, is a
problem and it's going to
continue to be a problem. I
mean, reoccurring is going to be
a problem, non-reoccurring is
not gonna be a problem, so we
could look at funding those over
a three-year period and say,
hey, we, we agreed to fund these
for 3 years and, and we want to
see the outcomes. It creates
Stability for everybody.
In that in those programs. And
so,
Something I would, I would think
about.
Specially as you move forward
because below the line is just
You know, it depends who the
executive was.
Right?
And we didn't have money to grow
below the line in the prior and
and she, we fought them all the
time, right? Now our below the
line has really shot up, right?
And so are you doing it
correctly for longevity and, and
are we really targeting what we
want and are we funding it, not
just 1 year but 3 years at a
time, so.
Thank you. Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, one
question I have is, um.
Regarding the out of school time
funding. I know that there was a
presentation and an ask for $400
million for that. Um, can you
show me in the
In the presentation today, is
there a line item that addresses
um
any of that funding, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative on
page 10, line 148.
That is.
Sorry, line 141.
Is the general fund
appropriation for 15 million for
out of school learning. Uh, the
prior year it was paid out of
the public education reform fund
on line 148 at $2000 and as you
mentioned, yes, there was a
presentation earlier this week
about a request from the out of
school time network for 40
million. OK, so.
All right, thank you. So right
now we're looking at an
executive ask for 20 is $25
million is that correct?
Mr. Chair, representative, that
was this last session session.
Thank you. I'm sorry, uh.
OK.
Thank you for showing me where
that is, but isn't there, aren't
there other areas where we find
that funding through the,
throughout the budget, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair representative,
this is the only specific line
item for PED to support this
type of initiative. In theory, a
district could.
Uh, partner with an out of
school time provider and or do
their own out of school time
programming using their SCG
funds.
Thank you. OK, my next question,
Mr. Chair, is I know also my
school district, Santa Fe Public
School District, was mentioned
earlier in the committee as
having the highest um control
over absenteeism. Is there
anywhere in the budget that
we're going to see where we're
we're going to put efforts to
fully fund
those efforts for them in other
districts that are meeting those
goals, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative, if
you turn with me to page 9.
I
Lane 92.
You are providing $5000.
For supporting the attendance
for Success Act through a
general fund appropriation,
non-recurring this year. The
department did ask for
17 million I believe during the
session.
Although that might be different
from the executive, um,
The,
as you heard from the
presentation this week, there
are
Beyond what the state has
control over a lot of other
underlying factors on why
students may not be attending
school, and that might actually
extend beyond the education
sphere, including health,
behavioral health,
transportation, and the like.
And so I think finding a
comprehensive solution is, is
sort of the big challenge for
that improving attendance,
attendance and Mr. Chair, our
districts using their
operational budgets as well, um,
because they're not getting
enough funding for this effort.
Mr. Chair, representative from
our last LFC evaluation on
attendance we were finding
finding that schools are using
about 19 million of their own
operational dollars to support
attendance, coaches and other
attendance type activities and
Mr. Chair, we are seeing a
return on those dollars and some
in these school districts by
them having achieving the goals
and having less absenteeism and
like was mentioned before, Santa
Fe Public Schools has a
20% decrease in absenteeism and
because they do have some of
those programs and they're using
their operational budgets. So I
just want to say maybe we need
to look at that a little bit
deeper and I'll end there. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and it's great to see LFC and
LASC working together so
closely. It's been a core goal.
I know that's shared and thank
you to Chair Munoz for making
this happen today, Mr. Chair,
and to the presenters on career
technical education, Mr. Liu,
you sort of outlined how there's
different uptake, um, some that
you the recommend the joint
recommendation is to make part
The SCG, some to continue to
follow through below the line.
What are the guy is there any
PED or other guidance about how
to efficiently set up CTE
programming or other guidance in
Texas, uh, cousin of mine runs a
feeder high school in the Dallas
Fort Worth metro area as part of
that that uh flows folks from
all over that area into one
school. There are ways to sort
of leverage and work.
even in rural areas, and I think
that we all know, and it's a
very much a shared priority to
continue to invest last two
months ago, we heard that as we
see it again today, there are
clear graduation and engagement,
uh, successes associated with
students who dive into CTE. How
are we helping districts,
operationalize those funds
effective.
ly
Um, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, I'll start and
then if Daniel wants to fill in
as well. I think CTE means
different things when you talk
to different people, um, for
some, it might be we need the
equipment to
uh consume within our programs.
For others it might be
internships. For others it is,
you know, designing a curriculum
that is focused on what students
are interested in exploring. And
so,
One of the things that PD
provides this sort of this
career clusters guide where
schools can sort of look at
what's available within the
universe of CTE and determine
what they can provide to their
students within their community.
As far as what we've seen, it's
been all over the place. I like
to call it random acts of
workforce initiatives because it
really is wholly dependent on
The resources within the
communities, the relationships
that are there, um, and the
access to resources. I'll let
Daniel and actually Jessica who
did this analysis, speak more on
that.
Representative Small. My name is
Jessica Hathaway. I'm a senior
policy analyst for the LASC, um,
to the heart of your question
about different models, there is
really strong guidance and
states usually use a combination
of local resources, federal
resources, and state resources.
With 4 primary models, either a
student-based model where you
flow funding based on the
enrollment, a resource-based
model, model where you're
actually just allocating a
minimum base or a cost-based
model where you might reimburse
on costs or some sort of hybrid
of those three components. New
Mexico does, um, fall into that
cost-based model where we are
basically looking at the cost of
CTE programs and then flowing
out. So with the recommendation
presented in the below the line,
it would be kind of moving to a
hybrid.
Where a portion of that becomes
student-based allocated based on
the membership and student
programs and other components
maybe more like the grand
structure that we currently see
in place.
Mr. Chair, thank you. That's
very helpful, um.
Then the next part of that is
how do we begin to ask our
districts and engage um
particularly as staff is going
to be coming on board with
members, there'll be more of an
ability to, I think, sort of
closely connect with, with folks
and monitor throughout the year.
What are the right ways for us
to ask our districts, support
our districts, and then think
about how that support from the
finance perspective to
Help them, uh, sort of make the
best, you know, give them the
best options and does, does this
sort of does a hybrid model,
does that mean ultimately
they're gonna count on some per
student funding, so that's not
that they can count on that. And
is there a buffet that they're
gonna see that based upon here
are your options.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Small, it's a
really great question, and this
is where we get at the
complexity of how we're
currently funding it. So the,
the NextGen CT pilot project
that you all created does have
some pretty strong guidance
because the public education
department has chosen to set
that up in parallel with its
Perkins awards process, which is
the federal funding. And so with
that, we see a lot of guidance.
They actually have to engage in,
for example, a comprehensive
local needs assessment that does
engage industry to a former
question from Representative.
And and so that one has some
guard rails around it where
we're able to have them talk
with industry with higher ed,
and then form their programs
based on that. And so that's one
of the reasons that you could
consider, for example, moving
that into SAG because they do
have some guard rails.
Innovation zones is another
example that we're also funding
where we're trying to figure out
in our local context, what other
parts of CTE might not be
covered by NextGen or Perkins.
And so that's where I think
there's some
for evaluation to consider the
right guardrails around that
component of it. Um, but you
kind of have a mix where we are
seeing some strong
implementation already.
Fantastic. Thank you very, very
helpful and illuminates even
more sort of the joint
recommendation about how we
should differentiate this
funding as we build the FY 26
budget, so super helpful thank
you very much. Um, secondly,
around.
Summer literacy first year we're
gonna I hope and I expect that
we'll see from Secretary
designate from PED lessons
learned, we're going to continue
to do this. We want to optimize
it, so we want to hear the good,
the challenges, and what we can
do better, um, but as Chair
Munoz said, you know, this is a
shared priority, uh, and one
that we're going to continue to
support and optimize. So hearing
the challenges is very
Uh,
around the summer literacy
Institute, however, you know,
that's $30 million that's
sitting out there. It really
we're now sort of in a make or
break time from an
administration timeline
perspective where we need to
make, I think some pretty
substantive decisions about that
in the upcoming session if that
money is better used in other
ways, perhaps for
we just need to to
Clearly make some some decisions
and that I appreciate and I
think it's a somewhat tough,
although fair
recommendation for us to heed,
which is the family income index
which really offers in theory, a
lot of opportunity to go school
by school as opposed to district
by district. The vast majority
outside a teacher salaries of
the 1 billion plus that we've
invested goes through the
at-risk.
Index uneven application at the
district level.
High performing schools maybe
got more money and the schools
facing challenges didn't always
get the money they needed or we
would hope they would that that
Yazi Martinez would suggest they
needed family income index
proposed as a solution to that,
but it's not working and so
that's $1000 that we're probably
just going to have to rededicate
to someplace else, I think, you
know, when we ask our experts to
give us their best, uh, joint
opinion, we have to be ready to
hear.
That, so that's $10,000 that
that we probably need to put
elsewhere, um.
I think.
Uh, yeah, I, I think that that
does it for right now, but I
really I think this meeting is a
big step in seeing these joint
recommendations the detail that
you all are presenting to us,
uh, is a very, very positive
step for all of us. Thank you.
Representative Arnstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Co-chair, thank you for having
us here today. It's awesome.
Thank you for this report as
well. Um, Sunny, I just had a, a
question that says, 1,053 were
eventually hired under the, uh,
literacy, summer literacy and
Do we have a uh some kind of
report that actually shows.
How many were hired and the
timeline because when I look at
$17.2 million.
For the instructors, uh, from
May, June, and July. We know
most of the schools get out in
May.
Uh, halfway through the, the
season or through the month. And
so for 2.5 months, $17.2
million. I did some rough math,
that's about if, if they were
all brought on at that time,
it's about $8000 a month.
Per literacy coach if, if that's
what you, if that's what they
are. And so I wonder if there's
a report that shows the timeline
of how they were hired when they
were hired and how the money
went out.
Um, not the other thing is I
wondered how many schools
participated or how, I mean, I
see 10,000, almost 10,000
students, 1500, they wanted, uh,
instructors, but I'd like to
know, uh,
A map location of where those
were located and if any, um, I
know one of my considered rural
New Mexico schools participated
and, and it was awesome.
Um, but also knowing, you know,
the reporting on it on actually
did, did we make a difference
with this kind of investment,
investment, Mr. Chairman, I
would really pray to God that we
made a difference because, um,
it's important to me. The other
question I have is was
transportation included in that?
Money or were they given the
liberty, the schools in, in
general, given the liberty to
run a bus, uh, or was there
funding included?
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative of
House minority caucus chair the
to answer your question.
We have summary data. We have
not received any detailed
information. What I do know from
our review of SHAR is that only
about 1112 million of it has
been spent.
There's about.
Um,
I think 13 million that's
encumbered, so there's only
about 2.7 million left that
hasn't been budgeted at all
from, from this appropriation
now, we can probably follow up
with you on where those
allocations are intended to go
to kind of speculate on who was
hired, where it was, but I think
the department does should have
a list of all of the sites and
the individuals that were hired
and uh hopefully that
information is forthcoming.
There was
An amount budgeted for
transportation and I think um
maybe Daniel can talk a bit
about that or the department can
share how transportation funding
was used under this program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Sonny. I just wanted
to make sure there was
transportation money included in
that because, uh, you know, I'll
whine about rural New Mexico
schools all day long. Uh, my
other question is, uh, uh, are
there license barriers with the
CTE?
Um, for bringing in
Uh, the people that we need to
possibly be able to help, um,
coordinate and with the actual
teacher on teaching these, or
are we requiring the plumber to
have a teaching license.
As or can they go into the
schools without that and be
supervised by a teacher? How is
that working?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Armstrong. Um,
great question. So with
licensure, there are some
differences in terms of how CTE
teachers are licensed and you
all as a legislature made some
changes to allow for additional
flexibility to recognize their
industry experience in the last
couple of years. That being
said, we are seeing some
creative models still because it
is a barrier. We do not have
enough CTE licensed teachers,
where, for example, in Hobbs,
New Mexico, we're seeing that
they actually partner a CTE
teacher with another teacher who
has
More traditional experience and
create good co-teaching teams to
allow for that partnership to
occur and that's one way that
we're seeing state, um, school
districts and schools kind of
work around the, the workforce
limits that we have there.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I, I see it as a
barrier in in a couple of my
schools where, you know, they
want background checks and
licensure and and.
Who's going to pay for that and
why are they going to come in?
Why is a company going to give
their time, energy and effort
and pay their employee to go
into the school when they can't
really when there's other
barriers. So I, I thought that
might be a barrier. I just
wanted to bring it to everyone's
attention that it, it is a
barrier. We're putting a ton of
money into it, but we still have
barriers, uh, where that can't
really be, um, addressed, uh, as
far as below the line, I
couldn't agree more with Senator
Wood.
that we create these, we have
these grand ocious ideas, and
they work really well.
And then they're gone.
And, and the ones who are
suffering are the students.
And so until we figure out a
better way to
Um, let the school districts.
Kind of tell you what they need
and let them say, this is really
working well for us. Can we have
this, you know, put into, uh,
above the line and recurring and
we really want this position.
It's working well for us. Um, a
perfect example is the
absenteeism.
We have $500 in there for
funding, and it's gonna be gone.
And then are we going to see
that dip again?
Um, and so I, I think that you
guys do a tremendous job and I
appreciate it all. Um, I just
think we need more input from,
from school districts to tell
them to tell you what they need.
Instead of us telling them what
they need. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want
to just add my thanks to our two
chairs and our two staff for
getting us together today. I
just think the LASC and LLC has
been working well together for,
you know, 3 or 4 years, and it's
really paying off. I want to
just talk very briefly about
this idea that we've
Been operating on where we start
a pilot below the line, and if
it works and it grows, we move
it above the line, uh, uh, many
of you probably don't realize
that, uh, now K-12 plus started
as K+ in 2003.
With $400,000.04 districts and
16 schools, 16 classrooms. Uh,
that grew to K3 plus in 2007, 4
years later because the data was
pretty stunning coming in that,
wow, 25 extra days for
kindergarteners, get us
somewhere. We moved it to K3
plus the data continued. There's
a big if with that data and
If is it if you did it like it
was designed, which was to
extend your school year. Uh, too
many districts couldn't do that,
so they put a 5th grade teacher
in for the summer and then turn
them back to a first grade
teacher 25 days later, which
sort of didn't go along with the
evidence of how you have to do
it. Uh, so, uh, then we went to
cave 5 and now we're at K12 plus
and it's all above the line. It
continues
to be a program that helps
district fund, uh, more time in
the school. Uh, so, um, so that
that shows you how we can do it.
It took us 20 years to move it
into the SCG.
Uh, and now today we have a
report on the family and C
index. I think the problem with
that was we started it in the
pandemic and we made it too
restrictive in the beginning.
That's my fault, and, um, and so
it hasn't really worked. So
we're gonna stop it. So one, we
worked on 20 years fully
embedded one we did for 3 years.
It's not working. We're gonna
stop it. So if you look at the
summer literacy Institute, that
is a pilot.
and imagine what we asked PED to
do. They had like 3 months to
hire 10 2500 teachers and and
and have places all over the
state for 10,000 students. Uh, I
am blown away that we did what
we did, uh, we almost reached
those goals. We did massive
training for teachers on
structured literacy, they met
with very small numbers of kids,
um, you.
It wasn't the 6 week for
everybody. Some districts
couldn't do it, so they were
flexible. Some districts just
did 3 weeks, but a longer day,
uh, so to me the summer literacy
Institute is going to be one of
those things that we keep
working on, um, because, uh, I
don't know about the rest of
you, but I'm bound and
determined to get our reading
proficiency up to a level that
will help all of our students
and all of our teachers.
And all for the future, uh, so
just wanted to underline that we
have major successes by doing
things this way, putting below
the line funding, giving it
enough time to work, is
evaluating it, uh, looking at
it, having it be flexible enough
for districts to buy in and then
continue to, to evaluate it. I'm
proud of us. I'm proud of what
we've done in the last 20 years
on student learn
Uh, so, uh, I, I just want to
say that is that if you take a
long view, things can look less,
uh,
Uh, problematic, uh, if you take
the long view and you think
about what we're really trying
to do and where we really get
to, so, so thanks again to both
our chairs for having us work
together in our staff. Wow, this
is phenomenal.
It's really great, the way
you've laid it out, and I'll let
go of family and income index,
although I'm gonna cry a little
bit about it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representativemi
Bamoa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, gentlemen, for your, uh,
presentation,
um, it is, uh, I've said it
several times. I have an issue
with the whole RFR process and,
and, um, and I, I hear it from
superintendents around the
state, uh, the ones that I've,
that I've talked to that they
are frustrated because.
Um, you know, like I wonder, I
don't know if you, if it's even
something that you can that you
can track how many of these
schools don't apply for some of
these programs because they
don't have the cash balance to
pay for this stuff upfront
because even if they're awarded
this, which many times they
don't even get an award letter
until October, November,
something like that. Um, they
have to pay for it. And, and if
they don't have the cash
balances because some schools
can handle it, some bigger
schools have that money.
Um, some smaller schools don't.
They don't have the cash
balances so they can't upfront
this money that they are hoping
by the end of the fiscal year
they get reimbursed for. Um, so
that whole process, how many of
these schools do you have any
idea? Possibly don't apply to to
for some of these things?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Moya, I was the one that did the
cash balance brief for you all
at the LESC meeting this week.
Uh, after talking with LEAs
across the state. I didn't
encounter any school business
official who explicitly said
that their cash balance is too
low to apply to any of these
programs, even the districts and
the charter schools that have
pretty low cash balances are
able to think strategically to a
certain extent in order to apply
for those programs. So as of
From what I know, I haven't seen
any any LA that hasn't been able
to apply to those programs.
And Mr. Chair, representative, I
think what's really fascinating
is that.
You're below line appropriations
are probably very popular for
your smaller schools and your
charters because it actually is
more per student.
Than what they might be getting
if it was flowed directly
through the SCG, which kind of
tells you if you throw something
into the SCG, it's not going to
go 1 to 1, um, in a per pupil
way for your smallest districts
and your small charter schools.
Now what we have heard is that
many charter schools and small
districts will actually do
multiple below the line
appropriations and cobble them
together just to pay for one
staff member. So you might have
a CTE attendance in
Innovations that like all of
these sort of pull together to
pay for one staff member, and I
think that shows that there's
some potential weakness if one
of those initiatives goes away
that
Now they're having to find a
different funding source to if
they want to maintain that
position, so we have to be very
strategic about.
What your intention as a
legislature is for the use of
some of these funds and these
programs and what the
appropriate funding source
should be uh for these
positions.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, gentlemen. It, it's because
it is like you said, they're
they're having to move money
around. They're having to figure
it out and um and and maybe it's
gonna be there next year, maybe
it's not. Maybe it's, you know,
um, now I have a question, uh,
when you were talking to Senator
Munoz about um the differences
between the grow processes and,
and, and, and, um, some of this
other is.
Is that grow process still an
RFR process, or is it fully
funded for the 3 years you
figure out if it works and then
if not, then you continue it.
How does, how does that work?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I can only
really speak to the.
One grow program that we know
about at this point.
But my understanding is that
each time a new PD below line
initiative is started. It really
depends on how it's structured.
There might be an RFP or RFA
process. They get applications,
they review them, then they make
awards and.
If this is sort of on a
non-recurring basis, it, it
seems, at least from what we've
observed that this
Renewal of the application kind
of happens each year.
And the delays that come with it
also happen each year.
What we've seen there with, and
this may be a unique case of the
teacher residency program.
They've been able to say, all
right, we're going to do a RF.
You know, I think it's an RFA
process for 3 years.
So you don't have to reapply
essentially every single year.
You've got this runway.
To figure things out. And in
that sense, from what I've heard
from schools and institutions
is.
If it's gonna be something that
I can expect for 3 years, I'm
going to be spending it on very
different things than if I had
the risk of it not being there
next year. So even the spending
patterns from the recipients
change as a result of the
signaling from the legislature
on how long this funding will be
available.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and Sonny, now is that, that
verbiage of what process it is
is that is just in the bill
itself that that gets or is that
something that PED uh determines
how it's going to be allocated.
Uh, Mr. Chair, it's ultimately
how PD interprets it, but this
is what we've seen as a result
of.
Confidence that that money is
there.
OK. Thank you. um, Mr. Chair,
one more, uh, question to, um,
is how much is budgeted, um, and
anything below the line or is
there uh for school safety?
Mr. Chair.
Representative, I guess it
really depends on what you
define a school's safety. There
is 200,000.
Specifically for a school safety
summit, um, that is online 176
on page 10.
If if you think about what we
heard earlier this week on how
out of school time learning
might be a preventative way of
improving safety within a
community, uh, or if you think
about attendance initiatives or
even extended school year or
behavioral health supports.
Those can all potentially be
lumped into that category, but
specifically for school safety,
explicitly is that $200,000.
Um, uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chair
and Sunny, so and that was for a
school summit, correct? So
that's just like a one time
thing or whatever, um, that that
kind of concerns me because, um,
we know and we've seen the data
that like school safety is the
student's number one priority.
That's, that's their biggest
concern. Um, and that could be
contributing to a lot of your
absenteeism. I mean, I know in
my school with these threats
that we've been having all over
the place, um, there's several
days if our school gets a
threat.
Then I have 6 people in my
class, uh, so which rightly so,
but those are, those are things
that are kind of beyond our
control, but it would be nice if
the that there was more things
in there for um equipment or
anything like that that would be
not just a summit where we all
get to talk about it and
hopefully something comes about
it.
Mr. Chair, if I could just make
a correction, there's also
$1,000,000 for a school panic
buttons on 164, but, uh, you're
right, the majority of it is not
very explicit about that sort of
hard infrastructure.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Moya on row 185. I also want to
point out that in FY 24, you all
also appropriated $35 million
for security as a pretty broad
bucket that was pushed out to
districts through an SB 9
distribution.
Thank you, thank you so much.
Senator Gonzalez.
Good morning, good morning, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, um, uh,
first of all, um, I just want to
say, um, what a privileged and
what an honor for the students
that come to his school. This is
beautiful and you know, it's
very nice to see something like
this, you know, in our state,
so, you know, congratulations
to.
The powers behind to make this
happen, but what a beautiful
setting.
Um, the, the part that I just
want to mention, Mr. Chairman,
is just a few things and um in
and out they have been talked
about it today is um
Um, below the line, every topic
that you have has been given a
lot of thought and uh that's the
reason, you know, why it exists
And what I was going to mention
is um maybe if you can just
mention it again. So how much of
this funding was reverted back
that was not used.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, senator of the 183 million
that came out of the reform fund
of 50 million was reverted and
that also includes
Pry appropriations that were
reauthorized.
I guess though where I'm going
with this is so.
The funding placed uh within
this line items.
You know, um, should be used.
And uh and what I'm seeing is,
uh, there's some flags of.
For whatever reason right now,
you know, that we're having
those balances.
But, uh, in, in all fairness, is
public education department PE
are they funded adequately to
handle.
The size of this programs.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I think
if you would ask the department
they would say no and it's
reflected in the request that
they want additional FTE for the
upcoming fiscal year. I will say
it really depends on how they've
designed the blow the line
allocation. So if it's an
allocation that is just simply
we're gonna formulaically give
all the schools a piece of this
appropriation, uh, that might
take less administrative.
than if it's a grant program
where they have to review every
application and make a
determination on whether that
grantee should be selected. So,
It is actually sort of a
function of how they design uh
the program itself.
We're having a very nice
conversation here today and I
think um you know, that should
be with them too, because uh the
The end result is we want to get
these funds to do what they're
supposed to.
You know, and work with them to
get them there and if there's
parts that, you know, need some
work from us or vice versa, as
you mentioned, maybe a different
design into
The being able to uh implement,
you know, to get these funds out
and then the accountability. So
I think that's something that we
can look at and uh the other
part is, um, uh, that I would
recommend to them is how can we
improve the outreach to whether
if it's a large district, medium
size, or a very small district,
but uh just that these funds are
there and you know, how can we
best assist with technical
assistance.
You know, to to be able to, to
have them there. Uh, the other
part that, uh, that I just
wanted to mention is um
Um,
I have, I, I've always been a
very, very strong supporter of
parental involvement.
And you know, and I really would
like to see more, more growth
into this part, you know, to
work with initiatives that would
get us there.
The other one is a concern that
I have had for a few years is um
the the high level of absentee,
you know, within our schools.
But uh just recently, it was
brought to my attention by, I'm
going to say probably about 10
parents.
The other component that is uh
coming into play is that there's
fear.
You know, and how can we work
with this without making it
negative, but how can we just
work with a part of assuring
parents, you know, we are
working, we are planning to have
a more and more safe and um you
know, I, I think we can get away
from that. I think we really
have to just push more into that
and get specialist and get that
advice that we need and uh work
with it because um.
It exists uh just within uh this
uh last week I'm aware of um
uh possible uh lockdowns in
Raton and Cimarron and Taos High
School, and next week we'll
probably have more.
So, I mean, the flags are there,
you know, and it's up to us to,
to really work with this strong
and be an open mind to.
The different things that we can
do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to everyone.
Thank you, Speaker Martinez.
Hm
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I echo
the comments and the, the
gratitude for having us and
hosting us here at Disco
Heritage, a beautiful school,
um, and just incredible
community out here. I'll be very
brief, um, and I don't have
questions. I, I do want to share
um a little bit of frustration
and you know, maybe some, some
hope, um, you know, as I look at
these churches, I look at the
family income index I had forgot
about that.
And that's shame on me.
But the reality is when I flip
the pages here and I look at how
many PD secretaries we've had in
the last 5.5 years. That's a
problem.
Um, so I was going back.
Just
Mining my own memory, and I
believe that the family income
index was.
To secretaries ago, maybe 3.
Three secretaries ago.
What is going on?
Rhetorical question. I mean,
you, I'm gonna put you guys in
that position, but something's
going on.
Um, when I look at
The investments we've made.
Um, we can always do more.
That's the reality. And
unfortunately our schools have
become.
Not just places for our children
to be educated and our teachers
have not only been tasked with
educating our students, uh, but
schools and educators have been
tasked with being social workers
and counselors and feeding our
children and keeping them safe.
There are schools.
In here in Albuquerque that have
Been forced to become community
schools they've got washing
machines now. They have health
centers. Now that's great. I
support all that.
But that's also not the role of
a school.
And so it speaks to a greater
failure?
That I think.
We all need to be cognizant of
and recognize and understand and
I can sit here and pat ourselves
in the back and say, you know,
we're doing great. The fact is
we could do better.
Uh, and I'm very hopeful, uh,
that we now have a, um, well,
first of all, um, it's a shame
that the prior secretary was not
allowed to stay on the job.
How many of us have sought maybe
a different job. Some of us have
sought different political
positions and no one asked us to
resign.
OK.
Um, that aside,
I'm very glad and I'm hopeful.
Uh, for, uh, Ms. Mariana
Padilla's leadership in this
role.
She has been a consistent force.
Within this administration.
Um, and she has been somebody
who has centered children and
the well-being of those children
and their families ever since
I've known her and I've known
her a long time.
So,
um, you know, when it comes to
the literacy institutes, we
don't have the data yet.
Um, and I shared my frustration
with Ms. Padilla personally.
And I also understand that she
literally she, when I say she, I
mean herself.
have to roll this out within
weeks, and she did.
And I think almost regardless of
what the data says, kudos to her
for pulling this off.
I also am hopeful that in her
new role overseeing public
education in the state that the
Summer literacy institutes will
actually be a very um uh.
A big asset in the um in this in
this education framework that
we've established because I do
believe that summer, uh,
learning loss is real, um, and
that's just the tip of the
iceberg, right? I mean, I was
commenting to Chairman Small
that
Even ourselves as well resourced
and informed parents, we
struggle to find things for our
kids to do in the summer.
We can pay for Explorer.
We can send them to a private
summer camp.
We can go to the local community
center.
But if you're a single parent
working in a low wage job.
With
Not very good benefits maybe not
a lot of PTO maybe not a lot of
sick leave, definitely no paid
family leave yet.
What do those kids do?
They're sitting in an apartment
somewhere and if they're lucky
they're sitting on an iPad
screen.
But sadly, as we know from
what's happening within CYFD.
More than likely, they're
probably sitting in a place with
bad people around them.
And that's shame on us.
We must do better.
I think PD will do a lot better,
I think, uh, Secretary designate
by the uh is gonna do an
incredible job and I'm here to
support her and her work with
MPD to turn this ship around
because I believe she can and I
believe she will. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Robert
Caviero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, um,
welcome to Attrisco Heritage
High School. This is in my
district and it is our pride and
joy, and, um, I hope that you
all have a, a chance to kind of
walk around and greet some of
the students, uh, they're
outstanding. I, um,
I think Speaker Martinez for
your words because I was going
to address my, uh, comments and
questions, um, on page 7 to page
7, which is the family income
index. I want to understand this
a little bit.
More clearly and now that I know
that it was about 3 secretaries
ago that was an important
question I, I had forgotten. I
think we all have, uh, admitted
that we've forgotten and shame
on us as the Speaker mentioned
this is a really key component,
um, in assessing and evaluating
our children's progress. So my
question is, there are several
references, Mr. Chair, to
The lack of capacity.
Um, and I'm, I'm curious to know
whether we understand, uh, maybe
perhaps giving us some examples
of what that lack of capacity
is, where are the uh schools
lacking in that and this, this
is to Daniel Esinan, uh, I think
it's your, your report, but
I think it's important for us to
understand.
Um, those examples, if you can
give us some examples.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, right now, you
are primarily support at-risk
students through the at-risk
index in the SCG and you all
invest approximately $380
million in the at-risk index for
the current fiscal year. The
family income index was
initially designed to focus
instead on the impact of the
concentration of poverty in a
school, not just the mere
existence of.
Poverty in a school, but one of
the innovative approaches of the
family income index was that it
flows directly to the schools in
the state with the highest
concentrations of poverty.
Unlike the SCG where SCG
distributions are usually
oftentimes all the time
actually, uh, flexible and
they're up to the to the
discretion of the local school
board and the superintendent and
how to divvy up that money by
school. So even if if an at
risk.
Student in the SCG generates a
specific amount of money. The
school board or the
superintendent is not generally
required to spend that money on
the students that generated it.
And so the family income in was
very much a stark departure from
that historical approach, and
that is one of the reasons that
we think there was a pretty
large amount of unspent money
because school leadership is was
generally just unprepared to
spend those large amounts of
money.
And they were just not trained
in fiscal management generally
through their uh admin prep
programs and many of them just
didn't know how to navigate,
identifying the unique
challenges that that their
students are facing and connect
the money that they were that
they were receiving to those
needs.
Generally
And that's exactly what I was
hoping to hear from you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So how, how in
your uh review is
What role did this has the state
played in assisting um the local
schools and districts in
building the capacity and the
resources that they need in
order to be able to expend or
connect as you mentioned, um,
those funds in a viable and
successful way, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, after
the initial rollout of the
family income index pilot
program around a school year
fiscal year 23 2.
For PED developed the Martinez
Yazi response team, I believe
it's called, and their job is
about 5 FT 6FTs somewhere around
there, and their job was to go
out into local communities,
arrange regional meetings to
help school leaders and other uh
school business officials, other
district officials, really hone
their skills and identifying
those unique needs. So that is
one that that PED was
was making in trying to bridge
that gap between school year,
between school leadership and
identifying those unique needs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
apparently, even though they did
step up in in those school
years.
The degree of growth was not
significant, and they're in,
according to your findings, and
therefore, the continued lack of
capacity to expand and connect.
So, um, that sends a, a great
message to, um, our
Secretary designate, um, and I
too have a great deal of hope
and, um, her leadership and have
seen, um,
How that has unfolded throughout
the years.
In her previous capacity.
And so I also would say that
The summer literacy Institute.
And as well as, well, everything
the career and technical
education, we all know these are
all very strong, um, areas that
students themselves have
identified and parents have
identified, um, I think that,
that,
As a, as a way to help uplift,
um,
their,
Success in school. And I think
that's really important. So
these are programs that are
integral now to our education
system. And I also, Mr. Chair,
want to mention that, um,
Here at Atrisco Heritage, one of
our prides and joy is the fact
that we've been able to connect
and create a real holistic
community approach to school and
education with families actively
involved, but also because we've
incorporated, uh, support
services and we have on site a
family care clinic, uh, that
also promotes, um, health and
well-being of our students and
keeps an eye on what
The educators as a whole can do
to continue to help our
students. So this, these are
examples around the state we
have these great examples. So if
we can do that with the new
leadership and incorporate then
it gives me hope that we can
move in the direction of
addressing the major core
principles and findings in Yazi
Martinez as well as what we've
known historically in our state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. So I don't have
anybody else on my list, but I,
I did have a couple things to
mention. Um, family income index
and I was chatting with Senator
Stewart about, um, is for a
couple of years we had um these
constraints that some of the
members have brought up that
their school districts have felt
with some of these initiatives
that there were constraints on
how to spend that family income
index and it's only been the
past year that those constraints
have been lifted and that the
family income
has flowed to the school
districts for them to use in a
broad range of issues. And then
we look at what they used them
for is like the bare basics for
staff, for materials for
supplies, um, for their
students, um, and that has
brought up the question that
we've had in LESC is are we
funding these school districts
adequately as a whole. The thing
I'd like to also mention is that
in the recommendation, you know,
the family income index isn't
looking at.
necessarily going away because
we found preliminarily, we don't
have the data to really assess
necessarily it's total
effectiveness, except for the
fact that it's been a greater
indicator of targeting poverty
at the school level, um, which I
think is absolutely important. I
think that's why the
recommendation is to move that,
um, the family income index to
the Title One and replace the
Title One component, um, in the
at-risk formula.
Because it's so effective and
that was one of the things when
we were kicking around the idea
about um uh family income index
was, uh, uh, how could we better
target um poverty in our
schools, and I think we have the
tool to be able to do that. Um,
one thing I would like to point
out, oh, if I could, because
the, while we're on family
income index, uh, under notes of
implementation, some schools
have struggled to expend their
funding, due partly lack of
Local capacity, um, it, it
reminds me of item 63, um,
school leader, professional
development, um.
As one of these programs, do we
know what that is going toward
because we've heard that some
leaders haven't known what to do
with this, where to expend some
of this money, what some of the
interventions for a family
income index could be? Do we
know what this training is
because I think we know about
teacher shortage and we hear
that a lot, but also the
leadership shortage that we also
have in, in, um, becoming a, a,
a administrator in our schools.
Mr. Chair, for to your question
on line 63, school leader
professional development, uh,
for those of you who have been
around a while, this was the old
principals pursuing excellence
program under the Martinez
administration, hence one of
those blow lines that kind of
stood the test of time. It has
since been transformed into uh,
probably 4 or 5 different
programs, ranging from 1, 2nd to
3rd year teachers to principals
to
Superintendent, so they've got
sort of this graduating program
for different levels of
leadership, and it's usually uh
Professional development
opportunities that are hosted by
the priority schools Bureau at
PED.
What we do know is that there
are cohorts are usually bursting
at the seams because they're
only serving a select few number
of school leaders and, um,
educators at each of these
conferences, and many of them
have expressed the desire once
they've graduated from this
program to continue receiving
that professional learning, so
there's just this ongoing wait
lists of individuals that want
to receive that training.
Uh, there's probably.
Opportunities to maybe expand
this into the realm of what you
could provide for school board
members as far as opportunities
for learning and also maybe.
Ways to increase the amount of
executive coaching that goes on,
but that's largely been left up
to the Priority schools Bureau
to determine.
Yeah, because we talk a lot
about like the complexities of
being an educator, which, which
are many, but then becoming a
school administrator, um, where
you're in charge of a budget
staff disciplined for a school
and really setting the the
school culture, um, and it's
good to hear that a lot of the
participants in the program want
to have that continual um work
in professional development. Um,
I will say the last thing is
yesterday.
Um, here at LESC we had a
presentation well we had a rules
presentation, but then we also
had a briefing on the motion
that the Martinez Yazi
plaintiffs have filed and it
singled out the legislative
Education Study Committee is
providing a roadmap, um, a
convening sessions to bring
stakeholders together, um.
To come up with solutions and
from our members, um, our
members, um,
Mhm
Mention some concerns about
doing that. Um, but I mean, my
comments were that certainly
we're flattered, um, at, at
being singled out for that, but
I think it wasn't without reason
either. It's because through the
legislative education Study
Committee is that we've worked
over the past couple of years to
set a long term vision for what
education would look like, not
just session by session, but
what is education? What's the
long
term plan 5 years, 10 years from
now, and how do these individual
pieces of legislation address
various aspects of not just the
lawsuit, but everything else,
um, in our, um,
Education ecosystem, and I
thought that certainly through
the work that we've done, we've
been very proud in that and
certainly happy to work with um
our counterparts at at LFC on
being able to put the financing
toward those goals and
initiatives because um I think
certainly through through my
tenure as chair as well as um,
Chairman Sols is that that's
been the one important thing for
us along with the staff is being
able
To where are we going? Where are
we and being honest in our
education system where we're at
and where we're going, not
session by session, but 5 years,
10 years down the road because
um,
We know we have a long way to
go. We've had a lot of
successes, I think jointly as a
legislature um that we can be
proud of, but we also know that
there's a lot of work left to be
done in this realm. So, um,
certainly it would encourage
folks from the LFC if you're not
familiar with that plan, is to
please look it up and when we
have meetings, obviously you're
are welcome to join us, um, in
that venture as well, but I'm,
um, I saw it as, as at least a
fla
and compliment to the work that
we've done. Um, but, and we'll
continue to do as we move
forward.
Um, but with that, thank you all
so much. We appreciate your work
and we'll move on.
To our next presentation. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Um,
All right.
So we get a little bit of a
little, we'll give a little bit
of wait time again to use an
education term to switch things
up.
Thank you
We are running about half an
hour, um, which is fine. I think
the next presentation will
probably similar, if not more
questioning, so as long as we
keep things concise
presentations concise and
questions concise, we should be
good.
Be sure to get everybody in
their questions in.
This is a good and interesting
topic.
Good morning,
Madam Secretary designate member
of the committees,
um, my name is Mariana Padilla.
I'm the recently appointed
secretary designate, um, but I
know all of you, so I'm really
excited to be here with all of
you. Um, I value my
relationships with each of you,
and I'm really excited about the
continued work that we're going
to do with me in this role.
Um, I'm really excited to be
here at Atrisco Heritage, um, I
grew up not too far from here,
south of here, and, uh, the
small community of Los Padilla
actually very close to where
Chairman Romero grew up so I'm
really excited to be here in
this wonderful community and in
this beautiful school.
Um, I would like to thank all of
you for your support in words of
encouragement, um, over the last
week or so. Um, I'm honestly
just incredibly.
Um, overwhelmed and humbled by
the amount of encouraging
messages, voicemails, emails,
um, all of the support that I've
received from my colleagues and
peers, educators, um,
legislators and general
community leaders that I've
received, um, over the last
week. So I really appreciate
that support and that
confidence. And I can assure you
that, um, I
Work incredibly hard whatever I
do. Um, I care deeply, um, and,
um, I like to get things
accomplished. So, um, thank you
all again for that, um, support.
Um, I also would like to thank,
um, the LESC and LFC staff for
their continued partnership, um,
in my role within the
administration, I have obviously
worked incredibly closely with
both of these.
and their staff and, um, have
always valued them as, um,
smart, um, smart individuals,
uh, they're incredible thought
partners. Uh, they're willing to
come and think with us through
the various things that we
should be focusing on. And so,
um, I've always appreciated
that, um, obviously under the
new interim director John Senna
and former deputy I'm
Sorry, former director Gwen Pria
Warnament, who's also here today
just very much appreciate the
partnership, um, and appreciate
the opportunity to come here and
speak with you today. Um,
We were asked to come and talk
about our priorities for the
below the line funding for FY
26, so that's what we're doing
for you today, um, we are still
in our budget planning process
for the public school support
budget. This is not a final
budget for us, but it was
important for us to come to you
today, tell you what we're
thinking.
Um, tell you what how we're kind
of structuring that budget and
what our priorities are for next
fiscal year. And so, um,
although we won't be talking to
you about specific, um, dollar
amounts for each of the things.
We do want for you to see how
we're prioritizing spending and
budgeting funding to support
students in our schools. And so
before I, uh, move into the
presentation that you.
should have in front of you. Um,
I just want to, uh, respond to
the presentation that was just
provided by LESC and um LFC
staff. Um,
I agree, we agree that there are
many things in below the line
funding and non-recurring
funding that should not be
there.
Um, you will see, and we're
already in our budget planning
right now for FY 26 have moved
many things.
Into recurring funding and we
agree with you things like
universal healthy meals. I agree
with you. There are many things
that, that need to be there, um.
We put things in the executive
as well as the legislative in
below the line funding obviously
to.
Test innovative and pilot
innovative ideas. Um, but we
also do that because we have
limited recurring funding and we
have opportunities with one-time
funding. So we're very
conscientious at the executive
just as you all are not to
really balloon recurring
funding, but
a Greek agree completely that
things should be in recurring
budget, it creates stability,
um, for the
Districts and charter schools
that create stability for us and
that's really the direction that
we would like to move into, um,
I wanted to just comment on
putting programs into the SCG.
Um, and just a highlight for you
a couple of things that we
should all be considering
together.
Um, one is.
We don't, um, we're not able to
really direct and guide how that
funding is spent. And so we know
that we value local control and
decision making over budgets,
but we also know that we at the
state play a role in identifying
how funds should be spent on key
things that we know that work.
So with putting things into the
SCG, there needs to be a level
of accountability to make sure
that.
the programs that we intend to
fund are in fact being funded.
Um, the other thing is, is that
in order for us to fund at
existing levels for things like
CTE, we will have to increase
overall funding to make sure
that the programs that are being
implemented in certain schools
and a very robust way, do not
then have to dial back their,
their efforts because the amount
of funding that they're
receiving through the.
SCG reduces so those are just
things that I wanted to point
out that I know you all know,
but I wanted to just share with
you that we are very interested
in what we are putting in
recurring and non-recurrent
funding. It makes total sense.
And we're on board with you
there and are ready to work with
you and thinking through how we
do that.
OK.
So, um, on slide 2,
Gives you the, the priority
areas, areas that we're looking
at as we're establishing our
public school support budget.
Um, we're focusing on some key
things that we know impact
students' success. Those things
are to reduce chronic chronic
absenteeism.
Improve graduation rates?
Improve overall academic
outcomes for students.
Uh, really support our educators
and school leaders.
Um, increase the safety in our
schools.
Um, and then also I wanted to
highlight for you something
that's really important to me is
to improve the operations within
the public education department
so that we can more effectively
support our schools around the
state.
So for attendance, you all had
at least the LESC members had a
really excellent set of
presentations a couple of days
on the, uh, by, um, by our, our
legislative staff as well as
deputy secretary Castillo, um,
who really talked about what
we're seeing around attendance
and chronic absenteeism, what
the difference is between the
two and how complex this issue
actually is to solve. And so,
Um, I just want to start with
sharing that we have seen
improvement, as was shared
earlier this this week. Um, we
have seen, uh, 6.4% improvement
last academic year, um, in
attendance, and that's, that's
pretty significant to see in one
year, and I will say that we can
attribute that to the
investments that we're making
and the focus that we have made
together um across.
the state and with our school
partners to address this issue.
Um, it's imperative that we do
address it because if our, if
our children are not in school,
they're simply not learning, um,
we're not able to support them
in their various needs, and
there's a whole host of other
challenges associated with that.
So our goal is to reduce chronic
absenteeism by 50 and 5 years.
Um, and so for us, we're
utilizing the, the 202,220.
23 chronic absenteeism rate at
39.22%. So, um, our goal is to
cut.
Chronic absenteeism to just over
19% in five years. Um, I think
it's totally achievable. I know
it's achievable, but we have to
dedicate the funding and
resources and and guidance and
support to schools to make sure
that gets done. Um, so quickly,
the barriers, some of the
barriers that we know exist for
attendance include illness,
household challenges like
housing and food insecurity and
other basic needs of families.
disengagement of our kids, uh,
feeling disconnected or having a
lack of motivation and interest
in their school, mental health,
which has been mentioned
numerous times and then
transportation. So I wanted to
share with you, um, how we have,
um, spent the money, the $5
million that we received, um, in
the last couple of years. I will
point out that, um, our first
appropriation request on the
executive.
supporting attendance was 17
million. We did get 5 million
from the legislature. We thank
you for that, but we know in
order to really address these
issues, we need much more
funding that can be used um by
our schools to really implement
some of the core sort of
effective strategies that we
know make a difference. So, um,
the first year we were able to
fund 7 districts, um, with the
funding and
This, uh, current year we're
funding 14 districts to
implement various, um,
intervention strategies that
they have designed on their own
with the support of the public
ed department.
That includes hiring attendants
and interventionists, which is
actually an incredibly effective
strategy to have dedicated staff
in schools.
Who are able to work with
students and families to address
the issues that are preventing
them from being at school. It's
an incredibly effective, um,
strategy,
um, to, to have this done. And
it's actually one of the things
that the districts have really
prioritized, um, Santa Fe Public
Schools as Representative Lujan
indicated has seen a really huge
improvement and they have
prioritized attendance
interventionists. They are
highly affected.
Um, other things that were
utilized with this funding were
to um adopt early warning
systems so that they're able to
come in as soon as they start to
see a problem with a student,
they could come in early.
They're identified and they can
provide support. Some of our
districts, um, implemented data
tracking and communication tools
or provided, um, and provided
workshops for parents to to get
parents to really understand why
it's important to be in school,
um.
Every day.
Um, we also were able to engage
a partner uh who implemented a
statewide engagement program,
um, so that all districts could
opt in if they so choose to
have, um, this vendor reach out
to their students who are, um,
starting to show issues with
attendance and work to re-engage
them.
We are also rolling out an
attendance awareness campaign.
Um, I think that it's important
for us to remind families to
remind our general public, the
importance of, uh, attendance.
And so that campaign is
providing materials and
resources directly to schools,
including, um, um, guidance as
to how they can talk about and
really support families around
attendance, and then the funding
has also been used.
To provide direct technical
assistance to schools as they
develop their attendance plans,
which is required through the
attendance for Success Act, um,
as well as, uh, we host, uh,
twice a year attendance
conferences. And what has been
really critical about these
conferences is it allows us to
really, um, bring in national
experts, uh, and local experts
that are very focused on, um,
attendance and chronic
absenteeism and our, uh, school
districts and charter schools
are able to really lean in
together and to, um, share ideas
and, and resources so that they
can improve what they're doing.
So the next line.
Slide 4.
Um, is some additional ways that
we're supporting attendance. So
in addition to the 5 million,
um, as was said by Sonny, um,
earlier, you know, we, it's,
this is really a complex issue.
And, um, in order to really get
at it, we have to think about
our solutions in a very
multifaceted way and really look
at what are the barriers that
that are
Students and families are facing
and to really know that serving
students with extremely
economically disadvantaged
backgrounds are even more
complex. So, you know, I
appreciate the conversation
about family income index, uh,
this morning, and I will just
share with you, um, all of the
things that were said are
accurate. We rolled this out
during the pandemic. That was
incredibly difficult. The
legislation initially had
Restrictions regarding how the
funding could be spent.
A 3rd on literacy, 3 on math,
and a 3rd that was a little more
open. I will tell you that
schools found that incredibly
challenging to really address
these economic-based complex
issues of families when you have
restrictions on a program. We
were able to take that off as
was mentioned, and, and I want
to thank the president pro tem
and, and really working with us
and being our sponsor and
helping us with this
legislation.
Um,
The the idea, the concept of
tackling poverty at a school or
community level is significant.
We have been recognized by other
states in the nation about wow
this is really innovative and it
is, it's incredibly innovative
and I want to make a pitch to
you that it is worth
The effort and investment.
I last year we changed things up
at the department in terms of
the supports that we were
giving, giving schools and what
we were encouraging them to do.
I personally got very involved
with it last year. And we'll be
even more now in my current
position. I think we could be
helping schools to really direct
how that funding is spent much
better. Um, I think we could be
supportive of and even how we're
helping them get that.
Money out to bring in things
like if they need social
workers. If they need attendance
interventionist. I mean, it's
really up to that school
community as much as you say the
superintendents know what they
need, the principals and
teachers know what they need as
well. And so for, for principals
and teachers to have funding
that is significant to really
address the challenges of their
students and families to me is
phenomenal. As a teacher.
I would have loved that
opportunity and I know we would
have used that funding very
wisely.
So
I will ask you, please.
To not do away with that program
at this time. I think that we're
at a point where we have the
right mix in terms of what the
statute tells us we can do.
We have our at risk, um,
Resource team, what are they
called? I think that our new
team who has been given very
specific direction from myself
again prior to me being in this
position and certainly now when
I'm in this position, that we
need to do better with that
program and, and we will. And so
I
Um, would love to visit with you
about this some more, but, um, I
really think that we haven't
really had 3 years of seeing if
this program works. We had 2
years of seeing it during a
pandemic and a structure
dictated by statute that was
very limiting. We have one year.
Where we actually have the
flexibility to do what we can do
and so I would just urge you to
not quite do away with that
program yet. Um, I think we need
a little bit more time because I
really think um it's an
incredible tool to addressing
the needs of, of students and
schools that have really high
rates of poverty. Um, so I see
this as a way we can address
attendance, as I mentioned, it's
listed here. Um, being able to
make sure that.
That kids have access to
healthy, um, delicious meals is
a reason to go to school,
Senator Padilla, um, and, uh,
uh, also the, the funding, we
have funding in our in our uh uh
budget that will address things
like restorative restorative
practices, making sure that
we're supporting and creating
positive school climates for our
students, uh, safe zone
trainings, all of these things,
as you all have already said,
Our ways of addressing
attendance. Also how we're
engaging families is critically
important and being able to
invest in those efforts to make
sure that families are engaged
and are at the table and that
they feel welcome in schools and
they feel supported as well.
And then really thinking about
how we're funding
transportation.
And how we can fund
transportation to help support.
Good attendance. Um, I will say
that, you know, districts have
prior to now eliminated school
bus routes because of a lack of
bus drivers primarily, but there
are other reasons why, and I'm
sure you have all heard from the
school districts, um, in your
areas that transportation is
incredibly challenging and
dictates quite a bit, and we
agree.
And we think that as we develop
transportation plans and, and
funding that we should think
about, OK, how does
transportation help improve
attendance? And how can we
design systems that address that
and in my mind, you should never
eliminate school bus routes. We
should figure out ways of making
that work.
Um,
All righty. I'm gonna pass it
over and I, I failed and I'm
terrible to, um, introduce the
two people sitting next to me,
um, to my right we have a deputy
secretary Amanda Debell, who
will also be presenting with me
and uh Greg's Crosstad,
assistant secretary Greg
Frostad. So
Amanda. Good morning. Good
morning. Good to be with you
again. Um, so, uh, this morning
I have the opportunity to speak,
um, on our request that we
believe
will help us to improve our
graduation rates. So we have
created an outcome. Right now,
we are currently about 14%
points below the national
average for graduation. So we
have set a goal for ourselves to
increase graduation by 1400
students over the next two
years, pushing us to get to that
87. Yesterday, uh, director Lynn
Vasquez was here and the team
showed a classroom of little
dots.
And thinking about how if we
were able to move one dot over,
then we would also see an
increase in our, um, proficiency
rates in reading and mathematics
as well as science. So if we
think about this, we have, um,
right now about 10,020,000
seniors every year. How can we
get just 1400 more students
across the finish line at that
four-year mark, that is, um, I
think a
Very realistic goal and I think
that is something that schools
and charter schools can hang
their hats on to get a few more
kids across the state so that we
see the outcomes that we wish to
see.
Um, we have heard a lot this
morning about CTE and, um, we
want to be able to support, um,
our, our career in technical
education, um, programs through
the work of innovation zones or
work-based learning, CTE
specific programming which
requires a maintenance of effort
from the state so that we can
receive federal Perkins funds,
as well as supporting our
student organizations around,
um, around CTE. We also
And ask for out of school time
learning to continue, we know
that families rely on this as
well as it being an additional
support for students who need a
safe and secure place that they
can also enhance their academics
after the school day and
sometimes even in the summertime
programming.
Next, we have some high dosage
tutoring, you all funded, um,
with the out of school time
funding this year. We are using,
um, approximately $800 right now
to support 23 LEAs at about
$1000 per student for high
dosage tutoring. Um, within the
school day. Um, this is outside
of, um, the summer reading
program tutoring. This is
support for teachers who notice
that their students.
needed extra while they are
doing their tier one
instruction, um, and so this
funding will support that. Um,
next we have the, um, the school
support for school
accountability.
We heard a little bit of a
conversation, um, earlier this
morning, and I want to just
highlight those accountability
funds. It does target
professional development for
schools that are in need of
improvement. So for those
teachers and, um, principals or
administrative teams. It also
supports the school monitoring
visits that are required, um,
next year we anticipate this
year we have 163 schools next
year we're
guesstimating 145 to 150 school
sites. Um, they each get 3
monitoring visits per year. Um,
so we're looking at between 435
and 450 school site visits to
make sure that those schools are
working towards their 90 day
school improvement plans,
working to get out of their MRI
CSI or TSI school designations.
Next, those principles and now
we offer it to our 1st and 2nd
year, uh, superintendents. This
year we have 37 brand new
superintendents across the
state. Those folks don't
necessarily get training or
networking unless they have
somewhere to go. So we are
providing for the 2nd year a
program that is specific to
brand new superintendents,
cohorting them, networking them,
giving them a lifeline to other
districts.
So that they can find support
amongst each other as we are
working with school boards as we
are working with our school
communities in our state,
superintendency does not require
specific and specialized
superintendent training. And so
our programming gives an
opportunity for us to provide
some additional professional
development. I'm getting to that
management and instructional
leadership that superintendents
need.
Um,
Those superintendents also, um,
have the opportunity to receive
executive coaching, so really
specific coaching to enhance
their leadership skills.
Um, so we have, uh, through
this, um, and also, I want to
also say the Office of Special
Education Initiatives are below
the line funding requests right
now, so that the Office of
Special Education, which is new,
can provide professional
development.
can provide parent universities
so that parents become well
versed in working with the
school system who has begun to
work collaboratively with them,
with the IEP process. There is,
uh, right now, the Office of
Special Education is well into
the midst of working with the
Office of Special Education
State plan, that is using data
to inform the decisions working
around the state to create
collaborative goals and
priorities
And this will turn into the
actual state plan that we can
share widely.
Um, next, the Office of Special
Education will use their, their
request for, um, monitoring
visits. We want to make sure
that every school district and
every school is providing the
very best quality education to
students who have IEPs.
Um, and then next we are working
to create a unified IEP
infrastructure. So right now,
and I think we have heard this
conversation, but I, I will just
briefly go into it. Every
district in charter school can
use their own IEP template. This
puts students and families at a
disadvantage as they move from
school to school, and it often
takes weeks for a transfer of an
IEP to get to the new school.
Rolling out a statewide IEP
infrastructure, so the tech
technological side, as well as a
common format for the actual
documentation.
We believe will support students
in not missing a beat, should
they transfer schools. Secondly,
we will be able to desktop and
on-site monitor to make sure
that IEP plans are robust. They
are goal-centered around an
individual student and are
working, um, towards making sure
that students are getting to a
graduation.
If they happen to have an IEP
also. Next, the, um, Office of
Special Education is, um, has
supported the first ever, uh,
annual law conference, so they
want to continue to put that on.
It was very well received by
districts, uh, superintendents
and school boards, and, um, we
hope to continue that work as we
move down and supporting through
the parent university.
So, um, just want to talk a
little bit more about the next
slide.
Which is innovation zones and
CTE works specifically. So since
2021, 6,145 students have
participated in student
internships. This is really
remarkable because much of the
money that has come through, um,
the innovation zone work got
flowed through specifically for
student internships, where they
could earn credit and now with
improved graduation rates, my
opinion, added in there. Um,
we'll see
Increase in this, um, this
workforce. During the 2223
school year, there were 104,000
students that were in high
school. 69,000 of those students
participated in at least one CTE
course that includes students in
73 districts, 48 charter
schools, and 14 post-secondary
institutions. To your point,
Representative, um, Vincent, uh,
we are partnering with students,
um, at the higher education so
that
Students can do dual credit.
Um, it also then um moved into
our innovation zone, um, dollars
that came from House Bill 2, and
that money supports efforts for
schools and districts to fund
innovative ways, um, to get to a
profile of a graduate and to get
students across the finish line
for graduation.
We are keeping that for the 2nd
year in a row so that we can
have really great data at the
end of 3 years. We are keeping
the innovation schools to 25
public high schools, 19 charter
schools, and 3 BIE schools, uh,
who are receiving that funding.
We wish though to continue that
work and be able to expand it at
some point so that we can
continue to work on our updated
graduation requirements and, um,
to work really closely with
individual school districts to
make sure that we are meeting
their needs.
Um, so next, I would just like
to talk about the high dosage
tutoring and out of school time.
So, um, uh, we just talked about
the 23 LEAs that are taking
advantage of that work, um,
around that layer 2 or tier 2
intervention and our out of
school time awards, which is
just under $6 million award is
serving 26 participating LEAs
and 7 community-based
organizations.
Um, and so with that, we, um,
wish to, um, have, um, these
funds continue so that we can
finish the pilot. I also want to
talk about CTE. Currently, we
have CTE programming in 70 of
our districts and charter
schools.
Those districts and charter
schools that have what we call a
very fancy term, completer. So
students who participate in a
first-level CTE course, move on
to a 2nd or a 3rd level, so
welding one, moving on to
welding 2, and then maybe doing
welding 3 as an example.
Of those students, we had a 99
to 100% graduation rate, and I
would like to highlight a couple
of districts that are standing
out as being examples of doing
some really great CTE work.
Bloomfield, Dexter, Estania,
Fort Sumner, Hatch, Hobbs, Los
Lunas, Rio Rancho, School of
Dreams and Silver Consolidated
Schools. So those schools are
putting students into CTE
programming. The students are
sticking with that.
programming. We don't have a way
right now to gather the number
of students who are certificate
completers that are actually
finishing with an industry, um,
level certificate that was taken
out of our data collection tool
a couple of years ago. We are,
however, seeing a need for us to
go back to collect that data. It
was taken out with some of the
administrative burden, but it's
just important for us to be able
to know and to follow those
students as they get their
industry certifications.
Um, so I want to also just
highlight a couple of great
partnerships. So the CTE team
works with the Department of
Workforce Solutions. They go and
they can convene regional
convenings in order to determine
what are some really great
industry needs across the region
and then they link up with
industry partners. One of the
high schools, um, in our
Southeast quadrant of the city
got a
$5000 scholarship from Airgas, a
welding company that will allow
them to expand their welding
company through this
partnership. Roswell High School
is another example. We got
another $500 or $5000 in order
to add a propane course that was
seen as a need for getting
propane certifications out and
so working with industry
partners, we were able to secure
those funds.
The other component that is
supported with these dollars is
that, um, that the students who
get to participate in, um,
CTSOs, career in technical
student organizations we support
uh several. I'm just going to
highlight a few. Business
professionals of America, DEA,
um,
And it might have even been DEA.
I don't know who was providing
our meals, um, to us too, it
might have just been culinary
arts, and Senator Romero, I look
at you to see, do you happen to
know?
Was it, it was, oh, it was APS.
This news provided by our
culinary arts, the culinary arts
team. Great. So it was not
Decca. Um, educators, right,
educators rising is another
program that we tout largely
because those students are
interested during high school in
becoming a teacher and so they
get to dip their toes into the
field of profession, uh, of the
profession rather. Our FCCLA,
which is the family career and
community Leaders of America has
grown over the last several
years. Hoa, future health
professional.
FFA, um, Future Farmers of
America and Skills USA are just
to highlight, um, a few of
those. So, um, I would like to
just also go back to answer one
of the previous questions while
we have just a moment. Um, we,
um, at the, at the PE level, um,
sent out, um.
We are only paying for one
position out of the $400
million. The rest of the money,
69% of it does flow through
through direct costs right to
the districts for them to
determine how they would like to
spend it on. We spent
approximately 14% on contracts
that then flowed through to the
districts. We spent 0.26% of
that allocation on, um, and on a
person. And then we use a few
dollars, about 0.
02% on building and supporting
professional development for
counselors to get students into
the appropriate CTE programming
and the training that is
required around the new
graduation requirements that is
rolling out this year. So a good
portion of those dollars go to
the districts.
Next, I would like to talk about
the educator ecosystem. We have
had several presentations during
this interim session, hearing
about our microcredentialing
system about the Ed Fellows
program and our teacher
residency programs. Um, I just
want to remind you that this
year we have 492 Ed fellows in
program and to have become
completers that are in their 1st
or 2nd year teaching this year.
We have 446 participants that
will participate in.
Paid student teaching by the end
of the school year, and we are
paying for 281 teacher
residencies this year.
So, um, this work will support
not only the pipeline to the
classroom where we know we still
have shortages. We're looking at
and we're waiting on the most
recent so report to come out of
NMSU, but we are approximating
about 7700 teacher vacancies,
um, this year across the state
that is reduced from about 1000
where we have seen. So we are
making an impact. I do believe
that the teaching profession is
gaining, um.
Additional respect and that we
will continue to see additional
um folks go into the profession
that we all care about very
deeply.
Next,
The next slide, slide 8,
is going back also to improving
academic outcomes.
We cannot do our jobs at a
public education department. If
we are not constantly pushing to
improve student achievement
across all areas. But statewide,
we would like to see a 6% year
over year increase in our
English language arts. Last year
and this year we've seen about a
4% and we want to create that to
be a little bit more robust. If
you were here at yesterday's
presentation, we talked about 1
or 2% increase is significant.
Greater than that is great. We
want to continue to be great and
I want to show you the efforts
of funding the literacy work
that we are doing and we have to
get back to funding of
mathematics and science so that
we can push on teachers, give
them the resources that they
need and help families to see
their students achieve what we
are calling a 3% year over year
improvement for mathematics.
So with our mathematics work,
we, um, are working on a program
this year. We have cobbled
together some of our funds to
continue working on what we are
calling the Nummeos project or
program. Numerros is a, um,
Upskilling for classroom
teachers around the Common Core
standards for mathematics. There
is a disconnect if we are seeing
it still in helping teachers to
make sure that they have the
skills that they need in order
to support early numeracy and
getting students to the algebra
and above, um, pathway so that
they can, if they choose to go
to college, if they choose to
choose to take.
Advanced mathematics that they
have those skills.
Since we have actually seen a
little bit of a decline, um, in
our mathematics scores, the
Ninos program will allow for
teachers by taking 4
microcredentials to enhance
their understanding of the
teaching of great pedagogy for
mathematics, working on
conceptual mathematics,
numeracy, and number literacy.
We are working also, um, to go
to create a K through 2 cohorts,
4 teachers.
Then we will move into sort of
like this a very similar rollout
that we saw for letters, then
move into 3 through 5 teachers.
We then will be able to offer
for those teachers who
participate and who finish the
new Medos program they can
actually become um especially
endorsed teacher for teaching of
elementary mathematics.
We believe in our 3 to 5 year
plan as we roll this program
out, that it will take a few
years for us to train every
single teacher just like it has
taken us a few years to train
every single teacher in letters,
but that it is an appropriate
way for us to continue to roll
out and upscale while
simultaneously working with our
higher education programs to
make sure that teachers who are
coming out of our EPREP programs
are getting the same sort
Of, um, knowledge in terms of
what we know for how students
learn mathematics.
Our science in STEM initiatives
are in their 3rd year. Oh, we
are also one more thing, one
more detail I just forgot. This
year is a math adoption year. So
right now, um, superintendents,
um, have the opportunity to
select their, um, teachers who
will serve on our mathematics,
um, course selection committee.
It will go through our high
quality instructional materials
team and we will provide for
districts, um.
Series of options for
mathematics materials that
should be considered for
adoption.
Um, by the district. Districts
can choose not to go with our
recommendations, and we will
highlight those districts right
now on the PED website. You can
see the districts who have opted
into our high quality
instructional materials for
language arts. We know that
there are single components that
make a difference in the life of
a child. One is school
leadership. 2 is the teacher and
having a great teacher in the
classroom. And the third thing
is having a great viable.
Curriculum with the appropriate
materials to support that. So
our high quality instructional
materials team is super
committed to making sure that we
have the best materials for
districts to choose from.
Our science, um, uh, our science
initiative with the NextGen
Science Standards is now under
its second revision. We just got
a really nice email from a
charter school, um, just outside
of Albuquerque this week saying
thank you for the scope and
sequence. Thank you for the next
gen science standards. It is
something that teachers are
using in the classroom and it is
impacting student performance
and we saw the student
performance in science
yesterday. So we are really
pleased with that work.
Um, and that will also roll into
our other STEM initiative
initiatives in supporting
schools with their science,
technology, engineering, and
many schools at arts and
mathematics to that, um, to that
acronym.
Um, then our literacy and
reading support, just want to
thank you for and we've had some
really great and robust
conversation today about the,
um, summer reading program, um,
We want to continue that
conversation and have the summer
reading program be funded again.
We know, and to your point,
Representative Small, we know
that with a longer runway this
year that we will not see the
sort of barriers that we had
this last year, being very
honest, we had a short runway
for 12 districts were using up
some of their Esther dollars and
they had some programming
already planned. That was
another barrier that we ran
into. But all of those things
can help us.
To provide for students in the
summertime, great quality summer
programming and support families
as they, um, are looking for
activities for their students to
participate in and I have said
this a few times before, but it
is important for us to know. It
will also support the summer
slide, it will prevent that from
happening at such grand rates.
Um, and I just want to address
one more, um, comment that was
made earlier. Uh, we are working
with one of our local.
Universities on the data report
and we anticipate having data
reports back to us during the
month of October. I know this,
this meeting, um, LESC is, um,
very full agendas, but we're
going to see how we can get that
information out to those of you,
especially who are interested,
um, as soon as we get it.
Um, so, um, when, um, additional
component with the Summer
Institute, I would just like
your summer reading program that
I would just like to speak
about. Um, we had 117 distinct
sites. You can see we have a
heat map on, um, New Mexico
literacy.gov. There is a heat
map to demonstrate all of our
sites that we, um, participated
with this summer. We had 18
districts, 2 charter schools.
And Shiprock associated School
District who took us up on
transportation. And again, with
a longer runway we do believe
that additional school districts
will take us up on that. Some of
their folks had already been,
um, um, slated for other jobs
during the summer. They're bus
drivers and so they just didn't
have the, the infrastructure to
support that. Um, so, uh, to
date, we have had more than 9000
of our state's teachers that
have been upskilled or or are
currently in.
rolled in letters training.
This year we have a middle
school literacy initiative with
the AI Institute right now, and
they are just getting started.
They had their leadership
meeting late August and
September, the teachers were
getting their training and that
work is, um, uh, continuing. And
we know that professional
learning is vital to an
educator's growth throughout
their career. And so this work
is really enhancing the work of
all of our teachers, and we
would like to continue that
work.
Um, at the secondary level also,
um, the PE has hired 15 literacy
coaches, um, at 15 of our model
middle schools and high schools
across the state. And we know
that those coaches are
important, um, to the work that
teachers are, are doing in their
classrooms with students every
day to have an external lens on
all of that. And if I could if I
could chime in here, deputy
secretary, um, I'd like to just
answer some of the questions.
that we've heard so far about
our efforts around structured
literacy and the recent
investments that you all have,
um, um, provided for our
children around the state. So,
um, as deputy secretary, um,
mentioned, um, in terms of the
number of program sites we had
statewide. We worked, um, very,
uh, collaboratively with school
districts and charter schools
around the state as well as our
tribal partners, um, local
government.
Partners in our community-based
programs to establish these
sites around the state and to
serve our students in the, this,
um, very engaging, um, reading
program in a, in a 44 students
to one instructor model. Our
model was, um, intended to be
for 6 weeks for 4 hours a day
with an effort to partner with
our local sponsors to, to
provide whole day programming
because we know
don't just need 4 hours a day in
the summer. They need a full day
while they're at work or at
school. And so in some sites
that was developed really
successfully and we had full day
programs. Um, in other sites,
uh, we just had the half day
programs, um, LEA is really
weighed in in terms of what they
were willing to do this last
summer, what they were
comfortable doing, of course, as
mentioned, some of them already
had some summer programming. So
this summer, our model
It vary. Um, we, it was not
consistently the, the six-week
program that we wanted to see.
But for our first summer, we
were really interested in in
getting this moving, working
with our schools to put
something together and to serve
our students and our families
because we know we can't wait.
We don't have not one summer to
kind of hold back and, and not
do all of the things that we
can. Um, I will tell you that
the feedback we've received from
families has been overwhelmingly
Positive as well as from
students. Um, we have, uh,
conducted, um, a family survey
after the program, we received,
um, I think we're over 800
survey responses last I checked
and, um, have just been
overwhelmed by parents sharing
that to have an academic-based
summer program that is free,
that is typically something that
you would have to pay through a
private program to receive.
was really impactful. Families
had options that have never
existed before that really was
focused on something so critical
as literacy. We've heard
incredible things from our, our
site sponsors from our schools
as well, talking about the
incredible learning that was
happening, um, as mentioned, we
have an, an outside evaluator.
We're doing this through New
Mexico Highlands University is
actually evaluating the program
right now.
Looking at the DILS data.
They're looking at the
qualitative data. They're
looking at the variation of the
program itself, right? Based on
what the local schools wanted to
do. So we want to know all the
same things you want to know.
And, uh, we'll share it with you
as soon as we have it. But in
doing this evaluation, it, it'll
allow us to hone in on what that
model should really be, and it
allows us to push a little bit
harder I think on our schools,
on our local sponsors to say,
this is the model actually that
has.
The biggest benefit. Um, in
addition to, to seeing overall
growth in reading over the
duration of the summer. We're
also looking at the impacts to
summer slide. When kids have
very, very limited, um,
opportunities to work on their
academics to just read and to
write and to get that
instruction, you all know we see
slide, a slide back in the
summer. So we're also measuring
not only what was that growth in
reading, but what are the
impacts.
On the summer slide and how
prepared our kids are in going
to the next school year because
we know that teachers have to go
back and reteach what was taught
in the previous year to get them
caught up because of that summer
slide. So those are other things
that we're looking at as part of
the program. So we're really
excited to, to see those, um,
outcomes.
I will tell you that we did not
spend all of the $30 million
this summer, Chairman Munoz. Um,
we, we didn't spend it all. So,
um, we would like to utilize
those funds to continue to do
this, this intervention work.
Um, again, we honed in in terms
of what this, this looks like,
um, and we're already talking to
our schools about next summer.
We're already asking them, are
you going to be interested next
summer? Let's start planning.
together. Let's make sure we can
plan full day programs. We would
like for the schools to be more
effective in identifying the
kids that really should be in
this program because we had kids
that had really high need in
literacy, and then we had some
that were at grade level and we
had some even that were a little
bit above, but still, we're
really excited about being a
program where they can get some
additional support and literacy.
Um, so we're, we're really
interested in working, uh, more
collaboratively
With the schools to really
target students that we think
would, would really benefit, um,
we've even talked about making
sure that they're doing this
during, um, the upcoming
parent-teacher conferences. It's
a great time right now to
already start talking to parents
about their children who need
some extra support. So they're
already now thinking about, OK,
I really want my child in the
state's summer reading program.
I'm going to plan that into my
family.
schedule for this summer and
make sure we plan our vacations
around that and can just build
it into the plans that we have
for our for our kids. Um, and
again, make sure that as much as
possible we can have full day
programs. Um, I like all of you
who have kids run around all
over the place trying to keep
our kids in programs in the
summer and that's just too much
to ask, um Madam Secretary, if
we could go through the
presentation because I have a
growing list of members who wish
to ask questions to answer some
of the questions
That came up before we got up
here we'll have plenty of time
to answer questions here in a
bit, but if you would please
you, Chairman Romeo. Um, so on
to slide 10. So we have already
talked about the importance of
school safety, um,
representative, um, uh, Moya has
talked about that. We've already
seen around the state this year.
Um, many incidences where we
have had reports, um, through
our school systems. We've seen,
um, around the nation about
incidences.
With, um, uh, active shooter
situations. For us, um, at the
public education department in
this, um, Governor Lujan
Grisham's administration were
clear that we need to equip
schools with the infrastructure
to, um, be responsive to these
emergency situations where we
can communicate effectively with
all law enforcement and, um,
emergency responders and a
coordinated way where we have
eyes in the.
School quickly where we can, um,
do everything that needs to
happen to make sure that we, um,
step in and intervene in
emergency situations. So for us,
please expect you will see, um,
and ask around school safety for
this next, um, PSS budget. Um,
and as mentioned, we have up
until this point, we had a $1000
appropriation for panic buttons,
which are being used, and then
I'll just highlight as well that
NISA also has an app.
Called Stop It, which is also,
um, something that our school
districts and charter schools
can opt into.
And then.
Last, no 2nd to last slide. Um,
I want to talk to you about
improving the operations within
the state agency. Um, this is
something that's really very
important to us. This is
something that when I stepped
in, uh, just over a week ago
that, um, we rolled up our
sleeves and immediately started
addressing. So we've heard, um,
today, and we've heard prior
that funding can sometimes be
delayed. Sometimes really,
Delayed getting out. We know
that data sometimes can be
delayed and getting out, and we
know that when we put the data
out, we want to have confidence
in that data that it's accurate.
Um, so that we don't have to
tweak things and change things
moving forward. So, um, for us,
really making sure that our
operations and the agency are
functioning as well as they can
so that we're supporting the
districts and charter schools
the best that we can is a top
priority for me. We are already
making, um, changes in the
agency related to the system
itself in terms of automating
things, but it's really also
about having
A clear sort of plan and process
for how we move things through
the agency and how we are really
laser focused on those things.
So since I've been in this role,
we are now tracking all RFRs,
um, and how money is flowing
through the agency by the top
leadership in the department,
um, together on a weekly basis
and individually on a daily
basis. We have given very
specific direction about how
long.
Staff has to approvals, uh, to,
to move funding through quickly.
So I'm confident that we will
very quickly reach our KPI of 22
days to process. Um, these funds
through, um, and I'm confident
that we will do that quickly.
We're also working very focused
on our data, our data governance
and management systems to again
address the things that, um, I
have, um, just mentioned.
And so we have several C2
requests that further support
our data needs, um, licensure is
another thing I'm sure you all
hear about. I have over the
last, um, many years in this
administration, get phone calls
all the time about licensure.
And so I have to call the
department and say what's
happening with this, this
license. So really making sure
that we have, um, an efficient
and effective licensure system
where we're communicating with
Applicants and they get their
licenses quickly so that we can
make sure we have licensed
qualified teachers in all of our
classrooms. And then Deputy
Secretary already talked about
the statewide IEP template. Um,
I'm really excited about this.
We all are, um, because we have
a huge issue with our IEPs,
um, before we came in with a
universal IEP template, there
were over 100 different IEP
templates statewide, over 100.
That's over 100 different ways.
Of developing an IAP for a
student. Of those IEPs, they
were well over 100 pages.
It is really difficult for
families and teachers to
understand and and implement
IEPs that are so varied and so
complex. Our new IEP is, I
think, around 30 pages,
um, Max's probably less than
that. Um, we think that having,
um, a universal template will be
much easier to implement, easier
for students and families and
teachers.
And to really address the issue
that happens in delays and
services. We know that our
special education students are
are graduating at the lowest
rates among our student groups.
They're performing at the lowest
rates in order for us to really
support them so that they're
successful. These are the kinds
of investments and things that
we need to do to make sure that
they, um, have effective IAPs
and that they're being
implemented and they're getting
the supports that they need so
that's also a top priority.
So with that you all had asked
for us to talk about how funding
flows through the department.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, we could skip
this line if you don't, if you
want to move to questions, but
if not, we can quickly talk
about how 5 minutes,
that would be through the
department. Yes, thank you, um,
Chairman Romero, for just, well
just very quickly. There are
several ways, um, that money
flows from the public education
department to SCG or
Excuse me, LAA is in charter
schools. So we have
formula-based grants,
competitive grants, statewide
initiatives, direct services to
students and agency improvements
and so with this, um, you, um,
can see here we have an example
of, for example, the
formula-based grant is the
family income index that we've
talked about, um, a lot today.
That gets flowed out through an
award letter and often a
preplanning award letter
precedes that before, um,
before districts and charters
can start spending and asking
for reimbursements. The same
thing with competitive grants.
Um, you might wonder, so, um,
this is an example of the
attendance improvement. There
was $500 that was appropriated
that spread across the entire
state would not allow for
enough funding to truly make an
impact. So the agency creates
competitive funding, asks folks
to apply, and then those award
letters are sent out. Then, um,
an example of a statewide
initiative would be where the
PED as an agency pays for
something for districts to opt
into the rave, um, or the mobile
panic button is an example of
that. And then the summer
reading program is an example of
direct services. So we,
are providing services. Um, this
is not often used.
Um,
Across the agency, but this is
one opportunity that can be
supported and then we have our
data quality supports in, in the
previous slide with our C2
request just to make sure that
the agency is actually operating
in 2024 rather than super
archaic systems that have not
been able to, um, be funded, um,
over the last several years. So,
that's pretty quick.
Very
All right, cool,
I appreciate it. So let's
continue the trend of quickness
and concise questions and
answers, folks, we'd appreciate
it. Uh, Representative Baca.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the,
um,
For the information, I'm going
to be quick. This is going to be
quick, uh, like speed
questioning and speed, um,
putting stuff out there. OK, so,
um, Mr. Chairman, uh, we also
talked about the number of
secretaries of ed, I think, uh,
first of all, welcome Secretary
Bia. You've had 2 or 3 stents in
addition to that, so we're like
7.
So I, I do also want to talk
about the consistency of
leadership at the site in this
district level.
I think if we look out there 30%
of our superintendents are new
or been there within the last 2
years.
This is, in my opinion,
something that the legislator
needs to take a look at because
we're always in a constant state
of starting over, and I think
that that's part of one of the
factors, we have not seen the
student outcomes that we have
hoped for.
Um,
Uh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman and
also Chairman Munoz and we
talked about in the last 23, um,
Session, we talked about the
$100 million that was for school
safety capital outlay, preschool
and some of those other moneys.
I would also recommend that this
committee take a look at that. I
know that that's been helpful
for many districts to fund those
projects, um, in addition also
not just funding capital
projects, I think that the
committee should also look to
see about funding personnel. We
fund OTPT RT social workers.
The fact that many districts
don't have that in their budget,
I think we need to take a look
to see if how, if possible, we
can flow through some of that
money to hire security guards
and not just rely on outside
agencies.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the other
thing I'm gonna talk about in
rapid succession is CTE.
Support that. I think we also
need to look at moving CT down
to middle school. I think that
we need to figure out is how we
can get these kids, whether it
be interested, may look
different, but I think that we
need to take a look at that as
well.
Um, in the area of engagement.
When we recently had a middle
school summit. Their first
priority was school safety.
Their 2nd and 3rd priority were
activities, sports, and other
things that were making it that
they wanted to go to school, um.
So I think that we need to look
at how we support that, looking
at APS.
They only have a certain amount
of athletic programs for their
students, right, because of
funding and lack of support and
otherwise. Well, we know that
for me, I'm one of those kids.
Without sports, I would have
been probably one of those
statistics, to be honest with
you. So we, I don't care if
they're in band, in choir, ROTC
AG or whatever. Um, I look over
here to Senator Padilla and his
middle school over here, uh,
that has their greenhouses and
they are trying to address both
school and community hunger. We
need to actually be doing
More funding for programs like
that and not have to directly
on, you know, individual
appropriations, um, the next
story I want to look at is
higher ed collaboration with
K-12.
OK, we need to be looking at
providing opportunity for
students to earn credit while in
there to articulate that as far
as certificate and degree
programs.
So the students don't see that
as a next chapter in their life,
but a continuation. Students
that actually earn credit,
college credit, especially for
our first generation college uh
attendees.
If they earn, you know, 1520, 30
credits, the chances of them
going on and being, uh,
successful in college or a
certificate program are much
higher.
The other, uh, point I want to
hit, and again, this is, I'm
doing this for staff so we can
get more information.
It's actually about facilities
improvement when we talk about
capital we talk about the aging.
Um, buildings that we have, I'm
also it was brought up the first
day about air conditioning, air
conditioning in our school
sites, especially during the hot
summer months, but I'm going to
talk about a recent thing, air
conditioning on our school
buses. You want to fund air
conditioning and school buses
put this committee on a bus with
no air conditioning, drive us
down to cruises, I promise you.
Air conditioning is not a
luxury, it is a necessity for
all of our students in our
buildings. And so I definitely
think we need to take a look at
that.
Um,
you know, we talked about, uh,
engagement. We talked about
interest-based electives. I
remember in middle school, we
had those, uh, how the elective
wheels I took, um, home Ec. I
took woodworking. I took this
and my to my teacher out there,
I still make those little pizzas
out of the biscuits and stuff
like that. So thank you to that
for Ms. Sanchez.
Um, Madam Secretary, the other
thing I'm gonna ask you about
when you talk about the teacher,
um, educator ecosystem.
What about the teacher
residence, uh, is that also
included in that? We talked
about Ed Fellows.
Which are those that are
aspiring to be teacher as
teacher residents, also a part
of the request. OK. Thank you. I
see you shaking your head.
And my last question is going to
be on the assessment for your
summer programs, dibbles is for
what particular age groups and
how are we going to make that
change when we add 5th, 6th, and
middle school components.
So, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baca, um, you said many
wonderful things that I agree
with and I'm not gonna hit it
all and the point of, of trying
to be brief, um, but agree with
many of the things that you
said, uh, specifically about
dibbles. We did use dibbles for
all of our students in the New
Mexico Summer reading program
for kindergarten through 8th
grade, so they all utilize the
dibbles assessment. Um, and just
to hit on something that's near
and dear to my, my heart in
terms of what
We're doing to support, um, our
teenagers in New Mexico,
particularly middle schoolers
that have very limited
programming. They are not old
enough to get a job. And so, I
really agree with you about the
importance of focusing on, uh,
middle school, uh, students, um,
we, uh, provided some funding to
APS that they're working to get
out to do a pilot focused on
middle school students. This
last summer, we were able to
pull together some money to
implement what was called the
youth, uh, youth challenge,
which supported students, middle
school students from Jimmy
Carter and Truman Middle Schools
here in APS, uh, was a very
successful program, um, one that
we will be coming to you to talk
to you about funding. Uh, it's
really important that we engage
kids. That's a critical age
range where it makes a
difference in terms of getting
them ready and pushing them
through high school and, uh,
and, and beyond, um, and agree.
About athletics and other
academic extracurricular
activities. Um, I'm selling
chips and uh drinks at every one
of my kids' middle school, uh,
volleyball games and these
programs are not funded, so
parents fundraise and schools
have to get creative and so I
agree with you they're very
valuable and important programs.
May I, um, uh, chair, Chairman
Romero and Representative Ibaca
two important um components that
I would just like to talk about.
So the DILs test for the summer
reading program is a K through
8,
reading assessment that actually
tells us how well or how much
trouble a student is going to
have in reaching grade level
reading proficiency. So we will
take a look at how we decreased
the next years, um.
Problematic reading behaviors.
That's, that's kind of the
question around using dibbles.
And then next, I also want to
just remind the committee that
all new school buses are coming
equipped with, um, air
conditioning, um, and so we
have, as they age out any new
school bus is actually
Coming with um air conditioning.
I could go on, but, um, Mr.
Chairman, I will defer my time
to my colleagues.
Senator Sheer,
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. I want
to start, um,
I've been, been here longer than
I'll admit.
And I've been on education
committee, been on LASC and for
the most part, I've heard the
same presentations for all of
that time.
And I don't mean to clearly
there's lots of good programs
out there, and I'm not insulting
any programs or any secretaries
or any LESC members or anybody
else, but I think that, um, what
we've seen here is, is when I
started here we were
forty-seventh in education and
then we're 48th and 49th and now
we're we're 50th.
And so while we've got a lot of
good programs going on,
something is missing.
Something is missing and I don't
think it's money. Uh, we're
middle of the pack in money, but
I also know, as was pointed out
here, uh, some small things you
get 1400 students to graduate.
Whoa, all a minute we're in the
middle of the pack now, um, and
yet, and we've known that for a
while.
But we don't know how to make
1400 students graduate.
So
I think that what we've done
since we were number 47th to
number 50, is we've continued to
put more top-down pressure on
the, on the teachers.
Uh, because, uh.
And and I think that's been
counterproductive, Mr. Chair.
Shiprock and jowl are just about
as far apart as you can get and
still be in the state of New
Mexico.
As the crow flies, it's more
than 500 miles if you're going
to drive it, it's 600 miles.
Uh, the mountains of Taos and
the deserts of Deming are, are
worlds apart and Roy and
Albuquerque are galaxies apart,
and yet we have one rule for all
of them.
And so when we say more top down
pressure, it doesn't work. If
we're trying to fix Albuquerque,
we break Roy if we're trying to
do something to Deming, we break
towels, so uh I think that that
needs to to change the mindset
here needs to change.
But I do think there are two
things that we really need to
focus on. One of them is
leadership.
40% of our our superintendents
are leaving and it's not because
they're retiring, it's because
they can't get along with the
school board.
We need to train the school
board on what the school board's
job is.
And I use this example,
Farmington School Board hires
the superintendent and the
superintendent stays there for
10 years or more.
And programs are implemented and
they can follow through.
Central Consolidated uh
School board goes through
superintendents pretty fast.
And yet we shop in the same
Walmart.
It's just not that much
difference between
between the people in the, in
the two schools.
It's the school board and so I
think we need to focus on
leadership, but that also goes
all the way down. I think that
our teachers need to be leaders
for the students, not
administrators filling out
paperwork. I think our
principals need to be leaders
for the teachers.
And if we do away with the top
down stuff then the then the
principal really is focused on
what's important in that school
at that time.
And not filling out a bunch of
paperwork.
The other thing is I think we
need to give schools an
incentive school districts,
schools too, maybe directly.
And so I've talked about this
before and I say so, so if you
hit grade level proficiency at
some level we can draw the line
at 40%, at 20%, that district
now gets an incentive.
We're going to give them more
money, more money with no
strings. Do what you want with
it.
If you don't hit the mark, you
don't get the money next year.
But, but SEG stays the same.
We're not, I'm not punishing
anybody in this, but we've got
what we know we've got is about
$100 million we didn't spend
last year. OK, well, let's give
some of that to the districts
that are succeeding and that
incentivizes the next district
to move forward and do
something.
Because they'll want that money
too. And I'm a firm believer
that people live up to the
expectations if we expect them
to fail, they will fail.
If we expect to get 25% reading
proficiency at grade level, we
will get 25% reading proficiency
at grade level. If we expect 70,
we'll get 70.
And I think every day because
there's no superintendent out
there that wants their district
to fail. There's no teacher that
wants a class to fail.
So let's give them that
incentive.
A leadership academy and an
incentive.
And let's stop here in the same
program for 10 or 12 or 20
years, however long I've been
here.
Thank you.
Chairman Nunz, thank you.
Congratulations on on your
appointment. I, I mean.
If you look at Senator Sher if
we incentivize those school
districts, you wouldn't have to
sell popcorn and coke.
That's just the food for thought
as we move forward, um.
Madam Secretary.
I mean, I expected to see some
numbers below the line funding
and why do we not have numbers
tied to that?
Um, Mr. Chair and Chairman
Munoz, um, because we're not far
enough along in our budget
planning process and this is
something that I talked to both
LESC and LFC staff prior, um, we
are working and I believe we're
ahead of schedule where we
typically are and um setting the
public school support budget and
finalizing that on the executive
side. Um, we're working hard to
come out sooner than we have in
previous.
years, um, but our process is
actually is.
Pretty extensive and I know you
and I have talked about this
prior. We start our planning for
the public school support
budget, um, you know, early in,
in the spring, in the spring
summer time range or.
Basically right after
legislative session. We start at
the at the program level,
looking at, uh, the program, the
effectiveness, the outcomes, and
start setting budgets. So, um,
what we have today is can share
with you where we're
prioritizing, what we're
thinking about should be
recurring and not recurring,
those sorts of things we're able
to talk to you about right now
and, and I will tell you that
we're working to get it out
sooner than we have previously
It's really, it takes time to to
build this budget and to do it
effectively. It is a significant
budget and we take it very
seriously.
Yeah, it, it also takes us time
to review it and sort through it
and and giving it to us in the
prior years you've given it to
us in November with one LFC
meeting left to review that in a
30 day period to go into the
session.
Just a matter of fairness,
right? You got 9 months, we got
1.
Well, Mr. Chair, what I will
say, um, Senator Munoz, is that
we do work closely with your
staff leading up to that point.
I, I would like to say that
nothing is a surprise. We work
for it not to be a surprise. I
think through the interim
process and all of our
collaboration, you all know
where we're, what we're thinking
and we know what you're thinking
and so I, I really don't think
that when the PSS budget comes
out, that it, it is a surprise,
um,
We, you may shift a little bit
in terms of one program we want
to grow, increase funding, and
others we want to stay flat,
but, but I think for the most
part we work hard to communicate
about what that budget is going
to look like and where we're
thinking again, we're working to
get it out sooner than we have
previously and, and that's
something that that I'm working
to
to get done. Mr. Chairman, Madam
Secretary, last year we had a
$350 million.
Pri
On below the line funding,
right?
Nobody knew what was coming and
then we get it in end of
November.
15 days before the next LFC
meeting, right? We had really no
idea. We had some thought of
idea what was going to be in
there but we had no dollars,
right?
And and
To be fair to everyone in the
state, right?
I mean, we're creating a $10
billion budget.
You're 44%, $4.3 billion of the
budget.
Yesterday we heard from HAC
Healthcare Authority.
You know, they requested 453
million in non-reoccurring.
Right? We're trying to figure
out.
Do we do DD waivers? Do we
increase the most vulnerable? Do
we end food insecurity? How do
we balance this at the end of
the day and everybody's gonna
start their budget hearings next
month. And we're gonna have a
hole.
A big hole
And and
We got to work together and it's
got to be fair to us and it's
got to be fair to you. But when
we get
15 days before our last meeting,
right, to really adopt and
approve a budget as we head
towards a session.
There's no fairness in there.
I'm not gonna disagree on, on
what should be in there and what
shouldn't be in there, right?
Representative uh the chairman
over here didn't know what
Dibbles was. I did because my
wife was a
a grade school principal, right?
And I thought it was just for
grade school, not for 8th grade,
right?
And, and so.
We gotta figure how, how we're
gonna get there.
And so is tightening,
reoccurring, and we have and we
as a body in the finance
committee as, as a body, have to
start balancing stuff.
Where do, where do we place our
money? Do we place it in DD? We
place it in Indian food security
in New Mexico? Where do we place
that money?
And when you have a 44% gap or
$350 million gap from last year.
It's hard to make those
decisions.
And then we get to the session,
they say you're cutting
education. We didn't know we
were cutting education because
we didn't have your budget till
15 days before we had to make a
decision about your budget.
It's not fair to to the school
districts, it's not fair to the
members of the body. It's not
fair to, to anybody.
And, and so when do you think we
can expect these numbers to
start coming through?
So Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Chairman Munoz, I will say that
just again that you know we work
hard to communicate. Last year
we hosted a literacy summit well
in advance, legislators and
legislative staff present. We
really signaled to a lot of
these things that the, a lot of
the increase was due to the big
push on literacy, it was due to
universal healthy meals was also
a big chunk of that money. So I
would say we all knew that those
things were
Coming prior to the legislative
session and, and again, we, we
work hard to make sure that
we're sharing with you
throughout the interim process
where we're going and what we're
thinking, um, I don't, I don't
have a date when it'll come out.
I will continue to stay in close
communication with you and your
chief of staff and the rest of
legislative staff, and I can
tell you we're pushing to move
that forward. Um, again, and
we're doing, we're, we're doing
what you're doing, which is
we're like
Look at the full state budget.
And so part of it is that as
well, right? We're looking at
how everything lands and where
education fits within all of the
state priorities. And so, you
know, that takes time as well.
So we will work to get it out
sooner. Um, we like it when we
can get a glance at your budget,
we usually don't get to see that
until right before the
legislative session, so the more
we can move those things
forward, uh, we're going to do
that and I know that, um, in the
governor's office
as well. There's a desire to to
work to move that timeline
forward because quite frankly,
we agree with you it does
benefit all of us. The
legislature as well as the
executive
of these numbers ought to be
pretty simple, right? We know
school security, I, I can't
remember what we put there 250
million or through PSCOC. I
don't remember the exact number,
right? And and so we know what's
additional cost, where are we
headed, what does that look
like? What's that number? Some
of these should be pretty.
Gathered up so we can start
getting there and.
Because these are the, this is
the year that reoccurring is
really starting to change.
And, and we have over $1 billion
in requests for only 600.
$80 million
right?
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, we, we
hear you, um, we're working at
it. We do have draft budgets
absolutely it's, it's, it
continues to evolve, um, but,
um, I hear you and we're working
to, to, to share that
information with you much
sooner. So thank you. I want to
touch base on, on one other
thing we know that if we
graduate 1400 more students a
year, right? It puts us in the
middle of the pack, right? How
do we get there?
I mean, how do we get to
Not the bottom. We could just
start moving up slowly because I
think we change our mindset in
New Mexico, right? If we move
up, right, how do we keep moving
up? Everybody will say, let's
keep moving up. Let's not go
back, right? How do we change
the mindset and I mean, it's not
all based on teacher pay. It's
what every kid's different,
right? Every kid and every issue
and every.
Day is different for a kid from
kindergarten to
12th grade, right? You tell them
what's going on in their life
and in their family. How do we
kind of balance that and say,
hey,
Once we get to
Thirty-fifth. How do we move to
20th. How do we not fall back
from thirty-fifth to, to do
that. I think if you change that
mindset, how do, how do we
maintain that? So how are we
going to get 1400 more graduates
a year to move to Mexico from
the bottom. OK, well, first, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Munoz, I
would say the things that we've
highlighted in the budget are
the things, but I'm gonna give
you something a little bit more
tangible than than these things.
More clear example. So obviously
working on making sure our
students are, are functioning at
grade level that they have good
attendance, that we're
addressing the whole child
aspects of the student, all of
those things are ways we support
our students. Investments in
CTE, the, the reforms we're
doing around high school
graduation requirements, all of
those things are going to help
us do it, but I'm gonna give
you, um, an example of how we
get 1400, um, more.
High school students, uh, to
graduate on time. So our schools
know which students are behind.
They know which students are not
on track to graduate. What we,
what I would like to do is work
with those schools on those kids
that we know need the extra
support and then go in and
support those kids. If we go in
and support those kids with the
things like making sure they're
dealing with credit recovery
that they're getting the
Just sort of educational
coaching and support, maybe we
get them in a, in a strong
work-based, uh, learning program
or other things that really kind
of make school relevant, make
them engaged again, help them
see that they have a path to the
end to graduate. I think that's
completely doable. It's
something that I would like to
do and then is very targeted. So
in addition to supporting all of
these programs, the things we
know work.
Do those, but, um, I think it's
really important that we target
on target those students that we
know who they are. We can work
with them, we can work with
their families and their
teachers to make sure that they
get there. I, I think that those
goals, the goals that we have
are absolutely achievable. The
goals around literacy and math
to me that that deputy secretary
shared to me um the minimum,
that's like the very low kind of
minimum. We see that
that are like model literacy
schools are showing double digit
gains in literacy. It is
achievable. We know how to do
it. We just have to implement
its strategically in every
school to make sure that.
It's getting done.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Stewart,
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much for this
presentation today. Thank you
for the 11 page, uh, handout.
Uh, I'm used to 50 pages from
the CBD. This is a breath of
fresh air and you talked about
each one instead of, you know,
putting, you know, big long
statements on there that nobody
ever talked about. That's in the
past. So thank you for that. I,
I wanna talk about, um, two
things that
Looking at page 9, structured
literacy. I had a brief but very
impactful for me anyway, meeting
with the new superintendent of
APS, uh, she gave me some data
on, um, on a few elementaries
in, in Albuquerque. So these
elementary, these three
elementaries I'm gonna talk
about 4 actually are on our tops
program. So they have 10 days
longer in
The school year.
Uh, two of the three are pilot
schools.
So they're part of that, those,
uh, model schools for literacy,
so they've gotten more help.
So they're going longer, they've
gotten more help.
Is San Jose 19.1% increase in
reading literacy. Sandia Bass
27.8% increase. 23.6% increase.
And then MacArthur.
32% increase in math.
Uh, so we, we know what we're
doing. We know what we need to
do. Um, I want to make sure that
we can continue this training.
That's why I pointed out on page
9. So we started training first
grade, then we did K and 2, then
we did 3 and 4. Now we're on 5th
and 6th, the data that the
superintendent showed me, uh,
shows that we've got a
significant number of teachers
that never have had this
training. I don't know why.
She didn't know why, but I think
this has to be ongoing because
you have new teachers and all
the grades, they need it. You
have teachers that didn't take
it. You have teachers where it
didn't take they need a
refresher, uh, so I just think
that going forward we need to
embed this kind of training
unless we can get the colleges
of education to do the right
thing and do this training when
they have teachers in their
programs.
So that's something that we've
both been working on for a
number of years. Uh, but that,
that's my request that we, uh,
that we look at how we do this
ongoing so that we don't have a
cliff, um, because once we're
not training anymore, then uh it
it's easy for for us to sort of
slough off. Uh, you know, we're,
we're looking at 5 decades of
teaching, reading, and a way
that's not.
Helpful. So all these classrooms
have the curriculum in their
classrooms, not helpful.
Colleges, education, not
helpful. So we're doing it.
You are and us are doing this
now, and I just wanted to
continue rather than to, you
know, after we've done 5th and
6th. OK, that's done. Uh, we're
done. So we have to maintain
this. I have to do a
presentation this weekend on
education. The first question
is what happened in Mississippi
and why can't we be like them?
And what happened in Mississippi
was a decade ago they started on
structured literacy. They were
at 50, maybe we were at 49,
we've been dancing back and
forth. A decade later, they're
25th in the country. So this is
doable. It takes time, but we
really need to keep the
pedal to the metal metal to the
pedal.
What is that in the metal.
So,
uh, thank you for your
presentation. It's been
delightful to actually be able
to take notes on a page of your
hand.
I look forward to working with
you and I'm just very pleased
about the, the progress we have
made. I consider it significant.
So, thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you
for the presentation and
Um, welcome,
Secretary designee,
it's, it's been a pleasure
working with you. I know the
efforts that you've been um.
Working on for our state, uh, so
I'm going to get to your heart a
little bit here. I'm going to
talk about
Uh, getting back to some staff
support. I have a few things I'm
gonna kind of do what
Representative, um, Baca did and
kind of more comments and just
some food for thought and really
talking about our educators and
uh staff support looking at
early childhood funding for
childcare for our staff members.
It's something we've been doing
in uh Santa Fe public schools
and uh like you to take a
quicker or more in-depth look at
that.
And also in the housing, um,
issue that we have as well. Um,
next, I'm going to talk about
is.
Uh, your points on innovation
zones and talking about student
internships, just looking at how
we're going to be funding in
that prioritization. Um, if we
start with the districts who
have the programs already and
then move the funding outward
into other areas, I think that
would be more or create more
continuity. Um, and the moving
on to our school buses, I'd like
to make sure that we're going to
give our full support as we are
transitioning to electric school
buses, and maybe if you want to
make a
Comment later about that. Uh,
you can, um, next I want to talk
about my favorite subject in our
schools right now is our out of
school, um, time funding in our
out of school, um, programs
representative Baca touched on
that as well, our
extracurriculars and and getting
those fully funded and making
sure that we are looking at
those programs as critical ways
of
Applying, as you talked about
attendance and what that means
for our schools, we did have a
presentation asking for $40
million. I don't know.
What you're looking at through
your budget um
But I would, I would highly
recommend looking at what we
need to do more for out of
school time, and with those
initiatives look for you. I know
in Santa Fe we have had school,
um, summer programs that really
integrated the, the summer
literacy program as well. So we
participated in that, but we
also served 4400 students in our
summer programs.
And that was all paid for by the
operational budget of the
district. So, I'd like us to
really focus on those sorts of
things and, um, as you're
getting and and finishing your
budget, uh, requests with us.
I'd like to know more about
that. The last thing I want to
touch on, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chair, is on the IEP. I can't
thank you enough for your work
uh PED's work and focus on
special education and creating
the Office of Special Education
and really looking to
standardize those IAPs.
I have I have been receiving.
Um, information from
constituents in my school
district with the IAP process
and I just want to make sure and
we'll have an off uh
conversation about that, about
this in regards to making sure
that our staff
And our schools are trained,
fully trained, and knowing what
the procedures and processes are
because children are missing
opportunities to receive,
the benefits and, and, um, get
the, get their um issues
addressed in our families need
the support. I myself is, uh,
have been a parent with a child
with an IEP in the past and
current. So I want, I want some
more information. I want to work
with you on that and really
looking a little more in depth.
And what the standardizations
you are, are going to be um
giving to us or implementing
because there are a lot of
issues around that and I really
want to emphasize that early
intervention is key.
And without that in place, I
think we're going to be missing
uh a lot of information in our
IEP process. Madam Chair, I
don't, Mr. Chair, I don't have
uh many questions. I just wanted
to add these things and if you
want to make comments on
anything I said, please do.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan,
um, the list is long and I look
forward to sitting down with you
and going through that entire
list, um, I'll get you an
in-depth briefing from the
Office of Special Education, uh,
to make sure that we can share
with you what's going on and to
get your input if that's OK.
Thank you. Yes, please. Thank
you.
Represent Caballero.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you Madam Secretary and team.
Uh, I too.
agree with wholeheartedly with
uh.
Madame Pro Tem, on your report.
It is succinct, it is clear and,
uh, I really appreciate.
Um, you setting out very clearly
your core priorities and then
demonstrating how you intend to
get there, which is really
important, um, because we can
hone in on the specifics that
we've been speaking about in
LESC, uh, not just this year,
this summer, but previously, so,
uh, and I'm particularly pleased
with page 5.
Where you're looking at
programming focus of career
connected learning is we want
our, our youth to be geared
towards not just jobs but
careers so that they can be long
term and sustainable and
contribute to healthy families.
Also the out of school, out of
school time learning is really
important. We discussed that at
length yesterday. So thank you
for that. I also sit on the
Indian Affairs Committee, um,
Mr. Chair, and we receive
reports as we
Travel around the state, um,
concerning, um, in particular,
this is my two-pronged question,
um,
I understand that, uh, PED
developed a comprehensive plan
in response to Yasi Martinez. I
know you're aware of that.
Um, the lawsuit, and I
understand also that there was
considerable public comment and
tribal comment, reference to the
plan.
I'm interested in knowing, um,
How those comments were placed
into the implementation part of
the comprehensive plan and if
you can give us a status on
that. That's one prong of the
two-prong question. And the
second is how you would um
Mr. Chair, um,
As PED, uh, encourage or whole
local districts a little bit
more accountable in ensuring
that native students in
particular, their educational
needs are being met, not just
from the, uh, through the family
income index, but also as
identified by at-risk and impact
aid funds. That's really
important as we travel the state
and here.
Comments from our our Native
American, um,
Tro communities. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Robo Caballero,
um, for your comments and
questions. Um, first, your
question about the um the
strategic plan. Um, we have, uh,
had a strategic plan throughout
the administration, obviously,
like all strategic plans, they
get updated based on ongoing
feedback that we, we receive,
um, our next version will be
coming out, um, very soon, so.
Um, we have, uh,
It's coming out very soon. I,
I'm gonna give you a date, but
it's coming out very soon. Um,
and so the goal of this
strategic plan that's coming out
is, um, very distilled, very
focused on
What do we need to achieve and
by when, um, by specific
priority area. It was really
important that we, um, have a
plan that's understandable by
all, by students, by their
families, by educators, by
community members, and so, um,
that has been a priority for us
with with this, um, latest
version of the plan. Um, as far
as efforts with um with tribal
leaders and, and, and working.
And our Indian education efforts
in general and what the
collaboration looks between,
between our tribes, nations, and
pueblos and our, uh, our school
districts and charter schools,
um, it's something that's really
important and something that we
are focused on and address and
every one of our government to
government education convenings.
These are things that we do, um,
not only twice a year, but also
throughout the year we host
meetings in which we have
conversation.
with them about consultation
about accountability for
students. Um, we, uh, invite
them to our government to
government meetings at our last
meeting that we had earlier this
year, we had, um, really, I
think, useful breakout sessions
between superintendents and
tribal leaders to really talk
about some core issues and
concerns. A lot of the questions
about how funding is spent and
how students are being served
and so.
With um I agree with you that,
um, not every district is, is
communicating and collaborating
effectively and, you know, I
feel that our role is to help
set the expectation and to make
sure that we help them get
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary. That is
very important for them to have
for everyone to have specific
expectations with timelines and
outcome and expected outcomes,
which is the same one and the
same. I, I think that, um,
because then we want to avoid
having the same pitfalls that
got us to.
Yasi Martinez in the first
place, but I also understand
that we're not advancing um as
as
Quickly
As we should given
When this was um
But to finality and the and the
determinations. So I encourage
Having realistic,
but
um,
Expedient turnarounds on
timelines and outcomes because
that's the only way that we're
going to be able to understand
the effectiveness and then just
one other point on your update.
On your next version, if you
could, if it's possible, if you
could specifically point to in
your update,
maybe Aster or somehow indicate
how the comments.
That were given in public
comment and tribal, particularly
the tribal comments are being
incorporated where they're being
incorporated within the context
of the overall update version. I
would appreciate that. That
would make it very clear to us
that actually, um, the comments
are being taken seriously and
that they are being incorporated
and that they will be included
in the, um,
Setting of expectations with
time frames. So I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just real
quickly, uh,
I want to bring it back down
here on the ground a little bit
and uh.
My school districts tell me on
absenteeism.
That after 3 days they call
CYFD.
And asked them to check into
that.
And a lot of times CYFD never
gets back to those school
districts.
And so I'm asking you, and if I
need to be an intermediary, I'd
be happy to do this. If you
could contact Secretary Casadis
and see if we could make
something happen there to get
communication back to the school
district about what happens to
these students that are absent.
Because uh
Right now we're not having a
whole lot of luck,
um, and, and with the whole
initiative we're trying to do,
we still got to get them in the,
in the classroom and if they
moved out of district, well,
Then those school districts need
to know that too.
So that they can, they can.
Finish up their bookwork.
So if you'd do that for me and
if I need to
Set up a mid-morning tea or
something to make that happen,
I'd be happy to do that.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, I work very closely with
Secretary Casanos, uh, both
prior to this position and now,
um, I will tell you that PED
staff in the at-risk team meets
regularly with CYFD staff as we
collaborate between the two
agencies regarding attendance,
um, I would be happy to meet
with you, um, and follow up on
concerns that you have within uh
the districts that you serve to
make sure that communication is
Be
Being done effectively. But I
would, I'm sure Secretary
Casales would be happy to join
us for tea or coffee as well,
Senator. I would like very much
because these, these kids are
the most important assets we
have.
And if we can't find them, if
there's nobody looking after
them were really misstepped
here. So, Mr. Chair, that's all
I ask. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Woods, and I do want to say on
that because this has come up
and I've brought this up several
times here at LESC, um, and we
had testimony from the APS
superintendent about what that
next step is for referrals from
the school district to
juvenile probation and to CYFD
and it seems like that's where
the disconnect has been, and
I've asked our interim director
to get a hold of, so if we could
butt in on LESC um and have um
the CYFD secretary, um.
Before us in the next couple
months to talk about what the
department has done in terms of
those referrals to school
districts because I think that's
the part that we need to get a
hold of because we've heard a
lot of different possible
changes to the attendance for
success and opinions about it. I
just feel like we haven't fully
implemented it, or at least we
don't have a complete picture of
what's being done in its
implementation, yeah, and I
think you hit on Senator.
Um, the key missing component,
um, of, of what we need to get a
handle on on that piece of
legislation.
Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
think I'll be pretty quick. Um,
I just want to, you know, say I
enthusiastically support you
and, and getting your work done
and and I'm very encouraged by
the team. I know that you're
going to put around you and, and
I guess it's possible, Mr.
Chairman, that maybe some folks
will stop asking if you're my
daughter now because that
happens quite frequently,
exactly. But I, I, I, uh, sister
maybe, but I don't know about.
So I want to take you to slide
10 and I, you know, I wouldn't
say that we have
We have not been proactive in
this area as a state. So I was
thrilled to see slide 10 in your
introductory remarks, Madam
Secretary Designate, and keeping
an eye on, on the shop in the
house and the school is so
critical because it needs to
feel like a very safe
environment in order for the
learning to occur there. Um, you
know, I think there's a lot of
technology that maybe we're not,
we're not maybe taking advantage
of. So I do ask that you spend,
roll up your sleeves and and and
take a look at all options, best
practices around the country on
this topic.
A bullet number one on the
school safety summit for
evidence based, has that
occurred or is that something
that's scheduled or what's the
status there?
Padilla, um, yes, we do, we have
had, um, school safety summits,
um, Representative Baca has been
a really good partner in those
safety summits, um,
last I, I, uh, Lieutenant
Governor Jay Morales partners
with, um, the public education
department and law enforcement.
And other, um, um, entities to
kind of move that forward. Um,
last I spoke with Lieutenant
Governor, um, if it doesn't
occur, uh, this winter, it'll
happen, um, probably shortly
after the legislative session.
Um, these safety summits are
places where we learn about the
best sort of technology. We talk
about safety plans and uh share
a lot of best practices
regarding school safety.
I appreciate that and, and, and
Mr. Chair, so yeah, there's,
there's technology that will
already that already exists that
that can use existing investment
and capital investment we've
made. I know that I sprinkle
capital money every year to my
public schools in my district,
but these cameras and things
they've already purchased can be
integrated into these, these
technologies that now exist to
capitalize and and and and
really make that work for us.
And there's a company called
Zero Eyes who's trying to do
some work in New Mexico that you
may be familiar with. I can.
You know more about them, they
can utilize these um already
existing technologies which
which check a couple of boxes.
One is immediate tie in to local
law enforcement, um, first
responders and, and, and those
groups. So I really hope that we
will spend an awful lot of time
on that. And then the last
thing, you know, I'm sorry that
I'll ask is, you know, you, you,
you said there's safety summits
that happen. I want to make sure
that they're regularly
scheduled, that we're not sort
of, OK, when should we schedule
that again? You know, much like
we do the planning and the
preparation.
For the school year, it seems to
me like maybe there should be
that should be built into the
regular strategy calendar,
whatever, so that it always
happens and that conversation is
always going on. Just feels to
me like, you know, I've been out
of school for a while, my sons
have been out of school for a
little bit, not that long, and,
and it just seems to me like
this is getting worse, the
safety, the safety issues, and
so we're not always talking
about them. I think we could
sort of kind of like a broken
chair in my office or a hole in
the wall. If you walk past it,
you're never going to see it
again unless
Do something about it
immediately and right away. So I
hope that you're always focused
on that. So thank you for
bringing this, you know, right
away as you walk into this new
room because it's so critical.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning and congratulations
again Mariana, if I may call you
Mariana, we just like you're
like part of us we see you all
the time. Thank you for you and
your staff. Um, I just had a
maybe more of a comment, Mr.
Chairman, first to say thank
you, um,
designee Mariana for the for
recognizing that much work needs
to be done and you seem
enthusiastic and and just
excited about getting it done
and together as a team, I like
that. I like how you really
delve into.
To working together and knowing
that we can't do it alone. So
thanks for that and for thinking
out of the box. I'm gonna just
leave it with this, uh, Mr.
Chairman, that, you know,
sometimes I feel like we're
getting lost in the digital tech
world too. There's so much
happening with technology and so
on that sometimes I wonder if we
can integrate some of the basics
back into education so that we
can have this balance, you know,
for our students. Maybe I'm just
antiquated.
I don't know, but I think
there's something to be said for
the real foundation of things
that were, uh, we used to see in
in education, um, but, um,
anyhow, so just wanted to
mention I'm gonna elaborate just
a little bit more and I also um
one of, I think his
representative Lujan who
mentioned IPs and others here
and I'm so happy to hear that
you're looking at consolidating
those because as a parent of a
child with special needs myself
when my daughter was in school,
I was very involved parent um
And I hope that more parents get
involved with IPs also, um, but
it was a nightmare because
there's so many forms and so
many things to do, and then, you
know what, honestly, you can't
implement all those things on
this huge IEP and the time that
it takes from everyone involved,
um, it's just a lot and so I'm
happy that you're looking at
that. That's a very pragmatic
way to to look at things. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman,
that's all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and Senator Rodri.
Yes and Representative Lujan,
you know, I really should have
said, um, really supporting the
needs of our students in special
education as a priority for the
administration. It has been,
um, the, the things that are
being done under the leadership
of Dr. Margaret Cage are
completely incredible. Um, in
the last year, we have made huge
strides and um I think that the
statewide IAP is an indication
of that.
Um, but there's so much more
happening and so I really would
love to spend some time with
both of you and anyone else
who's really interested in
knowing what's happening under
the Office of Special Education.
Thank you so much. Other
questions from committee
members. All right, um.
So again, thank you, um,
Secretary designate, it's good
to see another South Valley kids
making it,
uh, so Senator Munoz had brought
up the issue and you had
addressed um uh the issue around
the budget and working together
with the budget, I guess the one
request that I would have is
also on the policy side, um,
because in the past couple of
years we've had some pretty big
changes, some of them were
mentioned, special education,
um.
But that if those initiatives as
well, um, could be, and if you
all could work collaboratively
with our legislative education
study Committee staff on any
sort of policy issues that you
all are working on or wish to
see addressed during the session
because I've talked to a lot of
our members here is that, um,
you know, we as legislators, um.
have obviously a lot to deal
with and we deal with a lot, um,
during the interim process and
so when we have initiatives that
are in the middle of the
session, it becomes very
difficult for us to make heads
or tails of, and I think that's
what our interim process is, is
that we set a roadmap for where
we would like to go and then we
can as much as possible as
legislators that those ideas,
refine them prior to coming into
the
Legislative session. Um, so I
guess along with the budget and
getting those a little bit
earlier if we could get um an
idea of policy considerations,
um that you all at PED are
thinking about and wanting to
have her during the session.
So Mr. Chair, absolutely, um, I
will say we meet with LESC staff
weekly, I believe. Um, and we've
done that for
Throughout this administration,
um, we, um, visit before and
after any kind of program
evaluations. We invite, um,
legislative staff to our
meetings, our early childhood
summits, whatever we're hosting,
we always invite legislative
staff, um, I'm in meetings with
them all the time talking about
budget and programs. Um, and so
we value that working
relationship. I think we do it
quite well. Um, I value, uh,
the, the.
Great mindset, um, within LESE
Sunny is absolutely incredible.
Um, so, um, absolutely, this is
a continued commitment that we
have, um, I think we end up with
a better outcome in terms of the
legislation and the budgets that
we build when we do it together.
And so, um, I commit to you,
we'll continue to do that and,
uh, look forward to talking to
you about the upcoming
legislative session.
Definitely, we certainly
appreciate that and anything you
could do between now, um, in
October meeting, November
meeting would be great so we can
start getting a handle on that.
All right. Thank you so much.
Thank you for being here. All
right.
Anything else members
winning lottery numbers.
Alright, we're going to assign
you to the task of choosing that
for us. Um, but other than that,
thank you all. This is a great
meeting to be able to join LESC,
LFC,
um.
Could we do it again? Could we
do it again? That's a question.
Sure, sure,
there's some reluctance number
right here Mr.
Chair, I think we ought to do it
again. I think once PD comes out
with their numbers and you
decide on, and you see their
policy, then we ought to meet
again and say, OK, here's where
policy and the cost really meet
and how do we make these move
forward and how do we get an
agreement going into the
session.
And that way the executive won't
say, oh you guys are hiding
stuff for us, so maybe we should
plan a December meeting
If we have their budget and if
we have enough time to look
through their stuff to really
disseminate it because I mean it
becomes political.
And Greg smiling because you
threw out a number of 150. We
don't see your numbers till
December and we throw out a
number 150 and then you come
back and say, oh, the
legislature is cutting
education.
I mean, that's not what I'm here
for. I'm not here to pit us
against the executive. I'm here.
I want those 1400 more kids, so
we're not 50. We do too, Mr.
Chair, we have your commitment
then
absolutely.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
All right, lots of planning
going on too. So before we go,
remember members, LESC that we
have our next meeting in Silver
City next month. Um, so we'll be
there and then we'll transition
after that to our meetings in
Santa Fe. Um, I just want to
thank before he leaves Prince
Lovato for hosting us and all
the staff here at the Trisco He
is community that we love.
And then to our LSC staff, as
always, thank you all very much
and to the LFC CEF.
And with that folks, we'll see
you in Silver City and then in
Santa Fe maybe for December.
Thank you, folks.
