Talk about the do it budget
after me. Uh, so, so that's all
right with you, I'll get going.
Please. Thank you so much. OK,
uh, so, uh, good afternoon,
everybody. Uh, Drew Lovelace, as
I mentioned, uh, acting director
of the Office of Broadband Axis
and Expansion, uh, just giving
some high-level, uh, we're gonna
talk about a bottom line upfront
so you guys can look at the
numbers that we're asking for,
uh, get into some of the recent
successes, the requests, and
then look at some of the
broadband landscape. And then I
have some additional resources
as well, uh, in case there's
questions, uh, I'd like to
make sure that there's enough
information about technology and
and to help answer some of those
questions. So those I will not
cover unless you guys ask. That,
that sounds great. and members,
uh, thank you to, uh,
Representative Luhan. We're
gonna be on tab 361.
Uh, as we go through things.
OK. So the bottom line up front
is that the office of broadband
is still a relatively new
office. We are now 2 full years
into our, our cycle of
operations, uh, and we are still
growing. The last two years, we
have not paid fair share fees
for administrative support to
the Department of Information
Technology. So the bulk of the
$650,000 ask in our operating
budget change is to make sure
that we can actually pay the
fair share fees to do it. Uh,
and then the remaining about
$100,000 is going to be in the
personnel area to make sure that
we can pay for.
additional personnel.
Additionally, this last year,
uh, the, uh, house
appropriations and uh Senate
Finance, uh put together a
$650,000 transfer, uh, for
personnel coming over from the
public schools facility
Authority. Uh, so we now have
those 3, FTE that came over with
them. There were originally 5
positions though, and 2 of them
were vacant and so in our ask is
for 2 additional positions to
make sure that we can cover
those vacancies. Um, one other
thing from Secretary Breras is
uh uh presentation is that there
is a, uh, one employee that we
share, uh, and depending upon
what happens with the budget
there, um, we're looking to
again, increase our FTE by 2,
but there may be some changes
with that, and I'm sure he'll
cover it.
Uh, looking to our specials, we
are looking at a $70 million
Accelerated connect in New
Mexico uh program that we'd like
to do for satellite, and I'll
cover some more details there.
$35 million for affordability
connectivity program, uh, that
is a federal program that was no
longer funded at the FCC and
we're looking for some bridge
funding, uh, to make sure we
have affordability. Uh, and then
we have an $80 million ask for
uh broadband plan support for 5
years. And uh I'll talk a little
bit more about that. The last
part of this is
that the Office of Broadband,
uh, we do a lot of grants for
infrastructure and over the last
couple of years, we've had very
short-term appropriations given
to the office and with some of
these projects are both uh under
grants in, in progress right
now. Um, we're gonna be looking
at some of those extensions.
So, looking at the, the
landscape uh of broadband, it's
gonna be about another $2
billion. Uh, I did this in the
last presentation last year. Uh,
we have gone out, secured as
much federal funding is out
there and available. There are
other companies who are in the
audience here today that are
doing the same thing with other
programs that the office is not
eligible for, and they're going
to get it and we're tracking all
of that, but we're still looking
at a $2 billion shortfall and
making sure we get the
infrastructure that we need
across, uh, New Mexico, and that
includes Middle Mile, uh,
technologies last mile, uh,
things like, uh,
community institutions are not
covered in, in a lot of the
funding that we have long income
multi-dwelling units, 5G
deployment, uh, those are going
to be all top priorities. And
then looking at uh broadband,
the, the main point I really
want to get in, in front of uh
this committee is that broadband
is infrastructure. These are
long term projects that require
rights away, permitting, uh,
environmentals, and that can be
2 years into itself. And so, you
know, my big ask is coming out
of this is that we no longer get
1 and 2 year.
appropriations that we look at 3
to 5 year appropriations and
make sure that we can do the
entire grant cycle and that we
don't, uh, have, you know,
jeopardize the projects that
we're trying to do, do the
builds.
So it's just some of the
successes, uh, we've gone
through the whole broadband
equity access deployment
funding. This is a $675 million.
Uh, that was allocated to the
state of New Mexico out of the
bipartisan infrastructure law,
uh, we've kept on track, not
only having the allocations,
we've actually got approvals
this last July, uh, from NTIA
and we have been able to start
the process of doing the grants.
So we just launched the notes
Funny uh uh opportunity out
there, uh, this last week. Uh,
so that's
been a very exciting note
because we can actually move
forward on this. Additionally,
this year, we got the digital
equity allocations, uh, from
that same, same bipartisan
infrastructure law. Uh, we also
got NTIA approvals on our
applications, and we will be
launching the dose of funding
opportunity in early January for
that program. ARPA CPF uh is on
track. We have actually some of
our first projects that were
awarded, uh, back in the end of
2022, that will be coming to a
completion here in the 1st
quarter of 2025. Uh, so we're
excited about that.
2 plus year process to actually
see some of those homes
connected out of that.
Uh, we also saw this last year,
uh, an MOU with PSFA that we
continued on, uh, to make sure
that we have the ability to run
the state education network. It
was about an 8 year process to
get the education network
launched and in the last year
and a half, the Office of
Broadband has lent a lot of
support, and we actually have
launched that July 1st. We got
our 1st 8 entities connected.
Uh, additionally, connecting
Mexico expenditure Authority. We
were given that two years ago.
And, uh, in that timeline, we've
actually prepared, procured
grant software. Uh, we've
launched 3 grant programs that
in the statutory requirements
for it, and we've awarded
approximately $45 million out of
that funding, uh, which is going
to cover 6000 locations across
the state of New Mexico.
So looking at the operating
budget, I touched a little bit
on this at the beginning. Uh,
we're looking at $538,000 for do
it fair share, uh, payments and
to our other categories and
$112,000 for personnel along
with two FTE.
Getting into the accelerated
connect New Mexico funds. We've
spent a lot of time in the last
two years making sure that we
have tailored all of our federal
programs and state programs so
they don't step on each other's
toes. One of the gaps that we
see out there is, it takes 5
years to build these programs,
that's the period performance on
the broadband equity access
deployment funds. And so what do
you do for New Mexicans that do
not have connectivity today. And
this is where this program comes
in. We have approximately 95
households that today do not
have, uh, you know, service that
meets the
standards for those federal
programs. And so we are looking
to get a jumpstart, making sure
that New Mexicans can get
connectivity, which is a big
benefit of satellite, uh, here,
and this is to make sure that we
can do a voucher program, uh, to
have the satellite receivers for
all of those households that are
unserved, uh, and after we get
through the unserved, we'll open
it up to the underserved in this
category and then additionally,
the satellite is a more
expensive type of, of uh
internet service. And so we look
at a $30 subsidy, uh, to make
sure that New Mexicans who could
not
you know, for that, that they're
low income households, uh, would
be able to get a little bit of a
subsidy to bring it down to
about $90 a month.
Uh, the other, the other thing I
just bring up here is again,
looking at the timeline on this,
this is a one-time expenditure
that we're asking for because we
want to make sure that as this
program rolls off, we're also
seeing the builds happening for
all of the other programs that
are terrestrial-based
technologies, uh, like fiber or
uh coaxial cable or license and
unlicensed fixed wireless. And
so it kind of pairs nicely
making sure that New Mexicans
don't get left behind in the
digital divide today, while
still building the thing we need
for the future.
Looking at uh the affordable
connectivity program. Uh, so the
Affordable activity program had
about 180,000 households on it,
which was a $30 subsidy a month,
and for tribal households and
very rural households of $75 a
month. Uh, during the, the
pandemic, this program really
helped break down those barriers
of affordability for a lot of
New Mexicans who could not
afford the internet. We're
seeing a massive drop off of, of
uh New Mexicans actually being
on, on an internet connection,
uh, whether that's through a
wireless, uh, through their cell
phone, uh, or even
uh, through, uh, through a wire
line to their house. And so this
has been a big issue for, you
know, companies in particular in
rural areas, uh, we'd like to
try and figure out how to get a
bridge funding, you know, for
this from the state to make sure
that these households and remain
connected, while the federal
government looks at a subsequent
program, uh, they, there's been
a lot of discussions uh from
from our federal delegation that
they're working diligently on
this. There's bipartisan
support, and so there's just
kind of a gap that we've seen
for about the last 6 months, and
uh we'll continue, you know,
until the early of next year.
And so this is going to be a
two-year uh program uh looking
at 12 months of subsidies to try
and replace the ACP program.
Uh, additionally, the office of
Broadband has been leveraging
every opportunity to make sure
we use state dollars to help,
uh, you know, those federal
dollars get stretched further as
we move into the beat program,
we got $675 million. It is not
enough to get through the four
priorities of unserved,
underserved, the anchor
institutions which include
government buildings, uh, as
well as low income
multi-dwelling units. And so
when we look at how much money
has been allocated through that
program, we know we're gonna be
able to get through the
unserved.
I might be able to get in a
little bit into the underserved.
We have an opportunity from the
state side to look at match
funding for tribal areas, tribal
projects that they can, cannot
afford the matches. We have
opportunities to look at
programs that can help with uh
pole replacements, which is a
very big issue and making sure
that the pole attaching and pole
replacements out there are done
correctly and actually can be
supported so we can add fiber
onto those poles. Uh, and then
lastly, uh, in this, we can also
look at adding on locations of
underserved, uh, or community
institutions.
Or even potentially low income
multi-dwelling units that we may
not have been able to get to
with the federal funds. And so
looking at how to support the
broadband plan and deployment
and leverage those those dollars
and making sure we get the
maximum connectivity possible as
these programs go out. It's
gonna be incredibly important to
have additional funding set
aside to support the broadband
plan.
Uh, last couple of slides here
on the extensions. So, in the,
the session two times ago, we
actually had the Connect New
Mexico funds, uh, the
expenditure authority was given
from the office from, excuse me,
from the Connecting Mexico
Council to the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion.
There were 3 particular buckets
of money, uh, given the
appropriation, uh, one was for
infrastructure, $70 million.
There was a $25 million amount
for school projects and then the
last one was grant Read
Engineering planning. We have
launched all three programs at
this point.
So of that $99 million the
remaining from that 100, we were
also given $25 million to
support the broadband plan that
year. We've actually been going
through and utilizing this
funding to ensure we meet all of
our programmatic requirements,
uh, and make sure we're, you
know, getting the $99 million
out there. One of the big issues
that we had in that expenditure
authority is that it was a
two-year timeline that runs out
June 30th, as I was talking
about with infrastructure
programs, we actually have, uh,
you know, grants that are out
there right now.
And if there is any sort of
delays in supply chain, any sort
of uh delays in the right way or
permitting. Uh, we run risks
where we will no longer be able
to uh reimburse those programs.
And so we're looking for an
extension on the Connect New
Mexico fund. And it's just like
to, to highlight, we actually
have a lot of supporters in the
room. Uh, we have
representatives from Mexico
exchange carrier Group, uh,
Penaska Valley Telecom. Uh, we
have uh Los Alamos County here.
We have, uh, Isla of Pueblo, uh
San Odofonso, uh, we have, uh,
uh, also
MS, uh, uh, out here from, from
Janet, uh, in the room. If you
guys would just stand up and
just, uh, if you are in support
of extending this Connect New
Mexico fund, we'd appreciate
that.
As well as Comcast.
I'm sure I'm missing someone
else. Thank you so much.
Um, so there's a significant
amount of community support both
from, from entities that have
been awarded, uh, and others
that that stand to benefit, uh,
you know, from, from having
these funds, uh extend
connectivity further into New
Mexico.
Uh, additionally, in this, uh,
last year, uh, I sat in front of
the House Appropriations
Committee and, and uh right as
as things were getting passed,
we never got our work group set
up, uh, during that, we were
given a $25 million
appropriation, as I mentioned.
Broadband is infrastructure. $25
million for one year is pretty
hard to turn into an
infrastructure project. And so I
would actually ask for an
extension for that to make sure
we actually can turn it into
infrastructure. Uh, and then
lastly, we have a $7.4 million
tax bond. Uh, originally we had
dedicated this towards building
notes for the state education
network over the last two years,
we've gotten more efficient and
actually have reduced the cost
of that and we've used CARES Act
funding that we wrapped up
earlier this year to finish out
the 1st, 7 to 10 nodes, and now
we're looking
to transition to this into a dig
once project with Department of
Transportation. They have a
project going with New Mexico
Gas, uh, going from, uh, Dixon
over to Penasco, and we're
looking to increase some of the
connectivity, uh, maximizing
underground opportunities with
this, uh, trench that's already
gonna be dug, and making sure
that we have some fire
resiliency in the northern part
of New Mexico when it comes to
connectivity. Uh, so, moving
quickly on, just broadband
landscape on this. You can see
in the uh highlights of the
turquoise colors or federal
programs, all of those.
Appropriations, you can see are
basically 5 year programs that
have been deployed. You can see
the Connect New Mexico, uh,
grant writing engineering
planning and student connect
fund that we just launched, uh,
all are set out as two-year
programs. We're looking to
extend those. And additionally,
when we actually look at the
other programs, uh, the
Affordable connectivity uh
replacement or uh program or the
accelerate Connect New Mexico
program. Those are shorter term,
meant to dovetail nicely with
the build timelines in those
federal and state programs, and
additionally the uh the
broadband.
support funding we're looking
at, you know, for a 5-year
appropriation there, so we can
maximize again the, the need for
connectivity. So just quickly,
uh, highly one more time, just
the differences in those and
red.
Uh, and then I have to stand for
questions. I do have other
slides again to help answer
questions. Thank you. Let's go.
Thank you very much, uh, we're
gonna go to our uh secretary
designate.
And then, um,
Miss Hillet
Uh, we're going to this hell
first.
OK secretary designate and then,
yeah, it's great.
First of all, thank you so much.
I want to thank the uh LC
directorelli.
I really appreciate, uh, and the
committee for allowing me to
speak today.
So I'm happy to share that do it
is embracing advancements of
technology to drive future
growth and innovation. We have
effectively shut down mainframe.
We connect every single state
employee together through our
collaboration suites such as
telephones and emails I'd like
to introduce my team of
committed professionals who are
just right behind me. I have a
Raja Sabannaam, our CISO Drew
Loveless, who just spoke. He is
director of Office of Broadband,
uh, Jason Johnson, our deputy
CIO Michael Rohlbacher, our
director of Public Safety Radio.
Uh, Eve Banner, CFO, Natalie
Runyon, uh our uh GIS officer
Jason Clack, our general
counsel. I look forward to
sharing our presentation with
you and we'll address all
questions at the conclusion with
the assistance of my dedicated
team and staff.
So, overall, I want to go over
our agency overview.
Oh, there we go. Thank you so
much.
Uh, budget comparison, uh,
fiscal year 26 sources and uses,
uh, equipment.
Uh, replacement fund URF FTE
analysis and vacancy rate, uh,
fiscal year 26 agency IT uh
funding C2 request and
recommendations in progress.
Um
As everyone knows, uh, New
Mexico duo was created in 2007.
And uh
You know, develops a state
strategic direction uh for
information technology, IT. We
deliver enterprise IT services
and telecommunications for
executive agencies, uh, perform
oversight of IT projects and
procurements, delivers high
quality and cost-effective IT
services, uh, reduce exposure of
state's computer assets to
cybersecurity risks.
And provides government
technology investment oversight
with transparency consistency,
and fiscal responsibility. Uh,
we have two attached, uh,
departments or agencies, Office
of Broadband Access and
expansion as of uh fiscal year
23 and Office of Cybersecurity,
uh, fiscal year 24.
Some of the major changes, uh,
transitions and challenges that
we've had over the last year is
that I've taken over as the
cabinet secretary for New Mexico
do it. Uh, we also have
onboarded uh director of IT
services, which is Jason
Habidink back in February 2024.
Uh, we've done some soup from a
transition perspective,
cybersecurity assessments based
on executive order that was
issued out in September 24, uh,
for that for that cybersecurity
assessment, we actually
had 59 uh responses, and we have
9 outstanding and continuing to
work through that assessment.
Uh, we had the 24 audit rule,
uh, so 2, type 2 audit of do it
supported agencies. Uh, we
completed the gap assessment and
are starting to work, um.
On that right now, uh,
currently, some of our
challenges are attracting and
retaining technology
professionals, uh, very
difficult to um attain some of
the high level uh technologists
that we need in the state to
help support our agency, uh, but
we are working hard at
recruiting and retaining a lot
of our uh employees, uh, agency
prioritation of adoption and a
full duet agency services.
Uh, currently our fiscal year
26, 25 budget comparison, um, as
you can see, there's just a 12%
increase of $1,128,080,000 and.
I would say that based on
The 11 million.
Most of those dollars come from
the $4.2 million
radio subscription subsidies.
Uh, 550,000 of that is for EPMO
another 650 for our office of
Broadman access and expansion.
So, thank you there.
Uh, fiscal year appropriation
request resources, um, this is
just a little bit more of a
breakout, uh, but this explains
the changes from last year,
changes to the general fund
revenue balance, uh, largest
impact due to the 4.2 million,
uh, 4.25 million radio ask and
and the and and I'm sorry, ask
and to the shortfall of EPMO
caused by transfer of Office of
Cybersecurity to its own
program.
Other revenues decreases due to
decommissioning of the mainframe
and some lower service rates, do
it currently does not receive
any general funds.
Slight 7 fiscal year 26 base
uses by program, uh, summary of
each program we support, we, we
support the 300 professional
services, 400 other expenses,
utilities costs to use software,
500 other transfers from one P
code to another.
EPMO increased to assist with IT
oversight, performance measures,
and obligated compliance
measures.
A here.
slide 8 is the um fiscal year
summary by program for the
expansion of our GIS program,
which is $750,000.
Currently GIS receives general
funds.
Slide 9, equipment uh
replacement fund.
Currently is about a $1.121
million increase or if uh ERF
funds from fiscal year 25 to
fiscal year 26.
Fiscal year 25 do it FTE status,
uh, F FY 24 FTE uh authorized
was 177. We filled 133 of those
positions, uh, vacancy rate was
at 40% was 44 overall vacancy
rate was 25% out of 2024.
Uh, one year later, fiscal year
25, current status uh authorized
196.
We filled 159.
Uh, vacancy rate was 37.
Uh, which we had to decrease in
our vacancy rate to 1930, 19%,
which were pretty proud of, uh,
19 new positions were approved
through the 20 2024 legislation,
uh, effective 2025. These
positions are in the process of
being on boarded currently
today. Fiscal year 26, uh, FTE
request, uh, additional 5 FTE
for enterprise services are
requested with zero funding.
Uh, the EPMO and Officer
Broadband positions will be
funded by general fund.
You look at the uh table here,
fiscal year 26 FTE budget
authorized 196 expansion of 10,
uh, total of 206 employees.
Uh, down below here, we have the
additional FTE of fiscal year
25, which includes 4 FTE or
EPMO.
Um, basically for compliance and
project management, 2 would be
for EPMO, 2 for GIS.
5 FTE for enterprise services.
1 FTE for Office of Broadband
expansion.
Fiscal year IT funding C2
request, uh, as you can see
here, um, you know, from fiscal
year 20 to uh fiscal year 2025,
uh, we've had an increase in, in
several different projects and
dollars and to the point of
almost $1.8 billion currently,
um,
We're at total appropriations
for this year, fiscal year, uh.
610 million.
And you'll see fiscal year 22
and fiscal year 25 or low
dollars and we concentrated a
lot of those on our federal
funding dollars.
That's why you see a lower
dollar amount there, um, and we
talked about a little bit of our
cybersecurity budget, um, kind
of look at this Deloitte study
which states that
In general, most spend an
average of 10% of their IT
budget on cybersecurity, and
that's definitely a big concern
for us.
Evaluation criteria, uh, as you
can see, there's several
different points there and
bullets, we can read those here
shortly, but the summary of C2
requests for 36 projects
totaling of 391.1 million.
170.9 million in general fund,
4.9 million in state state funds
internal transfers.
And 215.3 million in federal
funds.
er other Steve.
Special state appropriations
throughout the years, we had the
SB 280 2019 for $6 million HB 2
2021 for $1 million. I'm gonna
read through all these, but HB 2
2022 was $22 million to plan
design and construct broadband
projects and improve
cybersecurity statewide at 11
million and 1 million went to
broadband.
HB 2 2023 $10 million to improve
cybersecurity statewide,
including up to $3 million for
incident response at the
regulation and licensing
department.
HB 2 2024 $5 million for
cybersecurity initiatives
including public education and
higher education.
Thank you and uh definitely
available for questions.
Thank you.
Representative Chatfield, you're
first on the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you for being here
today.
19%, that's a lot better than
25%, sir, uh.
How many, how many positions
does that represent?
And are those funded positions?
I believe we have over 206
employees today.
How many uh empty positions,
90%.
How many is that?
I'm sorry, about 35.
35.
Uh
35 funded positions.
Yes, sorry. I'm gonna go ahead
and bring in our CFO here to
help you answer those questions
here.
Hi, I'm Eve Banner.
CFO
Um, Mr. Chairman,
representative, if we go back to
slide 10.
Of the 19%, 37 of those are
vacant, and these are all the
funded positions that we do have
right now.
fiscal year 25.
37 vacant funded positions.
And uh so, so,
I'm just trying to understand
the purpose of asking for more
positions if you haven't hired
37 that you already have.
Mr. Chairman, Representative of
the 19 that we just received and
24, that became available in
July.
Many of those positions are
being posted and recruited, and
that's many of the positions
that's also um
And very difficult for IT to
fill some of the higher level
program.
Physicians
So the funding for those
positions from last year, did it
revert or was it uh uh
Transfered over to something
else.
Uh
What happened to there?
No, actually, um we needed to
Use fund balance to cover some
of our costs and personnel last
year for P773, the Enterprise
Fund.
And there was no reversion or
Do it in 24. There was 54,000 of
a reversion for Office of
Broadband that was related to a
special project. So last year it
was barred into another.
No, we had to, sorry, we had to
bring fund balance in to cover
The personal cost.
OK.
Uh, second question.
Uh, if you, if you receive no uh
general fund, I assume you're an
enterprise agency, you get paid
by other agencies to do their,
how do you, how do you get
funded? Mr. Chairman,
Representative, I'm going to
correct.
Um, the cabinet secretary on
page 6. We do receive general
funds, cybersecurity receives
general funds, EPMO, which is
P772 is general funded.
Office of Broadband is generally
funded, um.
And we are also asking for
enterprise services for the
trunked radio service, General
Fund to help with that as well.
And that
makes it our general fun, that
makes a lot more sense to me.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and sorry
I missed some of the
presentation, but I did receive
some emails on this, and I
attended quite a few of the
Connect New Mexico and um
On the appropriation that you
received, uh, I guess it was
July 24th from Obay, uh, you,
you didn't gain access to the
funds till the end of October,
and it looks like you're not
gonna be able to access the
funds till, uh, well, you're not
gonna be able to access until
after, uh, June 25th that you
can't access them anymore and
I've got uh Lincoln and Mayhill,
which is in my district.
And they're the ones I'm getting
some of the emails from.
If you don't get an extension on
this, they just don't get
service.
Chair, uh, representative, thank
you. So that is correct. There
is grant programs that are out
there that we've, uh, you know,
given a grant award for. And
again, we've looked very
carefully at the timing on
these, but if there is any delay
in these projects that we've
awarded because of the short
expenditure timeline.
There may be a cost incurred
from a provider.
And if they submit a bill back
to us after July 1 of 25, we
would not be able to reimburse
it because of how the
expenditure language is written
into the legislation in the
House Bill 2.
Well, I'm really sensitive to
being able to access money cause
I know it's really hard and um.
After all the devastation that
we had in Lincoln County and not
being able to access funds,
it's, it's irritating cause
there's so much red tape
involved in everything. So I, I
hope that that works out. And
then um one thing I wanted to
ask is, have you thought about
any funding for maybe some of
the fiber that we lost in the
Capitans, um.
So that those people can be made
whole again. Representative, uh,
phenomenal question we have
about a million to 5200 $500
that we were able to deconflict
out of some of the, the ARPA
money, the capital projects
funds, money from the American
rescue Plan A. We actually have
a meeting set up with Treasury,
uh, uh, this week, uh, Thursday
to see if we can get a shortened
notice of funding opportunity
and amendment to the program we
have programmed and take that
dollars and put it towards fire
and flood recovery.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um.
Thank you for the presentation.
Uh, I'm gonna direct my
questions to, uh, to, uh, the
Office of Broadband. Did you,
um, I'm gonna go back to just
quickly to page 8,
on the 4 connectivity program
bridge fund for 2 years, um.
And thank you for, for looking
in that investment, we, we know
we lost the, the federal, uh,
funding for that is all used and
then went away, um.
How are you, um,
First of all, is it going to be
enough to cover all the New
Mexicans who lost the the ACP
benefit from that federal grant
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
phenomenal question as well. Uh,
unfortunately, that program from
the federal government
represented about 70 million $70
million a year coming into the
city of Mexico.
Given the priorities for the
officer Broadband, you know, to
make sure that we have enough
connectivity. We want to go
after a a little bit more
targeted, uh, low-income group
with ACP there was uh a 200%
poverty level. Uh, I think we
could, you know, look at those
numbers as we get closer to, to
an appropriation and figure out
the right way to target this and
also look at maybe the mixture
of, of, you know, wire line
versus wireless connections. Uh,
additionally, I think it's
important to have a discussion
about, you know, the $30.
$75 what we've really budgeted
here is about 90,000 households
for about $30 a month, uh, in a
flat rate across the board.
Thank you. That, that was,
that's gonna be my follow up is
how you determine that and
sounds like you've already done
a lot of work and, and um and
delineating how you're gonna do
that. So thank you. Your office
is always
Ahead of the game, Mr. Mr. Cher
I did get to attend the
broadband um convention that was
held last month and I have to
say, uh, a lot of the
information that I received or
um
Learned about um was
It's pretty important that $2
billion gap that we have in the
middle mile is, is, is a
constant uh came up in the
constant conversations, but also
what I really reflect on is how
Different entities, uh, came
together to really help out in
those those areas that are most
affected by flood and fire. Um,
And through uh your programs to
um.
I'm looking at um something you
said about not being able to
spend, and that's in the
following page on page 10, you
weren't able to spend that $25
million in one year because it
was intended for specifically
for infrastructure build out.
What is the timeline again? You
remind you what just.
What is the timeline
in order to spend that type of
money share representative, you
know, there are, are certainly
some things we could do with the
broadband plan. Uh we're very
mindful that we update the
broadband plans yearly, uh, to
the legislature as well as to
the governor's office, and I, I
will say that, you know, on that
part of my oversight, you know,
leading the department not to
really think about emergency
funding that is not something we
listed in, in the broadband plan
last year. And so, that will be
corrected this year moving
forward.
You know, as we move into our
update, but we're very mindful
about how they appropriations
are given to us, and, you know,
look to be within those
boundaries. So that's kind of
one element. Secondly, looking
at the, the recovery aspects.
Uh, I, I, you know, I've got to
commend, uh, uh, Godfrey Nioti
from Mescaler Apache Telecom and
some of the folks in the room
here from uh Penasco Valley
Telecom, as well as other
providers, uh, part of the New
Mexico exchange carrier group.
They worked together to figure
out how to get connectivity
back, and they
lent materials out, uh, with not
really a whole lot of thought of
how am I going to get reimbursed
those materials that I've been
sitting in my stockyard, uh, and
so there's certainly some
challenges around, around the
fire and flood recoveries, you
know, that go along with those.
So, to that point of when you
actually look at the buildout
for the future, we don't want to
just build the same thing that's
going to get burned down again.
What we want to look at is
resiliency that's built into the
system. And so that's gonna take
additional planning, it's gonna
take additional rights away,
it's gonna take additional
permitting, uh, it's going to
take
Additional funds to build that
resiliency ring around uh Mescal
or Apache around Riodoso, uh,
and Lincoln and Otero counties,
and then we also need to think
about those same issues for the
rest of New Mexico.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. It's just a
little daunting amount of money
that we need to really get to
get us uh fully connected, if
you will. Um, and just lastly,
uh, you're talking about the,
the dig ones program that you,
you worked with DOT. Are you
looking to work with other
agencies and other uh other ways
so that we just have that one,
that one time dig. It really
saves a lot of time and money,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you. Uh, I
also just wanted to highlight,
uh, Governor Quanello had wanted
to stand up earlier from uh
Pierre to, to support the
extension of the Connect with
Mexico funds, uh, to, you know,
answer your question on the, on
the dig once opportunity.
It is something that is
incredibly important to
leverage, you know, when we dig
into the ground once, it will
prevent additional costs in the
future, if we can put even blank
onto it or add dark fiber into a
lot of those, those roots, uh,
and it can connect a lot of
places that may not have
connectivity, especially with
the dig once programs where
we've been discussing fires and
floods. A lot of those
underground opportunities may
not come again, and it'll be
more expensive to try and dig.
So in the case of of uh DOT.
Yes, we absolutely want to
leverage as much opportunity
with DOT as possible, um, what
we found out as we went into
this dig once is that you really
need to get in early in the
process, you know, I kept
driving down a highway and this
is maybe my naivete is, you
know, stepping in and be like,
hey, there's an open ground,
like, let's, let's just drop
some conduit in it, right? Uh,
but really once you get past 60%
construction documents is not
possible. And so we need to be
working, you know, consistently
and, and, uh, you know, I'm
fortunate to have a good working
relationship with Secretary
Serna and a lot of the DOT staff
having, having worked there
previously myself.
Um, and we've been working
towards those projects, but to
the bigger part of your
question, is there are other
agencies, you know, water is in
this. There's a lot of private,
uh, you know, projects that go
into the water side of things,
um, you know, we can look at
partnerships with counties. We
can look at partnerships with,
uh, with cities, you know, in
some of these opportunities, and
there's not really a central
place to to go get this done. So
it takes a lot of work for us to
go out and figure this out.
Thank you, sure, and I'm
bringing this up because we had
a
presentation from Secretary
Kendraine this morning where she
is looking to to build some uh
connections with with multiple
agencies.
Around the infrastructure, uh,
um, type, um.
Projects and such, so I just
wanted to bring that up because
if we need to save those
dollars, especially when we're
looking at, you know, projects
and the amount of money it's
gonna take for a broadband to
get completed and just the
resiliency which you're talking
about, where we need to put the,
the lines underground where
we're, we're forming those
project ideas with um our
communities that are most
affected by or have the most
risk, I guess I would say, in
addition, we're always building
and rebuilding our our roadways.
So I think that that could be
something, I don't know.
We need to have some kind of
legislation or something to
really make those directions,
but it makes a lot of sense to
me. Thank you.
A chair if I may, just one of
the representative, uh, just I'd
also uh highlight that the
governor's office has an
infrastructure advisor, uh,
Rebecca Russ, who's doing a lot
of the coordination with the
executive branch agencies and
and there's a lot of work and
discussions going along on those
lines and how we can, we can
maximize and leverage uh the
executive, uh, you know, silos,
right? and and cross those the
silos and really thank you Mr.
Chair. I'm, I really want to
highlight the economic
development aspect of what
broadband brings to our state.
And
just tell you or ask you what
happens if we don't make these
bigger investments or the long
term funding investments.
Uh, in, in respect to our
economic development, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
yeah, Broadband touches every
part of, you know, our lives.
Uh, I have a slide later on that
kind of talks about how it
touches healthcare, education,
uh, you know, entertainment,
right? Um, but it really has
become even a a big part of
economic development. So during
the broadband summit, uh,
Secretary Black, uh, came and
and talked about some of this
and one of the big things he
highlighted when companies are
looking to come to New Mexico, a
couple of years ago, broadband
was in the, the low twenties as
one of the elements that looked
for site readiness.
Uh, as of their most recent
surveys for this year, uh, they
are looking at number 6. So is
up there with water, it's up
there with electricity, right?
It's up there with, uh, you
know, making sure that they have
every other utility, that is a
necessity for for economic
development. Uh, the last
economic studies I saw was came
out of the kind of the 2021 uh
timeline. Uh, there was a, uh, a
professor out of the uh
University of of uh South
Carolina that did some work and
so the numbers don't exactly
align with the broad.
speeds that we're looking at
today, uh, but the estimation
was a $20 million drag on our
economy every month, every
month.
For not having high-speed
broadband.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
think most of my questions have
been asked, but I went to
national conference and be
allocation was um the big topic
and how you get skilled
personnel to do it when everyone
in the United States is looking
for the same people. What are
you looking at as far as getting
what you need, the people you
need, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, also a huge
topic and and broadband
landscape. Uh, so thank you for
the question on that. Uh, early
on, uh, you know, I was tasked
with looking at how to use
non deployment funding, uh, by
our, our previous director, and
one of the conclusions I came to
is that with bipartisan
infrastructure law, not only is
it just states competing with
states for broadband, uh, you
know, workforce. We also have a
lot of overlap with Department
of Transportation and, you know,
who's doing the construction of
this, uh, and so we're really
looking industry-wide at what is
the shortfall and then against
all of these federal dollars
coming in at the same time
competing nationally to make
sure we get the right number.
contractors and there's just not
enough workforce in New Mexico.
And so to that point early on,
uh, reached out to uh to uh
Secretary Nair, um, and, uh, and
she hired a Deputy Secretary
Greginsky, who she's really
tasked with a lot of the work
here. Um, so we've been working
very closely with Department of
Workforce Solutions because at
the end of the day, we did not
actually get an allocation for
non-deployment funding. There's
not extra bead funding to do all
of the priorities I talked about
earlier, and go after and
develop workforce. And so now we
need to leverage
other programs that already
exist from the apprenticeship
program, uh, that the
legislature appropriated for
last year, uh, as well as
looking at the
pre-apprenticeship program,
which we've already been
connecting, uh, you know, uh,
different entities too, uh, and
then on top of that, look at,
you know, how to maximize a
wheel funding and American
Workforce centers, Department of
Workforce Solution centers,
right, to, to leverage those.
Um, one other element, uh, I'll
just briefly hit on with
workforces that we did identify
this back in 2022. We put in a
correctionally directed
spending, uh, with
Uh, with the, both senators'
offices and we actually received
$2 million to do a workforce
trailer. Um, that appropriation
came in, uh, during a continuing
resolution in April. We actually
got the paperwork in July and I
have a project manager working
specifically on uh figuring out
5 different uh course works to,
to put into that trailer, and
with the idea that we're going
to go to the most rural parts of
New Mexico where we have, uh,
you know, folks who would like
to work, but have barriers to
entry into the workforce, like
childcare, like
security and cannot get the
transportation they need to some
of these other training centers.
Mr. Chair, it sounds like you
have it all set. Thank you. Good
job. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. I, I thank you
for the compliment, but there's
a lot of work to do there.
Starlink will fix that. Sindo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
Couple of questions have been
answered, but uh, went back on
On page 7, Drew on your
presentation with regards to the
95,000 households you mentioned
under unserved and underserved.
Is that the total of both, or is
it, is there a separate number
for the underserved, uh, chair
and senator, yes, that is
correct. It's for both. Uh, so,
you know, today we're looking at
approximately 45,000 locations
that are, are in that unserved
category, meaning that they have
25 download and 3 upload or
less. Uh, so that could be
literally no connect.
activity or it could be an older
technology that does not give
them speeds that that meets
broadband definitions, uh,
underserved is going to be, uh,
between that 253 definition and
100 download, 20 upload, which
is the newer standard. And so
what we want to make sure we do
is go after the unserved first
and give them priority in this
two-year program and then expand
it and open it up to
underserved. So the biggest
issue, you know, here is really
those folks who cannot get the
connectivity that they need, uh,
today.
Uh, and how many of those
unserved households do you say
45,000. It's approximately
45,000. OK. All right, I
appreciate that. And then on the
uh the request for ACP.
Uh, I know that like Maddie and
other tribal uh telecoms and
then there's also tribes that
are also uh do their own uh
internet service. Are they?
Also participating in this, uh,
Uh, whatever 75, I think you
mentioned $75 a month subsidy or
whatever, are they also
participating in that.
Uh, senator, as a chair and
senator, uh.
So when it came to the federal
program, it took the internet
service provider provider opting
into the program. And so you
saw, uh, you know, a tribal, uh,
broadband providers like Maddie,
uh, you know.
Getting involved in it and
making sure they got the $75 a
month per household, and they
really leverage that, right? Um,
there are many others who did
too, and then there are other
providers, you know, who did not
because it took some work to go
through the FCC, um, in a
similar case in this type of
program, we'd be looking for
administrative company, uh, to,
to make sure that they could
also do a lot of the validation
around the low income aspect and
manage a lot of that process as
well, and there would have to be
an opt in for the companies and
around some of that is around uh
personal information, uh.
That would be need to be private
uh and could be managed by a
third party better than we could
do it.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, when you say
opt in, is it, are they looking
at the economics of that.
In terms of opting in, I don't
know, but, but it, you know, if
it's not feasible for them on
the way out and that a
reservation and they decide not
to opt in, then we're basically,
you know, leaving folks out. So
I'm just curious as to
What this dynamic in terms of,
you know, providing so chair
and, and Senator, uh, yes, there
has to be an opt in process to
it, has to be an opt in from the
internet service provider
providing internet to a home
location. First and foremost,
right? They have to be able to
be set up to get that subsidy
back, right, uh, into the
system, and so much like ACP we
envisioned, you know, following
that same model. And then
secondarily the household would
have to qualify, uh, if they
were going to get the, uh, the
low income, you know,
for that subsidy. So they would
have to, you know, get into a
portal, um, during ACP there was
multiple ways to do that. There
was a 1-800 number, uh, that
they could call. So if you did
not have internet, you could
still call in and get someone to
walk you through that. Uh, and
again, this is, this part where
we believe, uh, you know, going
out to RFP, getting
administrative company to do a
lot of this work would be uh
more beneficial than having the
office run it directly. OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, just uh
overall question, your response
with the change of
administration, what things do
you foresee that are happening
going forward, positive,
negative, or maybe it's all
positive because uh you know, I
think, uh, Starlink uh used to
have the insider.
tracking some of these
conversations that are gonna be
happening, so, uh.
The
chair senator, you know, I mean,
I think there's a lot that we
can think about and prepare for,
um, what's nice to, to know
about infrastructure is that
whether you have an R or a D
behind your name, that if you do
not have connectivity, you want
connectivity, right? And so I do
not foresee a lot of change to
these programs that we've
already gone through multiple
years of vetting where we have a
program that has been approved
at this point, uh, being taken
away, the money has been
obligated to the state, uh, and
granted there is a process.
to have to draw those funds down
against a budgeted amount of
money, uh, you know, I cannot
predict an act of Congress, but
they would take an act of
Congress to to see some sort of
change, uh, to what we have
going.
Appreci it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. That's it.
Representative.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
all. Um, first, uh, um,
secretary designate, we're
looking at continuing to very
much sort of ramp up our
security efforts for state
agencies. Is that a great deal
of the request that you're
looking at.
Yeah, currently, I mean,
Oh, sorry.
Chair, appreciate that
committee. Uh, yes, 100%.
Great. Uh, Mr. Chair, I think we
need to look at all ways to, to
strengthen that security to make
sure that agencies are using and
working with do it and not going
off on their own, um, and so
that's good, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Lovelace, as it relates to sort
of, I guess I understand better
now that $70 million is, that's
essentially like a 5 year sort
of gap.
Funding is that the right way to
think about it?
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, and
Representative.
So the $70 million is to really
address those that cannot get
connected today.
So, yes, it's basically covering
the timeline shortfall, and I
pulled up the, the slide here to
show how it really hits in the
middle of bead, right? And when
you think about the build
timelines, we go out, we do the
grants. Chair, if I sorry just
uh um and we're a bit behind.
What are those timelines give us
sort of like the
If you need to give nuance in
the timelines, that's OK too, I
guess. Please explain what that
70 million the timelines that it
covers or it's intended to
cover. So the first two years of
bead, once we actually go do all
of the awards, and right now our
schedule is to be completed with
the award making July 26th.
That's one year from when we got
the approvals from NTIA and we
actually have to get one more
approval from NTIA to proceed on
these projects. From that time,
it's gonna take 2 years to get
through right away, permitting.
Last-minute engineering changes,
supply ordering before we're
really gonna see any digging. I
also say that, that maybe
there's a random exception where
you will have a program where
someone's already gotten the
permits or gotten the rights of
way done. Phenomenal. They can
get that done faster. Most of
these projects are in the most
rural parts or difficult to
reach parts of our state, and
it's going to take federal
permitting through BIA. It's
gonna take federal permitting
through uh USDA, uh, Park
Service, uh, it's gonna
take, you know, state
permitting, it's gonna take
county permitting, it's gonna
take, so all of these things,
and Mr. Chair, so Mr. Lovice, so
that 2 years from July 25 or 26,
2025, that's sort of that, get
everything ready to then build
and how much longer I guess, so
really it's two questions, the
time period. Second question,
um, there are, there are
additional non-satellite based
technologies.
That are eligible for this
funding, or is it limited to
satellite. Now, so, uh, chair,
uh, Representative, you are
correct. There's multiple
technologies available. The
priorities are fiber first, and
we want to get as much fiber out
into the state because it's the,
you know, most economical over
time, secondarily, you're going
to end up with license fixed
wireless, and then you're gonna
look at unlicensed fixed
wireless, and then low Earth
orbit is still somewhat
questionable. NTI is not
actually provided final
guidance. We have had our plan
approved, which
include a bid for a low Earth's
orbit, and there we do
anticipate locations that are
gonna be so remote or so
expensive to build to that they,
that will be their permanent
solution. And so that's actually
some of the benefit is not only
do we beat some of the time and
make sure the Mexicans can get
connected using satellite now,
we can also look at how to
exclude those final locations
and not have to do this twice
with the beat program, which
means we can put more money into
our allocation, which is too
small to make sure more New
Mexicans get one of those other
technologies.
OK. Uh, and again, it's sort of
a five-year, so 20, 2025, that's
70 million intended to cover
from 2025 through 2030, roughly.
So I was looking actually
looking at 2 years because most
of the permitting processes are
about 2 years, uh, and that we
start seeing builds being done.
I, I, I would probably punt, you
know, to have that discussion if
it's, if it's needed after that
and we can see how the program
is deployed sooner, sooner is
better. Thank you for walking me
through that. Thank you.
Thank you. Let me, let me just
continue on the cybersecurity I
know we put money last year. I,
I don't know what's happening in
that, but that needs to happen.
I mean that's vendors, that's
across the board, I mean, yeah,
I think you guys and I don't see
maybe Raj is behind you. I mean,
he, he wanted all the
cybersecurity in New Mexico and
he said, OK, and he wanted
highered, he wanted all the
schools, so it went through one
source and so we could really
protect data and, and everything
else and so uh I don't think he
needs to sit. I mean, the
cybersecurity issue, whether
it's a vendor, whether it's a
school, whether it's
TRD which
Um
is very vulnerable, all has to
happen and I don't know what
that's gonna take out.
I've seen some cybersecurity
money in your presentation.
Uh, the other thing, um.
wanted to touch on to is
I
I think Google had like a
nodule, right? They could place
in the state or an area and
cover up to 300 mile radius and,
and serve wirelessly.
You may know what that's called.
You want to give us an update
and where Google is with
providing wireless, uh, chair,
uh, I have not seen any updates
in some of the kind of early,
early news media, you know,
splashes with it, and so I have
not had any conversations with
Google specifically on their
technology and if they're even
close to deployment. I, I would
say that if they were at that
place of deployment, they would
be eligible to apply for the
beat programming and do some of
that, and I did not see an
application come through for
them.
And, and I mean, this is the
only industry or any portion of
an industry that that we lay.
Their utilities that they
generate income off of.
And we don't do it for cities
that run water and sewer lines,
but we're doing it for the fiber
utilities and the telephone
infrastructure and we're laying
the lines and paying for
everything and they're, they're
able to generate that money off
that. Are we looking at
recouping any of those costs
from the state for that fiber
lane in grounding it and when
they start generating revenue
off the lines that we paid for
either federally or state.
Sure maybe a bigger question
than, than I'm able to answer,
but I will say from the FCC side
where, you know, phone is
generally regulated, uh, and
then down here at the PRC level,
you know, generally regulated
internet is not regulated in the
same way. Uh, we did have the,
the uh constitutional amendment
a couple of years ago that put
it as a necessity and kind of
that same category, uh, but
there is not any regulation of,
of the internet in that regard.
Yeah, I mean, we're, we're
laying a lot of infrastructure,
I mean it, it's, it's.
It's really landlines now, what
we call voiceover IP, right?
And it's all that. I mean, but
this is the only industry that I
know that.
The state where we're spending
our own money.
Lean the wire, laying the
ground, and they make a profit
off it, I mean.
It's interesting to me that we
don't judge a water utility that
way, and a sewer line utility
and high voltage utility is.
The infrastructure that's
required as a basic need.
It it's the same thing, I mean.
I don't know anybody that
doesn't have one of these every
80 year old grandma has one.
And in
And so, I mean, I, everybody's
got connectivity. It's just to
what point?
And how they operate their
system, so I mean.
I'm, I'm, uh, you're digging in
the ground and you're gonna dig
up dinosaur bones and then I see
like uh an accelerator
replacement in 25 to 26 to
replace some lines that are
already.
been put there, I think that is
what that slide is showing me.
Uh, chair, that slide is the
accelerate Connect to Mexico uh
program, which is the two-year
satellite, uh, ask. So, you
know, for that, that technology,
um, you know, ultimately
wireless is not as scalable as
light-based fiber optics, and,
you know, ultimately satellite
companies, you know, may come or
go, uh, Starlink is the only one
on the market right now. There
are others coming out, Amazon
Kuiper, uh, is one that's, you
know, getting close to
deployment, uh, so, you know,
that in mind, if they are trans
wirelessly. Again, I think that
they are part of the landscape
of the future for broadband, um,
but if we want New Mexicans to
have something that's scalable
for the future for what we need,
uh, as in every home, you know,
fiber is the thing that's gonna
last the longest and be the best
investment. But are we getting
the last mile then, the
connectivity from not the middle
mi is the easiest.
Uh, chair middle mile is
actually the thing that's least
funded in New Mexico and
actually is hardest to do at the
moment. And, uh, and we would
like to dedicate some of the,
the $80 million ass to making
sure we get that in that
deployment timeline along with
bead. Last mile is the thing
that's funded the best out of
the bead program, as well as
some of the previous
appropriations through the
Connecting Mexico Fund,
specifically Tard targeting the
unserved and underserved. And so
to that point, yes, those first,
you know, grants that we've been
awarding, uh, back into 2022 and
2023. Those are starting.
To see their projects being
completed in this first quarter
of this next year.
But isn't the middle mi, I mean,
whoever it is, right? Uh, I
forget who CenturyLink changed
her name to.
The luminous is the primary
provider in New Mexico, yes. Why
isn't aluminum and all those
providers laying the middle
mile, knowing that they have the
connectivity on the on the last
mile to to do that.
Uh, I've had conversations with
Lumen, they're primarily
shifting their model away from
last mile connectivity to doing
transport, um, but I can't speak
to their board's choices about
where they invest their dollars
in New Mexico. There are other
providers out there out there.
Plateau is a good example where
they went after a middle mile uh
funding through NCIA and they
actually beat out the office of
Broadband for it, uh, and they
are working on a, on a project
on the eastern side of our
state. That doesn't necessarily
mean that the Western, you know,
part of the state is getting the
same benefit there. And so,
there are companies that are
interested in it, but not
everywhere is getting the same
treatment in New Mexico.
Yeah, I mean, if they beat you
out on a grand, I mean that's
it's a big.
That's a big deal being in an
apartment out on the grant.
Uh, and, and share, they also
beat out another consortium, the
fiber network, New Mexico fiber
network as well.
Yeah, and so I, I don't know,
but we're gonna have to figure
out how to, how we do that and,
and I mean they, they, you know,
they send us a phone bill,
whether I use Comcast at my
office, right, or we, we're
getting phone bills and we're
building, they're gonna have to
invest along with us. And, and
if they're not gonna invest
along with us. I mean, why
should we, why should we build
the middle mile for them?
So chair, I haven't seen them
apply for any funding, you know,
uh, from us, uh, especially on
Middle mile. Um, I think that'd
be a question, you know, should
we get the funding and actually
be able to go after building Mid
Mile, uh, but there are, like I
said, there are companies and
companies in this room are very
much interested in in doing that
and they are local here in New
Mexico. Now, I think you're
doing a good job because, I
mean, before we didn't, I only
remember who was there before,
but we had trouble in in your
well skilled and child knowledge
and you answers to everything
and
I'm gonna look for the ultimate
answer.
The,
the redundancy in line in, in
Gallup that's been cut 3 times
that I know of, right?
That completely shuts down the
entire system.
I,
you know the lady's name that
has, I'll, I'll say the wrong
company or the wrong name.
But we can actually get that
redundancy and gallop and so I'm
gonna try to visit with you
sometime this week to figure out
how to get that redundancy, but
I mean, we lost everything from
pretty much grants.
to the Arizona border in this is
the 3rd time.
A chair, I believe it's 12 times
in the last 10 years that this
has actually happened and, you
know, it hasn't been fixed in
the last 10 years. So, uh,
definitely something, you know,
should, should give there, there
are multiple providers in the
area and I'd be happy to sit
down with you and and discuss
further.
Oh, I have a backhoe
and.
And, and I can have a fiber
company that rents some space
for me, I mean, imagine we can
get what we needed in the middle
of the night and be done by the
morning and,
and so, but that, that has to
happen because I mean, it shuts
down
it just literally shuts down
everything. 911, everything
shuts down completely, and, and
I will tell you why I'm a
starling believer because
startling gave me service, and
it gave me Wi Fi calling, right?
I had to be at my home or my
office to get it.
And share I think to that point,
right? That's exactly why I say
that there's a, you know,
All of these technologies have a
place in the landscape, right?
Yeah, and I mean, that when
something happens, I mean, it
could be a power outage, right,
and if you had to regenerator
and backup generator, you still
have access to the internet when
when other providers would
probably be not have anything at
all if, if the power goes down,
so I mean, but I am gonna visit
you with you this week about the
redundancy line cause it's just,
it, it's gonna happen and I
don't.
I may have to put Kappa Alley or
you may have to direct me where,
where I can fund that so we
don't go through that situation,
but I mean in the hospital
system shut down, the flights
are flying in, right? The AWAs
at the airport doesn't work in
with AWAs is it tells you when
direction density, altitude, so
for pilots, so they know what's
what they're coming in and, and
so everything shuts down and
that, that needs to happen. I
mean, I never heard it happening
in another community where
they're cut.
You know, annually, uh, chair,
uh, you know, I think that, uh,
that Gallup and McKinley area,
you know, is, is the prime
example that I think of, um, but
there are other communities, uh,
and even happens in Albuquerque,
where there's a single point of
failure, and especially on
government buildings, um, you
know, uh, director Sam Baum, you
know, had a, had a situation
with uh with uh MDC where
they're
The single point of failure
happened, they were not able to
do, uh, you know, intake for,
for any of their inmates, uh,
and that was just a simple line
back to the University of New
Mexico Health, you know, and
that can be a challenge. So,
it's not just in McKinley, but
it is an important discussion
that we need to have on
resiliency and redundancy for
the future and making sure
government services are not shut
off.
OK, meaning deficient
presentation, you're going to
lead us through some stuff.
And were we behind the tab or.
No chair members of the
committee, there is a piece of
paper key hearing issues. It is
titled Section 7 Appropriation
requests. I'm just gonna quickly
go over what agencies requested
for uh general fund amounts, and
I'm gonna go back to the do it
presentation that had sort of
the history of what you all have
appropriated, uh, the last
couple of years, so.
For FY 26, 16 agencies requested
36 general funded IT projects at
a total of $175 million.
Uh, just for your comparison,
last year you all appropriated,
uh, around 25, 28 million just
in general fund dollars for IT
projects and so this request is
6 times the amount that you all
appropriated.
for this current fiscal year,
uh, 29 of the project requests
are for new projects and 7 are
for continued projects that have
received previous
appropriations. The 7 continued
projects totaled the majority of
the requests this fiscal year at
$111 million from 5 different
agencies, and so that's
including from the health care
authority, the Department of
Public Safety, the Children,
Youth and Families Department,
as well as the Department of
Workforce Solutions, um, there
was one request from the
collaborative for higher.
Education, shared services. This
is sort of housed under the
higher education department,
which comes to the largest ask
for general fund this year at
$25 million. You all have
appropriated $23 million
previously in general funds for
this IT project that has
received a little technical IT
oversight from the states.
Um, including federal dollars,
the total project request amount
is $391 million. Um,
Some notable projects, uh, I
would like to point out is the
Medicaid Management Information
System replacement project, Myer
for sure at the healthcare
Authority. They asked for $16
million of general fund dollars
with an associated federal match
of 146.2 million.
Uh, previously, the authority
has been appropriated $369.4
million with state and federal
funds combined, um, and has
spent 77 or 284 million.
Of that um appropriation.
Previously, um, but the
healthcare authority now has a
new project cost for Myer, and
they're expecting it to cost
$533 million just in
non-recurring funds alone, with
an estimated total cost of 832.2
million with non-recurring and
recurring costs combined.
Uh, for your information, this
project started in 2013 and will
is anticipated currently to
close out in 2027.
Uh, other requests, 25.4 million
of general fund revenue for the
healthcare authority where its
child support enforcement
replacement project, Caesar for
short, the associated federal
match is $50.8 million for FY
26. This project started in 2013
and is now anticipated to end in
2029.
Um, around 16 years later after
the start dates, um, it is only
spent 4, 15.2 million or 46.3%
of total appropriations across
the time that it started, uh,
around 11 years ago.
Um, in addition to the new
general fund request, the
Healthcare Authority is asking
for you all to reauthorize an
outstanding balance of 100 or
I'm sorry, 17.6 million, um,
In addition to the new.
Appropriations.
Uh, other projects to highlight
for new projects, uh, the
Secretary of State, as you all
heard yesterday, is requesting
$5 million of general funds to
implement a new ethics e-file
system to replace its legacy
electronic filing system, and it
is also requesting around 2
million for uh another IT
project.
$3 million is being requested by
the Office of the State Engineer
to modernize and replace its 15
year old real-time water
management system.
Um, as well, 2 million from the
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish to enhance and maintain
various security upgrades, um,
the Department of Health is the
agency who asks for the most IT
projects this year to start 6
new projects, however, currently
has 7 outstanding projects that
are currently open.
The agency within this last
fiscal year has closed out
various projects that have made
very little to no progress.
Um
With that chair, that is all
that I have for you for the
section 7 requests. We are still
waiting for the executive to put
together their recommendation,
which we should be getting,
hopefully, um, soon I'll be
meeting with DFA on Thursday to
talk about.
We don't need that request.
Thank you guys for your
presentation. Any questions on
other than the 2013 project, 10
years, 11 years later, still
hasn't moved.
Thank you.
Thank you, chair.
We're gonna break off into
subcommittees, and so, uh, I
think everybody looks in their
books, uh, the child welfare
stain in this room um it goes
across the hall in the uh the
sunset Committee stays here.
So
OK.
So
it yeah and it right the first
time. Child water is staying
here and the sunset Committee is
going across the hall.
Yeah, let's just say
321.
child welfare.
Flower.
I mean where you send everybody.
You guys want to move out of the
room so we can, we still got
committee business to take care
of. Let me start off over there
and then I'll come back.
OK
And then
Here I go.
Your child welfare is staying in
here. How are you doing?
Child welfare staying in here in
place.
Yeah.
And
Good afternoon, um, I think
you're now chair of Dickson, but
that's right, all right. I
sometimes get mixed up. Um, my
name's Rachel, uh, Garcia. I'm
the LFC analyst for CYFD for the
legislative Finance Committee.
I'm going to give you a little
bit of a road map of how you'll
be spending the child welfare
subcommittee time this afternoon
and direct you to places in your
binder. Um, so the first item
that you'll hear is part of this
subcommittee is an update from
the Senate Memorial 5 Task
Force.
um, and Senator Lopez, uh, who
is the chair of that task force.
We'll share that update, and
then I will kind of round you
out um with some reminders
around staff recommendations
that we've made over time
related to child welfare.
the materials that you have for
this subcommittee are behind tab
E.
In your binders.
Um, and there are 3 documents.
Uh, so the first one is a
PowerPoint, and that Senator
Lopez will talk from. Her name
is on the front. This is the
Senate Memorial 5 update.
Um, and then I'll go to what is
a child welfare wrap-up
PowerPoint.
And then also for reference in
your binders, we have a brief um
that LFC staff shared with um
LHHS a couple of weeks ago that
provides a summary of what is
included within CYFD's FY 26
operating budget request. You
all as LFC won't hear that
budget until December, but this
is just sort of a reference, uh,
material for you, um, as we get
into budget season. So with
that, I, I will turn it over to
Sandra Lopez.
Oh, go ahead. Sorry, Rachel,
with the um budget when we, when
you're going over the
recommendations, would you mind
if, uh, just
Verbally giving us some of the
uh highlights. Thank you. Sure,
I can do that as well.
Um, but I will start with
Senator Lopez. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and it's great to see
each of you. And again, I'm
across the other side over with
the LHHS we're having our
hearings, um, as you have yours
here with the LFC.
Uh, I am here this afternoon to
present um an update as to where
we are with Senate Memorial 5.
And Memorial 5, of course, was
passed on this past legislative
session, and it charged LFC.
Uh, to.
Houses, um, staff and work with
um the team that you will see
here that are listed for the
task force membership.
And what are charge, um,
essentially is, has been and
we're still working, so we
haven't ended yet. Our agent is
to look at the agency mission
values, uh, compare that to the
national best practices.
Look at implementation of the
differential or alternative
responses, which of course deals
with investigations and removals
of children.
Availability, needs and gaps in
existing services.
Best practices in permanency and
well-being that include hard to
place children.
Also looking at workforce.
Looking at leveraging federal
funding.
Uh, reviewing juvenile justice,
including trauma-informed
programming and behavioral
health.
And of course, looking at equity
considerations.
And what uh we were charged
with, of course, and hoping is
that uh as of today, we were
hoping to have had a final
product, um, as we organized,
uh, we did take a vote, um, a
discussion amongst committee
members, and we decided that um
as we would come to the last.
few days, the last day of all of
the information that we were,
that was shared with us is to
have an actual vote on
recommendations.
Um, we are still in the process
of going through all the
information we are tweaking.
I call it wordsmithing on some
venues, but kind of coming to
agreement. So we still have
hopefully just maybe 1 or 2 more
days to go through, and by the
time that's done, of course,
we'll be ready for session, but
we will have um the reports
still sent out?
To LFC members, but um we'll
also have a presentation during
session.
So that way it's still given a
more public uh forum for folks
to hear what the work's been
done.
And as you can see, Madam Chair,
um, the task force essentially
the, the memorial asked the
different entities on the left
side on your um on the task
force membership to make their
appointments. So, uh, Secretary
Casados has been with us at
every meeting.
Um, my, my colleague, um,
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
of course, was appointed uh Miss
Tedro, they're from Farmington,
um, has been with us at every
meeting, uh, Marilyn Beck was
appointed of course, Honorable
Emilio Chavez from the Supreme
Court, uh Jesse Clifton, who's a
representative from the
Kevinness settlement.
Robert Chavez, a service
provider.
Um, he works in the CEO of White
Youth Development Incorporated,
uh, foster family representative
is uh Nicholas Nativida. He's
down in the Las Cruces area,
youth representative, we have um
Mia.
I think it's Kali, if I
pronounce her name, I always
sometimes botch juvenile justice
stakeholder was Nicosalis.
Who has extensive experience
working with the juvenile
justice system, a tribal member
with ICA lived experience is Ya
Eliot pending, and then at large
representative we had Doctor uh
Signer, um, who's been very also
uh tending with us.
Um, you will see on the next, we
have, um,
Part of what our, our initiative
drive was in the earlier days of
the task force was essentially
to receive a lot of information.
So EU staff with Rachel's help
and John's is to um give us a
sundry of information that we
had an opportunity to read and
this looking at different
states, a different experts who
came in to chat with us based on
the different areas that you'll
see here, uh, prevention and
early intervention, workforce,
access to services, resource
families and children's
behavioral health.
juvenile justice and compliance
and oversight.
And as I said, Madam Chair, what
we currently are, um, is working
on final task force
recommendations as we have
compiled red, compiled and again
are are looking at the finality
as to what we will present
before you.
So what I have here just to
share with you are the different
areas.
Of um
Our discussions and information.
So our first one, of course,
deals with child welfare
workforce.
And what we were, um, our
discussion centered around
developing issues can see
stabilizing CYFD's workforce,
which is core to the functioning
of our system.
And part of our discussion,
Madam Chair, of course, centered
around a retention, as we know
very well the high rate of
turnover and any type of
recruitment, um, efforts it
still goes back to what we do to
protect, safeguard, encourage
whatever verbiage you wish to
use, ma'am. I'm sure, to make
sure that we can keep our staff.
So what you see here listing, of
course, we've not taken a vote.
But these are some of the
considerations that will be um
voted on for recommendations.
And what they are asking the
legislature to consider.
Um, is continuing to monitor and
evaluate the impact of the $80
million appropriation to the
schools of social work, as of
course those investments are
very important and are supposed
to increase the number of social
work graduates in our state.
Um, we also
Well, um, ask for the, for the
legislature to encourage
establishing measures in House
Bill 2 that are related to the
percentage of case workers who
are licensed social workers.
Also to consider return to work
legislation for licensed social
workers, uh, hopefully to
incentivize return to work, um,
for, for licensed social workers
to return to work at CYFD.
And also to prioritize
addressing high protective
service caseworker caseloads
when considering budget, which
of course you will be um
reviewing that, of course,
bringing it to the rest of us uh
for this coming session.
And also looking to codify in
states in our statutes, CYFD
leader priority criteria, and
that's something mirrored as to
what we've done in the Office of
Family Representation, which we
just did a few years ago.
Our public education department.
Um, and all of the other
entities that are listed here
too.
The next area, Madam Chair,
members of the subcommittee is
looking at prevention and early
intervention.
And this is one of our areas, of
course, too, where we had a long
good discussion of person
reviewing all the information
presented to us.
Um
Where we were looking at
CYFDT implement prevention and
early intervention programs.
And of course, working uh with
LFC to identify outcome measures
that include a preventing
subsequent interaction with CYFD
to track progress and prioritize
implementing programs that will
be eligible for Title 4E.
Which of course is to be
required through our approved
state plan and of course,
Medicaid.
And what they are asking the
legislature, we as a task force
is to in the existing statute
requires CYFD to make reasonable
efforts to preserve families.
And consider updating the
section, the statute that's
listed.
Uh, to outline the types of
actions that CYFD can take.
Including the delivering
services, um, for those who are
eligible for Title IVE and
Medicaid and can help connect
families to services delivered
by other departments.
Which of course, Madam Chair
goes through the healthcare
authority, um, ECECD.
Um, and Madam Chair, there was
other discussion to read to see
what we can do about utilizing
what the public education
department and the role that
they have uh with regards to
service delivery.
And of course, Madam Chair, um,
looking to update the
differential response statute,
um, as it currently refers to a
pilot, um, that is to be to have
been completed in 2022.
Um, and establish a target for
statewide implementation, and of
course, Madam Chair, that, um,
got us into a lot of discussion
with regards to the differential
response as to where we are in
state and what we can do, um,
pilots are good, but how do we
go full force and
implementation.
The next section, Madam chairs
community-based prevention and
intervention, uh, the state
should prioritize retention of
foster families and treatment
foster care providers to improve
the availability of
community-based placements for
children in care, leveraging
appropriations made, of course,
through the grow.
Um, and what we are considering,
Madam Chair, members of the
subcommittee, we are again have
not taken a vote, but these will
be some of the considerations.
um looking for CYFD to dedicate
resources at a regional level
for foster family recruitment.
And a training.
Consider an exit survey for
foster families to identify
retention opportunities,
leverage to grow appropriations
to pilot an intensive support
model for foster families.
Focus efforts on placements for
young people who have had
multiple placements or lack home
placements.
And of course, um, looking for
the legislature to consider
providing CYFD with funding.
Or an external entity conduct to
conduct a rate study of foster
care.
And um
TFC uh rates, looking to see how
we can balance this out, Mr.
Madam President, Madam Chair,
sorry.
Uh, ensuring the statutory
functions of behavioral health
collaborative, um, making sure
those are performed, identifying
the gaps, coordinating the
behavioral healthcare system,
etc. And part of our discussion,
madam, uh, chair and members of
the subcommittee was actually
looking as to how maybe we can
make some changes within the
behavioral health collaborative.
We also had um Madam Chair, some
Recommendations to come forward
looking at our juvenile justice
system.
And again, for New Mexico to
continue to make data informed
decisions about juvenile justice
services, recommending the state
to seek better to to seek to
better understand current data
trends and outcomes to inform
any future decisions about
juvenile justice, and the state
should look to implement
evidence-based and
trauma-informed progress.
And of course we're looking uh
to recommend Madam Chair, or
CYFD to continue evaluating the
juvenile justice services budget
to identify opportunities for
efficiency and to move resources
to the front end of the system.
To use a validated risk
assessment tool.
And resume annual public facing
reporting where they come and
give an import um to not just
the legislative finance
Committee, but also to the other
associated committees within the
legislature.
And convene with the association
of District attorneys to
facilitate collaboration
regarding decisions on where we
talk about bringing charges with
that effect um our juveniles in
within the system.
And of course, uh consideration
through the legislature,
directing the LFC or another
entity to study juvenile justice
trends, programs and outcomes,
updating previous research.
Also to understand better the
current trends and inform any
future changes to the Children's
code.
Also to update statutory
language related to the
community corrections fund that
can allow for the provisions of
services to be before
pre-adjudication.
Um, and Madam Chair, again, I
can answer any questions if you
want to do a little bit more uh
dive into some of the
information.
But uh with the juvenile
justice, of course, um, we just
had a presentation by the
council of state governments who
gave a presentation just to
cross over. Um, I know that they
are working with members of your
team.
But uh there's, I think a lot of
information that we could
utilize as we talk about uh
juvenile justice trends and what
else we can do again to provide
services upstream.
And of course, um, another last
area, Madam Chair, is the system
oversight, accountability and
governance.
And kind of the overarching um
mission that we were looking at
is a variety, there are a
variety of federally mandated
and state created external
mechanisms that exist to provide
oversight of child welfare and
protection.
Agencies within our state,
existing mechanisms for
oversight and accountability
have gaps and could be enhanced
to drive system improvement,
provide continuity and improve
outcomes.
And what we are looking for to
present, of course, under this
particular um section.
is uh to recommend moving the
substitute care advisory
council. It is currently housed
in regulation licensing.
Uh, moving it to a particular uh
departments we haven't decided
on that yet, but hopefully after
our continued discussion, we may
have a specific recommendation
to come.
But um we believe also that the
SDAC can be strengthened with
its oversight, um.
role that it has.
The risk management
recommendation, um, specifically
to require all agencies to
conduct to conduct post hoc
reviews following significant
losses when we talk about um
risk management and of course
those are for the cases that go
to court and where the state has
to pay out, uh, mons um for the
loss of um
The child.
Additional, um, performance
measures that are related to the
child welfare system and also
looking at the creation of an
additional oversight or
accountability mechanism, um,
looking at a long with
streamlining mechanisms that
already exist, and Madam Chair,
there are several um
councils and other oversight
entities that we really, I think
have not placed.
Um, attention on, um, and I
believe those are areas that we
need to, to review the um
Task force, of course, still has
yet to look over and maybe hear
a short presentation from the
state ombudsman, which was a uh
a bill that had been introduced,
um, I'm looking at a couple of
other measures that may be
raised it, maybe something in
the past few years, but that's
still a discussion to be held,
and so I have nothing to share
with you other than that's still
on our list to be uh to be
discussed. So it's kind of short
and sweet, Madam Chair, um.
But I will stand if you have any
particular questions, but again,
I will say that information that
I know has been shared with you
in your subcommittee has also
been shared with the task force.
And there's also another entity.
That is dealing with the uh a
task force dealing with the
State Children's code.
So we are still working on that,
um, coming up with hopefully a
recommendation to come forward
to the legislature were all cut
in the crux of time, so that
still is to be shared with the
legislature coming down.
Sometime soon. And with that,
I'll stand for any questions,
Madam Chair, and again, thank
you for um Rachel and for John
for your your work that you've
been um sharing with us on the
task force.
Thank you. I like the
microphones are particularly um.
Yes,
yeah, um.
Rachel, is it OK if we take some
questions now, um, while we have
the senator. OK, wonderful. I
know, um, we've got a couples
and thank you so much for the
presentation, uh, very helpful,
um, and a nice overview.
Um, Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator for that uh
presentation. I didn't hear you
mention nothing about maybe an
ombudsman.
I heard oversight, but not
ombudsman, any reason for not
having an ombudsman.
Madam Chair, those are a couple
of and and that's to the last
page that talks about the
accountability. Those are
measures that we haven't
completely discussed.
Um, and as we move forward,
Madam Chair, I'm sure that those
will be listed, um, we just
don't have the ability to do so
because the task force hasn't
voted on it, an official vote.
So I don't want to anticipate
something that we don't have an
official vote on yet, but it is,
we, we have mentioned that as
one of them. OK, thank you and
thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair,
On slide 6.
And it says the task force is
considering recommending CYFD
implement prevention and it goes
on with all these programs.
I
I think the last 2 years what I
understand is CYFD has such a
hard time rolling out.
These programs
And that's, it seems like that's
the biggest problem, and are we
gonna saddle them up with more
programs.
To, um, roll.
That
Frankly, I don't think they can
unroll, Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative, um.
For the discussions that we've
had, we're not looking at new
programs.
It's, I know there's a new, um,
Division that they have looked
at, you know, I think offering
services upstream.
How we can add value for that.
Um, looking as to how we work
with community organizations. I
mean, in other words, looking to
work with existing programs.
Um, but nothing new. The
department can't handle anything
new at this time. OK, thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, agreed,
and I don't think they can, and,
and I'm a, I'm trying to be a
fan of CYFD and I told him I'd
go down and hang out with them
and, and walk around in their
shoes and check it out, but it
says implement prevention and
early intervention programs, so
that's already there.
Um,
Madam chair, there, you know,
the division that they have been
talking about recently, you
know, as to where they're
putting monies.
I think it it's all
interrelated, Madam Chair,
because you go back and look at
the workforce.
When you can say you're gonna do
something, but it goes back as
to the persons who are actually
providing the services. So as
we've had our conversations,
Madam Chair, it's not just this
one thing where you're looking
with with blinders.
It continues to go back to the
discussion about how we hire and
retain.
Employees, the workers,
frontline workers and persons
who are going to be implementing
these programs.
Um, they've talked, we've had
information talking about
Um, yes, case workers, but then
who are um all of the other
different layers that they have
of persons who can um navigators
and such throughout the system,
sorry I talk with my hands. Um,
and it's, it still goes back to
what we do to recruit and retain
our employees.
You can't do this without a
staff.
So I think that that's been when
we've spent some time, uh, Madam
Chair.
And figuring out what we can do
to support and offer some
suggestions for the legislature.
And in fact, Madam Chair, this
is just a snippet of time. We're
hoping that we can continue this
task force with these different
persons involved because there's
still so much more for us to
delve into.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I, I appreciate
your comment on letting people
return to work, I think some of
those people that have retired
out, they still have a whole lot
of.
Experience and tread on their
tires to where they could, you
know, help out a lot. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation,
Senator. Um, this is
You know, it's just the ongoing
conversation that we've been
having, um, with CYFD with child
welfare. What is the, the big,
um,
presentations we've had ongoing
presentations and courts and
corrections this interim is on
on on the youth and um
DA Bregman gave us a
presentation, uh, last week.
And I don't know if you were
there or if you've, you've um
accounted for any of those
recommendations that he's, he's,
um,
He's, he has.
And
And with that, um, one of the
questions I had for him was, you
know, the part of CYFD and and
how.
They are integrated into some of
the the requests and
recommendations he has in the
youth programs. Um,
So through this task force, have
they, have you addressed, I know
you had the uh the additional
like um things that the task
force has not talked about or
there's a list of them,
including the ombudsman, um, uh,
discussion. Have you talked
about any of those
recommendations from the DA I'm
sure.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, the
juvenile justice discussion
happened before the.
Stack of information that um the
DA Brigman had presented.
But I think from his initial
presentation to courts
Corrections and Justice, I think
that gave us an idea.
Uh, as to where this thought is
going.
Um, but the discussion that
we've had there, um, and as well
as in the children's children's
code task force is, um, we need
to provide services for
families, um, looking as to what
we do upstream.
Um, we cannot.
And it was part of their
recommendations, as you can see
here too.
Uh for the juvenile justice, I'm
sorry. It's at the end, I think,
yeah.
Um, you know, looking to, to
look and study the trends that
are in existence, and in fact
your committee, your staff is
actually compiled some
information that we utilized.
That shows where we've been
going trending down, and if you
look at the numbers compared
last year to this year on the
possession of a gun, gun offense
if you wish to call it. It's,
it's dropped a lot.
And it's, I mean, there's
there's all this data, Madam
Chair, that you can look around
and see that trends.
And, um, essentially, um, we
need to provide services
upstream, and once you get a a
juvenile, a child into the
juvenile justice system. I mean,
they're all children for me.
Um, there's this brain
development and we can go ahead
to all this discussion. I know
you've done this too, executive
functioning in the front end of
the brain it's nonexistent, it's
growing. Um, there's a lot of
things that we need to be doing
for diversion programs and
investing in our children and
their families.
So it's been a discussion that
we had here, the Children's code
task force is having a similar
discussion.
And I think even for what we
just heard the presentation from
the CSG
um organization that's doing
their, their own um
trip this week in New Mexico. I
think it's there's some
complimentary information in
there.
Where we don't need to, I think
we need to study it as the
recommendation is here to see
exactly what's going on.
And where we need to invest our,
our monies and services. So
sure, is that gonna be one of
the things we're gonna look at
during this session is that uh
that um.
I guess the study that's going
to be done on the juvenile
system.
Well, I'm hoping to still be a
memorial brought forward um for
us to look at, um, including
this committee and others to see
how we go forward, um, we need
to, we need to really have some
clarity in the information. OK.
Um, this question, I mean this,
it's been a very big, uh, piece
of, of conversation and, you
know, from the looks of it,
we're gonna, there, there'll be
some legislation, um.
those recommendations and so
just wondering how we're putting
this all together. I appreciate
all your work. When does that
task force meet, Madam Chair.
Which one, Madam Madam that's
this one, yes, ma'am for the
Senate Memorial 5, we're still
trying to determine when we can
get everybody back together. It
should be hopefully maybe
sometime before the middle of
December.
So, as you know with profession
it's we're doing a doodle pole,
so we'll figure out soon, yes,
but we'll let you know too. I
know you.
Um, Rachel, she'll let you know.
That'd be great. I mean, I've
been trying to catch some of the
meetings and I know that they've
been moved around a little bit
and, and we all have to, to get
everybody there, but this is
important work, um.
Uh, what else do I have here to
ask? Um,
Yeah, the, the ombudsman, um,
discussion, I'd be very
interested in in knowing where
we're going with that if we're
looking at legislation.
For this session. I know there
are other groups that I'm
speaking with, Madam Chair, that
are looking at that and, and
seeing what we can, you know,
um,
What's going to happen and
taking note of what the task
force and what others are doing
to, to make sure that if we do
move forward with some
legislation that there's input
from all over. Are you hearing
or in discussion about that,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I know there's the
other entity, um, bill that was
introduced and creating a
commission.
That removes CYFD from the
executive and creates its own
commission, something similar to
what we've done with Office of
Family Representation.
Um, the appointments and such,
and, you know, it removes it,
um, again, still another
discussion to be had and
I'm sure we may have a
discussion um as we get into the
more finality of this Senate
Memorial 5 task force. That's
great. Thank you for the work.
Thank you for answering my
questions. Thank you, uh,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um,
In, in the meantime,
We still have children sleeping
in offices.
We're sending drug addicted born
children home with their
Parents
That may not be.
Uh, the smartest thing to do
and.
I
I appreciate the task force.
Uh, we also have a, uh,
behavioral health collaboration
that uh
Collaborative that's failing.
And so, uh, this is a huge, huge
task.
And so how are
Are you all considering changing
the function of car. Madam
Chair, there's discussion.
Um, and I know in other
committees too about um
statutory changes for Kara, yes.
We've had the discussion in
committee also, um, but again,
it's purview for us as
legislators to come forward with
some changes, but yes, there's
there's been discussion and I
believe support for some
changes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator. Um, that's
music to my ears. I hope they're
the changes that
I would push for and many others
in this legislature.
Um, one of the statements that
the prevention of on page 6. It
says New Mexico has gaps in its
array of prevention and early
intervention services,
particularly evidence-based
programs may prevent and divert
the need for foster care. And
then down lower, it's talking
about growing the foster care.
And so which is it? Are we going
to be more supportive or is
this, is this group thinking
about being more supportive of
foster parents, or are we
thinking of we don't need as
many foster parents, even though
we have children sleeping in
offices right now.
Madam Chair, when we're talking
where you're looking at page 6,
where we talked about um
prevention to divert from foster
care. That goes back to some of
the information um that I think
we've all heard in different
committees too.
Um, there's the uh universal
basic income, money.
Which compliments, um, you know,
maybe some basic payments of
support for families if they
Uh, when I, um,
A call goes out for a child or
referral, the person in case
worker goes out to investigate,
and it may be because of issues
of lack of food or whatever it
may be, um, what can the state
do and provide for services,
anything to help that family so
the child, children are not
removed.
It's a similar discussion we've
had on the children's code task
force about what we do to
provide for prevention entities.
It also complements another
discussion about grandparents
raising grandchildren. What,
what do we provide them for
supports, um, you know, it
prevents, it's, it's a mechanism
to prevent children from having
to get into the system.
So that changes the way we
looked at at a definition maybe
of neglect.
But there's some overriding
factors, maybe not specifically
with this task force.
Because everybody's operating on
a different
Not a silo, but just we have
different discussions that are
ongoing. What I say, Madam Cha
is to bring the work this
subcommittee is doing this task
force, the Children's code Task
Force, and I know there's
another one that's happening,
um, I had a presentation in
front of Health and Human
Services last month that still
has some more work to do next
interim. So there's there's a
lot of us, it's about
coordinating.
So that's that piece. And then
we talked about for foster
families, we want to support and
grow, but what can we do to um
add value to support our foster
families. We're not trying to
cut them, say we don't need
them, but it's, it's to support
those that we currently have,
and if we're going to go out to
recruit, right?
Um, it's, it's the supports that
we offer.
So it's
Kind of two different.
Conversations that we were.
Thank you, um, as I said before,
I, I appreciate that because
there, there is a lot of moving
parts, and I understand that,
but some of the funding issues
um with the juvenile justice.
Or local communities is another
issue that that is um it gets
dropped in the, especially rural
New Mexico, uh, you know, we, we
lost our funding in Socorro
County, and that was through
CYFD. This was many years ago.
Um, but I keep getting
Messages and emails.
Of all the issues that are
wrong. Everything that's wrong
with the system. Very seldom do
I find something that's, do I
get them I actually I've never
received a message.
Or there's something that's
right.
Um, and of course, they're
complaining to their legislator,
uh, but I have a family right
now with 3 foster um
But let's see.
Have had them for 3 years.
Um, biological parents have 8
pending felony charges.
CYFD still wants to return them.
I don't know what the felony
charges are. I have no idea.
Uh, I had a daycare.
Back in the day.
Um, Madam Chair, and to I would
report because it was my
responsibility to report, not
one single child got removed.
Uh, I was involved as many of
you probably have heard on the
news.
Uh, with my own family.
CYFD issues and ordered to
return the child.
And I didn't
Because I cared more about the
child.
Then I did my family, and
I appreciate you wanting to try
to fix this.
But as long as CYFD's purpose is
to reunite families.
And not pay attention to the
federal guidelines of Kara.
And
Not
Um, the Behavioral Health
collaborative, broken for 20
years.
20 years.
I don't know where to even
start.
This is a great start.
But until we change.
Holding parents accountable.
Holding kids.
Accountable.
Or their actions.
I don't know that we'll get
anywhere.
But as uh as I said, Madam
Chair, I appreciate you.
Grabbing the bull by the horns
and trying, and this task force.
And the people that are on it,
uh, uh, as far as I'm concerned,
are phenomenal.
But I don't know.
That this
Is the fix.
And I'm anxious to hear the rest
of the story and the rest of the
information.
And I will be waiting on pins
and needles to hear that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
thanks for being here today.
You know, on age 7, yeah, on the
first paragraph says see what
was dedicated resources to
regional level to foster family
recruitment and training, you
know, who oversees.
Because this is already in place
right now. Who oversees the
people that are in charge of
what's happening right now. And
the reason I'm bringing this up,
Madam Chair and senator, is
because I have a family right
now.
That has 2 kids.
They were the brothers, little
kids, both of them, they're
biological to, they're related.
He's got both of them. He's had
it for 3 years trying to get him
uh adopted.
And it's been a struggle, you
know, I've worked with you I
need to try to help these people
get along. Anyway, make a long
story short,
The two people that are the
foster parents got into a little
trouble.
And into a fight, so they charge
them a battery.
So the baby is does the
placement, took the kids away
from him.
And the kids were not involved,
they weren't even next to the
fight near the fight, there were
no nowhere to be around it, and
they're taking these kids away
from him.
You know, in the, in the
biological parents gave
They gave him up to the brother
took both of them in, and it's
been a struggle and who oversees
these people from this
happening, it's happening right
now.
You know, these two kids or with
somebody else right now.
And that is not a good deal.
And I, and I, I spoke to some
people, Madam Chair, and they
said, you know, if, if there was
an altercation and the kids were
there and they were put in
danger, that's one thing, but
they were not there.
They, they, these people have
not even been charged yet, but
the policeman agency took away.
So how do we stop that from
happening because that this is a
mess. CYFD is a mess right now.
And I'm glad you're trying to
fix it, but who oversees what's
happening right now on, on your
uh
your committee.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
um, what you're sharing, of
course, um, that's within the
department.
And what I call, I call it the
chain of command, right, as to
where they go and who's, who has
oversight on, on the different
divisions, different um bureaus
and such.
Um, that's a management issue.
And we've had discussions on
that, not just in this
committee, but on the other task
force too.
But it's, it's still goes back
to um
And to be honest, Secretary
Casados has been with us, and I
think she's given us a clear
picture as to where she knows
the department needs to go.
But when you're trying to change
the system, it's like trying to
move the Titanic.
It takes time and time our
children don't have time.
And we understand that.
But it's still an investment in
support and making sure that our
our employees.
Understand their job and their
role.
And that's an internal issue on
on management. What we're trying
to do here with the task force
is, is looking us to some
programmatic.
Um
Suggestions, maybe with some of
the other oversights that may
come out as a recommendation,
but ultimately, Madam Chair, is
still the same employees, the
same people that you have there.
And how we invest and work with
those persons.
Present that that worked for the
department. That's, that's the
task that we have yet to look
at, and how do we
Streamline, work with, um,
To change
Within the department, what
happens?
You can change any title you
want, you can move a different
department. I don't care what
you want, Mr. Madam Chair, but
it's an HR factor.
His human resources, and when
you deal with human beings,
It's a whole another whole
another game, another entity and
how do we value our employees
for those who are doing the
right thing and how do we
train and it's a discussion that
we've had, um, many a time over
in this, in this meeting and
we're still gonna have more as
we talk about um voting on some
of these suggestions in front of
you.
Um, I don't have an answer for
you right now, the secretary was
here, maybe she could, but it
still goes back to what we do
about training our staff.
Making sure there's
accountability within the
department.
And whoever's overseeing that
function and that role for that
particular issue that you have,
um, that it goes back and at the
chain of command.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator. I understand that quite
well, but, you know, reading
what you're trying to do here,
you know, focus on retainment,
you know, uh, lack of home
placements and, and so forth.
And this is another issue just
popped out. Now these kids need
a home placement.
And they don't have anywhere to
go. And, and when I'm trying to
get at, Madam Chair or Senator
maybe when you guys talk to
other people about what's
happening in the system.
They need to address these
issues.
They really do, cause, you know,
these kids are getting bounced
around like a basketball now.
And you know he's had them since
they were born, brand new you
got him out of the hospital and
took him in. And you know, now
there's kind of, they're in the
process of losing them over a
fight.
that the kids weren't even
involved in, they weren't even
around it, you know, I just had
to bring it up to make people
aware of what's actually
happening out there. And I know
you're trying to do well and I,
and I praise you for that
because there is a lot of issues
that we need to address.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
thank you, Senator Lopez for,
for joining us and um sharing an
overview of the task force, uh,
it's been helpful for LFC to
give us updates along the way,
but
Really nice to see, um, sort of
the
You know
List of possible recommendations
that that may come forth, so
very much appreciate it. So
thank you.
I appreciate you and stay tuned.
Thank you.
OK, Rachel, uh, you're gonna
take us through um some of the
LFC past recommendations, which
interestingly, I think there's
move. That's right, and thank
you, Senator Lopez, oh, don't
forget.
Um, that's right. So, um, again,
my name is Rachel Garcia. I'm
the LFC analyst for CYFD as
previously kind of wearing the
hat of supporting the convening
of the task force, probably not
gonna put back on my LFChat and
kind of focus on where LFC staff
have made recommendations over
time related to child welfare
that maybe have not yet been
picked up. Um,
Give me just a second to see if
I can switch over to what you're
looking at. OK.
Yes, it's the next in E and this
one is titled Child Welfare
Subcommittee wrap up.
Uh, let's see, I realized this,
this one has the little LFC logo
on the front, but otherwise
looks pretty similar to the
last.
Right, so what I'm going to do
is kind of give you a high level
of where LFC has made
recommendations over time. And
what I'm gonna focus in on our
specific statutory changes, um,
this will be kind of a summary
of places where program
evaluations or other LFC reports
have made recommendations,
particularly to the legislature.
Um, over the last decade, LFC
program evaluations or research
and analysis have recommended
kind of 4 core levers for
improving the child welfare
system. You will see there is
some overlap with some of the
things that the, the task force
discussed. Uh, the first is the
implementation of evidence-based
prevention and early
intervention programs to support
families in divert formal system
involvement, and here when LFC
staff have talked about this,
we've been pretty specific on.
kind of evidence-based programs
because there is a body of
research on specific programs
shown through research and
evidence that actually divert
and prevent maltreatment and
repeated maltreatment.
Um, the second lever that LFC
recommendations have focused on
over time our recruiting,
retaining, supporting and
developing a professional
workforce, particularly focused
on increasing the number of
social workers within the child
welfare system.
Um, the third is expanding
access to behavioral health
services and community-based
services for children and
families, and that is in
particular community based
placement so foster care based
placements as opposed to kind of
institutional placements, uh,
and then the fourth Lover LFC
has recommended over time is
strengthening oversight and
accountability mechanisms.
Much of the recommendation that
LFC has made over time in the
arena of workforce and
behavioral health, um, or
community based placement
services come down to
implementation. They often are
not things related to statutory
changes, but instead are things
like make an appropriation here
and follow and and update
implementation and we've seen
gaps in some of these areas, but
for that reason, for the wrap up
of the child welfare system. I'm
gonna focus on items 1 and 4
because
that tends to be where um LFC
has over time made statutory
recommendations that haven't
been picked up, so I share that
with you to say not that items 2
and 3 are not really important.
They are very important, but
they tend not to be the places
where LFC um has made a
statutory recommendations in the
last few years.
Um, OK, so what I'll walk
through are just sort of like
here are where, um, program
evaluations or LFC reports have
made recommendations that
haven't yet translated into
statutory changes. Um, you'll
see some overlaps with some of
the task force and I'll go into
a little bit more detail about
what this could look like.
Um, the first one is using
appropriation language and
performance measures to target
the implementation and
evaluation of evidence-based
prevention and early
intervention programs. You all
in particular did this last year
with the grow appropriations. So
last year put $3 million for the
next 3 years targeted to
evidence-based programs that
would be eligible for federal
Title IVE or Medicaid
reimbursement. So, um,
In 2018, the family first
prevention Services Act, the
Federal Act allowed states to
draw down federal funding for
prevention programs, but they
had to be specific programs
identified in a federal database
that had rigorous research about
their efficacy.
Um, so that is essentially what
this one is is talking about
looking really specifically at
the implementation of those
types of programs, uh, and to
your question representative
Vincentpresentative Armstrong,
that would be where uh from LFC
staff perspective, that is where
we've seen gaps that there
hasn't been a focus on those
specific programs that have an
evidence basis and that are
eligible for federal Title 40.
Um, so continuing to do that and
in the budgeting process looking
for what is the status of those
particular programs, the
implementation and that growth
funding in particular. So that's
item number one.
Item number 2 is um
recommendations around Kira
statute, uh, statutory changes.
This is kind of a short bullet
point, so I'm gonna elaborate a
little bit on what the program
evaluation found about a year
ago and with those specific
statutory changes were, um, one
of the specific recommendations
was to make the healthcare
authority, the lead agency on
Kara, the second piece was to
require the development of plans
of care prenatally, currently.
statute requires the development
of the plan of care at the point
of birth and the LFC
recommendation from the
evaluation about a year ago, um,
was to change that and and make
it prenatal, but to make HCA the
lead agency. Coupled with that,
uh, in addition to a variety of
other recommendations, the LFC
uh evaluation noted making a
change through rule, but this
could also be accomplished
through statute that clarifies
an instances where a plan of
care is established, um.
Particularly for a baby who was
born, uh, substance exposed to
illicit substances and um the
family refuses um substance use
treatment that would then
initiate um an assessment by
CYFD, so it is sort of a a
coupling of a couple of
different pieces that would
strengthen the statute, um, and
we can bring back up the detail
of that, uh, program evaluation
if that would be helpful. But
that is one of the places where
last year during the budgeting
process.
You all moved in appropriation
for Kara implementation to HCA,
um, that initiated some of the
HCA's work around they they
hired um a contracting firm to
go out and find families who had
plans of care who hadn't that
they had been in contact with,
so the budgetary piece happened
last year, but the statutory
policy piece didn't necessarily
so I recognize in college some
of what is uh what um Senator
Lopez referenced in regards to
the task force, there has been
some conversation about Kara,
um, this recommendation may not
be what the task force
ultimately recommends I am
wearing my kind of LFC staff hat
right now and pointing back to
the program evaluation
recommendations from last year.
So that's item number 2.
Um, the third is prioritizing
the implementation of
differential response, which is
also known as multi-level
response, which was required by
statute back in 2019, um, at
that time, the statute directed
the agency to initiate a pilot
to be completed by 2022. Um, to
date that really had uh COFD is
working on implementing a pilot,
but it has not been implemented
at scale and certainly not in
alignment with statute. You
did make a grow appropriation
again last year, um, to support
that implementation, um, and
pilot, but there, um, is likely
an opportunity at the very least
to update statute because it
references a pilot that should
have been completed several
years ago and instead be more
prescriptive about kind of
targeting systemwide
implementation. Um, so, so that
is that, uh, recommendation
there.
Um, and then the last one is
kind of connected to something
that you all heard Senator Lopez
referenced, but I'll, I'll get a
little bit more explicit. Over
time you've heard LFC staff, uh,
several times mentioned the
state's family first prevention
Services Act plan, um, that has
been submitted but not yet
approved and that that is a key
lever for implementing
evidence-based programs that
have been known to um reduce,
um, and prevent child
maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment.
Several other states have
actually codified the
requirements in their state
statute related to this. Texas
is actually a really good
example of this. They in their
own state statute and said
essentially the child welfare
agency will administer programs
that are specifically um
identified through the Family
First Prevention Services Act
and Texas essentially mirrored
the federal law in their own
state statute. So that might be
something to consider in terms
of codifying.
What are the specific types of
prevention or early intervention
programs that, um, the agency
should implement, and there are,
there are some pretty good
examples in other states of
legislation that's done that. I
mentioned Texas, Colorado has
done that. North Carolina has
done something similar, but in
administrative rule, so there
are examples in other states,
um, that would be a little bit
more uh prescriptive, directive
and specific about the types of
services, um, my child welfare
agency must implement. Um, so
that's kind of the summary of
past.
LFC recommendations in regards
to prevention and early
intervention that have a
statutory piece that have not
been implemented. Um, I can
pause there for questions or I
can go on to the next section.
I think it would actually be
helpful for you to go on to the
next section, um, and then,
yeah.
Great. I will keep going. Um,
uh, so then, Madam Chair, the
second category of
recommendations for LFC has
recommended statutory changes
over the last few years that
haven't been implemented or in
the arena of oversight and
accountability. These are kind
of the three specific
recommendations LFC reports have
pointed to in regards to
strengthening oversight and
accountability. Um, the first
one is moving, uh, Senator Lopez
also alluded to this.
The substitute care advisory
council, um, which is a federal
requirement to oversee the
foster care system um through
citizen review boards that
review, um, foster care cases.
That is required by federal law.
Um, currently that function in
New Mexico state government
exists in the regulation and
licensing department and LFC uh
reports have highlighted some
gaps in in that function's
ability to provide system
oversight.
Um, and so LFC has recommended
for several years moving that
function to the administrative
office of the courts, um, and
strengthening through statue,
the requirements of that
function, that could include
things like requiring a
representative sample every year
of foster care cases reviewed.
Um, there was one point in in
history in New Mexico's history
where that function was
reviewing all cases, um, in
recent years, um, that function
has not had very much capacity
and last year, for example,
reviewed a total of 54 cases
which impacted 101 children. So
you could through statute, um,
strengthen that function and
also strengthen requirements,
uh, in regards to um the
feedback or response that CYFD
must.
died in response to case
reviews, so things are currently
in federal law, they have 6
months to respond, but you could
make that more robust. So both
are a written response in a more
timely way, as well as, for
example, a specific action plan
in response to some of the
findings of case reviews. So
that's one recommendation LFC
has made to strengthen
oversight.
And the second one is related to
risk management. Senator Lopez
referenced it because the task
force also mentioned it. It's
not specific to CYFD. It was a
recommendation made from um
LFC's risk management program
evaluation done in a year, a
year and a half ago that um is a
best practice in other states
and essentially it requires all
agencies um to appoint a loss
prevention review and do a post
hoc review in the event of a
significant loss.
That could include um death uh
or substantial loss. So that is
a a statutory recommendation LFC
has made. And then the third is
related to consolidating
functions of oversight that
exists in a few different places
in state government.
What I'll now do is, um, while
you heard him, the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force hasn't yet
aligned on specific
recommendations related to
oversight and accountability.
Um, I will walk you through a
little bit more information
about different options or
models, um, now kind of wearing
my LLC staff hat that you all
might consider. So, um, this is
just some additional information
or options you consider, you
could consider related to
oversight and accountability
strengthening.
Um,
OK, so the first one, I already
discussed a little bit, but that
is federal requirement of
citizen review boards fulfilled
currently through New Mexico's
um substitute care advisory
council, and that could be moved
and strengthened, and we provide
a few examples of other states
and kind of how they do that,
that you all could look to if
looking to craft legislation in
that area.
Um
The second option or
consideration could be kind of
an ombudsman office of Child
Advocate function. This is an
increasingly common function
developed in other states.
There's somewhere between 30 and
40 states that have adopted this
function. They tend to be
focused on reviewing individual
complaints within the system,
um, and providing resolution for
individual complaints.
Um, so one consideration when
thinking about an ombudsman
office.
is they may not inherently
translate to systemic
improvements. There are some
states that require um kind of
annual reporting to the public
and response um from agencies,
um, but likely the ability of
this function to really improve
the system, probably really
depends on the leadership and
the relationship, um, within
that entity. So take from this,
you know, it's an increasingly
common function, it just tends
to be most focused on.
involving individual complaints,
it may not inherently result in
system level improvement or
oversight.
But could
Um, the third option you all
might consider our child welfare
commissions and councils. This
is also an increasingly common
function, um, according to NCSL
since 2012, about eight states
have created um state uh child
welfare commissions. Um, these
tend to take a few different
forms. Some are long term
bodies, um, that kind of address
a broad variety of issues. Some
are temporary or time bound and
sunset, um.
In general, they tend to provide
an oversight function and an
advisory function, though in
some cases they do provide
direct governance. Oklahoma is
an example of this. Um, they had
a temporary um commission that
provided direct governance and
oversight that followed a
litigation and then that sunset
and went away.
You all could also consider sort
of different um I would say kind
of hybrid models that that
involve the creation of a new
entity that provides oversight,
but maybe not direct governance.
So for example, you could do
something like a commission that
provides a nominating or vetting
function for the leadership of a
child welfare agency doesn't
necessarily pull it out of the
governor's cabinet, but would
provide sort of an additional
vetting function, um, could
provide some stability over
time.
Could provide things like an
oversight or advisory function.
One example of how you could do
this, for example, would be to
create some in statute something
like a subcommittee attached to
something like LHHS or another
body that provides consistent
look and oversight and advisory
functions related to child
welfare and that type of model
is, is pretty common or not
pretty common, but there are
several states that have models
that kind of look like that, um,
Texas.
For example, um, Nevada and
Oregon all have some of those
advisory kind of commission
functions that provide
oversight, though not
necessarily direct governance.
And so that is sort of a summary
of different options you all
could consider when it comes to
oversight and accountability and
different models to consider
that are a little bit deeper
than um some of uh the
Preliminary recommendations
coming out of the FM 5. so that
is all stand, I guess for
questions.
Thank you, Rachel. Well, and I
was gonna ask, um, you know,
members, uh, can read through
the briefing that um you
provided the Health and Human
Services interim committee, but
is there anything in here that
would affect.
The recommendations.
That we just covered.
Um, are you asking me, uh, Madam
Chair, about, um, uh,
LFC staff review of CYFD's
budget requests for FY 26.
Yeah, it, yeah, it did um CYFD
make any budget requests that
would.
Change our consideration.
For any of the recommendations.
Um, so, Madam Chair, um, as you
read through the brief, uh, LFC
staff prepared regarding CYFD's
budget requests for FY 26, I
would say there are probably 3
categories of requests. Um, the
first category of requests is to
reorganize the department and
specifically pull prevention and
early intervention out of where
it currently is protective
services into its own budget
code, its own P coder program.
The second category of request
um is about significant
increases to protective services
to address high caseloads. Um,
and so that is kind of a
workforce recommendation or
function, and then the third
kind of big piece of CYFD's FY
26 operating budget request is
to backfill lost federal funding
about $13 million in federal
Title 4E funding on primarily on
the foster care adoption and
guardianship side.
CFD is not yet ever drawn down,
um, prevention dollars. This is
the backfilling of um a a
federal revenue for the foster
care program. Um, to your
question around, are there any
considerations? I think probably
the biggest overlap is in the
kind of the programmatic
functions related to prevention
and intervention where they are
delivered, what specifically is
delivered and how, um, as well
as workforce.
Thank you. Um, OK, uh,
Representative Baca.
Uh, you had some questions and
then Representative Armstrong.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for your um
presentation.
Um
Part of the recommendations for
the LLC is talking about
commercials and councils, um.
Being an educator, um,
I think that we know that most.
Referrals come through our
public education, our schools,
right?
And, and I think that one of the
Missing pieces or was causing.
A gap
And services for kids.
Is the communication back and
forth.
Between schools.
And between our child protective
services, but Madam Char, I'll
give you an example. Um, when we
are dealing with
Guardianship or treatment
fostered.
Many times these things are
fluid, they happen quickly.
Yet they're not communicated
with the school.
And I think that's when we're
talking about.
Those types of activities, you
know, I, I love this and I'll
say that things have improved in
my own county, so if you're
listening, I, I did throw a fit
and earlier this year, but
they're making an effort, but.
By their guidelines, there's
information that they cannot
share.
Regarding investigations
regarding service plans for
their kids.
And my question, Madam Chair,
in, in part of this is
Well, is it possible then to get
liaisons from CYFD just have one
point of contact in the
district, you know what?
That could access their system.
You know, I
I think that that's an important
piece of it. I don't know what
the requirements are to be a CYD
worker. I've seen these folks
that come in there, they have
bachelor's degree. I have a
couple of master's degree, but
I'm not in 32 years, I'm not
able to handle the informer, so
I, I think that when we're
looking at making
recommendations.
Maybe if there's a way to
increase the way district.
is able to access it, even if
it's one person designated. If
we have our mental health
provider.
If we have a local social
worker.
Why could they not be the
designated point of contact,
that could act that could um
access their database with all
this procedures, with all the
safeguards.
So that we can make good
informed decisions. I don't need
that as an administrator.
But I think that our hands are
kind of tied and it's
frustrating is that.
You know, we ask and they say,
well, we can't impede our
investigation. We can't share
that with you, and it, it causes
The kid ultimately it's the kid
who suffers. So, when we're
looking at commissions.
I think it's good and we're
looking at oversight, OK? You
know, this, this legislator is
good at creating commissions and
oversight.
But when we're looking at boots
on the ground, and we're looking
at working with those that are
closest to the kids.
I think that's where we need to
be directing some of our
resources, some of our funding
and also.
Allow for better collaboration.
And better communication and,
you know, be able to
Take down some of those barriers
that share, that we can share
information.
Back and forth, so I, I don't
know, and I, I mean, it felt
strokes to listen and, and tell
me, you know, what is it that
would need to be done.
That even if it's one person for
our school district or 2 people
for a school district of 8600
kids that could access that
database.
And with all the information
that would help just to say,
hey,
You know, this is why, this is
what we need to do, because many
times we have a kid sitting in
the office, we're not sure who
he's going home with. We're not
sure what's going on, or we get
a kid from treatment foster
care, that they have a, a safety
plan where they have needs.
Um, that were unaware of, and
then we have further incidents
or we have, you know, a
situation that kid is there, so.
I, I think that would be on top
of the recommendations here. I'm
not saying it's either or.
But I do think that we need to
kind of sit down there and say,
OK, what, what would be
required?
Of somebody, can we put a
liaison in every school district
for an APS we put several.
Can we currently with one of our
Current social workers or mental
health providers, can we provide
them and get them the level of
licenses and, you know,
confidentiality that they can
share with us in our own
language because many times we
speak two different languages,
right? We speak the language of
CYFD. We speak the language of
the schools, and there's that
opportunity for
miscommunication.
So as part of this is part of
the overhaul.
Of both our schools and our
child protective services.
I think it's about building
relationships and it's about
increasing communication and
also about
As far as the resources that
have been done, how do we, how
do we get the most of the
resources that have been
allocated to those two.
I mean, cause again, CYFD and
public education, I don't know
what percentage of the budget
those make up when you combine
them together looking at
Charles, but
It's got to be, those are
probably some of our largest.
Pots of money out there public
schools are
4.5 billion CYFD is is got to be
up there as well. So because
there's such a huge investment
from this legislator in the
state, we need to figure out is
how we can work better and more
efficiently.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Rachel, did you need to add
anything to that? No, OK.
Right. Uh, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, have any of these
recommendations, Rachel being
shared with the task force.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
yes, we have brought a variety
of different options and and
recommendations and
considerations for the task
force, as the person kind of um
shepherding them, I would say
they're still in kind of
discussion and um finalizing
what they're ultimately gonna
recommend. OK, thank you for
that. I, I just wanted to make
sure that they knew possibly
what, you know, we were thinking
about doing. So in 2021, Senate
Bill 242
passed unanimously.
The House and the Senate and the
governor vetoed it.
Um, and it was a mandate, uh,
for CYFD to respond to the SCAC
reports.
So what do we, why do we think
it might be different now if we
run it again.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I think that is a good point,
um, you know, given the
different functions of
government, um, and at the same
time they're likely still
potential policy considerations
you may all independently
consider and continue um to
consider legislation for. OK,
thank you for that. Uh, and that
was, that's a shout out to
Senator Gay Kernan, who did
that. So, um, anyway, uh, uh, so
is CYFD right now leaving
federal
dollars on the table.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong, we have spent time
over the interim trying to
understand, um,
What is happening with federal
Title IVE funds. Um, they're
probably two categories to
consider. Can you just wait, can
you tell what, tell us what time
I apologize. Yes, absolutely,
and, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Federal Title 4E
is a section of the Social
Security Act that provides
federal funding primarily for
the administration of foster
care in states, and so there are
two buckets I'm going to talk
about. The first one is the
family's first prevention
services Act. That was the new
edition in 2018, 2 title 4E that
would allow states to draw down
federal funding, um, for, uh,
families or children families at
imminent risk of involvement in
the foster care system, and it
would allow states to draw down
funding if implementing
evidence-based programs to
prevent that.
New Mexico states had to submit
a plan and get federal approval
to be able to draw down because
New Mexico has never had an
approved plan. We're not drawing
down those funds and so that
category of funding, yes, we are
leaving on the table because
we're, we've never drawn it
down. The second category of
funding federal Title 4 provides
for the administration of foster
care, adoption and guardianship
assistance. Um, in April,
of this year, the department
shared with LSC staff that they
were projecting that they were
projecting that federal revenues
would come in significantly
below budgeted levels. And so
what we know from having done
some analysis in particular, the
funding that CYFD has claimed
for the administration of foster
care adoption and guardianship
has both the projection has
increased over time and the
actual amount collected has
decreased over time.
So, um, there are both of those
things at play that likely
suggests we're leaving federal
funds on the table, CYFD has
engaged with a consultant
provided by the Casey family,
uh, programs to help them both
review the states um prevention
plan and to look at their
current practices for claiming
related to foster care
administration to try to
understand if there are
opportunities to increase
reimbursement for, for that
program.
as well.
OK, thank you for that and, and
Madam Chair, can you tell me,
uh, do you happen to know how
long?
We have not had an approved
plan.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I believe, um, uh, under
previous leadership CYFD first
submitted a plan in 2019. It was
submitted again in 2022, um, and
to date, we, we don't yet have
an approved plan.
So just since 2019, before that,
Madam Chair, were we receiving
those dollars? Um, so Madam
Chair Representative, that plan
is in relation to the prevention
program, which came sort of into
existence in 2018. We have been
for a long time been receiving
federal funding the Title IVE um
funding for foster care,
adoption, and guardianship
Administration and um
maintenance payments.
Thank you for that information.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Rachel.
Any other questions from folks?
Um.
Rachel, thank you so much for
pulling all of this together.
Um.
I had um.
Uh, one question about the
commissions and
Um, councils.
And my question, I guess, goes
to, we have the Senate Memorial
5 Task Force.
Um, and
What is sort of recommended
here.
With the commissions and
councils, uh, that are in other
states is having something that
is long term, um, could
potentially have a sunset, um,
that does oversight and um
My question is, if that is
something that could be done
through an interim committee,
um, if
There was an interim committee
dedicated to um
Child well-being oversight, um,
That had more
Authority.
Can you talk a little bit about
what would be involved in doing,
um, an interim committee.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I will share some and then I
might call in director Silly who
can provide some more, more
guidance there. Um, I think
there are a variety of options
for you all to consider um
through statute. It could be an
interim committee, it could be
another function or body that
provides um
Oversight functions kind of
consistency over time. You all
could also consider through
statute something like a
nominating function to
essentially provide a vetting
function, um, related to, um,
the appointment of um executive
leadership that would then
require a governor approval,
that would be something kind of
in between fully carving out an
agency, um, from, from the
cabinet. So there are a variety
of options that you all could
consider directorly, you might
wanna weigh in on it.
additional considerations or or
detail about how to do those
types of options.
Thank you. Um.
So there's
A wide range and pros and cons
to each.
Um
You know, a new oversight
commission that sort of is
responsible for the
Hiring of the director.
Or the secretary.
Um, it's kind of like the old
boards and commission style of
governance, state school board
as an example.
As
Potential benefits to
stabilizing leadership and
having consistent citizen
oversight.
Uh, it has also, uh, particular
potential downsides of carving
out this important function out
of being able to work as closely
with other cabinet agencies.
Every new cabinet secretary that
I meet with, I tell them, all of
your mission critical money is
not in your agency. It's
actually in healthcare
authority.
So that potential downside, you
know, for me personally, I
really weigh as what's, how, how
can you thread the needle? The
other um options that we've laid
out are something similar to
what you've set up for uh OSI in
particular had to sort of
vetting committee or who to
Submit or consideration and keep
that power of appointment in the
governor's hand, keep that in
that person as part of the the
cabinet, um, but
Have a
Of independent vetting process,
vetting process.
Um
Combined with kind of focused
maybe temporary legislative
oversight, you know, maybe one
day a month during the interim,
focused on specific things that
you, that everybody knows that
committee is going to come back
to sort of like what we're doing
with Legistat.
Where are you at with
performance? Where are you at
with hiring? Where are you at
with caseloads?
You know, in a, in a very
dedicated, maybe 4 or 5 year
period. And why I bring that up
as a potential option is back in
the 90s, the legislature and the
executive were tussling over
welfare reform, and how to
implement that and one strategy
the legislature had was to have
a committee focused specifically
on
Welfare reform.
Oversight, uh, as a subtopic to
all the things that LHHS is
responsible for.
It could also be a subcommittee
of LHHS that meets the day
before they come in.
It could be created by the
council.
It may not need to be statute.
There's a variety of different,
um, considerations with that.
Um, for you all to
Thank you, uh, director, and so,
um, thinking along those lines,
um, some of the recommendations.
Here, uh, that Rachel has
presented, uh, our statutory in
nature. And so,
Our subcommittee, our role.
Here would be to say that we
want to either recommend or not
recommend that.
LFC as a whole.
Um, prepare bills.
To address. That is correct.
Great. And so, um,
In our subcommittee report that
goes to the full committee, uh,
we can make some recommendations
for statutory changes that we
would like to see, um, and so,
I would be interested in hearing
from subcommittee members as to,
um, if you think we should
recommend LFC, uh, support all
of the their 8.
Uh, recommendations identified,
um.
And so what we would be doing is
saying to LFC that we want LFC
as a committee to pursue. And
so, uh, there would be
time to work with Rachel go back
to some of the specifics, I
think a good example for me was
Um, when Rachel was talking
about um,
Uh, the first number 2, so under
prevention and early
intervention, amending the Kara
statute, um, to make HCA the
lead agency, and then also
Rachel mentioned uh what could
be complementary.
Is coupling it with
Um, steps for if a family
refuses.
Uh, the plan of care or yeah,
plan of care and um other
aspects. So,
Any thought?
My second that motion.
Yeah, it, it's, I think it's
really good. I, I also really
liked the part. I don't, I can't
remember where it's at, but
where
Uh, we're codifying the federal.
Uh, in New Mexico's statute.
So just to add to that.
I would also let him try out. I
also agree that this would be um
A worthwhile task for.
Excellent. OK. So it sounds to
me like we had emotion in a
second.
Um, that we would like, um, our
subcommittee is going to
recommend that LFC prepare um
bills for consideration for the
session.
On these 8.
Um
Recommendations that have been
made over the course of several
years, um, and not yet
implemented.
Do we need a vote? Or is there
any objection?
To the recommendation.
No, I don't think so. I think
we're unanimous in our
agreement, and I think that is a
testament to the great work, um,
of staff in doing the research
and following um the trends and,
and keeping us posted. So thank
you, Rachel, John, Charles,
thank you all.
All right.
I think that's it.
Yeah.
Issues on governance that they
need to.
Weigh in on hers that covered in
your. Um.
Doctor Slate, I don't believe
so. I imagine, uh, the task in
front of us is to then.
Put pen to paper, work with
counsel services to to bring
bills for review. Is that
correct?
OK
Alright, I believe that our
subcommittee's work is done
today.
Thank you.
