All right
thanks everybody for a wonderful
lunch we want to think are very
gracious host
and again we we have the
sponsors that are listed here we
had a wonderful lunch and what
we're going to do madame
secretary we're going to have l
s c present the report cards and
then one by
both PED and LESC up for for
questions
as we go in in one of the things
were very pleased and great for
to have the public education
department and the legislative
education study committee it's
one of the points that we've
made is to you know as best we
can include sort of a broad
representation so with that
we're gonna turn over to mr lou
whom we also want to
congratulate
great to see you here yeah
everyone
it they welcome the he and his
wife have welcomed a wonderful
child into the world
then back from attorney to leave
so great to see or maybe not
that I don't know I don't want
to
all turn it over to let
uh will go through the report
cards and then again we'll go to
invite AP d analysis and enter
in what i'm sure will be another
robust conversation mister
thank you mister chair and i'm
sure the committee will
appreciate this for them my
son's name is simo in translated
in chinese means hope for a
little rain sir
he was born on a day at random
very excited
I am back part time and I would
actually really want to take a
moment to introduce rachel mabe
she is helping me with kid from
issues whime kind of in and out
from attorney leave so.
If you can't get a hold of me
component rachel
will be starting from tab seem
you'll see there are
presentation in your binder
that's called a status update on
the martinez jazzy last suit
once again for those online my
name is sunny louis and the
public schools hours for
and excited to present an update
to the committee alongside our
partners
john center from the earlier cm
secretary marianna period from
the public education department.
It's been
over a decade since this last
suit was filed and it's been six
years since the judge first
ordered the state to comply with
the findings and I think it's a
really helpful exercise to look
back at work the states goals
were
when this last suit ruling came
out if you turn it with me to
page two.
Want to talk a little bit about
some of the history and
background from this last suit
and where the cases right now
and some steps debt you should
consider moving forward first
and foremost this last it is
based on a single line in the
constitution requiring a uniform
and sufficient education for our
students.
The court was very careful in
two thousand and nineteen two
give difference to the
legislative and executive branch
to create a system that was
sufficient and it's really
interesting the language that
judge single ten years which
i've sort of highlighted there
on page two which is the goal
is to get at risk students the
opportunity to obtain a uniform
and sufficient education that
prepares them for college and
career that was the goal back in
two thousand and nineteen
if you turn with me to page
three
the court made a really bold
statement at the time which was
that inputs
were inadequate and what they
meant by inputs were things like
funding programs things that you
have done as a legislature such
as raise pay for teachers
increase the amount of
programming for literacy
career technical education
initiatives these are what the
court considered as inputs
they were considered inadequate
when the court made its initial
ruling and they made a
connection between inputs and
outputs outputs being things
like reading a math scores
graduation rates college
remediation rates and the quote
essentially said because your
inputs are insufficient because
you're outputs are dismal
you are not providing a
constitutionally adequate system
and therefore we are ordering
the state to increase funding
and oversight of the system
spend six years since that
ruling and just a few months ago
the court had a new hearing
they have now ordered p d
develop a remedial action plan
using an outside expert
and also inviting earlier seat
participate in the process and
you'll see on the right side of
this page sort of the.
Proposed timeline and it's very
quick
by november this year pd needs
to have a plan to get into
compliance and
my understanding is the courts
very impatient there's there
sort of this idea that we want
to get this done and move awhile
so if you could turn with me to
page four
lets take a little look back at
where we were in two thousand
and eighteen
this is actually a list of
some remedies that were proposed
by the yazi plaintiffs and the
martinez plain tips over a legal
councils they're put together a
coalition of stickholders they
had consulted a lot of
individuals and i'm not gonna go
through the whole list but i'm
just gonna read a few of this
restore three hundred seven
million license for square two
thousand nine expand pre
kindergarten to all four year
olds
mandate k five plus and require
at least the equivalent of a
hundred ninety two school days
find and monitor el programs
reduce class sizes raise teacher
minimums to forty five thousand
fifty five thousand and sixty
five thousand
raise the at risk index.
At the time I think you know
this is where some of these
ideas originated and looking
back it's it's kind of
interesting the see where we've
come where we've progressed in
where we've may have changed
course since then
turning into slide five
I think it's very helpful to
have an exercise where we think
about what are responsibilities
are you as a legislature have a
very key responsibility which is
providing some of the inputs and
they're pretty straight forward
right funding pre key providing
instruction materials increasing
teacher pay changing the funding
for a meal those are within your
perview and you have been doing
those for the last few years
the harder part is what's the
responsibility on the next two
calls
scores are ultimately where your
outputs come from it is those
classroom teachers that are
producing the outcomes that
you'd so desire in the court
desires
and pd is a key partner in this
process but is ultimately the
one being sued for compliance
and as you can see
it may be easier to raise
teacher pay but it's very hard
to change class from instruction
and that is where the real work
needs to focus for
moving on to page six
it's also good I think to take a
little snapshot of where we were
in two thousand and eighteen and
where we are today
the very first one you've dumped
two billion dollars seventy
percent increase into the
recurring public school budget
since the last suit
if more than you've quadrupled
the at risk student formula
funding and I want to back a
little bit to their two billion
one billion dollars of that is
for salaries and benefits for
school personnel the next two
bigger buckets were.
Three hundred twenty million for
at risk students and two hundred
fifty two million for extended
learning and increasing
instructional hours
despite those investments you
can see that the average school
they have really haven't changed
that much we have really ground
our presence and precame and
you've also seen a decrease in
the statewide student a teacher
ratio that's mostly because we
have fewer kids but about the
same number of teachers
statewide
moving on the page seven
here's a history of unrestricted
cash balances at school
districts and charger schools as
you can see it's fluctuated over
the last few years but
as you're probably also aware
our system is getting to a point
difficult to move money quickly
for a variety of reasons and i'd
be happy to go into those as
well those are some of the
discussions about the input that
have happened since i'd like to
turn over to rachel now to talk
a little bit more about the
outputs
thank you
mr chair committee i'm very
honored to be here and also feel
on nervous so my first time
presenting to you up
sunny just covered inputs
and now i'm going to talk about
outputs and he defined this
really well but one thing that I
like to think about is a little
machine a little education
machine sort of like a dumb bomb
machine or a toy machine at a
supermarket or a diner and you
have you know if I put in input
of her where do I get out do we
get a gumbar or toy or increase
literacy there is like a clear
something goes in something
comes out so with that frame
would you may or may not find
helpful umm we can think about
the ruin what happened since i'm
page you'll see this quote from
the original ruin which says
that most at risk students do
not get the basic literary
maskels needed.
To pursue post secondary
educational careers
and it defines the outputs by
which we can gauge or success
there to be test results
graduation rates frequency of
need for a mediocre courses in
college and that the blue box on
the left is different tests used
and the gold backs on the rate
list different ways of measuring
college and career readiness so
let's look at some of those
outputs a little more closely
and will start with test scores
so i'm slide nine
you'll see two graphs that shown
need scores and nape stands for
the national assessment of
educational progress it's also
referred to as the nation's
report card so in people talk
about where new mexico ranks
nationally there it's usually
based on this test student saga
reading and math naptest and
fourth in eighth grade the graph
on the left shows the reading
scale scores the dodded blue
line shows new mesco eighth
graders or the sound line shows
the national average
and the darted green line
represents your mesco's fourth
graders and the solid green line
the national average and you
look at this you'll probably
notice a few things one the data
blind of eighth graders and the
daughtered green line of fourth
graders are relatively flat
there are some variation from
your year but it's more or less
a flat line clean all the way
back to the nineties two the
south lines are also pretty flat
and three the solid lines and
the darden lines are pretty much
parallel the space between them
has not really changed meaning
that we continually score below
the national average
without causing the gap the
graph on the rate shows the mass
scores and you can see when
comparing in the same way that
numerous who continues to score
below the national average on
math in both grade levels
so on page ten
you'll see reading and math
proficiency rates on the new
mesco state tests and if you
look at reading for a moment on
the last.
You'll see all students on top
and red and then log income
students in gray made of
students and green english
warner students in your world
and special education to the
them boil and one positive that
you can see here is the increase
in scores for native students
english corners and low income
students indicated that there
may be slowly causing the gap
math rates are on the rate and
they don't show us the more
closing of the gap math
efficiency why to remain
unchanged over the past figures
on side eleven
you'll see some details from the
other bucket of outputs
mentioned by the court in twenty
eighteen graduation rate and
remediation rate alongside sat
profession to rates and reading
and math
into the good news first
graduation rates for the cost of
twenty twenty four where the
highest they've been in fifteen
years reaching seventy eight
percent and i'd bike for you to
look at the graph all the way on
the rate that says high school
graduation and college reading
this
so high school graduation is in
boil and college or mediation is
in green and you can see that
the blue wine of graduation has
been suddenly climbing and the
green line of remediation was
declining and then increased
again postcode nineteen and
called your mediation means the
need for since to do our media
work to succeed in college so
that would decreasing as exactly
what you'd want these two
getting further apart
but nationally students who need
remediation are more likely to
drop out of college and you can
see that in twenty twenty two we
got down to just over thirty
percent and now we're back up to
nearly forty percent of students
need in remediation
the graph on the left shows
graduation rates alongside
saturday proficiency rates
you'll see state wide all the
way to the rate and then eight
albuquerque high schools that
all had high graduation rates or
increases to the graduation
rates this year else lf staff
undertook this analysis which
will see more about in pd's
quarter three report card.
After the committee asked about
the relationship between
graduation rates and proficiency
rates are muscural
the blue line is graduation
where it breaks the orange
finance reading proficiency and
the green line is math there's a
lot of research including from
lfc that
talks about increasing
graduation rates being good for
students communities and the
state as a hall but there's also
clearly a disconnect between
proficient rates and graduation
which leaves the question of our
students really ready for
college and career when they
with high score and partially
this is a question of connecting
inputs and the outputs because
when the connection is either
messy though like the
relationship between graduation
rates and proficiency or
unchanged like kneep scores then
it's easy to wonder what your
invests what your investments
have resulted
if I could ask you to turn to
the next slide on page twelve
so the legislature is working on
connecting inputs and outputs
and your hear a lot over this
interim but different ways this
has happening but one way
specific to education is the
public education reform fund
which were calling by its
acronym perth
during the twenty twenty five
which lead of session
repurpose the public educator of
foreign fund as a way to study
and pilot educational
innovations the first round of
per funds five projects for
three years the registration
requires rigorous study in
evaluation overseen collectively
by ped lsc lac and dfa
which is outlined before
implementation in evaluation
plan one big part of these plans
is what's called the larger
model as simplified version of
which will see at the bottom of
the page in these blue boxes and
it's just a representation of
how a program intends to achieve
its calls it's a really explicit
connecting of the and puts on
the alphabets and so let's talk
about example one of the perf
initiatives which in the
official.
Documentation was called
secondary educator literacy
which is a little bit of a
confusing name cause it sounds
like we have a bunch of teachers
who can't read running around
but it is really about giving
secondary school teachers
updated training and literacy
instruction and pd hasn't yet
turned in their plans and I do
yet they're due to july first
but you can imagine for a
program like that that the
inputs or what you're investing
in like the quarter that goes in
and money people materials in
time and the outputs or what
comes out like my gumbar might
be the number of teachers the
number of schools participating
or the number of students served
and then there's this third
thing of outcomes which is a
little bit confusing because the
court is talking about outcomes
and outputs is worth the same
thing graduation rates in that
sort of thing but when we're
talking about research and
evaluation talking about
outcomes as the effect of the
program so it would be you know
like if you will allow me to
extend my metaphor just a little
bit it would be like the quality
of the number you get is it
fresh and delicious or is it
like a one that's been sitting
there in this staleman will
chocolate isn't that great so it
is the thing that I think we're
all actually excited about and
looking for it is increased
proficiency rates closing of the
gap um and so right away in this
model of connecting and puts an
outputs there's a clear path
which means that there's a clear
sense of what we need to be able
to do to determine if a program
is working and a clear plan for
collecting data so that by the
end of the three year period d d
alliancy lfc and dfa can make a
recommendation based on evidence
about whether to fund these
initiatives on a larger scale
okay one more side you'll turn
to the last page on page
thirteen you'll find a chart
that has the five percent issue
to solicit across the top and
pd's five big calls from their
strategic plan on the side.
And the check mark show where
they overwhelmed so you can see
that what the legislature
decided on what was funded
through perfect this year
reminded pds goals as well much
of what the court highlighted
seven years ago and the martin
is yes
and connecting the input and
outputs and outcomes through
perth will allow us to know
whether a program works before
investing in it on a larger
scale and then we can invest
with confidence so that seven
years from now we all be in the
same place i've not been sure
what's going to make the biggest
difference for kids in mexico
that includes our presentation
thank you mr chair if you can
tell rachel came to us from the
classroom so we really
appreciate her perspective I
when we sound open for questions
or whatever is next message
thank you mister lou thank you
mister mckay thank you very much
for that members are there any
questions for a methodology or
understanding what's been
presented what i'd like to do so
we'll stay on schedule will go
ahead and invite ah ah p d and
and LESC up unless members have
any specific questions will
center goes off please
thank you mister trouble i'll
keep it to
I can sweat i'm seeing here so
with the information provided to
us and where we are and or we
have been and the looking at the
remedies and if you look at
everything goes up to twenty
twenty five
but what I don't see is so
what are we expecting for twenty
six and what are we expecting
for twenty seven and for twenty
eight and years back home you
know the federal problems you
know you were allowed to go up
to him five years safe from
today you know what the
expectation is now if you met
those calls great you know
that's what the purpose was and
if not well what was going on
that he didn't happen.
And all I feel that he would
give it like a much more clear
picture if we're striving to
know what to expect every fourth
hence fourth for every year and
maybe if you just want to
comment on that or if it's
coming in or and I understand
what you said about three years
but to me that doesn't tell me
what in three years you know.
Yes mister chair and senator
that's a great question I think
we know we were just speaking
with the school yesterday and it
really struck me that they are
really focused on
making sure that the doors are
open they're very focused on can
I pay all my teachers can I get
it on my insurance cover can I
just operate
this year
and they're not really in in
that mind said thinking about
how do I use extra money to
innovate or how do I change the
trajectory of what's happening
in the score what I think is
what interesting that rachel has
presented on this public
education reform fund concept as
their you as a legislature can
pursue the strategy where you're
based on the revenue situation
providing a stable funding out
in the next few years for
operations but then also having
some funding aside to really try
and test out whether some of
these interventions actually
work before you build it into
the recurring budget we haven't
been really doing that the last
seven years we don't have a
light of information to suggest
it the interventions that we've
done have made a huge impact as
you can see from the scores and
the measures of success.
So
job number one is making sure
there is stable consistent
funding for schools but job
number two is making sure the
extra funding that's available
is being used for something that
is actually going to make a
difference.
Mr terminal not on the and I
know that we have some other
percentage I just want to
mention that on
what I used to do yes we always
had a internal and external
evaluators and I really believe
in that you know I think that
that works really well and a new
medical finance authority went
into that affairs back it's
working well mortgage finance
authorities doing that now and
when you have that you have more
of a very close gap on your
valuation what's happening and
the whole thing is so not to
treated us as punitive but just
to treat it as some constructive
to where are you and or you
going and I don't think that if
you can't see that picture you
know he makes it a lot harder
here not for for everyone and
then you know you have all
a number of teachers well
there's different thinking
within that group so that way
you would have a more defined
but that's a thought mr chairman
and just like to bring to that
excellent thank thank you very
much senator consolidate okay
let's we have an uh a long list
developing let's go ahead will
mr center manner secretary if
you wouldn't mind coming up
and I know members we should
have a
the
sheets from them as well for a
one page sheet
lets thank you all for being up
here this way we ca- as
questions come in we can address
those and we can have sort of a
a freer flowing conversation
with that will keep doing down
the line next is to represent
chapter
so
you know I turned on the tv a
while back and it said
graduation rates increase you
know i'm like
now I get these numbers from
your says that.
Proficiency and math and reading
is dropping but graduation rates
are increasing so would you say
that we're dumbing down the
qualifications to graduate.
I missed a chair representative
I don't think that there is an
active attempt to dumb down the
curriculum that I do think that
more students are still moving
through and advancing through
the system regardless of whether
they are prepared post secondary
here's there not as qualified mr
chairman when they do graduate
so.
Is that true
and mr chair representative
based on the metrics that the
status using for accountability
and there are cohorts of
students that cannot pass these
proficiency tests but are still
graduating thank you mister
chair
thank you very much some
chapfield next we have
representative little then
center to bison.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for the presentation
I have a question related to
page eleven and the graph that's
presented there and i'm curious
taking a look at the
graduation rates at the schools
that are listed in the graph
these are all the much larger
schools and uh in
as far as I can see almost most
of them are in the elbow cookie
area and then there is a latter
less line mister chair is
is
the depects of steep wide rate
rates ago corrected i'm curious
as to
i'd like to understand
the
the criteria that's used to
establish this these rates are
they
standardized in terms of am
looking at these as like the
really big larger schools in the
cricket area and i'm wondering
if these
outcomes outputs
have been examined in the
smaller school systems in rural
communities in rural school
districts and how this doesn't
show me or I can't see it and
perhaps mister might be later in
the presentation and if so i'm
looking forward to seeing it but
i'm curious as to
where
at what would like to see how
the other schools in the state
uh compare in this graph
mister chair representative so
these schools were taken just as
a representative snapshot and
thinking about these were
schools that all had have high
graduation rates or the
graduation rates increased and
the rates are from the sat
scores but I am happy to look
into some smaller scausing and
get something to you like.
A similar graphic to look at
those two
think you so much mister
chairman wondering might be
helpful
to have this
um depicted may be even
regionally i'm i'm curious as to
how this graph would
held those schools and
regionally would compare but
look in this type of graph
thank you so much mister that's
it thank you very much for the
senate by some before we go to
you
maybe we can ask madame
secretary missing it if you
could briefly sort of summarise
the present the the sheets that
you have here today
this is going to be sort of our
big round of questioning and so
if we could ask you to spend
just a couple of quick minutes
on that whoever wants to go
first
thank you mister charles
good afternoon committee john
sanamir staff director for the
lec
and you should have this this
document
one two pager that we put
together for you off
I won't I won't take too much
time other than to say a couple
couple of things one is the art
committee in our staff over the
last few years specifically
starting in twenty twenty two
tried to identify some critical
gaps in the education system
so how how can we as a stay and
how can you as a legislature
take action to try to improve
this system in addition to sort
of this over arching gaps we
also wanted to to look at the
martinis yazi lawsuit and what
kinds of actions were specific
to the last suit so the one
thing I want to say here is that
this is.
Not specifically to the last
year but it does address some of
those issues and it speaks to
the larger systemic improvement
or change that needs to happen
and so what we did is we
identified these four k areas
you'll see them educator equal
systems academic designs or
child supports and over arching
systems within those four boxes
you'll see some examples of the
kinds of things that fit within
those categories that we need to
address not just to to remedy
the last suit but to ensure that
we have a successful education
system to senator gonzalez point
this isn't just about a year or
three years this is about how do
you ensure that every student
has that opportunity that sunny
was talking about earlier from
here and indefinitely so that
new mexico's providing those
opportunities for all students
out of the work the alliancy and
that you all have done as a
legislature
I we highlighted a few of those
bullets at the bottom of page
one some of the legislation that
you all have enacted including
increasing instructional hours
finding literacy updating your
graduation requirements does
funding formula revisions I
won't go through them all here
but here some key pieces of
legislation that you are passed
over the last few years to
address some of those things
on the backside of the page
we talked just a little bit
about how some of the things
that you've done
and that we have done as a seat
are
are helping
we are seeing increasing
graduation rates we are seeing
slowly increasing proficiency
rates you are have funded
initiatives and career technical
education things that we hope
will get out student engagement
and relevant education for
students so we're seeing some
positives based on the work that
you all in the state has done as
a whole but there are still
other pieces right that need
that need work.
And so this graph looks very
similar but if you look at those
those boxes what we've
identified here are some things
that we can continue to work out
within those categories and i'll
just highlight a few of them the
first one is making sure that
every person who comes out of
one of your educator preparation
programs is actually ready to
teach the kids when they get
into the class and that's making
sure that they're up to date
with our structured literacy
initiative that they have
good pedagogy around bath
instruction
when it comes to academic design
we want to make sure that again
school districts are
implementing our structure
literacy curriculum and are in
those practices that they've
learned are based on the
training that we've provided as
a stay up and not just as
individuals but that as the
system principles understand
what that looks like
superintendents understand what
that looks like and so that
every student is benefiting
sunny mentioned earlier the huge
investment to support at risk
students we need to continue to
make sure that that money is
being used intentionally to
serve those students and that it
isn't being soaked up by other
things that districts are
deciding to to do
and then the last piece here is
these over arching systems and
again to the to the point of
needing this longdashterm
planning
we will hear from the secretary
I think a little bit about the
response to the last suit and
what the court is asking the ped
to do
as a state
education in the end the need to
improve this system doesn't end
even if the court says martinez
yasser is resolved
we wait we might pay teachers
fifty five sixty five and
seventy five thousand dollars
now but in five or ten years
that's not going to count it in
so what does that long term
planning have to look like
based on our resources and what
we think is appropriate and so
at the bottom here just wanted
to to sort of sum up that
pd is going to be looking at
this plan and I think the
secretary is going to speak to
that a little bit.
But we need to continue to work
through
these long term plans that that
outlive political and leadership
change
because
we I think I think we would all
agree that we want all of our
students I have students in the
public school system your kids
and grandkids we want all of
those folks to have
opportunities and we still are
in a very unique position unlike
a lot of other states actually
to fund the kinds of things and
to implement a kinds of programs
that will do that and to create
that solid foundation for our
system for years and generations
to come and without all handed
over to the secretary
of secretary thank you mr chair
members of the committee and
thank you to my colleagues here
i'm going to build off of things
that they have just presented to
you
it's clear that we have
addressed much of the plaintiff
the plaintive proposed inputs
this is something that we have a
complished over the last six
years together both in the
executive and in the
legislature
but we have not addressed all of
them there's some key things
that we have not addressed
tonight and sunny did highlight
some of those ideas about
mandating k five for key k
twelve plus the idea of at least
a hundred and ninety two
school days state wine
mandating nursing social work
and counseling to support
behavioral house
creating stipends and other sort
of supports for bilingual
teachers addressing class sizes
these are all things that we
have not addressed so we've done
a great deal and we are seen
improvements particularly in
language arts and in graduation
rates.
I were not seeing in a math as
rachel indicated we haven't
invested in math instruction and
in interventions it hasn't
happened consistently in new
mexico and we see the outcome of
that and so just find a point
out some of those things yes we
have done a lot but it must be
sustained it's not a one time
investment these are things that
need to continue and they need
to be looked at in a way that
we're making sure that we're
improving our educator quality
so that instruction is better in
the classroom we need to and
continue the
interventions like our literacy
programs we need to do it in
math too we need to have high
impact tutoring interventions
for our students they will not
catch up if we they continue to
pass from grade level to grade
level without those
interventions that's where we
get to the the graphs that
rachel shared where our
proficiency rates for our
students are not at grade level
because as they move from grade
level to the next grade level
they're not at proficiency and
until we actually invest in
consistent interventions that
allow our students to catch up
those are the types of things
that we will see if we look at
mississippi and their model and
literacy structured literacy
same thing that we're doing
there are key things that they
did that are different mandates
from structured literacy that we
have not done they have
implemented third grade
retention laws i'm not
advocating for retention but I
am saying we have to have clear
interventions to get our
students act rate level that is
consistent through their
educational experience so that
we do not get to a point where
kids never actually catch it and
are at grade level or above and
so I just really want to
reiterate same thing that that
director center mention.
These really are continual
investments but they also have
to be specific in targeted and
we have to have specific
requirements mandates
expectations for our schools as
well
I will also like to point out
something that was discussed
already related to the increase
and funding over two billion
dollars increase in funding just
this legislative session we
increased at risk funding
through the series by another
hundred and thirty three million
dollars for at risk secondary
investments as well as english
language learners these are
significant investments
but we have not
had a proper accounting for the
expenditure of those funds this
is also something that we are
hearing from the martinez yazi
plaintiffs they are asking for a
one to one
student accounting of how
schools are spending these funds
these are the kinds of things
that we have not addressed as a
state at a ped nor at the
legislative level
we're also seen schools actually
move to reduction and
instructional days and so this
next academic year we're seeing
that thirty eight point five
percent of our school districts
and charter schools are in a
four day school system so we are
providing more opportunity for
for additional funding through
things like k twelve plus but
we're actually not seeing more
instruction these are some
things that we have created
through legislation but I
believe and that reach research
shows does in fact impact
outcomes.
I would like to share
an effort to that pd is in the
process of rolling out related
to school accreditation the
public education department has
a responsibility of a crediting
public schools came through
twelve scores
this last school year we have
been rolling out our pilot year
for school accreditation we are
going through a process in where
we're looking at all eight
hundred and fifty plus schools
in new mexico and we're looking
at the work that they're doing
as required already through
statute or through raw these are
things like their ed plans
there are tendence and safety
plans are they conducting tribal
consultation how are they
budgeting their money so we are
in this process now with schools
in that effort and looking at
their school budgets we will be
looking at their expenditure of
at risk and special education
funds for this next school year
we have asked them all to
provide an assurance to the
department that they have
budgeted their funds at the
local level
to serve the students that
generate it particularly for at
risk funds and special education
funds I would also like to do
that for english language
learners now that we have
through our seg changes
additional mechanisms to see
that funding I believe that we
should be able to account for
how funding is spent
I will I think that this is
something that the legislature
is also interested in and would
like to see the legislature do
this as well this is when we
actually start to see is are the
inputs generating the outputs
that we want to see as we
increase seg funding.
That funding is really
determined at a local level how
they will spend their money what
are they going to do with it are
they gonna hold onto it as a
cash balance or they going to
focus on specific students or
specific schools we are very
much stepping up at ped and
through our creditation process
will be looking at this this is
not a one to one accounting as
the plantiffs are requesting we
would have to look at how we
would do that but we will be
doing it at a school level we
will be seen and a school level
how funding is spent for those
specific populations
we make to quickly just share
the document that I brought for
you all the first and sigh the
front sign outlines
at the five big goals for the
public education department as
outlined in our strategic plan
our strategic plan is very much
focused on student outcomes
related to literacy achievement
meth achievement attendance
graduation rates and are shared
accountability across all levels
across the department
are our local schools families
legislature all of us that have
a role to play
in the improvement of the
educational outcomes for our
students so within the
department everything that we're
doing in terms of the budgets
that we're generating for you
the programming valuation yes we
are working on programming
valuation and close
collaboration with all of c n c
but we are implementing
program evaluation for every bit
of money that flows through the
department not through the seg
because again we cannot do that
but middle and below the line
funding.
Will have program evaluation so
that we can really see the
impact of those funds
we have a big goal of meeting
the national
rate for graduation rates this
next year twenty four hundred
more students you all have heard
me say that number numerous
times are goal is to hit the
national average it's nine
percentage points we can do it
this is something that I know is
absolutely achievable
and then just for the sake at
time if you want to flip to the
second side of the page i'll
talk a bit about
ped's efforts to develop the
martinez yazi remedial action
plans so sunny already talked to
you about the timeline it is an
incredibly aggressive timeline
but one in which that I
am confident that we will be
able to do together
we have put out a request for
interest for experts that can
help come in and support our
efforts with the establishment
establishing this remedial plan
we received fourteen proposals
including local entities
education experts national
organizations and and
contractors as well we have
reviewed those a proposals
looking at really building a
team from the beginning my
approach was not one expert but
really a team of experts that
creates the right framework we
want to have that local
knowledge and expertise the
lesc
i'm very grateful that director
center and deputy director have
really been at the table with us
from the minute that we really
got that direction from that
judge wilson and april we have a
commitment from less to be
involved in every aspect of the
development of this pla.
They are even carving out
aspects that they will lead
themselves
and I think will bring a great
deal of value so we we are
intending to hire a a contractor
team that builds upon the
expertise of the public
education department that builds
upon the expertise of the less
that brings in national and
international perspective as
well so that we have the best
sort of approach
we're building on the work
that's been done not only by the
department by but by mini
educator leaders in our state
that have been working on this
issue for many years along side
of us are planned is to once we
will go I know we have a number
of folks on the the for
questions okay I would you like
me to sat mister june so very
quickly to wrap it up will be
identifying our stay colder
engagement plan very soon and
then we will be launching
network in july
the intent is for this to be a
very collaborative inclusive and
transparent process involving
all of the important
stakeholders in the development
of this plan and so with that
i'll go ahead and start mister
chair thank you very much ok
will go thank you both we're
going to go back to our
questions going back to center
to buyers and and then to
represent length and on from
there senator toys thank you
mister chair thank you for all
that information and i'm back on
page eleven
in the slide deck
i'm pleased to see and the high
school write down the street
from my house the quaver is
right at the top there I know
that they have a record of
excellence but i'm looking at
some of the other schools if if
I look at all three data sets I
would go to c n d elderly and
then volcano this is well.
I'm and also including law
quarter
is there something different
that those schools are doing to
have those types of results and
do you have any comparative data
i'm from those schools to the
others and then talking on to
that do you have a chart that's
also showing us results from
charter schools.
And I don't know who wants to
answer that.
Mr chair senator that is that is
the question that needs to be
asked what are they doing
I will say in our previous
evaluations of you how about
your public schools.
We have not been able to do what
you're suggesting which is an
inventory of programming at that
level but I will say what we did
fine is that there is a tendency
in albert key for your most
experienced teachers
to be teaching in a certain area
of the city
and in the motion is jazzy last
suit there was noted that
because of the teacher
evaluation system at the time
there is a huge incentive for
teachers to move to different
schools that were easier to
teach so I think that there's
something systematic that's
happening outside of the perview
of the policies and the budgets
that are being developed that is
deeply
desperate within certain
communities
I don't know if that is the only
thing that is contributing to
those differences
but certainly will be fine from
the research literature is that
the health in the environment of
the community do have an effect
thank you mister chair and how
do we
study that silver night guessing
what could be the obvious answer
in really no
dig into that data so we know
for sure why those outcomes and
i'm sure it's that's not the
only reason I was able to think
it's not the only reason i'm but
don't we owe that to our
children in all of our school
systems around the state to
really study that and if just
like the mississippi model if we
have a model that's working at
some schools then dig deepen to
that and use that model state
wide whatever the solutions mean
and but at least no instead of
guessing is there something you
could propose that that we do to
figure that out
mr chair senator appreciate the
question.
I I just got her name and I
think you're alluding to it and
and so I need a two obviously
you're looking at some of the
the scores that should have some
of the wealthiest parts of alba
cricket and and research and
scores have born out for decades
probably the connection between
community wealth and and
assessment scores the so I just
say that but to your point about
what's actually happening in
those scores
you know you're probably talking
about this is an actor I haven't
been to these schools either
you're talking about more
offerings of advance placement
courses more offerings of
international back lorian
courses to sunny's point about
teachers you're talking about
more experienced probably in
more highly educated teachers
who choose these particular
schools partly because they're
able to do some things with
students who come from more
afterward families that is more
challenging to do in a lower
economic communities i'll say
you know there have been
initiatives and i'll name avid
uhm as one initiative which
tried to take and still does in
some communities
those kinds of practices like
advance placement let's put more
students in advance placement
even though they might not
traditionally sign up for those
classes or may not be what we
would consider prepared for
advance please smit and then
support them through those
classes because we know that
those count that kind of
instruction has been official
for college readiness so there
are those kinds of things that
are that that are in place in
some communities on a large
scale I think what we're talking
about is teacher quality for
sovereign in every in every
classroom
um
administrative support I then
assume you mention some of those
community
indicators that are sometimes
outside the the influence of it
of what the school can do and so
that's why I think it's
important that you are
considered that as well because
you're making a lot of efforts
that are are focused on
community health rather than
just on the school building
although they have to be done in
tandem.
The.
And mr chair I also want to
answer the second part of your
question which is we also did a
programming valuation recently
of schools they were beating the
arts and one of the subject
schools was a charter school
that served a very low income
population and there are certain
practices that are happening in
those schools such as do they
look at data and provide
appropriate intervention which
is something the secretary has
been mentioning
do they expect students to
perform at a higher level and
those are things that you can't
really legislate but you need
the right people in place in the
right leadership and vision to
create that type of environment
we do know that students lose
learning and mastery over the
summer that was part of the
theory of change behind
increasing instructional time
and but all of this once again
requires willingness on behalf
of this entities to provide the
appropriate interventions to the
kids that needed the mouse which
you might find kind of damning
is
some of your highest performing
kids if they get extended
learning they actually learn
faster than there will
lower income peers which if
we're not careful as a state we
may actually be in advertise
white inning achievement caps if
we're not focused and targeted
on providing supports where
they're needed.
Thank you very much senator and
next we have representative
lending then center pity at
representative thank you mister
chairman good afternoon to the
presenters thank you very much
for that for each of your
presentation this afternoon let
me begin by first addressing our
secretary of ped by thanking you
for your support in what this
legislature passed is past
legislative session related to
substantial financial increases
for native american students I
think that type of of leadership
that type of commitment towards
the need of married and
communities in this state will
go a long way to helping are to
be due those discrepancies as he
relates to achievement levels
and as it relates to educational
attainment and so on and so
forth I think that's a that's a
great step in the right
direction that this legislature
may happen just a few months ago
I also want to make mention in
regards to the discussion that
took place about a year ago back
in santa fe in this very
committee and that was one where
again with without any offense
to the to the ped when I asked
about a plan related to yazi
martinez and when we were trying
to still figure it out right and
now here we are a year later in
the courts now making us come
together to create that plan we
have been chasing a plan for the
past or since twenty eighteen
when the court first ruled in
yazi martinez that the
legislature and the state must
do something to create an
opportunity for our children
and about seven years later here
we are now finally having frank
and honest and canada
discussions about how maybe we
can all come together mister
chairman and committee members
and panel
mr senator you get the nail on
the head when you talk about
that's come together and have a
real and honest conversation
between
the less c between the PED
between
this body.
But I would also venture to say
that maybe you also need to
include the plaintiff parties in
that discussion because as I
have learned since yassie
martinez even prior to that this
is my nineteen year as a
legislator but since yazi
martinez.
If that gave any fuel to the
fire to try to change what was
available for native american
improvement in education that
was it and I was going to push
that envelope as hard as I could
to create good policy changed to
create additional investment in
in financial ability for our
native american students and
their districts so for the past
nine years of my tenure as a
legislator we have done that we
have changed policy for native
american education we have
increased investments in the
emergency education to a point
where I would say that amongst
the plaintive groups again
minding all of you that that
includes low income it includes
native american it includes
english language learners
includes children disabilities
those other plaintive groups are
now looking at the nato american
scene what about us
it's it is a classic tactic of
let's sep that let's divide and
conquer but it's us all working
together so I think now it's
incumbent upon all of us to come
together with all of the
plaintiff groups so that no one
is left behind that north deals
left out and saying well where's
my piece of the pie why aren't
we being addressed in a way when
we can develop some type of
success in improvement in our
educational result and mister
chairman and and and panel I
think that the question that
representative little asked
earlier in this discussion
related to page eleven and the
graphs they were presented
or a classic right I mean you
have
a team in levels and you have to
the senator's point the quabel
rate a great school district are
in in in a beautiful part of
albuquerque but that's
representative of how classic
the discrepancies are in new
mexico right la quava the
northeast heights of albuquerque
that's not
the popular center the mingle
that a represent that's not the
town of bernalio that a
represent.
That's not the navigation and
the chapter house of touring on
the middle of of the desert that
I represent that's not them so
for us to to begin to compare a
team at levels we will never be
able to hang true equality
because there's been so many
generations and decades of
disdain
a classic level of of
I guess I well ltc and attempt
to abolish a people said they
could ever obtain true
status in in in today's modern
world right now i'm talking
about the nave american policies
and education i'm talking about
the boarding schools and talk
about the other things that have
come to mine and and and that
only goes to show then not only
just with those types of
policies federally but also with
the lack of investment within
those communities that many of
these individuals and the planet
group come from
we can throw as much money but
we will never be able to achieve
that the equality that you might
see in the north east heights of
albuquerque and that's the
honest truth so when we come
with these policy changes
whether it's policy or whether
it's investment and increasement
investments in education and a
community education and people
back at you when you say you
want to see an extra million ten
million hundred million
it's almost embarrassing that
people react that way when i've
asked for it only because it's
that type of commitment level
that will bring our communities
to at least a little bit of a
level playing field as relates
to educational equality and so
when we talk about yazi martinez
i'm hopeful that that this last
ruling might be one of the final
rulings before the judge can say
yes new mexico you have done
everything you can do to satisfy
yazi martinez and at this point
for we will release the that the
order and and you guys can go
but your own way.
But I think that is only gonna
be going to happen mister
chairman and and and committee
members and presenters is only
if we can create I was even in
this committee a subgroup to
create a subgroup with the less
c to be a part of this with AP e
d and our staff folks at at lsc
and the plaintive groups all of
them to come to some type of
resolution so that come december
first and that's the lesson for
a little more than five months
away
actually it it it's november
third when that when the plan is
required to be at the courts
you can have something in hand
that everyone can feel like they
were a part of the solution so
that being said mister think for
the time thank you thank you
very much representative next we
have senator padia and then
represent that I think you are
chair and thank you to the
presenters and a secretary of
directors so
they just want to say that you
know over a pdpd I really feel
the focus the energy the
commitment I feel about I think
he guess really working hard so
thank you it's i've been here
long enough to have worked with
several cabinet secretaries for
this department and I really
think the work that you're doing
is is right on so please keep
doing what you're doing and
bring in the energy so one of
the things mr chairman that I
want to ask this panel about was
just sort of a goal setting and
cascading of those calls to all
levels of the organization so in
my business one of the things we
have a consulting division and
one of the first things we find
with our clients are new clients
are that the the line employee
has a very different focus and
understanding of what their
goals are and how does that
cascade up to help the
organization achieve its goals
would any of you like to comment
on on where that is today
because in addition to
the classroom teacher and
everything going on on at the
school and in the school
district then you got pd and
then you've got you know lec and
then you've got lfc and then
you've got these other groups
and then you've got early
education department which I
created.
K through twelve a pd then you
got higher educate there's a lot
going on there and want what we
find mister chairman is win when
these thing when these goals are
not completely lined up and
cascaded appropriately and
everybody understands what
they're putting into the next
run to the latter something's
really broken does anybody want
to comment on that I mean are we
are we totally jelling and
connected or we not
mr chair senator pathy I think
you first inform us for your
your comments and I appreciate
that very much
your point is exactly about our
goal around shared
accountability all the parts
have to be working together and
so I can tell you from the point
of the public education
department every single employee
of the public education
department is clear about their
role in the implementation of
our strategic plan which again
is completely focused on our
students and on the educational
outcomes of our students every
single employee knows what role
they have to play whether
they're in fiscal and it's about
making sure that they are doing
their job to get money out
quickly so that it's served
students as quickly as possible
every single employee and so
having that clear focus and
leadership and and tracking of
outcomes looking at the work
that we're doing closely looking
at data looking at all of those
things that we are doing on a
day to day basis that we're
responsible including how we are
supporting schools making sure
that we're in schools that are
struggling with proficiency
rates that were providing that
support but really if this is
not the role of ped alone again
martinez jazzy is a loss it
against the stated new mexico
we all have a role to play
including our school districts
and charter schools including
every teacher including our
school leaders and so these
issues that we so desperately
want to address and our
education system the challenges
that we have.
That we're working every single
day to address we can't do it
alone and it cannot be sale of
the same guys
er to say with other early
childhood education department
and the higher red department
it's about creating an
educational system that starts
from the very beginning to make
sure that our are kids start off
in the best possible way and
have the foundations that we
need we can't do that alone
without early child key twelve's
best friend really is early
childhood system it all has to
work together so I think
embracing this concept that it's
not one entities responsibility
it's really a shared
responsibility
and we have to hold each other
accountable including ourselves
and so back to how how we're
spending money how were spending
a instructional time are we
doing the interventions do we
have the mold the multilayer
system of supports for our
students to get caught up all of
these things are response shared
responsibilities that we have
together and we have to be
honest about that and we have to
do the work together because if
all we're doing this kind of
point in the finger at the other
person are entity we are not
going to see the improvement
that we all desperately want to
see that we work every single
day to accomplish for our
students and I don't know if you
won't want to elaborate mister
chair senator it's
if I asked each of you
individually
how many students should be
profession in reading
what's that percentage which the
right percentage what's the rate
percentage of math and you the
easy answer is everybody a
hundred percent sure but how
quickly should we get there
should it be within five years
or ten years
if I ask you it's to write it
down you might have a lot of
different answers
and that sort of at the heart of
the question that you're asking.
It isn't so much that we don't
agree that we want better
outcomes for kids we all want
that it's what should that look
like how quickly should it
happen uhm whose responsible for
which of the role specific roles
right because pd provides
training teachers get training
principles also get training
whose responsible for making
sure they were using the right
tax books and what that
classroom looks like every day
one of the ways that some states
have gone about this and we
presented our committee about
this in the four is actually
either forming some sort of
planning commission or oversight
group that identifies those very
explicit goals that you're
talking about because then you
can actually go down I think to
that to your point about you
know line workers in this case I
think it's teachers and
principles the secretary
mentioned twenty four hundred
kits
which scores do we need to to
focus on how many more kids does
it mean for my omba moderate
spinelli valley high school what
do they have to contribute to
that goal to get to twenty four
hundred and I think if we can
again agree somehow that there
is some shared not just
accountability but
mile posts along the way where
we measure and then we can also
say in your contributing to that
goal by helping one more student
graduate by helping five more
students graduate you're not
just helping them that's that's
important but you're also
helping the stick do these
things as well and I think that
goes down to every metric that
you can think about when it
comes to attendance
discipline it would be heavier
all of those kinds of things but
until we explicitly say what
we're expecting we're gonna have
some shared and common vision
around overall improvement but
not necessarily get to the point
of whose responsible for what
and how am I as an individual
contributing to that.
One caveat that i'll point out
and it is about the graph on
on
page eleven that we're all
talking about and I think it's
just a caution to all of us
if we talk about increasing
graduation rates guess what
schools think their job is
to increase graduation rates
and that's what you're seeing
now those two graduation rates
and proficiency rates shouldn't
be independent to one another
obviously we want students to be
able to know and do things
but as we measure as we hold
people accountable you have to
be very careful about how we
talk about that and how we
support them in getting there
because if we're going to come
and say every every year
graduation rates went up or down
that's what people have been
there in their minds about
what's the ultimate call and
they are doing their job if we
said increase graduation rates
they did their job in a
graduation return.
We have to be able to be very
explicit about how you manage
all of those things
simultaneously and I think
having some sort of explicit
goal setting exercise whether
that's a legislative exercise or
an exercise that's done in
collaboration with the
department and to representative
lent this point
larger stakeholders who are
actually responsible for doing
the work like they have to be
part of that conversation to
because they're the ones who are
going to decide which levers to
pool every day on the daily
basis
I appreciate that chairman ended
up for both your answers at just
again if folks don't understand
what they're part of the show is
it's it's it's a show that gets
canceled and gets taken up there
if you will there's a lot of
atlantically shares we can get
there takes a lot of ingredients
subcake stand up without one
ingredient start there that cake
is going to take us terrible
it's never gonna rise so I just
hope that you know if we can
cascade goals from its our our
goal as a state of new mexico as
a people here to it's most my
new portion otherwise nobody
knows what they're doing to make
this thing work so I I would
encourage you mr chairman to
maybe take a stability and as at
a survey or a pole of every part
of education and find out who
understands how many folks
really understand what their
part of the show is my last one
chair is not a question it's
more of a comment and that's
just and I know chairman yourson
and an incentive financial were
there he's made this comment a
couple of times but i'll just
keep saying it too and we we are
right on the cost of another
administration it's going to be
here before we know at everybody
and so I I really hope that we
are preparing for that all of
this wonderful hard work that
that you're doing doesn't just
you know not yet continue some
of it doesn't get continue
whatever we've got to make sure
that we have a good hand off
from what administration to the
next and I don't know if
secretary if you want to come
into that but just something to
be aware of i'm i'm sure you're
already aware of it.
Very well
mister jersey are really i'm
very aware of a the amount of
time remaining in this
administration and it it does
concerning to me as a secretary
ped
and as a parent you don't want
to see
the things that we're putting in
place now change and I do think
that the the momentum is strong
we we have done a great deal and
I think we're right at a place
where I think we're ready to
maybe address some of the harder
stuff that we haven't quite yet
got to I think that the
partnership between ped and the
less scene lfc are strong I you
know I want I want an improved I
want a world class education
system our kids deserve it I
wanted for my kids and every kid
in the state and so yes i'm
aware it is something I think
about every single day I there's
not enough time but I all of the
work that we're doing if we'll
really focused about our shared
responsibility it is not just
that responsibility of pd this
is not we if we had the power to
do it alone we would have done
it it's not that simple right so
I really appreciate your
pointing to
this if people should know what
is their peace and this and and
to really have that commitment
because it's not a
solution for ped to figure out a
lot so I appreciate that thank
you chair great thank you next
we have represented down the
reps i'm dunkin and
representative first center here
thank you mister chair and thank
you sector and thank you it's
great to see all of the all
today and thanks for your work
on this and I
secretary you brought up that
the financial transparency and
the dollar for dollars something
the planets have asked for an I
know we passed a while back so
that bill ninety six that
created the financial
transparency portal at the
district level is that not
working as it's supposed to
mister chair representative that
we do have.
Available online a dashboard
that provides a counting it is
not at the level in which
provides that level of
accounting a dollar for dollar
accounting that does not exist
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary is there anything
in the language prohibiting that
from being part of it
mr chair representative down we
again we are going to do that
through the accreditation
process it's it's a matter of
one making sure that
we look at the budgets we look
at what submitted in the
educational plans that are
submitted at the start of the
year they describe in narrative
form how they intend to spend
money
within the various populations
and it's a matter of us honestly
at the department and I think
also at the legislative level
two go back and check that
accounting go back and look not
just at a state level but look
at a school level how our funds
being expended and so again this
is something that the department
i'm is in the process of doing
thank you thank you mister chair
and the four plaintiff groups I
just want to we got need
american low income special
education in english learner's
who's not part of the idea can I
speak in the sunnis who's left.
This chair representative
I think that's
anybody who is not
performing or receiving the same
level of service as their peer I
mean that that is essentially
what the court used as its
benchmark was all these specific
subgroups are below their pier
group and if there was a group
at the time cause there was only
a few types of demographics the
department was collecting
information on it could include
foster migrants military
with they didn't have the data
at the time the court made a
ruling but they affectively if
we were to reverse the clark
as long as that subgroup was
probably below there peer group
i'd imagine they would also
potentially be a plaintive to
this this case thank you
determine and thank you for that
sunny and are we obligated to
implement the states are the
courts as a separate branch of
government as a legislative body
and as the appropriators
are are we obligated to do with
the courts say
mr chair representative
there's been a whole wave of
litigation related adequacy
across many states almost every
state has been sued in this type
of capacity we've seen states
like washington say we will find
the legislature a hundred
thousand dollars every day until
it comes into compliance we've
seen cases like the android in
north carolina which is on year
I think twenty six or twenty
seven
I don't necessarily know i'm not
a lawyer the legal ramifications
on whether legislature is
compelled to respond to a
quarter it's certainly been
different cases across all other
states I will say though we are
obligated as a state to uphold
the constitution.
So we need to define what is
sufficient and you know form
education is and we need to
abide by that that is something
that we have all sworn in oath
to protect oh thank you mr
chairman thank you sunny III
appreciate your frank and honest
answer to that because that
uniform education would get to
the the fact that will when you
add low income it's nearly every
student and it's
when you're talking about
growing the gap you know i'm
have a background in education
and there are times when it's
like that's a title one computer
you're not a title when students
you can't touch the title one
computer because you're not a
title and student and then we'd
have say but i'm this is appear
other title one student and we
believe in in small group
education and working together
and collaboratively or you know
I mean it it's pretty subjective
in the response of have been
different across the state are
you running to say something to
that oh okay okay anyways the
aca are really big commitment to
addressing the plaintiff's
recommendations
and
can you do other interventions
that aren't in the
recommendations.
Yes okay thank you an are you
guys aware that the yazi family
the plaintives from the gazi
family pull their kids at a
public school and chose to put
them at rehub with christian
school.
And mr chair are you guys aware
that they are so happy with the
outcomes that were hope with
christian school that they
journeyed to sound a fee to
testify and support of the
targeted school choice dollars
following students that were
sponsored by senator tease you
know and testified that they
wish that was part of the
reminiscent record
and I just I just thought that's
worth noting um that dollars
following student is something
that one of the plaintiffs would
like to see at this point and I
I don't know how they
engage a matter how they get
their voice heard on that in a
formal way
I hope that's part of the
discussion but there are schools
that are meeting the indicators
and all four of the categories
for all four populations like
gadston and bernal leo are like
i've seen some are you guys
talking to them and gathering
data about what they're doing to
close the gap and is how are
other districts told about that
so they can replicate it.
So mister chair representative
down i'll lead on that question
but I would say that we're all
looking at those charter schools
and districts that are doing the
right thing back to senator to
uh to buy it since question we
do know the things that work
we invest in it every fiscal
year we roll out things like
structure literacy because we
know they work but they have to
be implemented
and so this idea that
you know it's just not happening
do we know do we know the right
recipe and with you we learn
from them when I talk about
gasting all the time we're going
alien c down to roswell tomorrow
to learn about what they're
doing related to structured
literacy and biliteracy we do
know what works
but again unless we mandate
things these are really locally
determined decisions as to
whether or not the implement the
things we also know that teach
your quality principle quality
turnover of staff all of those
things are factors you'll
utilizing data really looking at
your student data and have that
drive instruction having a clear
strategy and supporting students
who need extra support how do we
keep our gives kids engaged that
are disengaged all of these
things we know are factors and
things that are address
effectively and districts and
charter schools maybe not all of
it but most of it that they're
doing really well they have a
strategy they have a clear focus
and all of their staff and and
principles and administrators
are aligned in those efforts
that's when you see big and
improvements and really pretty
quickly
thank you mister chair and and
thank you for that secretary I
was pretty disappointed this
last legislative session I
think.
Most of the people in this room
voted in favor of the when the
school districts received the
student outcome data that those
be released early
so that you can do intentional
interventions of tutoring in the
summer so parents can have some
strategies in the summer to help
to prevent summer loss and to
help kids do better and a plan
for fall and so it's pretty
disappointing when a single
chair can stop a bill from being
heard when it's flies through
committee without any opposition
and then dies in a committee and
so I don't I what can you guys
do about there's what's what's
what some preventing the state
from releasing that data so that
parents so that parents can no
and communities can know and
ngos and third party tutoring
and intervention folks can start
helping out mr chair
representative down I would like
to remind the committee there
isn't one assessment we are
assessing our students
throughout the academic year
rights of there is assessment
data that they have that should
be continuously driving
instruction and so those tools
exist those are tools that the
state provides and so I just
want to say that that's really
the data that should be driving
instructions as for our
statewide assessed assessment we
are releasing the data and
working to release the data much
earlier there is a a data we
have to get the data and we have
to validate that data we give
opportunity for our school
districts and charter schools to
be a part of that process my
goal is to get it out as quickly
as as possible that's a whole
point of assessment it should be
driving and informing
instruction and so
you know we're doing everything
that we can to to get it out as
quickly as possible but again is
that there's not a singular
assessment that should be
driving instruction and
identifying interventions
that it thank you for a place
thing was chair I I do hear what
you're saying secretary but it
is one of the assessments and I
it seems.
I'd that it's not released when
it's available and then
I guess
are you looking at the
mississippi model is in white
what what things from that that
we dropped with the change
administration are you
considering bringing back
mr chair representative down we
have studied mississippi and
many many other states most
states that have taken on a
structured literacy effort and
that have seen improvements
we've been in an continuous
conversation new mexico has been
a part of a national state
cohort that has been focused on
structured literacy multiple
sort of efforts including with a
hand institute so have we
studied absolutely again things
that they have done that we have
not done a really tied to
mandates they're tied to
things like like retention
legislation
again I am not advocating for
retention legislation but we
must do something to provide
interventions to to support our
students if we're going to
continue to promote students
there needs to be a very clear
targeted effort to get those
students kind of until those are
some of the differences that we
see and like mississippi and
louisiana chair representative
packages added just we are work
as secretary said we're gonna
have a presentation to our
committee this week specifically
about what other states have
done and what we've done in new
mexico and where there's where
those gaps might be i'll just
add one thing at least one thing
to with the secretary mentioners
things like funding literacy
coaches I i'm not going to have
the right number but I think the
secretary said something between
eighty and ninety we have about
eighty and ninety literacy
coaches currently for the entire
state some of these states are
party having a literacy coach at
every school and so there are
additional supports and
resources that they're
providing.
So it is it is a conversation
about inter intervention and
whose making sure that districts
and schools have the the rate
training but also the right
personnel to provide those
interventions when students are
identified um because right now
some schools probably have that
not all of them do and the state
was not fun I I know we're going
to
uh mr ludigia anything to add in
them back to you
just very briefly I wanted to
touch upon some point she made
representative thank you mr
chair that to your point choice
works best when there's
transparency and access
if there is an ability for say a
low and come student to shift to
another score and they're aware
that the school has the supports
and instruction that's necessary
that's where it thrives I think
when there's choice with the
sake of choice you end up seeing
these sort of by appreciations
of those who are able to versus
those that are not so I think
you need a combination of things
for that to work the other
question that I think that's
kind of key to what you were
mentioning with the student the
plaintiff yassi plaintive kids
who went to republic
we care about what we measure so
I think if it's a question of
what they received at the school
versus what sort of was the goal
at their public school if it's
all about math and reading and
graduation that is what the
school is going to focus on if
there's something else that the
family is themselves wanted from
an alternative and they received
that I think that that is
something that we also need to
grapple with with our system is
what is the measure of success
and how do we know once we've
gotten there other
very difficult questions that
we're not going to be also off
today but I didn't want to
respond to your comments there
thank you thank you and I
appreciate that and
went instates where choice is an
option it's on the high end not
even thirteen it's around
thirteen to fifteen percent.
A students choose and I do
believe in new mexico we have
achieved the majority of
children that are attending a
non traditional public school or
charter school or indeed low
income they are at risk they are
of minority they are several of
these indicators make I I don't
know it doctor specifics on
activity ethnicity but
you know you tough you said it
takes everybody it takes the
family so the parent is the
primary educator unless they've
demonstrated otherwise they are
that child's expert at least
that's what if you say and
that's what americans with this
bill he's actually the
that's what they would say so I
don't know why a typically
developing child this parents
wouldn't also be their expert
they know them best and they're
their advocate throughout their
lives so engaging parents is a
huge part of educational
outcomes and how parents feel
about the service they receiving
you know we talk about someone
accessing housing is a customer
well appearant has got their
travel rolled into public school
should be seen as a customer
and so they should have choices
and
maybe that's part of the
equation and in the early early
years is the back in the
nineties when we've when I
started working in non public
schools and there was before the
the constitutional amendment
there was an office of non
public schools and we had the
option of testing you said we
can only measure what you you
choose to measure you can only
have date on what you choose
measure the non public schools
were given the option of
participating in the exact same
assessments that ped was doing
so that we weren't just
measuring students against
traditional public school and
charter school but we also knew
how the same population these
four plaintives how they were
performing if they were
attending a private school and
and we all know the services may
not be equal but maybe it's a
smaller classroom maybe it's
engaged families maybe it's
different things but I do know
that when there is not choice
then it is absolutely one
indicator and that is income
that allows parents to make a
different choice that I think is
best for their children
so it was I wasn't trying to get
type cut up and in choice.
But i'm just saying if those
plaintives went back and said
oops instead of giving a seventy
percent increase to public
education we would like dollars
to follow students to places
that meet certain indicators
would we all be saying that the
plaintiffs are right and we're
going to do exactly what the
court say it was just it's just
something I think about that
anyways I I that's a rabbit
holding i'll be done mister
chairman great thank you very
much next we have representative
dunkin then senator heo and then
vice chairman representative
thank you mister charle be try
to be brief
I just hope that with the new
administration coming in that we
stay the course
when we have what is it six or
seven sectories for your
department in the last eight
years
seven years
I don't think that does any of
us any good so I I hope we stay
the chorus with what we're
trying to do here and and and
and do it can acknowledging the
fact that not all the schools
are the same you know when we
try to show
square peg into a round hole it
doesn't work sometimes and so I
hope we have the ability and the
agility to
two let schools that are doing
something extremely right let
him keep going there instead of
saying we're gonna mandate
hundred ninety two days instead
of a four day work five day so I
I hope we do that second man
sector recommended for wanting
to graduate twenty four hundred
more students and i'm going to
go on my sort box remit it here
but until we hold
but not holding our kids to the
level we need to hold them to we
might graduate him but they're
not going to do themselves any
good they're not going to do a
communities any good they're not
going to our economies or
businesses any good at all when
we don't hold them to the so we
need to hold marm's dads and
grandparents who are the main
educator and we need to help
them to be able to do this
otherwise we're going to
continue to put these kids out
and and i'm i'm sorry to say but
we are dumbing.
Him down just to graduate just
get him out the door so I hope
that we can
offer whatever help we can to
the communities to mum's dad's
grandparents who are rate
whoever are raising these
children and and offer them some
help because obviously they need
it as well so i'll get off my
soap box thank you mister chair
thank you very much senator
thank you mister chairman I I
know that we're going to run in
late summer and I try to be as
friends as possible although I
could stay here all day and ask
questions thank you for the
presentation this has been
valuable information secretary
on the page one of your hand out
here I would encourage you under
the foster shared accountability
I think school boards need to be
I think they need to be noted
because in my and I was on
school board for two terms right
so i'm i'm i'm going to be a
little bit harsh here but but
school boards need to be held
accountable to if if the
legislature is held accountable
by the court pds now being a
held accountable by the courts
school boards need to be held
accountable so I just encourage
you to just call them out on
this part here part of the
challenge of I i'm looking at
this plates proposal page for
and insure april dollars follow
up at a student the problem is
is that we embed all of that
money into the s e g and so when
the money comes to the district
the boards don't necessarily say
well we've got this much money
for outrageous students what
schools do we need to place it
out they really try to equally
not economically equally
distribute the finds to the
schools based upon the number of
students or the teachers are in
other words they they don't send
you a right they're really
looking at how do we keep the
lights on how do we make sure
that there's x number of kids in
each classroom how do we make
sure that we've got these
classr.
It's hard for them to get past
that and so you know somehow
another I do think that we need
to come up with some sort I I
know we did it in santa fe where
and I don't know if they're
still doing it but we've did our
own situation formula or meet we
made sure that at restaurants
followed at risk kids to schools
that they were at that meant
that schools were not equally
funded they were equitably
funded because we give those
extra dollars because we know it
takes extra funds to educate
certain groups of kits
historically so secretary and
wondering how many districts
have implemented structured
literacy.
And mr chair senator to hill
I would like to say all of them
but what I can see is that
they've all been trained all of
our educators pre k through
eighth grade have been trained
and structured literacy we've
trained our principles with for
providing coaches we provided
can continuous support but I
cannot tell you that structure
literacy is implemented in in
every school and every classroom
I know that to be true because
you know
we will have those that are
honest about it
and so
I I will shake it every only a
new mexico but that's not the
case so um mr chairman madame
secretary i'm wondering if we
can start collecting or if maybe
you already are collecting data
so that we can look at it online
these classrooms cause I think
it's down to classroom but I
will tell you I know my district
is not implementing that and I
know that because not only
principles tell me that they're
not but teachers tell me that
they're not I would like to know
which classrooms are
implementing structured literacy
so that we can make an educated
decision or those kids improving
attorney that it makes sense for
everybody else to then model it
so I I don't know if that's
possible
but it would be nice to know
cause I I spent some time we
were talking earlier this
morning looking at the reading
scores for the districts on the
ped website and the only one
that looked like it was high I
think it was sixty seven percent
was lost alamos and clearly it's
because they have the highest
level of phds in the country
right up in los alamos that's a
fact they have higher income in
los angeles they have less
students but they're performing
great everybody else was in that
thirty to thirtieth maybe thirty
seven percent tile so I couldn't
really tell.
Because I was kind of trying to
figure out like okay are there
some higher percentages so that
I could see maybe those are the
districts that are implementing
the structure literacy but I
know that debt the status
properly still not entire real
time to figure that yeah mr
chair senator to her you know we
get assurances from school
saying we're doing certain
things um i'm in a lot of
classrooms around the state i'm
not in every classroom this is
where we really need our
instructional leaders and our
schools to play take on that
responsibility as they should
the department is rolling out an
observation tool really training
our principles are
superintendent center coaches to
utilize this observation tool
related to structured literacy
we just recently had a a big
conference we had a track and
that literacy conference
specifically for our principles
we had over eighty five
principals that are attended and
as well as instructional leaders
within districts so that they
can learn how to effectively use
these tools we need our school
leaders to be in classrooms to
support our educators to make
sure that if they're not doing
it why why are you not doing it
do you need some extra support
can we bring in some coaching or
is it a matter of just saying
you will do this you need to do
it
and so we need it again I just
want a highlight that would be
absolutely neat are
instructional leaders that every
level principles are super
intense are chartered leaners
are school boards I do want to
address the school board piece
if I curn you know that recently
we have passed legislation
effort in partnership between
the department and the
legislature that addresses
school board training to improve
the level and quality of
training and I hear from school
by members who are also asking
for this they they want to be
prepared.
To be effective decision makers
there their schoolboard members
to really have a positive impact
in the educational systems in
their community so we need to
make sure that we're training
them properly that they're that
they're getting what they need
to to really be effective
part of our creditation process
will include school board
training to make sure that they
are in fact taking their annual
training requirements that they
have the the information and
knowledge and support from the
department as well to make sure
that they're prepared to be
effective but we also need the
willingness rate the skills back
to that partnership on the part
of school boards thank you
mister chairman thank you
secretary so
i'm hoping that structured
literacy is going to be
something that school boards
will learn about because there's
three things that they basically
have responsibility for
supervising the superintendent
approving the budget and
creating policy and policy can
absolutely be driven around that
kind of um
implementation of curriculum so
how many programs are available
during the summer like this
summer how many programs are
schools ped parties how many of
our kids are in summer school
because when when you talks any
about kids losing over the
summer what happens is it's a
domino
is they lose over the summer so
they come in behind
their other piers who have other
opportunities during the summer
and then they don't learn as
much because they're catching up
for a couple of months and so
each year that loss over the
summer becomes greater and
greater and greater and makes
the gap wider so i'm just
wondering what kind of programs
and how many of our kids across
the state are participating in
summer program mister chair
senator to hear that a great
question.
Are many of our school districts
and charter schools host their
own summer learning program so
those that could be summer
school to get car right to do
some credit recovering or it
could be some extra support in
particular
subject
what I can tell you is that the
state has our state funded
summer reading program we had
over seventeen thousand students
register for this program this
program is extremely popular
among parents and families they
love it because of the very
thing that you mentioned some
are summer learning loss is real
this is this is an issue that
every single state is dealing
with and so at the state of new
mexico has stepped up as
invested now in our second
summer to provide those
educational opportunities and we
are not only experiencing a
avoiding the learning last that
is typical every summer when our
kids are not learning
were actually seeing growth and
proficiency so that's exciting
for me and I again think the
legislature for that continued
partnership and support in that
program is determined secretary
thank you that was going to be
my next question is in regards
to arm do we know that kids are
actually participating so I I
guess i'll just i've i've got a
couple more questions but i'm
gonna ask you those tomorrow
because I think you're here
tomorrow to um in regards to
we've put this really strong
emphasis on graduation how do we
how do we divide data and at
least put a strong emphasis on
the things that we are were
making decisions about whether
or not or at the top of the
bottom of the nation and to be
honest with you the the the kids
count a valuation that's only
two of the sixteen measures
right but we put a tremendous
amount of of
importance on mouth.
And on reading and on graduation
how do we divide up kind of that
without losing the graduation
commitment and start having that
same commitment for reading and
math well I just give you an
example when I have two word
schools in my district it
towards the end of the year
they'll have
talk boards or white boards now
that have kids listed by name on
them who are falling behind and
graduation there are keeping
track of these kids they know
and they're meeting with them
the principles meeting with them
the vice principles meeting in
some cases the superintendents
going out and meeting with them
they're doing everything they
can to make sure that these kids
crossed the line but I don't see
that same kind of
canara
in reading the map how do we do
that so mr chairs senator to
heal
We frankly have not made those
same investments and math and I
worry about it every single day
we need to do equally as much
investment and focus strategic
focus across all levels related
to math but I I want to address
your question about graduation
this this goal in graduation
rates is not just about seeing
we're graduating more kids but
are they proficient can they
can they effectively attain a
job post high school graduation
this isn't just about a number
this is about the work it takes
to actually support those
students who are disengaged and
not on track it's about being
targeted and focused in our
funding in our efforts it's
about doing exactly what you
said in schools we know which
give kids are not untrack to
graduate we know
if we have a clear and specific
strategy and effort where a
lining our funding were
providing those interventions
were re engaging now we're
getting them in programs like ct
work based learning or whatever
it is that really makes them
want to be at school that were
providing we're leaning in and
we're supporting them to get two
graduation to come to completion
of their graduation that's
meaningful so it's not just a
matter of it's not a number it's
about all of the actions
activities investments targeted
investments and those kids who
are disengaged or not on track
for some reason or another to me
that's meaningful it's not just
a number i've meat was students
every day
and i've talked as to high
school juniors and seniors who
feel like nobody really cares
about whether or not they
graduate they're just they're
not engaged they're not showing
that and these no one seems to
really care according to them
but when we actually say we do
care we are going to help you be
successful.
Whether you need some academic
supports whether you need
mental health supports whether
you need an adult on campus who
is there for you no matter what
is going to help you
that work whether we're going to
show them the relevance and the
make education exciting to them
again that's when we get to them
to completion so to me that's
what it means to focus on twenty
four hundred more kids is to do
all of the things that support
them that we should be doing
anyways to make sure that
they're successful and they
graduate it's not just a number
our kids are bright incredible
people
even though we see that we have
to improve their proficiency
it's us but have not supported
them to be where they need to be
but they're bright intelligent
capable people
we need to support down to make
sure that they're successful
that's on us and so that I just
want to declare that it's not
just pushing more kids to
graduation and it's just a
number it's not just a number
these are kids that we are
better serving an engaging and
supporting so that they can be
successful thank you mister
chairman and secretary i'm
wondering I know each child
passed to have each student I
say child each student is
required to have a graduation
plan I don't remember when that
starts is at ninth grade is at
eight grade and i'm wondering if
we don't start those graduation
plans close to the like fifth
their sixth grade
you know when kids are starting
to understand more
abstract kind of philosophies
and part of that graduation plan
at the very very beginning it's
becoming proficient and reading
that map and the other things
were requiring the credit you
know all of those is there a way
that we can we can lower that
down and start those graduation
plans earlier so mr chair send
it into here i'm so good us this
question.
So so by statute student should
start their next step plans in
eighth grade and it should
continue through to graduation
they are not being done across
support we know that to be to
read these plans and and some of
the plans that are being done or
kind of copy and piece jobs
right there really not focused
these plans are meant to help
identifying the students
interest to get them thinking
about what focuses they have in
what interest they have post
secondary it helps us identify
if they're taking the right
courses
they're incredibly important so
so they are required they need
to be done we have a tool called
level that is online platform
that I think will help move from
a paper based system to an
online system that will be more
effective but those are one of
the big strategies we talk about
what works that's one of the
things that work early warning
systems work if you recall we
had legislation that are
required math and literacy
screeners for our students early
on in the first first year's of
their schooling we got a catch
him early these are these are
tools that allow us to identify
when we have a problem but it's
not just identifying when
there's an issue it's about
making sure that we have a plan
in a strategy at the school
level that includes the parents
that includes the educators how
are we gonna get does each
student caught up that needs to
be carner it's not going to
happen by accident it has to be
intentional and so hopefully
this coming session that we can
begin to bring those bills for
it again so that we make sure
that we have the system simplice
that not only identify our
students that are needing some
extra support that were actually
creating the systems at the
school level to make that happen
thank you mister chairman i'll
just close was saying thank you
again for your information I
know you guys are working
incredibly hard.
It what what's hard to do is to
get that down to the lower level
i'd love to see that program so
that parents can see on a daily
basis if they want to where
their kids are in each of these
laws thank you mister chairman
thank you very much we're gonna
have a representative with a
quick question and then when you
thank you mr chair and I just I
think i'm right about this I
think two thirds of our
superintendents are brand new
this year
mr chair representative I don't
think we had the number but we
can get it back to you there
have been a lot of transitions
in the last few weeks actually
mrperiod cher represented him
and I don't have the exact
number either but will get it to
you but at the turnover rate is
very high and so just in the in
the last month of this academic
here there have been several
changes that the superintendent
level but it is very typical
something that we see
consistently here over a year
thank you and and really my only
question is what is our
projected school age enrollment
population going to be five
years from now
or next year the year after that
I know it's going down I I just
would like to know
mister chair representative
right now the population stands
at two hundred ninety five
thousand we're losing about five
thousand a year or so I would
say my guess is two hundred
seventy thousand and five years
thank you that's all I have
mistreater thank you very much
for the victims thank you mister
chairman you you know my kids
went to home with christian
school it's a private christian
school if you're you can get a
scholarship to go there so a
party to lawsuits their kids
should not be brought into
legislative conversation whether
the parents choose to go to a
christian school or not or
public school I think that kind
of urge me when when represent
have down brought that up
the boss family funds that
school.
And if missus jazzi chooses to
send her kids to a private
christian school to a charter
school to any school that's
their school choice in that
their business it's not the
legislature's business
just because you're a party to
suit to to change something
doesn't mean your kids are
brought into that party as a
soot and discussed in the in the
committee
it doesn't sit with me well
let me ask you some questions
and and you may have to give me
a legal opinion because charles
may
associate attorney over here
and I had a discussion about the
lawsuit that was brought in the
district court in santa fe and
since that was only brought in
the district court is santa fe
and it wasn't appealed then it's
not a state white ruling
am I correct in saying that any
since you've been on the case
since the beginning or can we
get that information because if
it's not a statewide case and
we're acting like it is.
We wasted a couple billion
dollars
chair
the survice chair i'm not a
lawyer and I do not know the
answer that question
but we will follow up and get
you respond to your john and get
this a legal opinion maybe get a
sole an opinion tomorrow for the
committee as I think that's very
interesting that if that was
brought in one district court in
it wasn't appealed according to
chat gbt my attorney
it wasn't
then it wasn't appealed and it
applied as an applies statewide
and we taken that and applied at
stateway that's just a question
i'm not so sure right but I mean
ma'am sector I think we need to
get you don't keep your door to
your office and make sure you're
in the office more and make sure
they school districts are doing
what they're supposed to be
doing when they have these court
orders otherwise we need a they
are I don't know which school
district is a party to that
sanity lawsuit do we know which
school districts are party to
that is it how many school
districts are party to that
santa fe lawsuit.
On the aussie martins are martin
shots you however ever say mr
chair mr vice chair I believe
there were
I had to get back to you I think
they're about either twenty
three or thirty five focus
districts they were part of the
original countersolidarity last
suit
but the primary parties were the
martinez and yassi families that
brought the suit yet there are
the parties to the suitcase they
had standing to bring the case
but the other parties did not
have standing they just join us
I forget what they combat
in so they mean I have standing
and may not apply to them steep
wait if the governor would have
a pilled the case
when it was first ordered then
it would have statewide standing
according to chat chat gbt
in and since it doesn't I want
to understand how that what
effect we put ourselves into
you know if the school districts
put thirty million dollars in
structured legacy
and the school is tricks are not
participating and they're taking
that money and they're putting
in their cash balances i'm
coming for it
if they're not going to
participate in the lawsuit those
school districts that they filed
against us and are not going to
spend the money the way the
court told us to spend the money
in the plans that we've done and
they sit there and build their
cash balances on the money i'm
coming for it
if you're not going to
participate with us and
resolving this law suit
and you're not going to fix the
problem because it's all of us
the legislature can only fund
fund it
the secretary can only put the
money out in if they want home
rule or they want rule
themselves and then don't
find the things that we fun that
gets us in the lawsuit
then there should be a party to
the loss in each of every
superintendent and each and
every school more member.
Should be held to the party of
the loss if they're not doing
the what the court is telling us
to find and refund it
and they're not doing that they
should be a party to that suit
otherwise pd should or the state
should seek a suit against a
school districts for not
participating the way the court
has ordered us to
would you agree that many
section is you're shaking your
head is mr chair senator on yes
I hear what you're saying and I
think that
um
i've seen should consult your
returning
the public education department
is using the tools that we have
we do not have the ability.
To mandate things cause that you
know as we've tried before we we
get sued at times when we are
view to over exert our authority
we are using the authority that
we have at the department but I
think that if you're interested
sending her in doing more I
think that that's something that
the legislature should
absolutely look into and we're
happy to do that with you but if
your authority only goes so far
and we're trying to educate kids
and they're not participating in
the educational system the way
I guess we see fit or or less a
year whoever's has the plan or
the governors with structured
literacy to improve the grading
system if they're not
participating there should be
recourse I mean
it's the kids that are losing
out because the kids that need
it are not getting it because
the school district doesn't want
to do it
in a hear this example all the
time all we want home rule
control that's fine in dandy if
you do that in the world they're
strict and in the rancher's kids
are probably well educated and
the ranch ends workers are
probably not that well educated
and they may need more structure
they mean more letter see or
they may need more programs and
so
I mean at some point you just
got to see
you're going to participate or
you're not in in have you server
sent them a letter and said
you're going to participate
structural
otherwise we're going to start
looking at other things within
the school district
mr chair center money was I
completely
understand and support your your
sentiment and this we do provide
a guidance we are through rule
through policy we have more
authority and working with our
schools designated and and need
of improvement where we're much
more engaged
so again at school accreditation
is going to be.
Another tool that I think will
be very effective in helping us
do these things we are utilizing
all of the tools that we have if
there are there more as their
need for more tools and more
options yeah I think so
and so I I think that this is
something that
we will look at as part of the
martinis jose remedial action
plan as well this is this is
kind of that area that is been
under addressed as we look at
the things that we have improved
that we've passed legislation to
address that we have increased
funding in focused on specific
programs that we know that
matter that that is maybe one of
the things left in terms of
what we need to explore together
and I think that will be
something that's looked at as
part of the remedial action plan
how about a little phrase like
do your job
mr chair center
if you're referring to me
and try to refer in the school
districts because we're fining
them in and we're telling what
we want done in what we're
saying or what whoever seem i'm
not experting education scene we
want stretcher literacy all we
want after school programs we
want all this to help correct or
educational prom graduating the
student that can't do math
that's no good because then you
hear the colleges of me here
every day sing you send his kids
that are on educated and we're
back in teaching ninth grade in
in as a freshman in college
whether it's elder brought one
hundred and ninety nine or
whatever it is in college but I
mean somebody had some of the
and then the day somebody's got
do their job I mean we're paying
him a lot of money for the last
since twenty twenty would be
increased teacher pay from
beginning teacher pay from fifty
five thousand to.
To fifty five from thirty six I
mean we've increased teacher
paying
across aboard in and they need
to get paid well they do hard
job in
bbsending kids in the school the
strickers topic my wife was a
prince but she'd been through
the whole school system
principal librarian you name it
and every added a lot of
different schools but people
have got to do their job in
order us to change the
educational system and if
they're not going to implement
why we as a legislature fund in
and we see that changes are
educational system then we have
a problem and if you don't have
the tools in your tool chest to
fix that then I guess our only
choices to look at where they're
building their cash balances is
that
mse structure glucy because
that's on the top of my tone if
we gave him money for structure
alersy and they didn't use it
then we want to back
if we gave a money for after
school learning and they didn't
use it then we want it back
maybe there's a school that
needs it
maybe their school that wants to
do it that that we need more
money to do it that we can we
don't have the money budgeted
but I mean
this is our kids in everybody's
kids I mean me is apparent I
mean I I made sure my kids had
good teachers in their
classrooms and they went to the
right schools and you can talk
about elderado and i'll talk
about red rock school and I
lived in that district so that's
where my kids went but that's
one of the premier schools and
gallop just like elderly was in
albert and parents make choice
were to send their kids in which
school districts that eleven and
they want to send to the best
schools it in that's not going
to change in the community
there is always gonna be premier
skills and not premier schools
and sunny knows that from his
teacher american days
when we trade that program in in
it kind of fizzled out and we
brought in a lot of teachers but
tell me how.
How are we going to make them
participate when the court tells
us that we have to do these
things and then they don't
participate
how do we make them john sunny
how do we make them
participate
mr chair senator right hesitate
to answer that question but i'm
sure I would try might get shot
yeah
the building actually actually
at the risk at the risk of
sounding like making excuses I I
just want to back up for just a
second structure literacy as an
example and and I want to again
my point out I think we've all
pointed out here with the
legislative efforts that the
legislature in the state have
made over the last five or six
years since twenty nineteen
structured literacy secretariat
I think I want to I went the the
law was passed in twenty
nineteen was a fully implemented
until twenty one twenty two
essentially because of the the
pandemic year so we really in in
essence been training teachers
just to start there for about
five years and we started with
kindergarten and first grade
teachers first we've now trained
second and third grade teachers
in in a year fourth and fifth
grade teachers was just last
year I think
fifth grade teachers were just
trained last year and and the
reason I I point out that
timeline is
for us to expect immediate
results either in terms of
implementation or proficiency
rates I think we I think there's
some patience that that needs to
happen there because we're
talking about people the fact
that we had to train every
single elementary teacher in the
first place speaks to how our
system was not working on a
fundamental level we've now
trained every elementary school
teacher to do this
and so I think
first training then takes time
in them and then them
implementing takes time.
To your question though
there is there is I think still
a lot that that's not happening
in terms of implementation
either on a teacher level
principles are still learning
about this and we talked about
superintendent turnover
superintention over means
principal turn off
and so when you have a new
principle come in maybe they
haven't been trained and
structured that it was
so there's some fundamental
issues that are happening in
terms of implementation that are
one going to take time but to
your question also does require
some level of
accountability I guess for lack
of a better term
and how we do that is you know I
think the secretary would
probably say is is difficult
because she doesn't have enough
people to go out and and measure
all the things and make sure
every teacher is doing
everything and every principle
has to be doing that and every
school board has to be doing
that
I wish I had a better answer in
terms of how we make it cause I
will say you can you can require
it
you can mandate things but in
the end every teacher has to be
on board every principle has to
be on board and that's not
something that you solved with
with policy we we you know we
joke all the time you can't
legislate behavior and and we
can try and so I think ensuring
that the department has the
resources it needs that
superintendence in school
districts have the resources
they need is a star and then to
senator true hills earlier
question about assessments
we have to get it whose where
are we seeing improvements and
where are we not singing
improvements because then you
can we're we're not going to get
into every single classroom but
you might be able to get into
those schools and clashrooms
where you would expect to see
improvements but you're not
because of some of the efforts
that are being made the model
and support schools in regard to
structured literacy is one way
to get started at that that
didn't answer your question
senator about how you make them
because we can write a lot
allows and you can pass them
potentially but it does get to
what behavior looks like an
ensuring that folks have all the
resources.
And supports they need and then
potentially some sort of stick
to
well we're under mandate by the
court right or under a court
order to do these
and they should fall under that
order to that's like me being a
contractor and only putting in
half the pain on the wall not
finishing the job are you in a
pain now because you didn't do
the work ring so if you're not
doing the work why are you
getting paid
that's ultimate question but the
question of the day is this this
is coming at us in november and
you're the fifth their six
secretary
i'm counting how it is excuse
for a while
it ends so stability is another
thing within the executive
office that has to happen to and
I have said this before but
we're looking at a court order
and trying to get something
settled so we know where at
and if we don't have stability
throughout the system whether
it's the secretary whether it's
the correct funding whether we
fund things and they don't do
him it just creates a stability
and every kids different I get
that right every kids can learn
different everything is going to
be a little bit different in
every school district but if
they aren't participating and
we're funding them to
participate
why are we funding
I mean we could go back and look
at impact aid and what change
that meeting in all in in
districts rate as every district
that impact aid money I think
but you look at galloping you
look at grants and you look at
suny and impact aid it hasn't
changed their performance levels
which we thought it would they
spent the money on cars vehicles
trucks other things that didn't
change which they were spending
it also spending a classroom so
I guess in gears for so long in
the frustration level of of
hearing the same old ding and
and then trying to do the right
thing by increasing what we
increase about two and a half
billion dollars over the last
four years
four years.
Two billion dollars in education
over the last four years and I I
understand it's slower change
we're not just going to get a
load of graduation graduates
rates the same thing the drop
out suit at night to the twelfth
is where we need to really catch
but
at some point it's got a change
it's got to start that direction
in and if you don't participate
in help changing that direction
then why should refund you
and if the courts are mandating
it on us
white and so waiting to
legislate your mandated on the
school districts
if it's if it's there the ones
are brought to soon
if it's mandated by us then we
should mandate it on them and if
they don't fall the mandates
then maybe they lose our
creditation if that's all you
have that's all you got but
you're going to punish a lot of
kids in I don't know but
somebody's got to send the
message that it needs to change
in and they file the suit in the
court's mandating and they're
not participating the mandates
that help change educational
system then we got a change a
whole lot within school
restricts
mr chair center money short very
short I think you bring up some
really important points and I
think that this is something
that we need to look at together
and then when last thing
I have a key to my office and
there every day evenings and
weekends to
date they vice chair thank you
very much secretary
director and and the l o c staff
mr
I guess two quick questions won
sort of sufficiency of funding
when we look back on it we will
have exceeded probably anyone's
expectations when this loss so
it was file do we think that
that's right
mr chair to your point in the
case.
The plaintives used the ****
study from two thousand eight
and said we could use this as a
benchmark the court said you
don't need to use that benchmark
but you should look at it we've
already exceeded the inflation
adjusted amount for that but I
think it becomes a question of
the sufficiency mean the inputs
are there or are the ultimates
there that is the that is the
question at stake right now
that's a core question in reach
really appreciate your
presentation in sort of
the logic model
sort of that the clarity because
there are so there's such a deep
policy and ongoing learning in
the education space and then on
the other hand for particularly
us on appropriations it's an
input in an output and in and so
then a micro question and this
was something spark during the
discussion
literacy coaches something
that's maybe a that's the best
practice for increasing literacy
assuming math coaches would be a
best practice for increasing
math scores
does
at risk funding could at risk
dollars be used by school
districts and schools for
literacy coaches
and math coaches so the I think
my one of my takeaways and I
want to think the panel we and I
and the LFC
decided very intentionally to
invite ped and listen
even as this is a LFC report and
I think everybody sees the
incredible amount of detail and
expertise it's gone into the lsc
report as we acknowledge the
entire equal system one of my
takeaways is we simply cannot
nor frankly maybe should we
continue adding new recurring
funding.
Because there's sort of a very
big disconnect there and maybe
that hinges upon the plan that's
coming in this year in november
frankly it puts a lot of
reason behind the perf three
year test because why would we
continue to add new recurring
funding when there is I think
actually mister lou you made
this point
not even a necessarily a
disconnect that it's just more
money static outcome in some
cases we may be doing more money
that is worsening the gap in
effect because some districts
are choosing to do it in a way
that implements that money
effectively and the districts in
schools that clearly the kids
they serve need at the most
armed so more money is making
the problem works was that the
point you are making mr lou in
that sort of example
mr chair my point was that it
was the observation you were yes
that is a potential outcome if
we're not careful about
targeting resources where
they're
thank you so as we look ahead
and for a new for the plan
I find it incredibly difficult
to dedicate new recurring
dollars to leteracy coaches or
math coaches or other evidence
tested approaches because right
now we have so little knowledge
and so little evidence about how
the two plus are the roughly two
billion new dollars outside of
salaries which have gone up
extraordinarily and have needed
to but are now competitive
outcompete colorado outcome
other states that i'm sure
outcome the arizona.
So I guess an ongoing question
from me will be
how do we even consider adding
new recurring funding going
forward is maybe the plan and
something that represent a vente
brought up is sort of a full
agreement between LESC PED and
LFC and updated plan is that
sort of a foundation to unlock
new recurring dollars is it even
a good idea for us to add new
recurring dollars in the last
year with administration in
madame secretary for what it's
worth to me you're doing
arguably I think the best job of
any of the secretaries you're
open you're accessible you're
think well verse and working
with with the different partners
and stay called or so it's
absolutely no sort of slight at
you to sort of look ahead to
that next this final year uhm
but that's what I think the
struggle particularly at the
finance level because it's
either add more you know stay
flat in extreme cases reduce and
I think to the point that vice
chair muniels brought up
when as we're able to see that
there's a misuse or not really
meeting the moment with the new
dollars that have been dedicated
that seven years ago folks would
have only sort of been laughed
out of any of these meetings
saying yeah four five years
we're going to have two billion
new dollars.
Maybe that really does depend
upon the group in the stake
holders you and we collectively
represent to a firm a plan
moving forward otherwise just
from my perspective it is very
difficult even for very
important and good quote unquote
new ideas or new
strategies adding new money when
there is so
when the results and the clarity
about how the current money
outside of salaries has been
used and it's effectiveness is
is frankly you know muddled at
best but we that said thank you
for this conversation thank you
all for very much for taking the
time thank you offer continuing
to work together in a big thanks
to the committee I think for
really good questions from a lot
of different perspectives
great.
Okay now we're gonna go into
and presentation on orphan an
abandoned wells
the couple of quick notes were
doing this uh i'm in a invite up
mister winchester and
actually from the mulga after
the presentation should they
wish
this is a
staff report lead by nonpartisan
extra staff with excellent
expertise
mister winchester and and I
think ashley have requested the
opportunity to sort of address
or or
offer perspective given that
their industries are very much
at the center of the report
which is fine you know obviously
we're working under time
constraints I do very much is
there any sort of questions the
lsc staff work very hard to do
the very best job that they can
it's for us in our elected roles
to sort of through that but any
sort of ascribing of mode over
this or that sort of tipping the
scales when we're another on the
staff staff is doing the best
job that they can think we all
always benefit deeply from that
so without just as a look ahead
and mister winchester and should
thank you for being here we'll
look forward to visit a little
bit later with that will turn it
over to south
thank you mister chair members
the committee my name is
stephanie choice I am one of
your lfc program evaluators and
today i'll be presenting this
LFC policy spotlight report on
or find oil in gas along with my
colleague elizabeth that's in
the report is in tab of your
binder and it looks like this
if we can get the technology to
work we were also the tracking
where we are.
In the report up on the screen
they're working on it
just before we diven I wanted to
bank secretary kender dine
deputy sector shelton of the
energy minerals and not
resources department and the
staff at the oil conservation
division ocd for their
collaboration on this report I
also want to thank the
researchers and oil and gas
workers who generously length us
their valuable time and
expertise
so mr chair members the
committee just to set the stage
a little bit the goals of this
report were too fault first to
understand why the number of
orphaned wells reported by ocd
has continued to rise despite
record funding allocated to ocd
for plugging those wells and
second understand how much it
has caused is casting and will
cost the state to plug those
wells
if you please turn to page one
you will see a summary of the
report
the key point that I will draw
your attention to is that the
state this is significant and
growing financial liabilities
for oil and gas well clean up
as you can see here in turn one
on page one the report estimates
the current and likely liability
to be between two hundred and
seven hundred million dollars
with possible liabilities as
high as one point six billion
dollars
or get into how we arrived at
those estimates in a bit and why
there is such a large range but
first if you will turn to page
four of the report will start
with a little bit of background
about the oil and gas industry
in new mexico and how it is that
the state sometimes ends up
responsible for plugging and
decommissioning oil and gas
wells.
So as you all know
new mexico has been an oil and
gas producing state for more
than a century and during that
time companies have drilled more
than one hundred and twenty
thousand wells and the state
many of those wells tap
hydrocarbon reservoirs a mile or
even two miles deep.
And wells aren't built to last
for ever over time as the oil
and gas reservoir is depleted it
gets harder and harder to get
oil and gas out of the well and
a well reaches the end of its
lave at that point the well
needs to be sealed or plugged
that's been a requirement in new
mexico since the very earliest
days of oil and gas production
and it's important for a few
reasons one unclogged and
inactive wells can pollute
ground water by acting as a
condo it for fluids and gases to
migrate under ground
two they can pose a risk to
human health and safety if they
weak gas were produced water to
the surface and three they can
impede the efficient extraction
of nearby resources
if you'll turn to page five of
the reports
here in figure one
you can see
you can see how plugging can
mitigate some of those
undesirable outcomes so here on
the left of figure one is a
diagram of an unplugged well and
on the rate is a diagram of a
plugged well the basic idea is
that you use cement to isolate
each underground water hydrocurb
information from the ones above
and below it and I know i'm
speaking to some folks for
experts and so bear with me
using specialised equipment
cement is pumped down the
wellboard to specific daps where
it sets up and when done
correctly keeps all the gases
and fluids in their original
places
now once a well has been plugged
the well site needs to be
remediated and reclaimed if
you'll turn to page six of the
report you can see that
remediation means removing any
polluted soil and addressing any
impacts to surface or
groundwater and reclamation as
ocd defines it includes removing
debris and equipment and closing
any above ground pit.
Figure two here on page six on
the left shows an example of in
progress remediation and on the
right a well site that has been
reclaimed
if you'll turn the page again to
page seven
you'll see that one wells are
producing any volume of oil or
gas ocd typically leaves it to
the discretion of operators to
decide when to plug and reclaim
the well tort two here on page
seven shows that in recent years
the average well produced about
seven hundred barrels of oil
equivalent in the year before it
was plugged or about two barrels
of oil equivalent for day
operators of course take many
variables into consideration
when deciding when it makes
sense to plug a well a few
included the costs to get oil or
gas to market the cost to
dispose of produced water which
is the salt water that comes up
alongside oil and gas
and the vast majority of wells
are plugged by industry but as
you can see here in the middle
of page seven when a well
becomes fully and active and is
not plugged by its operator ocd
can pursue the authority to plug
the well itself in order to
prevent some of those outcomes
that I mentioned earlier
if you'll turn to page nine of
the report you'll see a figure
that shows how ocd pursues
authority to plug a well the
first step is issuing a notice
of violation to an operator with
too many inactive wealth and
then there are few different
pathways that can result in ocd
receiving authority to plug the
well.
On this same page page nine in
chart three you can see the
number of wells plugged
historically by ocd versus
industry light blue is industry
dark blue is ocd I do want to
note here the ocd did not keep
robust records until recently
other wells it had plugged
historically so these numbers
are almost certainly low
but according to its budget
performance measures ocd is
plugged at least nine hundred
and sixty seven wells since two
thousand and two which is an
average of fifty one wells a
year or about five percent of
all wells plugged in the state
since two thousand and two.
Here at the bottom of h nine his
next few pages starting here at
the bottom of page nine these
next few pages of the report
explained the various ways the
state pays for plugging when it
has to plug a well historically
the main source of funding has
been the oil and gas
recommendation fund which is
discussed on a page eleven if
you'll turn the page again
as you can see in the first
finding or the first paragraph
on this page the legislature
created the recommendation fund
in nineteen seventy seven and
directed a portion of the oil
conservation tax proceeds to it
the share of the tax and going
to the reclamation fund has
grown a thousand fold since then
currently ten point five percent
of a tax goes to the reclination
fund when the price of west
texas intermediate crude oil is
below seventy dollars as it was
this morning and nearly twenty
percent when it is above seventy
dollars
as you can see here on this paid
per eleven in turkey the balance
of the recommendation fund was
sixty five million dollars at
the end of this school year
twenty twenty four
here at the bottom of page
eleven you can see it and on to
page twelve you can see that
that's because recently ocd
hasn't actually been using much
in the way of state funds to
plug wells instead the division
has been using federal grants
allocated to the states under
the infrastructure investment
and jobs actually that by
partisan infrastructure law new
mexico has received fifty five
point five million dollars in
grants from the federal
government in the last two years
and is eligible for another
hundred million dollars in the
coming years
further down here on page twelve
you'll see that ocd has used
that funding to increase its
rate of well plugging but if you
turn the page to page thirteen
you'll see that the cost of well
plugging has also gone up in
afly nineteen the average state
plugged well cost.
Thirty thousand dollars to plug
in off my twenty four it was one
hundred and sixty three thousand
dollars.
A different measure is that
often used is the poor foot cost
because deeper wells are more
expensive to plug if you look at
chart six here on page thirteen
you'll see that the performance
cost has gone from about eleven
dollars to forty three dollars
since afly nineteen
will talk about a bit about why
that might be at a moment but
first i'm going to hand the
presentation over to elizabeth
to discuss the reports estimates
of the state's current and
future liability
thank you stephanie mister tara
members of the committee if you
all turn to page fifteen
you'll see the overaging finding
of this chapter is that the
state face is current liability
of
roughly two hundred million
dollars and likely liability
exceeding seven hundred million
dollars for orphan wells which
is considerably more than the
funds available through the
federal grants or the
reclamation fund
before we get into those numbers
though i'm gonna suspend a
minute on the terminal or friend
wells as you can see on page
sixteen the term is commonly
used in both industry and the
media to refer to wells that
have no viable operator in there
for have become the
responsibility of the state
however neither new mexico
statue or code actually defines
the term orphaned well
new stories site a few different
numbers for how many orphan
wills there are a new mexico
like seven hundred seventeen
hundred three thousand because
ocd has used the term
differently depending on the
context for example if we are
only talking about wells on
state or private land that oct
has already pursued the
authority to plug then the
number of work and wells is
going to be on that lower end
but if we're talking about all
inactive wells in the state
regardless of the land owner
that may not plug the worlds
or their operator may not plug
the wells and it's going to be
much higher
for this report we were a
primarily interested in
understanding the potential
costs to the state.
So we defined orphan wells as
wells on state or private land
akay their surface owner that
ocd has pursued and received the
authority to plug
that's the first section of this
chapter then we'll look at wells
that ocd does not currently have
the authority to plug
but which the state believes
what ultimately become its
responsibility and finally we
look at wells that are at risk
of being orphaned because the
expected cost of that are clean
up for exceeds their predicted
future revenues
so again this chapter is going
to go current likely and then
possible liability for orphan
walls
here at the bottom of page
sixteen
you'll see that based on ocds
internal list of wells it has
received the authority to plug
there are seven hundred and two
currently orphaned wells on st
in private land
turning to page seventeen table
seven shows that the report
estimates that at recent
plugging rates it will lately
cost ocd at least a hundred and
thirty million dollars to plug
those
and it could take close to a
decade to complete that
now ocd will also have to
remediate and reclaim those well
sites and their associated
infrastructure on the on top of
the seven hundred orphaned wells
that we've identified the
division also has a large
backlog of clean up for
previously plugged orphaned
wells
the report estimates that
remediation and reclamation work
will cost at least another
hundred million dollars and
possibly much more just for that
current liability of plugged in
unplugged orphan while so that's
where our estimate of two
hundred million comes from
plugging remediation and
reclamation of wells and they're
associated infrastructure that
the state is currently
responsible for
now turning to page eighteen
you'll see the next section of
the report estimates the cost of
plugging and remediating wells.
That have been inactive for at
least fifteen months.
But for which oct has not yet
pursued the plugging authority
for
these are not worth in wells as
the report defines those but oct
considers them to be almost
certain future orphan wells.
So they often include them and
their estimates of the number of
orphan wells in the state
as you can see it the bottom of
page nineteen
the estimated cost for plugging
remediation and reclamation of
those fourteen hundred inactive
wells on state in private land
is at least four hundred and
sixty eight million dollars
plus so this number plus are two
hundred million dollars and
current liability that we
estimate is how the report
concludes the low end of our
likely orphan well liability to
be about seven hundred million
dollars
that brings us to twenty
this next section of the report
looks at a category of wells
that are not orphaned or
inactive but which are producing
extremely low quantities of oil
and gus such low quantities that
they are likely not generating
enough revenues to cover the
cost of their own plugging and
reclamation these are the wells
that the report terms possible
liability
you've probably heard a lot
about stripper wells which are
wells that have produced less
than ten birls of oil equivalent
the the wells that the report is
talking about in this section
are wells that are producing it
volumes that are one tenth or
one twentieth of that stripper
will
as you can see in chart nine
here on page twenty
there are a lot of those really
low producing
wells those categories for this
to the left here and in fact new
mexico's well inventories quite
skewed towards them
however most production is from
really high volume wells as you
can see in chart ten below there
the profitability of the is low
producing wills depends a lot on
the price of oil and gas but as
the report notes on page twenty
two
table twelve
there are about
twelve there are about three
thousand wells on state of
privately that produced less
than a barrel of oil equivalent
a day forth.
Three years street between
twenty twenty one and twenty
twenty three meaning they are
consistently producing in very
low quantities and are probably
nearing the end of their lives
most of those wells are owned by
a privately held companies which
makes it difficult to see
whether they have money set
aside to plug and reclaim them.
But if a third of those wells
were to end up on the states
books it would cost many
hundreds of millions of dollars
to plug and reclaim them and if
all of them were to end up the
state's responsibility for
liability could be close to a
billion dollars at current
plugging and recognition rates
so adding the estimates and
estimations discussed for
current likely and possible
plugging reclamation and
remediation liability the report
estimates a total cost between
seven hundred million dollars to
one point six billion dollars.
Now alternate the presentation
back over to stephanie for more
for more about the various
factors that could produce that
liability
thank you was between mister
chair members of the committee
if you'll turn to page twenty
four of the report
you can see that the report
finds that reforms that
prioritise operator lead clean
up can limit the state's
financial exposure a key
component of that conclusion is
the reports finding that ocd was
not set up to operate as a large
scale plugging contractor and
struggles to control both the
cost and quality of state
contracted plugging and
remediation work as I noted
earlier at the cost of plugging
has risen dramatically in recent
years that's partly attributable
to factors outside of october
control including the fact that
it's been plugging deeper more
expensive wells recently oil
field inflation has also been
quite significant since the
pandamak but not as significant
as the cost increases that we've
seen
if you'll turn to page twenty
six of the report
there and on the next few pages
the report discusses for finding
that ocd's procurement practices
are likely contributing to
rising costs to summarize some
of the contributing factors
maybe that the division relies
on contractor estimates for
plugging and does not
competitively bed projects in
general the report recommends
that ocd change a number of its
contracting practices and that
it's strengthened oversight of
its spending to ensure state
funds are being used efficiently
specifically the report
recommends that ocd follow the
lead of a number of other states
that require a state
representative to be on sight
for all plugging operations both
for quality control and to
ensure invoicing is accurate if
you're flip ahead a few pages to
page thirty one the second
finding of this chapter of the
report is that financial
assurance requirements are
insufficient to cover the costs
of plugging and recommendation.
So earlier in the background
section I mentioned that the
state mostly pays for plugging
out of the reclamation fund and
federal funds but in statute ocd
is also required to collect up
front financial assurance from
operators quote sufficient to
reasonably pay the cost of
plugging the wells covered by
the financial assurance and
quote.
Ray now statute says the maximum
amount of financial assurance
that ocd can require for all of
the companies active wells in
the state is two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars or up to
one million if the company has a
lot of inactive wells
as you can see in that second
paragraph here on page thirty
one from many operators that
translates to less than a
thousand dollars per well and in
some cases just about a hundred
dollars as remindered the
average cost to plug a well last
fiscal year was one hundred and
sixty three thousand dollars so
right now the amount of
financial assurance required
from most companies is not
enough to cover the costs of
plugging and reclamation
further down on page thirty one
you can see that ocd has
successfully recovered eight
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars in the last twenty years
from operators whose wells it
has had to plug but has spent
hands of millions of dollars on
plugging and recommendation.
If you'll turn to page thirty
two
the report recommends that new
mexico adapt policies that
incentivise operators to plug
wells before they become the
responsibility at the state
leveraging industries capacity
to do the work more efficiently
and likely more cost effectively
different states and countries
have used different statutory
and regulatory mechanisms to try
to align incentives towards that
goal each of them has their own
pros and cons this section of
the report provides an overview
of many of those options
including increasing the upfront
financial assurance required and
allowing the regulator to review
the sale of wells between
operators to ensure the
purchaser has the cash flow to
plug the wells
many of these regulatory
mechanisms are summarized and he
will seventeen on page thirty
three
we be happy to discuss any of
these more independence but if
you'll turn again to page thirty
six of the report i'd like to
preticularly dry your attention
to a somewhat novel approach
that several states are taking
to this issue which involves
basically setting up trust funds
associated with either specific
wealth or their operators the
company is pay into at a fixed
rate you could think of it
something like a retirement
account for a well where
companies put money into it over
the course of a wells life so
that the money is there when
it's needed later different
states have structured those
trusts in different ways and but
the report finds that it's a
policy option that you as of
legislature might consider
adopting
which brings us to are key
findings and recommendations as
we've discussed the state visa's
current and mid term liabilities
in access of seven hundred
million dollars possibly more
significantly more than the
funds currently available for
plugging in reclamation
if you'll turn back to page two
of the report with me.
The.
You'll see that in might of that
were recommending both some
statutory changes and some
regulatory changes all of these
recommendations are intended to
improve transparency around how
much the state is spending to
plug and reclaim wells and to
reduce the chances at the
state's liability growing in the
future
with that and with the
permission of the chair we'd
like to invate deputy deputy
sector he shelton with the
energy minerals and natural
resources department to present
the agency is response and then
we'd be very happy to stand for
your questions
thank you mister chair and
members thank you for for having
me here today
I am here in place of our new
oil conservation vision director
of a change started on the job
yesterday morning he was
presiding of the world
conservation commission he sends
his regrets.
The overall response on behalf
of me and the entire staff at
the conservation division is
thank you this is a exhaustive
comprehensive well researched
accurate and fair report it's an
accurate assessment of the
challenges the division is
facing with regards to or from
while liability the challenge is
the division russell with every
day regarding a financial
assurance sufficiency
and basically how to manage this
enormous level of work that ocd
is candidately not set up to do
we are regulatory agency set up
to
permit the operation in the
willing gas industry in new
mexico this is something that
has become a
bit of an elephant that the
division is deal with
I would like to
try to give a little bit more
context to some of the tools
that the state uses right now
around cost containment for
plugging specifically I am are
talking about a lot of the
environmental work I just want
to use my time here because I
know we are a little over time
to talk about the plugging costs
and the way that we approach
them sort of compared to other
states
a couple of the examples that
were actually highlighted in the
report or great examples to sort
of illustrate that i'm
variability of wide the wide
range of outcome that we see
when we actually begin the work
of attempting to plug a well and
I would start with the two wells
that are highlighted on page
twenty nine
um so if you look at these are
too well as you've got to I
should have checked on the
pronunciation of this I believe
it's barknet and and or brian
i'm starting with the cheaper
while the obrained well and you
can kind of see from the diagram
on the page they're very very
close together he's well are
going we think into some or
formations
so there's reason to believe
that you should just looking at
the math that they should be
comparable in price
what they found when they went
in to start plugging.
I or brian was that at every
single death
name there was good casing
integrity the amount of cement
that it took and the time that
it took to leave that seminar
ten is exactly which would hope
for it took a single plug worth
of cements to establish the plug
at the required death
and generally speaking
everything stayed on target
this is the exception
we see more commonly is with but
you see with the bark now well
which costs marm wide almost
three types almost three times
that much they punters a med
down that well to supple to
assess plugs at those depths day
and night they plugged more
cement we had to plug you know
four plugs are to to lay the
base plug and these are costs
that you just do not begin to
see until you are down and you
are pumping this man seeing if
you have circulation or not was
happening is that there are
preparations that that casing
and when you pump cement to
attempt to plug your cement is
escaping into the formation so
effectively you pump intel you
have stability in that formation
that a back fills into the
wellboard and that is how you're
going to see a lot of you feed
it and tell it starts to eat I
mean that is the approach that's
not just the ocd approach this
is the approach the industry
wide this is how we plug wells
in the state.
We had that yeah we pumped
various plugs multiple multiple
times the only ploy on market
that went really according to
plan was was plug number four
when you factor in the
time that was spent cause the
two main drivers of costs are
the time that we spend with the
rig in the time for the crew to
actually operate it when you put
me factor in the time that was
spent plugging and popping and
the actual submit utilized this
actually came in pretty close we
didn't see overruns based on
based on the actual time
the reason that we are
highlighting the cost of this in
particular is because I don't
want to put themselves in the
situation where we think we can
take these actions we're taking
a lot of actions let us
legislatively or ocd is taking
actions and expecting big dealt
downward in terms of what we're
paying per well because
candidately the the flag that
popped for us on this is that
when we compare our costs of
plugging well with what the
costs are in the private side
they're comparable ours are
higher for reasons i'll talk
about in just a second but
they're not two to three times
higher than about ten to fifteen
percent higher so this is the
cost that we are seeing right
now in the private industry just
and I don't leave we ask them we
meet off probably three to four
times a month we have different
operators in sort of checking in
in one of our questions on the
list is always what we would you
paying right now approximately
to plug in the answer recently
and I recently I mean in the
last eight to twelve months has
been a hundred and twenty to one
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars our ocd average is a
hundred and fifty five to
hundred and sixty
moving in the side three I I for
on my on mine which is mostly
text just to just a compare you
know people want to comparison
texas a light as I understand it
are plugging requirements are
stringent than texas we have a
statute that says that we need
to seal off every single strata
which means that we lay multiple
plugs at the required deaths we
pump concrete and cement in
there not you fond cement in
there until we get the pulling
established a required death.
The way operators tell us they
do it in texas as you lay is you
played the bottom you feel
withdrawing budget and you plug
the top it's cheaper and faster
and will help contain your costs
but it does not result in the
sort of predictable isolation of
strategic we are required to
comply with you in mexico
because are presumably it's more
environmentally protective.
The other
well I would draw your attention
to just because it's an
important story to tell us
on page twenty eight the
buckskin federal number two well
this is a well I got very very
expensive very quickly the way
that we
approve costs with contractors
is that they effectively are if
they need to go over what is bid
so we have you know statewide
price agreements where we
lay out the criteria for billing
and we generally do cross
reference that were being billed
for each task for each sort of
item in in our price orders is
comparable to what's getting
build on the private side we
assess this because the
contractors that we are using
are the same contractors that
the private private industry is
using
but when those over just come we
tell them to just pump it and
bucks can federal number two is
the reason why this is a
terrifying plug this is
something that had is well had
the potential to contaminate
water supplies we were very very
worried about this and we just
tell me advise them to go and
this has kind of thing happens
more commonly than you would
take again we have a statutory
requirement to plug it straight
and and and protect
environmental resources
the reason that i'm i'm glad the
bucks can federal number two was
was identified in this is that
that is a club job and that is a
well that has talked about to
this day ocd as a what could
have gone wrong if we
didn't have the ability to react
quickly to use our purchase sort
of approval and sort of overage
approval process to just keep
cruise working on that at a
timely way to get up
moving in and I want to just
use this as sort of a visual
reference you can see these are
just two invoices that we get on
the left
you can see a daily report that
we get that we have as an
example it's a few years old but
just a daily report that we get
one of the recommendations is
going to having a specific
inspector or a company man
reporting daily from the site we
do have an analog to that and
that is the steely reporting
process it's a desk.
It gets reviewed at the desk
from our from our office either
in albuquerque santa fe our
teacher are hobs there will be
staff were
receiving and reviewing this
daily report so we don't have
people on site that's a capacity
determination that that we just
have to make we do have
inspectors will drop in
periodically we do not have
staff on say every single day
what we do have is this
reporting process so you see the
day report on the left on the
right as an example of the
invoice that we get for broken
down by sort of activities per
day at the end of the plug and
that gets reviews well by
by staff
the cost for specific pieces of
of our plugging are taken from
the state way price agreement
they are itemized out and
purchase orders
that is a piece of context that
is probably useful it didn't
matter the report robustly that
is our fault we did not get that
information communicated
profitly tell of see staff so
didn't get into into some of
this but some of the things that
they are asking for in terms of
oversight of individual while
plugging the work orders
oversight of the actual work
done from a daily basis we do do
but we just didn't get that
information to staff that's our
fault just for that and then
finally inside five and six this
is a sort of a thumbnail quickly
proposed response to some of the
recommendations this is the
first one at least is incorrect
that was based on the
preliminary important not the
final so you can throw that one
out the range of our responses
to most his recommendations are
good idea we'll get to work good
idea where in process to
incorporate it we don't or you
know something along blinds if
we don't do this because we
don't feel like we've got the
capacity currently to do it or
we're not sure it would
necessarily help
up the problem but for the most
part I think that a lot of these
recommendations are things that
we are currently addressing i'm
certainly regarding
characterization of inactive
wells more from walls that we
are looking at as part of a rule
making response there's a
petition that is before the oc
right now that has been filed by
an external party to reexamine
some of the financial assurance.
Rules that we have in place and
acting the the statutory
legislation a lot of the things
that are going to be in that
rule are gonna be really on
point
for for a some of the
recommendations in here so we're
accepted to get started um but
yeah the the wrap in conclusion
this is it's good to be heard
this is something that we have
been struggling to say as
clearly and comprehensively as
you have it before you today
things tell of c we have been
trying to say this for a few
years now and this is the this
is the clearest and best way
that that case has been made yet
around the states coming
issue with orphan well liability
and the and the tools and the
limitations are some of the
towards the ocd currently has to
meet the moment
thank you
will go straight to committee
questions
so where just as a a quick
reminder we're gonna I think go
through questions for the
presenters we're going to invite
up
mr winchester in miswagon or
after there's questions for for
the presenters to share
perspective and to address any
questions that the committee
might have um so
we're gonna start with
representative sanchez then go
to
outside or go to will come back
to him represent chat field then
represent vincent then represent
dunk
represent chat feel please
thank you for the presentation
can you just can go through it
for me how the reclamation fund
responded.
Mr chair represented thank you
yes the recognition find is
funded through the oil
conservation tax which actually
happened
we wanted to turn to appendix c
um at the end of the report but
it's funded through a portion of
the
reclamation tax or the
conservation tax that is on
produce
revenue from produce oil and gas
and then it gets a portion of
that tax right now the portion
is
let's see it is
to point two four percent of the
revenue of the tax
win the price of time
sorry let me jump in here yeah
so right now the the the the
recommendation fund gets a
portion of the conservation tax
and the portion that gets
depends on the current price of
west texas intermediate crude
oil and so when the prices below
uh seventy dollars a barrel ten
point five percent of the
conservation tax goes to the
recommendation find it when it's
above nineteen
point seven I believe percent
are goes to the recommendation
find someone fair and so too
that I don't know the answer to
the questions that i'm asking
but it's not my first of about
off the retailer trucks are not
a little bit about or masking so
what is the rest of the
conservation fund go
close to the general the rest of
the conservation tax goes to uh
the general find and as you'll
see here in appendix see
historically the conservation
tax when it when it was
introduced in nineteen fifty
nine
was used to fund to enforce the
oil and gas act that's with the
statute said when I think well
conservation tax was passed
eventually over time i.
Leave
different appropriators
different legislators made the
decision to have more
flexibility so rather than
directing all of that tax
specifically to the oil
conservation commission it went
to the general fund principally
in order and then you fund the
operations of the oil
conservation division out of the
general fund in nineteen seventy
seven the legislature also
created the recommendation find
and at the time point zero one
percent of the conservation tax
went to the reclamation fund
that's obviously grown over time
so wasn't here in nineteen
seventy seven but i've been
around the round house good well
before I got elected and i've
seen the i've seen the fund
rated
before i'll just say before i'm
not say
for water how many or by who but
I have seen this money used when
the state gets cannot get some
tough times and the money
certain there so.
I guess so
I will my question is to yes
in the past
a lot of money has been
appropriated by the old
companies to plug wells in the
in the chair time whenever they
become useless and how much of
that money is still in the fund
how much is number one how much
money is in the fund number two
how much money isn't in the
found that was put up by the
industry in the past to plug
wells with
mr chair representative if you
will turn to
uh hit eleven I believe the
report you can see at the oil
recommendation fund balance
currently as at the end of my
twenty four
and as you can see the amount of
money that has been the fun has
been receiving has grown
considerably in the last few
years as a result of high oil
and gas prices and high
production
the
as they said the the fund has
not been used at very much in
recent years to plug while
they've been using aderal grant
funding to plug wells here in
new mexico which is why you see
that a high balance currently in
the fund now if they can direct
you sorry to make a jump around
in the record here but if I if
you can code pendix a I hear in
the report that's on page thirty
eight you can see ah you know
there are over time energ has
had to report to you
about how that fund has been
used i'm in there are a number
of
moments when the fund has been
used for things like paying for
ocd staff for example so that
has certainly been the case
that's detailed here in appendix
a and some of these report card.
Updates
so I mean wells did ocd plug
last year.
Mr chair representative it was
more than a hundred wells that
oct plugged last year
let me see if I can find a
specific page mister chairea
with state front not not the
federal part
mistreat
mr chair representative
i'm gonna I I don't know the
answer to that question
I can tell you how much they
cast and how much each well cost
to plug but
in terms of whether the funding
used was specifically state
funds for some funds I can
answer mr chair I guess where
i'm going without is
just looking at the report here
it looks like the federal
government pays for wells on
federal lands and that the ocd
pays for wells on state in
private lances that true plug
mr terror representative
historically that is true in
recent years the federal
government as part of the
infrastructure investment and
jobs actor the bipartisan in the
structural the federal
government has a allocated
funding to the states for
plugging on state and private
plant
with the goal of addressing the
large backlog of orphaned wells
that many states have including
new mexico so those resent
federal funds are grant funds
from the federal government for
plugging on state and fee land
so i'm very supportive and happy
to see federal money going in
the plugging are wealth and I
guess where i'm going with that
is
how much money better if we used
this for them to plug some more
wells errors in and have a week
mr chairman if I may that we
also I would add do plug federal
wells we are effectively the
contractor occurs for blm to
plug wealth.
So we and we get some we get
paid by for that out of it
additional and separate fund
that belongs specifically
supplies to us it takes a little
longer below the federal
government has a lot more
process they go through before
they will let you plug a well
between an addition to using
federal money to plug state and
private we're also using federal
money
so most insurer thank you
now you're talking about
physically plugging the federal
wealth i'm talking about using
the reclamation funding to plug
state in private will in new
mexico
mr chairman is
stephanie mentioned we we have
been using almost exclusively
federal funds so the reason that
you have not seen that you've
seen that rack find balance
climb in the last two three
years is because just about all
the activity renewing on state
private and federal well yeah
state and private land is a is
using those ij bill federal
dollars
so mister chair are we going to
reduce the money that the
old companies are putting up to
that phone is that
what we're doing I mean I know
that's not what we're doing what
i'm saying is if we have federal
money coming in and we're
plugging wells worth it we've
got a fund over here
of money that's been put up by
the old companies and we're not
using it to plug all to plug
wells with
what water what are we doing
why are we not doing that
mr chair representative
I believe I the total of the
federal grant funding that we
are eligible for it and or have
received and the current balance
of the recommendation fund i'm
still is insufficient for our
estimate of the likely liability
post by orphan while so mister
chair that is insufficient for
the likely liability how about
is it sufficient to.
Plugs some of the wheels that we
have orphaned now.
Yes sixty six million dollars
will certainly plug some walls
are priority has been to utilize
federal dollars I think mr
chairman and representative
going to your question of
whether or not we can collect
less of the conservation tax
based on the availability of
federal funds the answer to that
is not that a certain statute
the collection and the amount of
the collection are out of so
mister I apologize I was more
but smart canceled in anything I
just hit i'm saying we've got
money why are we not plugging
that you know that's a simple
thing as we the the federal
government is is appropriating
money and you all are doing the
contracting and we have money
there and I hear a lot about our
friend whales i'm just I don't
understand why we don't use the
money that's appropriate
to plug wealth
maybe even the money that goes
in this goes to the conservation
fund instead of putting it in
the general fund where we're not
sure on funding right now I
understood it and maybe yours
passed when we were desperate
but maybe we should think about
using that money to plug wealth
thank you mister chuk you
represent chat field
war go next to represent vincent
then represented duck for
example
thank mr chair
so whenever whenever we talk
about you guys being in the
contractors do you have a
company that does it you have
multiple companies that plug
these wells mister chair
mr chairman representative we
have five contractors right now
on our statewide price agreement
that is
you know what I I realize in my
presentation I didn't get back
to something I promise to get
back to which was are why we do
pay more all five of our
contractors are currently and
send one courier that is who bid
we took every single bed in
twenty twenty two or three when
they.
When they bid into the statewide
price agreement and would just
happen to be the case that all
five that we got at that moment
we're to say one county so we
pay for them to drive across the
state and we pay for them to
stand by occasionally if we need
it to plug in the premium which
adds costs to add about 10-15
percent we do pay a little bit
more than the private industry
and that's one of the reasons
why we reopened with gsd that
statewide price agreement and
march of this year we are
currently trying to get some
more bids in trying to get some
more contractors in the permian
so that we can sort of cut down
on some of those transportation
costs thank you miss chair so
always whenever I see that kind
of money always know that
there's contractors following
that money around and we only
have five in the state and
they're in the sand one area and
they're having to drive
completely across the state
which makes costco way up
are you telling me that there's
no body in the southeast that
would be willing to plug these
wealth when that mister chairman
representative when that first
bid went out for the statewide
price agreement that was the
case we are working right now
and hopeful that we will have
contractors on the state way
price agreement in the permit on
this new round of
of bidding thank you mister
chair and so when when will that
price agreement come available
and how often does it come
available
zave price of mister chairman
representative of the price
agreement it's open to gsts
basically when we ask gsd which
we ask them earlier this year to
do um in terms of when that will
be concluded I don't have an
exact answer for that I can
connect to gst and follow up
thank you mister chair
thank you very much for upset a
vincent representative of dunkin
and then represent the
representative
thanks chair I was at that
meeting in nineteen fifty nine
yeah I was there
I would suspect everyone in
those dollars at that point in
time we're supposed to go into
this fund.
To take care of the wells
mischair I would recommend that
we put all that money back and
we delegate all of that money to
go into this fund to take care
of that if we do that
will we be a long way towards
the goal of meeting that seven
hundred million dollars.
Mr chair representative
if you would like to turn back
to page eleven you'll see in
table for the reclamation fund
uh
sources in users so the you can
see the the cash balance as it's
increased in recent years last
year the recommendation plan
received a record twenty seven
million dollars from the
conservation tax
even at those revenues I think
you'll find there's a
significant gap between the
revenues going into the fund and
they estimate it liability thank
you mister chair what I was
meaning is if we took all of
that tax everything that's going
to the general fund we brought
it all back in in diverted all
back into that fund would then
we have a whole lot more money
to work with
um since we're using what ten
percent
I 10-20 percent depending on the
price of the
uh with you know the chairs
permission I have to have our
chief economists come up and
speak to the impact to the
general fund of diverting all of
the conservation tax to the
recommendation fund
I will note that it is generally
this committee's policy not to
recommend your marketing tax
revenues and because it ties the
hands of future legislatures so
this report really focuses on
encouraging industry to plug
wells since they are more likely
to be able to do it efficiently
and cost effectively
mischairman thank you for that
but who's paying those taxes
right now is it industry or is
it me going shopping in the
walmart
mrperiod terra representative
the conservation tax is a tax on
oil and gas produced okay so
thank mr so those bad industry
is already paying this in and
then wordy verding it as
legislature we've diverted it
and it's going somewhere else I
am saying.
We should do the right thing
bring all that money back that
the interest industries paying
into this and plug those wells
and that's why i'm recommending
that mister chair thank you
thank you very much
representative next we're gonna
go to represent the hand then
center linear and then keep
going from there a lot of hands
came up thank you mister chair I
think answering my question to
have been answered already but
i'm looking at
some of the issues you brought
forward on page three for eminer
and some of the problems you
have with
the
just filling the the those wells
as it did the the drilling
practices or how do you I mean
can you explain that a little
bit why and each is different
obviously but you know
geographically but due to due to
this how many I mean have you a
measured how many
more difficult wells there are
or prior is there a
prioritisation that you have for
for these over orphan wells and
how we spend the money to plug
them mr chair
thank you mister turn
representative of look on it yes
we do score based on a priority
for the or for the orphan while
one of the recommendations in
the report that's great
recommendation is be more
proactive on that list about
going back and examining the
sort of wells to see if the
conditions that let us to score
it where we did have changed
that we don't do but we do score
based on environmental hazard
age all sorts of things that
result in as we wind up tackling
wells that tend to be a little
bit more expensive a little bit
earlier when we get in there you
know it's another reason that
it's difficult occasionally to
compare our costs to private
industry costs you know private
industry I will be preferably
plugging well they've been
producing for
years sometimes and will find
wells in rough ship olds casings
that report sometimes around.
World war are and that's that
drives costs
thank you mister chair that to
my that's really what i'm kind
of driving here how many I mean
what are the
new prioritization list
what are your estimate the
highest cost I guess what is the
highest cost of estimating on
just maybe one in the worst
wells
mrperiod
mr sharon representative I don't
want to get too far out of my
skis but when we put that list
together we don't decisive
necessarily assess it on cost we
assign a new merit score based
on
criteria the cost is determined
when you're actually down haul
pouring cement we have you know
specific sort of costs for
different actions in different
pieces that are in the statewide
price agreement but in terms of
what the whole project is going
to cost that's just not really
possible to assess until you're
down hold trying to do the work.
Mister chair representative and
I will just bring you in the
report to appendix eu which on
page forty three which does show
how ocd prioritises it's while
plugging and I did just want to
know that so to date as far as
we are aware and no cd has not
historically tracked costs
systematically but the most
expensive well the state has
plugged was plugged earlier this
year and it cost five point two
million dollars
thank you that's that's kind of
the exact that's where i'm
getting out where those those
costs and how we estimating them
and when we're we have these
unknowns I guess is what is what
we're really looking at it's
going to take more work and even
more money to really if we find
a way to estimate those costs
and how that's going to happen
but I I mean I I am aware that
interest to your point that
private industry when they they
they do the vast majority of
taking care of playing their
wells and that's good those are
good intentions but it's gonna
cost them a lot less than what
we're you know what we're left
with because we didn't have
policies in place we didn't have
a directive in place so to speak
as we do to you know today so
one of for the work on the other
point is the
maybe i'll ask that when offline
bits do we know
the the ownership of our
previous ownership of those
wells is that something that's
on record mister chair
miss cherabzen of yes you can go
and happen what's called the o
grid it's the you can unique
identifier number for for
different operators and you can
kind of search by well and get
an idea of we have a list of the
old grids associated with the
different well over it's like so
thank you and you have better
technology in the way that we're
doing business so to speak now
it's gonna you know be more cost
costs effective and we have to
pled these wells but where were
left right now is where the
conundrum is so thank you for
the work in doing that but the
other will offline just to
prompt you the safety of this
and and in the work that's
around it i'd like to discuss a
little bit more but you're thank
you mister chair for the time.
Thank you very much for saying
the hunt next we have center of
the near the rooms
thank you mister chairman can
you just kind of walk me
through.
When did we start
plug in these wealth so for
example that we have a major
accident in the state that
caused us to do that what what
is the
what started the the plugging
process
mr chair senator it has been a
requirement
since the very early days of oil
and gas development since the
nineteen thirty five oil and gas
act for operators to plug wells
at the end of their life for the
reasons that I mentioned earlier
for groundwater protection it
was actually originally
intended to preserve resources
because when you have an
unplugged well you can leave to
pressure drops or water
intrusions that actually impede
the extraction of nearby oil and
gas resources so that was really
the initial goal and then over
time regulators realize that
there were these other
sort of coral area
benefits to plugging wells and
so if that's your question so it
was kind of driven by the
industry itself
yeah they wanted to plug to any
of their other wells
so mister chair and we have
so we don't know the exact
number that we need plugged into
mexico correct
I mean we have three different
numbers seven hundred fourteen
hundred and three thousand but
nobody seems to agree on exactly
how many we need all of picket
number of those numbers
is that driven by the industry
is that and driven by
environmental industry or is
that by government.
Mr chair senator I do want to
just a
walk through a little bit those
as those different estimates and
the report if I can um so for
the purposes of this report we
really wanted to quantify with
the potential viability to the
state is from these unclugged
any inactive wells
as we mentioned orphan while is
not defined in statutory rule
it's just a commonly used term
and
people refer to many different
numbers of work and wells for
the purposes of this report we
refer to or from only as those
wells for which the state ocd
has plugging authority so they
have gone through an
administrative law process and
they have received authority to
plug those wells we also further
near that to only wells on state
or private land because those
are the wells that the state is
likely to be paying for
as the deputy secretary
mentioned the state does also
play whilst with federal
government it's reimbursed by
the federal government for those
while
so that seven hundred number is
the number of wells that the
state currently has
responsibility for plugging and
reclaiming
the fourteen hundred and active
wells
are the wells that are well that
have been inactive for at least
fifteen months and if I can draw
your attention to
the technical mind I hate to
mister so when you when you mean
inactive what's the barrel count
zero
four zero so it too
at two u start looking at it if
it's only producing two barrels
you start looking at it and then
when it gets to zero it has to
be plucked
mr chair senator
the inactive wells that oct
tracks have been inactive for at
least fifteen months and if you
get table nine here on page
nineteen you'll see.
That many of them have been
active for much longer than that
at that point those wells when
they've been inactive for twelve
months the offer is a three
month grace period for an
operator to either
apply for a proof temporary
abandonment of the well I too
plug the well or to resume
production from the well
if they do none of those three
things they are out of
compliance with the oil and gas
and oc can pursue authority to
either ask the operator to plug
their own well or to plug the
world themselves so it's
fourteen hundred inactive wells
are all out of compliance with
the oil and gas act and are
subject to enforcement
oc historically and i'll let the
deputy secretary speak more of
us
historically has pursued
plugging authority only for
operators who have a large
number of inactive wells so if
you have one or two inactive
wells which may be out of
compliance with the on the gas
act octo has historically not
pursued the authority to plug
them as well so as well as
they're sitting there which is
how I there are some wells on
the inactive well list as you
can see her and table that have
been inactive for more than
forty years
the
the third section of uh this
chapter which looks at
extremely low producing wells
while it's producing less than
two barrels of oil equivalent a
day
those wells are not orphaned
they're not inactive the state
has taken no action against them
this report is recommending that
there be additional regulatory
oversight of whilst once they
reach that point that is the
point two bills of oil a day
when industry appears to be
plugging most of its wells
the report shows that
industry tends to plug wells
when they have reached about
seven hundred and fifty barrels
boil equivalent a year and so
we're recommending that well is
the produce less than that.
Are subject to additional
regulatory oversight in this
report currently they are not
subject to that okay thank you I
think it has a good explanation
and mr
w talked about the difference
between texas and mexico which
i'm like you I hate getting
compared all the time to such a
small state but
they plug at the bottom and they
plug at the time
and in new mexico we plug
whatever the distance is we plug
it fill it with
not concrete but seem it and
then we plug it again and then
we retest it retest it so that
drives that car start so if it
works in texas as a much more
economical way why aren't we
adopting that here
mr chairman seller it said in
the statute for to do so is that
something you would recommend us
looking at
mrperiod chairman center about
that's in the recommendations
for for the report
so mister so you don't think
that would help get more of
these orphan wells plugged
mrperiod chairman there's a
policy to determinations that
were made around preserving
resources protecting fresh water
resources those kinds of things
I e that's just the statute that
we buy but we don't think about
it on that
okay and mister chair how do we
how do you make a plan so let's
say we have a well and it needs
to be plugged what what's the
process of making a plan do you
work with the industry do we
work with the federal government
the industry the state in the
mexico your office
and set a plan and go key just
this one needs to be taken care
of and this is how we need to do
it or is it just it's zero plug
it
mr shame and center what's once
we have that plugging authority
we go out and basically issue a
purchase.
Under our statewide price
agreement to one of our one of
our contractors we cannot
itemise out the work that we
expect for that well and we set
them to it that the
the use of the say why price
agreement is that it is compared
to the rest of the current code
of relatively nimble tools so
let's just get teams out there
relatively expediently and
working
all right and then thank you for
that
so when we
we set up this find right so we
I hate to go back to the
financial part but that's what
we're about here so
we we set this fund up
so that we can start plugging
these wells yet we're asking
industry to plug their own wells
I don't understand how
if we're taxing them and were
also acts asking them to pay to
plug their own well
why are we taxing them if
they're plugging anyway is there
is it does it get lost in the in
the paperwork do we not know who
the owner is do not know whose
responsible for it is it federal
government stepping in I don't
understand how how do we
when we get a well plugged we
see all the prices we know what
it costs I don't understand how
we're putting money back and
then their plugging their own
wells anyway.
Mr chair senator
if I can direct you to page
eleven and I think it would help
to maybe I just go over again a
bit of the history of the oil
and gas recommendation fund
the legislature established the
fund in nineteen seventy seven
as um
and and enumerated some of the
purposes of the fund as ensuring
the proper plugging and
reclamation of abandoned oil and
gas walls and associated
facilities the statue doesn't
define abandoned
historically the fund has
primarily been used for plugging
and reclaiming wells and
associated infrastructure they
don't have a low catable or
financially viable operator so
for bankrupt or
to fund companies so
historically the own gas
recommendation fund was intended
sort of to take care of those
those wells that were not being
plugged by industry
over time
the
the fund has been has been used
to plug
in some case as well as for
active operators and that was
not at in in reading the statute
the original intent of the find
primarily it was used as a stop
gap in it as they said that was
created in nineteen seventy
seven
after the
oil conservation tax was created
in eighteen fifty nine okay so
mister chairman
it's like I guess my question is
so we're all on finance
committees up here and capital
outlay is a big huge part of our
our job
so when we when we send out
capital outlay we expect it to
get spent we expect it to get
used on the road we put it on
the bridge we put it on whatever
swemphole.
Whatever it is weak that's what
we expect
so my my question is
you know in capital outlay
we can reauthorize it
but there's a big movement again
and the house and the senate
there is a big movement to start
doing all these re
authorizations because we have
over six I don't even know the
figure of charles fully has a
figure or a six billion dollars
of unspent capital outlay
so
my question is
if you're not going if you're
gonna have the industry use
their money to plug these wells
then we need to be pulling back
this fund
and we can use that money
somewhere else
whether we keep it in the
environment department whatever
it doesn't matter
but why do we just have sixty
million dollars sitting there
not getting used
I understand where fareful that
the federal government make
certain pulling money or
whatever I mean obviously you
use a lot of federal grants and
things like that but we still
have all that money sitting
there doing nothing it's good
it's no good for us
so
how can we resolve that
mr chair and sender was just
spending the federal money first
we have there is we're not gonna
have any trouble spending down
the balance of the wreck if and
when we get to the bottom of the
barrel on the federal dollars
ideally we'd like to be spending
them both down at the same time
it's a it's a capacity concerned
that we're trying to resolve by
getting some more contractors on
the price of human getting that
we all spending faster but we
were we what we have plenty of
work to spend down the existing
balance of skate dollars in the
record we've just been
prioritising spending the
federal dollars first
so miss chairman and that's a
good answer.
And and that's exactly what i'm
getting to is I want you to
spend the filter money first
do it x spend it all the way
down
but why are we keep taxing and
we're talking about increasing
the taxes to our industry that
feeds so many different programs
in this state and we're going to
keep taxing them when we add him
start to spend in the money that
we very taxed to my
decision to say in I don't know
that it's a a fair and a level
playing field when we're playing
on
the unknown
if if we need to come up with
three hundred million dollars to
plug every well in new mexico
and why aren't we working
towards that
I don't understand why
we were breaking it down and so
many different ways other than
the confused the world out of
me.
At the end of response
I and I think that thank you
center I think a lot of you know
there's a very media policy
conversation for us here as
elected members particular
analysis and so were a lot of
those questions I think will end
up being very fairly ones
will be debating
and again with particular staff
yeah we don't there they're sort
of given their best expertise
and uh if we want to ask them at
some point to sort of bring back
policy recommendations and maybe
that's something we as a
committee can discuss alright
thank you mister chair thank you
panel thank you very much
senator we have representative
dow and then center woods next
website down please think thank
you mister chairman and I a lot
of the questions I had we're
answered but created more
questions so i'm on page eleven
and looking at this and it was
saying it's saying that this
fund was established in nineteen
seventy seven as non reverting
to be used for all conservation
division to carry out the
provisions of the act in its
four plugging of the
the band in wells where the
you can't locate the operator or
they're not financially viable
and that was at the time of the
creation but now
am I understanding that in
addition to this the producers
are paying a fee and to go into
this fund but they're also
responsible for plugging their
own wells today
mr chair
representative
industry has always been
expected to plug their own wells
it is in it is in statute that
industry must plug their own
wells at the end of the well
slave
in nineteen seventy seven the
legislature
must speak for legislature then
but I presumably need for their
to be additional funds available
for wells that did not have a.
The history of this elizabeth
went into you that the books of
statutes and it's it's a little
hard to parse but
at the time
the legislature in numerated the
purposes of the recommendation
fund as plugging abandoned wells
it did not define abandoned
wells in statute so
conventionally the fund has been
used for plugging while that
don't have a locationable or or
financially viable operator the
expectation has been and remains
that that operators plug their
own wells at the end of the well
the welsh life thank thank you
thank you mister chair and think
for that so since nights since
the seventies the producers have
been plugging their own wells if
they're viable producers they've
been plugging their own wells
and contributing to this fund
and at some point we started
diverting the phones and now we
want more money for the fact but
not by recapturing the dollars
that are being diverted to the
general fund from increased
fees.
Mr chair representative
there's a very detailed history
of the oil gas conservation tax
and the recommendation fund in
appendix c of the report
since the creation of the
recommendation fund in nineteen
seventy seven the portion of the
conservation tax that has been
done type ordered at two the
fund has increased a thousand
fault so since the creation of
the fund the amount of the
conservation tax that goes to
the fund has increased from
point zero one percent two as
high as nineteen point seven
percent today so that's not an
additional tax on industry that
is a percentage of the
conservation tax that is being
diverted to the recommendation
fund has grown significantly
over time so what that means is
that
over time the recommendation
fund has expanded there's more
money available to plug or fend
or as the statute caused them
abandoned bills thank you thank
you mister chair and and
maybe this is for the deputy
secretary you are talking about
federal dollars that you're
spending are is the federal
government paying you to do to
plug wells on federally under
their paying you to plug wells
on federal and state land mister
chairman and representative
all three thousand most of their
bill I j funds were using
private.
Okay thank thank you and but and
these dollars are used for state
land only or are we also using
because it is the federal
government pays for plugging on
federal land is is this fund
only being used to plug wells on
state lane
by this for you spent your
friend that reclamation funds
specifically because remember
the bill the federal money
you've been spending is kind of
over here right so the rack find
so yes the wreck finders used
for state and private land
plaguing and mischairman I think
I think what I am not
understanding is if this is a
tax or if it's a fee.
Is is this a tax or is this a
fee on industry.
This.
Mr share representative it's
attacks in the conservation tax
it's a conscious it's a
constitution tax observation
conservation
and mister what what
differentiates we had a lot of
debate in the house side anyways
on the difference of something
as a tax or something's a fee is
what it is what's the what makes
the distinction between attacks
on
mr that's a good question I I
don't I I don't I can repeat
something that I heard in
committee last year because I
happened have the opportunity to
sit at the table there and a lot
of that's a bit
but I heard that soon to make
sense to me is attacks that is
collected by one person spent by
somebody else a fee would be
more like a or cd collect the
filing fee but the ocd spends
the money on administration of a
filing system attacks is more
something that trd collects and
then it's spent by
you
thank you mister I mean that I
think that's where i'm getting
lost here because it's an
industry fee
is an amount that we take from
the industry that was designated
for a specific purpose plugging
orphaned wells and along the way
we've decided as a body to
change those purposes.
I i'm i'm just thinking about
that dog food thing that came up
where it was it was determined
that we were we had to spend the
money for the purpose intended
so i'm just wondering the
distinction between when we
decide we're going to this is an
industry that's paying into
something for this purpose and
somewhere along the way we
decide to divert money
why we had that right to do that
why we had the right to divert
the money away from the intended
purpose and statute
and and why that was legal i'm
not i'm not I I guess is.
Mr chair
representative and uh if I can
again refer you to a pendic
conservation tax was created in
nineteen fifty nine I at a rate
of point one four percent an oil
and gas products severed and
sold an estate the revenue went
originally to the oil
conservation fund which was used
by the oil conservation
commission to enforce the oil
and gas act
in nineteen seventy seven does I
just later chose to create the
reclamation fund and for the
recognition fund receives a
portion of the conservation tax
so mr chairman and I guess the
question would be it when when
when that money was restored
or when why didn't that money
just start going to the
reclamation fund I mean
did we make a mistake
as a body when we said we're
gonna create the reclamation
fund to plug wells and didn't
put all the money we were
collecting from industry for
plugging wells into the
recommendation fan but instead
said instead we said this had
this purpose but we're going to
only leave a little bit of it in
reclamation and the rest of it
we're going to put in the
general fund I
what has anybody else that
questioned and what was the
answer.
I mean I just I I know where to
totally fair questions I think
many of those may end up sort of
things we may need to wrestle
with uh in our roles I don't
know that the staff would be uh
would sort of have necessarily a
perspective superfair questions
maybe
russell with those and
okay is that okay then we're go
next to sorry
I don't know when we last their
list
we have representative edata and
then senator woods evident
thank you mister I actually was
following up on rebecca and
representative downs question I
looking at this chart
so we spent in let's just change
fy nineteen three million five
hundred and twenty nine thousand
went into the reclamation but
how much went into the general
fund that I guess that's a
question I want.
Mr chair with your permission
i'll have our chief economists
come up to please mister
mister chairman representative
in FY twenty four the general
fund received about a hundred
and six million dollars from the
conservation tax and then the
recommendation find I think we
have twenty six million that's
also in the report so a total of
about a hundred and thirty two
million dollars of that tax
collected and then hundred and
sixth general fund twenty six
for the recognition so I think
that's the question that we're
all struggling with and the
questions rebecca was leading up
to if we had if we're putting in
I have their paying in a hundred
and
six hundred and twenty more
million
in twenty three
into the general mister chair
and represent it yeah and and
you know at risk of overstepping
here I think maybe it's helpful
from the outside perspective to
clarify that when the tax was
created the tax was not
dedicated towards plugging
wealth and I think that might be
missing in this conversation so
the tax was created to help run
the agency and so over time the
legislature began to pull more
and more of that tax away for
the recommendation for the
purpose of of plugging those
wells as stephanie pointed out
increasing that amount over time
and so there is still an amount
in the general fund which is
theoretically in statute the
purpose is to help fund the
agency and and hopefully that
helps clarify some of that
confusion maybe well I think i'm
agreeing with a lot of
representatives and senators on
this family that we really need
to look at the distribution of
those moneys make sure that we
use most of it for plugging the
wells in and running the agency
and seems like there's a lot but
I you know i'm i'm i'm sure
there is others on this panel
that will talk about well we
need that for the general funds
so I I think we need to look at
this formula all over again so
thank you that's all I have
mister thank you very much and
thank you mister thought as for
the
the additional context nexus
center words and center schendo.
Then center to basically
thank you chair.
If you guys are turned to page
thirty eight on the report for
thirty eight up there
it's very interesting process
here that we've gone through
through the years
that
in order or or blame it the off
nucers
but I can see most definitely
why
the finance committee cut money
did put money in ocd for abandon
worlds occurs it looks like
it was going to hit me as a lot
and we've been required them to
set up gold
on how many worlds who is going
to plug
and it says if you all read this
deal it says in here well the
contractor was busy with someone
else and didn't get to our
stuff.
It says that gs
pick the contractors is that
true does gs say much.
Anybody there's gsa picked
contractors
mr chair senator no ocd
today in the present day selects
the plugging and recommendation
and remediation contractors at
their currently thirty one
vendors on the state way price
agreement
did you say there were thirty
one vendors contractors that's
on the list to plug
mr share my understanding again
and this this statewide price
agreements in the reason that we
may be getting.
Our number is crosswise is
because they bid on different
components so when we do a
offer there's
I think gsd put it out for many
many different tasks sort of
items and people bid on
different components of them up
to an including supervising the
environmental review but not
actually doing that so there's
all sorts of different things to
do I think that we for most
perspectives have five down haul
owns the trucks will show up on
the day and pour the cement
contractors so the total number
may be larger than five but from
our perspective we see it as
five sam one based contractors
actually do the plug in work and
cement it.
Is really so there's no other
contractors in the state to do
that kind of work
mr chair and senator yes there
are many those are who bid when
we first opened our statewide
price agreement we have that
another one open right now and
we are getting more so there's a
lot more that are doing it but
at that time that's who that's
who bid on our on the gst
so this is a this procurement
contracts that we let
these procurement they are
competitive bit contractors open
wide open
if you meet these qualifications
as a downhole operator
mr chair yes they bid into the
open process that gsd had I
believe that was twenty twenty
three and they were accepted we
we took we said yes to everyone
who showed up and dead for
actual plugging working there
was those five were it's funny
because in in this
this lediture that I have and
from me on page thirty eight it
doesn't sound like that it sound
like
their profile contractors at one
time
you know it sounds like.
Yeah.
You know they didn't plug any
one quarter because he said the
contractors said it was to wear
they talk about uh they plug.
Anticipate plugging sixty wells
and twenty eighteen and
you know then
then and twenty nineteen they
said well in twenty eighteen we
plug forty one
and the agency only targeted
twenty seven in nineteen.
And yet they knew there was two
hundred and eight abandoned will
norphone will
and then in first quote or
twenty one timing conflicts with
the well-plugging contractor.
Was not net in twenty twenty
and then.
A new procurement agreement in
twenty one allowed for
additional approved well
contractors so it sound like
maybe that was the first time
additional contractors was
considered
just in this narrative I mean
this what I read here.
I have a I have a hard to you
know if
this all I can do is read what I
see in front of me
can I know this is a particular
section of what you oversee
you don't know all the details
and in the deal you probably
don't work with it daily.
Thank you mr chair senator so
this is a company you know you
get your quarterly report cards
for agencies and this is just a
compilation that this has been a
chronic performance challenge in
this particular area and we went
back to two thousand seven we
started these we're not plugging
very many other
cost is variable they're
stopping start with contracts
and it it's sort of provides
context for why did we do this
report because sometimes that
performance data doesn't tell
you why you're what to do about
it or provide more information
and what you've got front of you
so that was the purpose of this
report it's like let's get a
better handle on understanding
the scope of this performance
challenge that's faced the state
and how other states are are
trying to tackle that if they
have similar issues
i'm sorry i'm a cut new also
much chair with that
That
that yeah this plugging goes up
and down with our market
so why wouldn't you use the
money as the aus being produced
to put in a phone so that you
could keep this steady
and I know
because of the performance of
this ocd
you're saying those some box
ain't using the money anyway so
i'm not going to put money in
their undersea donor for smith
saying that
mr chair senator I think the fun
balance has grown exponentially
as oil production in the price
of of oil group exponentially
which happened at the same time
that we got a huge influx of
federal funds for the same exact
purpose and then it's what we're
experiencing across the
government we've talked about
this just in schools as
organizationally it's a state
government as well as the
private sector in this
particular area we've run up
against capacity constraints and
so the challenges had to figure
out how to manage through those
capacity strings but the
challenges that industry let me
they take care of the vast
majority of their wells as
required by statue there's a
very small number that we're
very challenged to do anything
about and how do we work through
that to prevent more of those
coming online as abandoned and
state responsibility and work
with industry in order to do
that.
Anna and I agree with that I
mean I agree that we probably
have it discovered all the bend
in wells yet
and you know we can't figure out
who those operators were so you
and they may be bankrupt as it
says in this narrative
but if you collect the money as
a produce and well
as well as they produce the
did you don't have to worry
about going bankrupt because
you've got the money to take
care of the ban and well no
matter
and that is something that the
report alludes to of coming up
with an alternative way to plan
for the cost of plugging it
currently there's bond
requirements financial
that it's very difficult for cd
to work through
and this is it and alternative
mechanism that should be
explored you know based on the
staff report
and it in a way that hasn't been
an option.
Well I will I will
keep going back I understand a
little more of the problem now
the main problem is.
All abandoned wells and you have
no body to tad to that
but what you're saying in the
reporters we need to collect
more money
from a producer to data to to
take care of somebody else's
mistake and I think most of the
comedians say and were
collecting money if we were
directed to to this particular
phone but then again.
I'm worried you know as long as
there's plenty of contractors
out there and we do this at a
comparative bid so that we know
we get its cheaper job is we can
get I think that's what we all
want we want and plug but we
don't want to pay extra the plug
and I think the the question
there's not a recommendation in
here to increase general
industry tax to put even more
money in the recognition
there's
a recognition that there are
certain types of wealth that
exist out there about three
thousand better only producing
about a barrel a day when your
common stripper well would be
producing ten
and are those financially viable
what do we do with the three
thousand if they stop pumping
into turn over and say it's your
problem ocd
is there and a new a novel
solution to dealing with that
potential liability
so that the the reclamation
finder the general taxpayer
doesn't have to to take on that
responsibility are there other
alternatives and how can we
explore that with industry
okay and under that circumstance
you've got to produce her has a
well produced and one barrel of
day
doing the operator is yes
in uk tight obligation to him
will be by law there's their
obligated to
to fill it and plug it and so
what do they do use llc is help
easter in this bankrupt that all
they'll see and no longer
an operator well there's a a
worry that it's like not
economically viable but it's
still needs to operational
definition and does there need
to be enhanced regulatory op.
The report is raising a question
about
it what's the industry sand
about that we will be finding
out yeah so that's a great
opportunity.
No no that was great in it good
to go through the questions we
always want to make sure it
folks have that opportunity we
are going pretty late we may
have to delay dinner or at least
our appearance at the dinner
a little bit we will have an
opportunity it'll need to be
brief to hear from mr winchester
and miss wagner
we've will go back to you center
was if there's additional
question okay
and thanks very much director
next we have senator sendo uh
center to bias and bice term
when you and then will conclude
with representative dix center
central thank you mister
chairman I think for the
presentation to set a quick
question on a page eighteen
where you have the chart on the
right hand say we're inactive
for
whilst you have three hundred
and thirty six identified as
tribal are those mainly
on nab whole lot of lands i'm
just curious I know because on
page thirty nine on their last
section on twenty twenty five
also written on their let the
division has been requested by
the federal indian minerals to
to
to help you know plug it on
wells on average land so i'm
just curious or those or one in
the same or the different
i'm assuring mr chair senator
don't have the exact answer for
you about exactly where those
wells are located and you can uh
if you go to page fifteen
of the report there is a code
that you can scan with the
camera on your cell phone it
will take you to a web page that
has an interactive map showing
where all of the currently
orphaned inactive and low pretty
singles.
As we've identified them in this
report are located so you can
see where all three categories
of those while are located here
in new mexico on that
interactive map okay or are in
the other question is
it says that the ocd or or has
begun plugging the nable lot at
land wells so are those is that
from the fifty five or whatever
million federal dollars or is
that a different source of
reimbursement to the state that
comes and i'm not sure
mr share senator has a good
question I don't have the answer
that right now
and information
and the other questions I had
been answered by other questions
so
great thank you very much center
center center to buy some thank
you mister chair
over the wells that you've
mentioned that are or from how
many of them are let's say
thirty forty years older older
mr tears senator we do have a
short of that
you will just give me a minute
to find it I believe it's on
page seventeen
yeah chart eight
you can see uh
the age of the wells uh that are
currently or offend
based on that year decade that
they were drilled ok so it looks
like by that chart and thank you
for that that the vast majority
were orphaned in the sixties so
looking at other states like
texas i'm sorry mister chair
just passed a lie believe this
last legislative session i'm to
be able to go back to those
orphan wells with today's
technology and make those walts
viable are as a state are we
looking at that so that we're
not just focused on plugging
maybe there is a way to make
these active with today's
technology
mr chair senator I just want to
clarify that turn eight.
Is showing not when the wells
were orphaned but when they were
drilled
so
this is the year that they were
spider in the industries
terminology
when they were orfin depends on
when october plugging authority
because as I have said we we
define in this report orphaned
wells as well as for which has
pursued plugging authority and
as for question about whether
these wells can be repurposed
for for other uses I think there
is a lot of interest in that
I understanding in speaking to
experts as part of this report
is that
that's often not possible
because of the way the well was
completed was drilled originally
the way that the well was
constructed originally was
designed to target a specific
formation
and targeting a different
formation it's deeper formation
doing something like uh for
result of drilling or hydrolic
fracturing often requires a
different well design and so
these older while often are not
able to be produced
using modern technology then
they do need to be plugged in or
are to facilitate i'm in some
cases
those new wells coming online
okay and mister chair so are
they doing something remarkably
different in texas
does or drilling look different
than ours
why would they have passed out
in texas what's what's a
different.
Mr chair senator i'm i'm not
familiar with um what you're
discussing in texas I wouldn't
want to comment ok fair and
we're talking about increasing
bonding amounts and we just
increase them in twenty eighteen
so i'm really concerned about
our small drillers how does the
tightening bond market really
affect them in this scenario.
And mr chair senator
so I will direct you to
um
when you just get there a
page
thirty one of the report just as
that we're all in the same place
when it comes to a financial
assurance and you did mention
that uh financial insurance was
you did increase the maximum
manife- financial assurance that
can be required for active wells
from fifty thousand to two
hundred and fifty thousand
yours introduced
uh
as separate financial assurance
requirement for temporarily
abandoned wells which are not
currently defined and statute
that translates to from many
operators less than a thousand
dollars per well
so
the amount of assurance help for
a single are well in some cases
is a hundred dollars
so I
that's the that's the context
obviously the overall amount
when you look at it looks looks
large a hundred and seventeen
million dollars but ocd can only
pursue
financial assurance for future
from the operator whose while as
it has to plug so far and
operator only has a thousand
dollars per well in financial
assurance that's all oceany can
pursue if it has to plug that
operator as well
so I just wanted to know that.
I'm sorry if you could hear the
question I get a little lost
there well I some is returned
just concerned and maybe mister
winchester can help us when he
comes i've just speak but i'm
concerned with how the
tightening bond markets will
really affect small producers
and are we pushing i'm small
producers out of an industry
and I don't know if you want it
elaborate
at mr chair senator
we did here from namoga and
that members have been having
trouble securing shorty bonds
which are currently one of the
many options for financial
assurance and that is allowed by
statute
desertivon market has gotten
tighter as we understand in
surveying shirty companies as a
result of increased perception
of the risk of these wells being
so as in in the report there is
a recommendation that you the
legislature look at an alternate
financial assurance mechanism
which is a third party trust or
a site specific ascrue account
which would allow operators to
set aside money over the course
of a well
to ensure that the money is
available when it does
eventually need to be plugged
and reclaimed
and mrperiod terror more
question
you mention that you only have
five people that responded
to the here in new mexico and
that they're in san one county
all of them which is kind of
shocking to me since it looks
like based on the map from your
code that most of our wells are
in the premium based so are you
also going out of state in
particular or to texas for a
responses.
Mister sharon and center of that
who responded we do resource out
of state resources that really
expensive plug that's definitely
mentioned earlier was because we
had a unit that we had to bring
in from louisiana at a branch
subbing reagan from from
louisiana
that's not something that's
necessarily on the statewide
price agreement itself that's
more like our existing
contractor will sub contract out
for that and then bill us is an
overall
so whether or not the state when
price agreement is open to out
of state contractors I don't I
don't know of the top of my head
mister chairman's are act I can
look that up mister if you could
because it just seems to me as
just a business person not it's
not best practice for a state
and even all the dollars whether
they're federal dollars that
were currently using or the tax
from the oil and gas industry
here in the state
it just doesn't seem practical
to me that we would be paying
top dollar i'm when they're i'm
sure there has to be other
operators in the region at least
even if they aren't in texas
which I would imagine texas has
quite a few i'm and i'd want to
know why they aren't responding
is there some situation here in
new mexico that precludes them
from any desire to come here and
expand their business so I i'd
like to know that answer
thank you mr great thank you
very much
we're going to go to vice
chairman and then conclude with
representatives
thank you guys then thanks for
doing this report let me ask you
some questions how many federal
wells are on plugged right now
mister shelton
mr cherry writes senator honor
of week I don't know if we keep
that list
we
can tell you that the process
for the federal government for
going about getting permission
basically getting the plugging
orders is.
A lot longer and a lot slower
than ours but we're not tracking
the federal wells that need to
be plugged because of the feds
decided to come up
are not fundors where the
federal side probably can
mistakes responsibility so i'd
i'd like to know that and then
why is not the land office
abandoned wells listed in this
also because they're part of the
bended well project I think that
I don't know how they do those
do you know how the the state
land office pays for their well
plugging
at mr chair advice chair and
state land off as well as are
included in the in this estimate
of worth and wells and it is
state and private my own dwells
and the stateless office
at ocd plugs at all wells in new
mexico including the state land
office whilst and so ocd as all
of the plugging for wells in new
mexico including one state my
owns so does does the state land
office have their own fun for
well plug
they do
mr no I will say that the state
land office will compelled their
leaseholders to go in and plug
so sometimes i'll have the
leasehold you wanted to be
operator be somebody else the
state land office will
frequently have the leaseholder
go in and and basically compel
them to plug the well on state
i'd stay trusted which that
would count account towards the
private or like industry plug
so do you have any estimate and
how many federal wells will need
to be plugger how many in the
last five years you plugged in
where those numbers look like
I mean federal wells have been
plug in the last five years and
how many do you have on a a two
year spreadsheet to plug
mr chair mask and mister shell
in there
you may not know that number
mrperiod share I don't know the
exact number the number is not
huge we yes we basically will
plug.
Blm wells with bln fines as a
separate fund it's a separate
project that we operate under
but it's
not more than probably i'd say
three hundred in the last five
years so so how many in the last
four I would estimate not more
than three hundred in the last
four five years but i'll get the
exact number for you but you can
plug those three hundred wells
in the last five years but in
the last coming wells did you
plug on the state leases a slash
year
mr chair and sender I think
about a hundred thirty
so you have enough contractors
to to plug the federal wells but
you don't have enough
contractors plug the steep
wheels or are the benefit will
be l m wells opering under when
you plug him offering under the
state price agreement
mister school in and the slim
finished my question so if
you're operating the state
pricing agreement and your
you're sending your contractors
to plug
lm wells before you plug state
wells because the federal money
is there
you're not balancing out the
number of wells equally the
balances even though you have
the state funds to to plug those
wells correct your priorities
blm wells to be plugged over
state wells
mr share in senator I don't know
that I would I think that we
prioritised plugging wells based
on our criteria for what is a
priority the bomb project is
significantly smaller we get
much less frequent orders and we
use like different part of money
to go plug deal and well so it's
just it's kind of as a little
bit of an apples and oranges
comparison mister chairman based
on the just the volume of of
work well how could it be
different because I mean if you
have a b and m will be lm
next to a state well mile away
right and you choose to
priorities you said three
hundred wells over the last
couple of years and you've only
got a hundred and twenty wells
for the state.
Your prioritising that steep
pricing agreement to to do the
federal wells and that do the
steep wells is that way the
state money is not getting used
mister chairman now now that is
that is not what we are talking
well we're not priority we don't
prioritise federal wells
overstate wells when the blm
receives a plugging order under
the contract that we have at
them and they send us we will
utilize our contractors into the
statewide price but the actual
order that we tackle the work on
is based on the the list that is
an appendix I believe that is
how we treasure it's a based on
a number of of criteria but the
the question the difference is
really just who does the
plugging order come from whether
that is coming from the from ocd
are coming from the biller
says does ocd give the plugging
orders or does a state land
office give the plug in orders
if at least is expiring in the
leasy so who gives a plugging
order mr chair the ocd as
there's all the blogging orders
the land at the land office can
request them but they will
occasionally direct lessese
which is different from this
we have in
ocd that are working on
well plugging.
Mr chairman and that is that
would be our engineering bureau
and that's about
thirty to forty staff that are
doing well plugging in addition
to all of the permitting for all
of the active producing walls in
the state
so but you're not plugging
active wells you're just
plugging abandoned
or wells and have the plugging
orders through agency correct
mr chair yes it's correct and in
are you required to get a permit
to to do plugging
or you issue the permit to the
to the contractor not just the
order to do the plugging
mister chair to raise chair of
city is required does require a
sundry notice for plugging a
operators have to submit that
before they plug
wells the contractors who work
for a city also have to submit a
sunday notice before plugging
which includes conditions of
approval of cd engineers review
and the plugging diagram the
plan
add additional conditions where
necessary so there is a
permitting process for plugging
so could you get me a copy of
those orders in I want to see
the difference between the blame
in in
and the state and see what the
difference in the orders are in
c way because there's there's an
imbalance for a reason I mean
three hundred and one twenty
there's an imbalance for a
reason I mean if you have a
hundred and twenty how many
orders do you currently have to
plug wells right now
mr terribly the number seven
hundred and two on our list
i'm sorry seven hundred in two
seven hundred and two ones seven
hundred and two and how many do
you expect to plug this year.
Mr chairman that's a bit of a
moving target because we were
recently advised that using bill
funds to plug wells requires a
satisfy some scoping
requirements for the end injured
species act and national and
natural cultural preservation
act as well which is held up
some of the expenditure of the
federal funds so it's difficult
to project right now it can it
depends on what our contractors
get back to us with that final
information that will satisfy
the federal government's
requirements but that's on the
reclamation on the top site not
inside the well right to plug
the well no that's to go in down
hold mister chairman and and
what in danger species would be
down the well give me an idea of
some creaturing it may be big
foots there since we aren't
found him yet or any bones or
anything
might my understanding mister
chairman is there more concerned
about the surface impact's
associated with the planning
activity that's right you're
stasting so that's more in the
surface than within the well
you can plug the well and then
do the recommendation later that
which is bob that's different
from the environmental
reclamation which can frequently
involve exceeding soil and that
kind of thing this is more
trucks traffic than that kind of
impact in in some when you did
your statewide pricing agreement
how many contractors bid on on
plugging wells in animal how
many you know their scopes are
worked for each area rate that's
going to take a place to say she
man if it's going to take a four
thousand and ten thousand psi
how many how many contractors
bid on well plugging in the
state of new mexico
and again mr chairman not to get
to lost in the in the sauce but
across I want to get lost in
this as because I would
understand how the source is
made and so how many contractors
bid on on the well plugging on
the actual well plugging down
hold work suitable state price
agreement how many contractors
bid the state white price
and that's five in total in our
last round for the say why price
agreement yes and then there's
contractors in southeast new
mexico that th.
Plug wells and then may own well
plugging deals but they're not
allowed to plug wells in new
mexico I won't say their name
that you guys have told them
though you can't plug wells in
new mexico even though they plug
wells in texas and even though
they're well owners and can plug
their own wealth you guys
require them to go the statewide
pricing agreement to do that and
so if they gonna plug their own
well at a higher cost because of
the steep weight pricing
agreement then them plugging
their own wells and a lower cost
and meeting the same specs white
why are you not allowing
mr sharing i'm sorry i'm not
familiar with the process you're
talking about our our
contractors plug abandoned well
so if there's not greater who's
seeking permission to plug their
own while they wouldn't be bound
to use not a contractor on our
statewide price again that they
can use
whatever contractor the day the
day I did need for their own
well
well I I there's get the names
of the contractors and will get
the letters and seem they have
wells and they're one of the
plug their own wells are they
want to plug other wells in and
you guys aren't allowed to do
that I don't know if it's
checking in the hand cooper what
the scenario is but that's
interesting how many abandoned
well con or owners have a state
when after for well plugging
costs
mr terror mr vice chair if if
you mean how many operators
whose well as the status plugged
has ocd sued the answer as none
and doing mister shelton why
hasn't your agency sooner tried
to reclaim the money in the cost
of the state from them from
from those operators owners
whatever you want to call
mr character and just to be
clear there's two specific
activities suing and then
there's actually pursuing
financial assurance and to be
fair we have barely pursued
financial assurance and the
answers because the juices and
work.
I have three attorneys to
process a hundred
the juice is not worth the
squeeze I am not gonna send one
of my three attorneys who are
doing a hundred percent of the
enforcement for the entire state
on a two month goose chase for a
fifty thousand dollars bond it's
just not worth the states takes
the taxpayer's dollar for me to
dispatch legal staff to go to
that right now that has been the
case we were adding another
attorney we're getting a little
bit more
active about doing this but at
this point the value proposition
of the department of pursuing a
lot of financial assurance is
certainly suing under some of
these things the conditions have
not been there for us to even
pursue it and then once the
conditions are there it's
not an efficient use of taxpayer
resources to go and try to get
it
so so in the end whoever it is
and in your center to bison
because she keeps losing that
looking at me so center device
and has a well and she says i'm
just going to this wealth not
producing any anymore I don't
want to spend the money plug it
i'm just going to walk away
right
you got a fifty thousand or bond
maybe it's
maybe it was a thousand bucks
per fifty thousand our bond in
she knows the states not going
to come after
for plugging the well because
the plugging the well cost they
really couldn't see because in
handling glasses to see what it
cost plug a well from drink well
services informington
why would I not walk away
knowing that i'm not going to
get prosecuted even though
that's the state's
responsibility to chase the bad
actors that leave and leave the
band and wells and that's a
state's responsibility then why
even have a bond
if we know that you're not going
to chase them on mr chairman and
this is at that's a great point
and this is why we're putting
more of a priority and more of
an empty sister starting to
retire and get go after some of
that financial insurance in
particular but there is a check
in a neg problem here which is
that we don't collect enough to
make it worth our while we don't
make it we don't collect enough
to make it really hurt for
operators that we have to go get
it and they're not going to get
it back.
It's different in the mining
space for instance where we do
forecast binding they really
really really want to get their
minds cleaned up because they
really want their buy back and
that's just not the case in the
oil and gas space because our
amounts are are low and then
yeah
candidately we just the capacity
concerns have advised against
pursuing it but it's something
that we're changing specifically
because that dynamic we don't
want to send that message but
you're allowing bad actors to
continue their bad habits
knowing there's no recourse
I might go get a thousand our
men on in band you know by
twenty wells spend twenty
thousand getting a bond and
maybe I may
I don't I don't know what they
make I make money off that deal
and I just know walk away
knowing that
I committed a crimer violation
against the state in new mexico
knowing that they're not going
to even begin to chase me
because we don't think we need
to send a message for for her
fifty thousand dollars to chase
their money I I mean that that
is kind of a derelict of of duty
because the bond exists for a
certain purpose to create the
well but you're just going to
see no matter what happens
we don't think your bonds worth
anything and we're not going to
chase it and so go ahead and
just keep doing the same thing
over and over again and and
people are creatures of habit
there's good actors with bad
actors in their creatures of
habit but if you don't
prosecute or start chasing
balance in the bond company say
we're not going to issue a bond
because you're not credit worthy
that's the way the issue wants
help how you on your credit
wordingness and so we're not
going to issue one because we
think you're gonna you're gonna
bend this well you don't have
the weather with all to plug the
well and they're going to come
after us for fifty thousand
dollars I mean
there's a process and it was
said in there in place for a
reason but if the state
determine that they're not going
to chase the bones you could buy
it you could get a million
dollars bond for her a well and
then the state would say well
we're not going to chase them on
because it's it's not worth the
juice.
And doesn't quite make sense to
me I mean
as a contractor I have to have a
bond in any time anything
happens that i'll try to chase
your bond if they they can but
they they will pursue it but if
the state's going to drop their
hands
going to do whatever you want
banned in all the well you want
new mexico because we're not
going to have any recourse what
I could do anything to you we're
going to tax industry or charge
industry a fee or whatever it is
at a certain rate and they're
going to plug your well for you
those guys that are buying those
wells it are low producing that
they know we're gonna end up
there aren't credit worthy spare
continue to
leave abandoned wells in new
mexico and leave us to clean up
the mess that's not fair to
everybody else
so I I want to see when the
agency's going to start chasing
bonds because they they are
tests which chasing those bonds
and I imagine that in the
statute and station says the
bond is a place because if you
bend it well and we have to plug
it then stay has a duty to
proceed to to chase that one
not just I don't have the time
there's not worth the juice
doesn't really help
send a mental
and issue to him saying you're
better get to to plug in this so
with if center to bias and
didn't plug your well and
abandon it and and open a new
common company would she be
allowed to issue a permitter get
any any
any other wells even though she
abandoned that one.
Because
he controls a permitting process
to you guys control the
permanent process so are you
matching center to bison with a
bad well actor and then the new
well actor and seeing you didn't
fix this well so we're not gonna
let you depermit the next one or
take over the next one are you
guys matching those up
mister chairman our view of the
well and gas and mean proposed
legislation I feel like a
resent twenty three four this
may have been part of that bill
uhm both the view right now is
that we don't have the authority
to do that sort of bad actor
review on personal
and personal compliance if you
start a brand new company that's
got a clean dollar health in a
clean record than no we don't
have the ability to come in and
say you're one of your officers
has a standing liability on
another company
but I think the state can do
that if if the state has won't
have filed or chase that bond
they would actually have a
leaning and somebody that's
listed on a corporation that
could now come back and say well
we have the state lean and we're
not gonna allow anything else to
happen until this this other
issue is resolved I think they
have that I thought I think they
do it all the time
I think that clay bailey's
agency
can sort of contractor and say
you have you have a complaint
and you have a lean and you have
a claim and we're not going to
we're not going to knew your
license or issue a permit the
former director shake your head
at me and have recourse until
that's done or if you all your
taxes on on the state of new
mexico I think there's recourse
that can happen to
but I I mean the legislature is
the legislature but
the agencies under the executive
have to function
and if they're not functioning
and they're not functioning
incorrectly to to plug wells to
make sure that you know you you
can't control the supply of
contractors are going to play
them well plugging
but you can control having
priorities wells how you chase.
People that have a bond that
abandoned wells and leavers with
this mess and spend this in the
two or three hour discussion
today and leave us home the bag
for how much money over the last
ten years charles.
I mean whether we spend last
year forty million.
When or do we spend on abandoned
well as last year over the last
three years
mr term is your rise chairs
since er fy nineteen we've spent
about fifty million dollars
fifty million dollars because
as we don't want to chase on it
I mean that's a big number I
mean there there's places where
we can put fifty million dollars
probably gonna be in the snap
program as it comes forward
in catch but I mean we all have
to work together to get these
prom result I I do want to bring
one other issue that that's
really bothered me in that in
this report
in this not going to the staff
at the charles
you agreed to meet with a
legislator and then had him set
up a meeting with the staff to
talk about this and this is a
legislator i'm talking about and
then when the legislator showed
up at the meaning then there was
no meeting
and were non partisan committee
but it's a legislator or someone
has knowledge and a skill said
they should be allowed
to talk about it in a non
partisan way so we have the best
information that we can have and
in that's an issue for me when
when someone you if you don't
want to have the meeting then
tell him you don't want to have
the meeting but don't schedule
meaning and then schedule with
your staff and the analysts in
the short meaning drive
rosable and then not have the
meeting
I completely understand we're
going to be non partisan
working.
We're gonna listen to industry
right your opinions and what you
think the processes and give us
a clear
spot light on what needs to
happen but if there's any
outside influence then it
shouldn't be in there and that
goes on every side but when we
schedule meeting with
legislators
and agree to meetings and agree
to do things in the loc man we
should do if we don't want to do
don't agree to
it but when I got to get my
email it up and and how
conversations I I don't expect
that happened to
any more so
I I think we got some
responsibility and so needs to
happen I think ocd in an emit
has somewhere to do so we don't
spend fifty million when we
could be ahead of this problem
if we have to change legislation
I guess we'll have to change
legislation but but
everybody should have an
opportunity especially industry
when they have knowledge and
skills it thank you mister
chairman
thank you we're gonna go to
resent dixon and then senator
pidea.
Thank you mister chair and
thank you and staff and deputy
secretary four sitting here with
us through a very long but I
think in latening and through
discussion although I think we
could discuss this for another
three hours because there is
actually a lot to unpack
I have three pages of questions
but since I am at the end of the
list I will ask all of them and
I will try to consolidate them
so that I can just ask a
question and get a quick answer
we answered why the state
doesn't sue for financial
insurances it's because
the agency I think has a valid
perspective that it may not be
worth the tax payer I think
that's useful information for us
as we consider moving this
forward
why is the agency sorry mr chair
and deputy secretary is the
reason that the state is not
plugging more wells each year
capacity if or is it money
mr chair it's a I guess capacity
but not agency capacity that we
are limited by the contractors
so if you had more money or less
money that's not the issue right
now it's that there are five
contractors
on the price list they have
signed up to do this pluggings
and when you do another bed for
the state price agreement
hopefully operators in the
premium with this expertise well
sign up is that correct mister
chairman rubs are correct and so
mister chairman
secretary w secretary if you
had.
Ten contracted operators
theoretically the agency could
plug twice as many was
theoretically
mister chairman sure thank you.
The.
Mr chair
and team I guess
do we monitor all of our
inactive wells
they to see if they're mething
emissions things like that
mister chair representative as a
condition of the funding through
the ija b I l
c d has begun monday methine
from some of the orphaned wells
I believe it's in the report but
if
they've taken mapping
measurements that something
about like a hundred and twenty
five wells
that but now that's great
mister chair deputy secretary is
it possible that the state could
implement measures could you
work with contractors to monitor
more wells because that's a
significantly cheaper operation
and with that potentially help
priorities more wells that
should be plugged
mr chairman representative this
quick question from my mind the
first question I ask is that is
acceptable use of just just
monitoring versus the actual
plugging reclamation work so
that'd be the threshold question
I answer but if the answer is
yes then certainly we could add
we could put a price for group
or put a it be out for for that
kind of money thank you mr chair
think you were secretary because
there are actually a there's a
wide range of new technologies
that are emerging that can
actually help with the
monitoring and plugging
activities that I think it would
be great if this state could
explore because it would also
support the current energy
industry as well as some of the
advanced energy
start ups here in new mexico uh
tsnano being a great example of
a home grown
company
at some point i'd like to talk
more about.
Why
they're a hundred and one
hundred twenty one companies
with one thousand thirty four
inactive wells
just to the and this is probably
a question where i'd really like
to talk to the industry to
understand the calculations of
you know what those wells are
doing and why they wouldn't be
plugged or would be plugged
because I think that's just a
business
because i'm not in it in the
business so
along those lines
I would love to hear I don't
think we're gonna get to it
tonight but in the future i'd
love to hear what the industry
recommends for
steps that the state could take
because I think that there's a
valid there the question of
raising financial assurances
using more reclamation fund
money gets to a fear you know
philosophical debate about moral
hazard right I mean i'm not an
economist or a philosopher but
you know I think that there's
this is not just an easy answer
and so i'd like to hear what
industry suggests along those
lines similarly I was wondering
for a team if you looked at
colorado's
their new legislation that
rewards
operators that plug their wells
with a credit because I
certainly am a fan of incentives
and carrots as opposed to sticks
particularly if the sticks
aren't working the best and so
with that mister chair I will
conclude great thank you very
much for some dickson ah
sympathy information is going to
have some questions offline
encourage everybody to do that
i'll wrap up a couple of quick
things first we have a
nationally recognized.
Evaluations team one of the
reasons that their national
recognized in this work has gone
on well predating my time in the
legislature is because it's an
independent group that is able
to do their work that is very
engaged with all of us whether
stay holders or individual
members I think we can all agree
that defending that independence
is a court part of what keeps
this evaluations team
really functioning for our state
and you know we all know that
more evaluation particularly
with the resources were putting
out is very important at this
time so that's a long winded way
to say uh thank you to mischoice
and mistakes and really
appreciate this work
in the extensive amount of work
that went into it the evaluation
of the yeah the evaluations team
so thank you guys were uh
whenever you can spark a lot of
discussion you know you're doing
really good work so a big thank
you
mister shelton thank you deputy
secretary
i'm from my own perspective I
think it's clear that there are
things that need to change and
this has been sort of a start to
that with an excellent report
really good discussion another
part of the accident let you
guys step away from the table
after that thank you guys I want
to invite up mister winchester
and miss wagner communicating
with them offline today they
made the request to be part of
the presentation this is I think
sort of a the way that best sort
of uses the time we have today
very grateful for them one
invite them they're gonna share
brief thoughts and perspectives
there won't be any questions
simply because we have a couple
of the presentations we've got
to go to but while this wasn't
on the schedule I did think is
very important and appreciate
them both being here and taking
the ti.
Without will go to you.
Mr chair can hear me okay thank
you
first of all I just want to
introduce myself
jim winchester from the
independent patrol and
association of new mexico we
represent a predominantly the
smaller producers and in this
case they are the ones that
stand to be impacted quite a bit
by some of the recommendations
and some of the information
that's being shared here
I want to start by saying that I
really do appreciate the
opportunity to comment
in and concerned in want to
offer context on the issue of
been in wells a little bit from
a a higher perspective
in frankly whatever specifics
are in this report we only did
get this this afternoon so
obviously i'm not going to get
into the the specifics of the
report itself because we just
don't know the context of that
completely
but I want to offer context both
as my eight years
representing independent petrol
association new mexico but also
four years working at emerge
and directly interacting with
ocd on many issues in seeing the
pain of a bureaucracy so I want
to stress that i'm empathetic of
the challenges to that
department
industry his long bin very
concerned over plugging
abandoned wells and as you heard
so much show that in the
seventies and then with further
reforms over many many years
we recognize that problem in
want to fix it
as you heard the most recent
financial assurance increase
took effect in twenty nineteen
roll making was in twenty
eighteen
but further more I want to
emphasize that it was industry
that worked with the state that
so many years ago to create what
we were hoping was going to be
adequate funding by industry to
the plug abandoned wells through
this reclaimation fund we
recognized that there are
operators that abandon wells.
In the whole concept behind the
reclamation fund was for
industry to have the state
holding reserve money to take
care of those wells by the bad
actors were not happy about the
fact that this occurs and that
there are bad actors that are
out there I want to stress that
the conservation fund the
reclamation fund these are not
taxes paid for by private
citizens
these are industry dollars on
every barrel of production
in you've heard already in the
discussion had the funds
remained hole
it's our estimation that you
know at least five hundred
million maybe more like a
billion dollars.
Of money paid by industry would
have been available to simply
plug all the seventeen hundred
wells that we have abandoned
right now now I don't know
meeting the back that up
statistically but i'm i'm
telling you that with the last
fifteen years the way that money
has been robbed from that fund
we're talking about millions
intense of millions of dollars
we do want to make sure that the
sites are cleaned up that the
environment is returned to its
natural state and I do want to
stress that ninety eight percent
of abandoned wells are already
plugged by industry in industry
alone without any need the
additional funds that are put
into the recommendation fund
that operators already pay into
as you've heard during the down
years
it is the legislature that has
swept these funds in allocated
them elsewhere
in essentially in the the
perspective of my members that's
broken the trust with industry
and it's it's time up the hands
of ocd
again with the legislator
spending industry's reclamation
funds money since twenty ten
elsewhere it's become a very
very sensitive topic for the
smaller members because that
money is dedicated from industry
in earth marked for that very
reason and it was rubbed so
understand that that is the
starting point of view and this
topic for ipan and members hence
the sensitivity which I do
believe is justify
that's our first point obviously
legislature created this problem
by choosing different priorities
other than those intended by the
industry in those industry
dollars I do want to note that
even with that circumstance
industry has attempted to fix
the thievery of the oil and gas
funds with proposed reclamation
fund act bills the past two
sessions that would redirect
that industry money back into
the reclamation fund in i'm
pleased to say it's head by
partisan support with money
folks around this table but we
can't get it across the finish
line for whatever reason sadly I
feared stude.
Politics in frankly without the
votes from you guys that fun
will never be made hole
my second point it is this
industry has tried many times to
work to create efficiencies with
ocd to plug wells in a better
manner with that industry money
and now with tens of millions of
dollars from the federal money
in that money has to be spent or
risk it being reverted back to
the federal government
but the excuse we always hear
from ocd is that there's not
enough staff
now I am shocked to hear that
there's thirty to forty people
working and plugging wells in
ocd
that is not what least my
members tell me cause I maybe
it's just because they
communicate with only one person
in at times when they're trying
to get stuff through there's
delay after delay after delay
but frankly you know in our
estimation is not necessarily
just the staff situation there's
a systematic problem
when ocd is only able to issue
contracts to plug a small number
of wells a small fight number of
wells
industry does this job much more
efficiently and at lower costs
than occurs we've talked about
that in in fact to to follow up
on what um senator munio said
ane totally we've had some of
our member companies create sub
companies.
That have wanted to bid on large
scale plugging a projects a
hundred at a time at cheaper
prices but they've been told
because of bureaucracy that's
not how we do it
it's I don't want the numbers
twenty five at a time or the
bids are separated by component
jobs which is inefficient in
really just translates into
bureaucracy getting in the way
of cost savings and efficiencies
these member companies of ip
have abandoned those projects
because it was fuel
now again I do sympathise with
ocd
having worked there in some
respects their hands are tied
but the fact of the matter is
that the existing recommendation
fund right now has tens of
millions of dollars that remains
unspent now I commend them for
working hard to prioritise those
federal dollars before getting
to the the remainder of that
which is contributed by
the state in the state operators
excuse me the state operators
but the fact the matter is they
can't spend the money that they
have
I do want to add that we have
high hopes in are excited about
the newly appointed oc director
albert chang and will look
forward to hopefully working
with him collaboratively to
address this in many other
problems finally
I want to comment on the timing
of this forty three page report
in
go ahead mister winchester I I
do want to say in it be very
much appreciate the that
sort of the the hand on the
scale idea from staff it is one
of the few things that were uhm
car
so please continue just just
please now that sort of the
independence of staff and the
ability for folks to operate in
a way that is
sort of separate from the
politics that we have to work
through which is totally what we
sign up for.
It's a it's an important place
for me for sure okay thank you I
and and regardless of the the
intent or or why this report
comes now the fact the matter is
is that it's it's problematic
because we know that lfc is a
non partisan
group they do hard work they do
good work but this report now
comes three months before the
oil conservation division will
be holding a extensive role
making hearing and it knew
extremely high banding rate
proposals that will put smaller
operators out of business
ocd and again I haven't read the
report but what we have hearing
suggests that one major answer
to the abandoned well problem is
to raise bonding folks that is
not the answer.
At least not a six fault
increase proposed by ocd in the
environmental groups who are
driving this rule making now I p
n intends to argue vigorously in
rule making an october that
raising bonds to this level
would be catastrophic
now this non partisan report
will be unfortunately flaunted
as a dramatic reason as to why
we need to increase those bonds
regardless of what the
conclusions are instead of
really addressing the problems
that are just outlined
again on the report itself I
peach do it there are definitely
some good points of analysis but
we strongly disagree with the
financial assurance findings
the last thing they will mention
in i'm learning about this
process even eight years into it
with lfc
the report comes without any
consultation to our group the
independent patrol association
in mexico for us to even talk
with the analysts or explain the
aforementioned problems that's
highly problematic to my members
and they're the ones that are on
me to ask why
I find great irony and the fact
that mister schelden wrapped up
his comments with it's good to
be heard in this report I
countered by saying it sucks not
to be heard
I think the members that I
represent are highly justified
in their concern had we been
consulted we would have pointed
to colorado and raised their
financial rule making that
occurred several years ago and
the impact of that which
immediately added to the
abandoned well problem because
the bonds they put in place were
too high for smaller operators
to continue to operate.
We call that forced premature
closing of wells due to over
regulation in the shame is that
those wells would have generated
revenue to the state the
colorado and we fear that that's
coming our way
again I apologize i'm wrapping
up i'll skip the final notes on
the problematic stance that I
saw on here but at the state is
paying a hundred and sixty eight
thousand dollars per well for
for plugging they're getting
taken to the cleaners and
there's more i'm on indulge
I appreciate all of you allowing
I p and to offer our serious
concerns about the process
again we need to look at the
content of this report
in there is a larger problem
here about abandoned wells I do
want to stress despite the fact
that we are sensitive as you can
tell that we do want to partner
with the state to solve this
problem
but to do so without making the
problem worse and potentially
taking down some of our good
smaller operators in the process
thanks
thank you miss wagner
thank you chairman and
thank you chairman and members
of the committee i'm actually
wagner the vice president of
government affairs in mexico oil
and gas association we represent
over two hundred member
companies jim did such an
excellent throw a job that my
comments will be a lot shorter
in reason years oil and gas
operators plugged over ninety
percent of the will well
decommissioned in the state for
every well plug using public
funds the oil and gas industry
independently plugs ten more
without found fair and without
burdening new mexican taxpayers
only tax dollars paid by the oil
and gas industry are used to
plug orphan while in new mexico
not a single cent come through
the pockets of new mexico
families the million spend by
ocd plug wells came directly
from federal funds and the
reclamation find funded entirely
by industry paid taxes but these
funds are only effective if
their deployed efficiently.
The oil and gas industry
supports modernizing the
reclamation find to ensure it
maintains a sustainable
efficient tool for environmental
remediation they mean
streamlining procurement
reducing administrative burdens
and preserving the funds
integrity for its intended
purpose dealing gas industry is
proud to carry the
responsibility of plugging and
remediating wells during the
wells lifetime it provides
energy for the world and
contributes to our state's
economy at the end of its cycle
the land is returned to its
native state it's a
responsibility we take seriously
and one there were already
fulfilling
let's work together to insure
that the systems in place
support this important work now
and for generations to come
nimilar's committed to working
with ocd and the legislature to
find a solution to move forward
thank you thank you very much
okay members we have two more
presentations we're going to do
our tax expenditure report and
then mister director sali is
going to work at uh go through
the large appropriations as he's
informed me and it's imp- uh the
large appropriations both of
these pieces are important for
the rest of the week as we go
through it and there's really
not other time to to reschedule
so we know we take our uh work
seriously so we're gonna invite
up our analysts in work through
tax expenditures.
Alright good afternoon everyone
chaired members my name is magic
i'm one of your program
evaluators at the lease.
Are on my rate here is bringing
gray one of your economists at
the lsc if I could have you
alternated to have in your
binders will be presenting the
first tax expenditure assessment
report or tax e report for short
and we will try to keep our
presentation short as well.
Starting on slide too.
Will start with some background
on tax expenditures why these
tax expenditure assessments I
needed what they contain as well
as some key terms and
definitions you all and
understanding the information
you're going to hear today then
will present our first two
assessments on the royal job tax
credit and highway stop tax
credit.
Turning to slave three what is
the tax expenditure so the name
is actually a little bit maybe
misleading it's not necessarily
an appropriation either the
state is spending but money that
the state four goes to
incentifies businesses or
individuals er to act in a
certain way and so this can look
like a credit or an exemption or
deduction a credit is where
business are individual gets
money back from their taxes and
a deduction or exemption is not
having to pay something in the
first place
now moving to slide for
tax expenditures make up a large
share of the steep budget around
three billion dollars or around
thirty three percent of our
fiscal year twenty four
recurring appropriations with
the largest expenditure is going
towards citizen benefits health
care and economic development
however despite this large share
of the budget monitoring of our
tax expenditures has been
limited thus far a recurring
appropriations are try closely
with performance measures we've
recently begun non recurring
quarterly reports but we don't
really have a good idea of what
we're getting for money with
these tax expenditures
so now moving to slowed five
as you can see tax expenditures
comprise most of economic
development investments and you
can see a list of these economic
development tax expenditures on
the right side of the slade
once again like I said currently
we don't have a good idea of
what these expenditures and
claims are getting or we have an
idea of the expenditures and
claims to the taxation and
revenue departments in your tax
expenditure report but we don't
know what we're really getting
for our money so income these
monthly tax expenditure
assessments or tax reports
so we're starting today with the
two that you see highlighted in
blue highwage jobs and rural
jobs and all these make up a
short uh a small amount of the
share of the total we grouped
these by topic and started with
these because as you'll hear
highway jobs will be expiring
shortly and so we wanted to go
ahead and get that information
and if you guys.
I'll now hand it over to bring
into further to describe the
reports focus and governors and
key terms for you
mr chair community members my
name is brendan gray i'm an
economist at least see like
magazine at my task is to orient
you a little more towards the
actual report itself and to
define some terms before or jump
in and we're going to keep
flying through our slides and so
if you want to read ahead you
can the actual taxi reports are
going to be after the slide dock
if you flip the your binder
they're going to look like this
the good news is they're very
short one page front back uh
that summarizes a lot of
information very quickly
and
yes if you aren't slight six
this summary's what these
assessments contain and what
they don't contain so hitting
three sections where summarizing
the history of these tax credits
some of these are multi decades
old and so we're going through
that process we're looking at
the fiscal and economic impact
we ran these through a new
economic modeling software that
we have called the rimi to
understand how these are
reverberating through the
economy and then lastly we're
looking at the design of these
tax credits are they designed
well are there places low
hanging fruit that we can make
improvements what these
assessments don't have we're not
comparing across states
we're not doing a cost benefit
analysis so we're not at that
point where we can compare
apples to apples between these
types of investments and other
investments that you all has
appropriators make and then
lastly we're not making
recommendations all of that we
we can develop if you mister
chair the committee at once used
to develop those things were
happy to do that but for now
we're getting an inventory get
on our hands around that six
hundred million dollars that
we're spending on economic
development tax expenditures to
present to you
on slide seven two quick.
Terms
first at these kind of a t
takeaways the economic impact of
these the return in revenue this
is a measure that's that's
measuring how much for every one
dollar respend how much more in
taxes are we get are
recollecting and so a negative
return in revenue means that
we're spending a dollar and
we're getting less than a dollar
back in increase tax revenue
and then you also have economic
return on investment this is
moving away from just revenues
and looking at the entire
economy for every one dollar we
spend on this tax expenditure
how much is the state economy
growing that's with that
measures and you you're welcome
to read uhm more about those
definitions and if you have
questions about our methodology
there's a whole long explainer
on how those are defined on a
website and happy to talk about
that if you'd like
an inslight eight on a pile of
in going really quick here and
talk a little bit about the cost
benefit analysis and why why
it's important that notable that
we are not including that here
so cost of analysis
helps you all this policy makers
compare apples to apples across
the policy areas so you could
think what's the cost benefit of
investing in early childhood
versus in you know
k twelve occasion apples to
apples and it's really the gold
standard for answering what we
call normative questions is this
thing worth it is this tax
expenditure the rural jobs tax
credit is it worth it or not and
because we haven't done a cost
benefit analysis they these tax
expenditure assessments don't
answer that question that near
may or may not be on your mind
instead or hoping to do its
compare everything in this
ecosystem to each other as soon
you can get a sense of how you
can prioritize best.
In this six hundred million
dollars ecosystem that you're
currently investing in.
Alright those are the terms and
in last line i'll cover on
slight nine this is the summary
table that we're going to be
presenting or move relatively
quickly through each of these
but if you have questions in the
reporter afterwards when you
reading this is really the place
you can come and get those
answered and so this is that
summary table first two these
are just reported by from trd
jobs created economic rey return
and revenue those are all
calculated using remi usage
trends pretty self evident
purpose statement we're looking
at the purpose statement of
these expenditures whether
they're being met or not and
then lastly the design of these
credits and which I also think
are relatively self explanatory
or mr chair and committee if you
can now flip to the end of the
those that slide deck you should
have the first actual tax report
looks like this on the rural job
tax credit.
I've got one or two more minutes
and then alternative over
magging and then we'll wrap it
up
so the road job tax credit is
eligible to companies eligible
for g tip if you're from the
later with that those are
economic base companies in rural
areas
a business can get up can get a
thousand dollars a year per job
and I can take you to qualify
for that for two years or for
four years based on the
population that they're in
this credit is not refundable
it's transferable up to three
years
and i'll summarise the economic
impact on the top right hand
corner of the page
you can see all those numbers fy
twenty four at the state spent
six hundred and thirty seven
thousand dollars on the rural
job tax credit that was forty
five claims or forty five
businesses got this tax
expenditure.
This report estimates the
economic ara are to be thirty
five percent so means for every
one dollar we spend on the road
job tax credit the state economy
grows by thirty five cents
and this report estimates that
the return in revenue for the
rural job tax credit is negative
eighty three cents that means
for every one dollar we spend or
forgoing eighty three cents and
we're getting back seventeen
cents so we're not making our
money back and we're making
seventeen cents back every
dollar we spend
alright that's the economic
impact analysis calculated using
arimi software and if you turn
to the second page quickly
through the summary table i'll
go through the design elements
and the usage trends usage is
dropped a lot recently for this
credit
it does not have an expiration
they does not have an
expenditure cap those are both
lfc tax policy principles that
aren't being met it targets
rural areas but maybe not
distressed areas in particular
and it does target export based
industry.
And this report concludes by
saying the credit partially
satisfies its purpose of
increasing businesses to start
our expand business to start or
expand their operations and it's
partial because the claims have
come down so much and it's
relatively small expenditure
less than a million dollars a
year
and also the value of that
incentive has decreased a lot it
was created in two thousand at
that one thousand dollars per
year and that has decreased
invalued by forty five percent
over that period so you can
imagine the the relative size of
that has decreased a lot mr
chair with that i'll pass it
back over to mage for high wage
jobs
thanks brian I chair members if
you are could turn to your next
page you should have a brief
experience similar but says
highway jobs credit at the top
so the highwage jobs credit
similar to rural jobs provides a
tax credit to business is
eligible for the job training
incentive program or j tip for
the creation of new highway jobs
businesses can receive up to
eight and a half percent of
wages up to around twelve point
seven thousand dollars for a new
high each job and so a highwage
job is defined as one with wages
over sixty thousand and urban
communities and forty thousand
and broke millions they refilled
for at least forty four weeks
so for instance if i'm a
business owner that created a
new job costing around ninety
thousand that would mean that
i'd get around seven thousand
five hundred dollars back per
year for that job so looking to
the top rate of the page you can
see that in fiscal you're twenty
four businesses received around
eleven point two million and six
port through the credit and
eighty nine claims remain
at all so the top of the page
you can see that that economic
return on investment is around
forty seven percent meaning that
for every dollar spent the state
gets economy grows by forty
seven cents and the return and
revenue is negative eighty three
percent meaning that for every
one dollar spent.
The state for goes eighty three
cents and gets back seventeen
cents and s.
If you could now turn to the
back of the page for me
at looking at the design
elements about summary box on
the rate the brand and twenty
two two other credit does have a
sense that they of july first
twenty twenty six so it does
have an expiration date however
it does not have an expenditure
cap I similarly because of the
urban rural divide it does
target rural areas but it
doesn't target other distressed
areas so we said that it
particularly needs that statute
or that criteria and because of
the date of requirements it does
target export based industries
given the usage of the credit
and the estimated jobs created
around a hundred and thirty five
jobs per year add this credit
likely meets its purpose of
providing an incentive for
businesses to create and fill
new highway staps you think you
offer time and now if there's
time for questions would be
happy to answer any
excellent thank you both at
fascinating information we're
going to jump right in starting
with represent dunkin uh
representative behind
no of course chairline date of
seven dunkin to start thank you
mister chair and just one quick
question for young page six
you'd indicated that you didn't
compare other states um you ever
look or do you ever think
there's a possibility that you
will look back as you catch up
and look at what other states
are doing so we don't have to
reinvent the will
mr chair representative
absolutely that's something you
would you would find valuable we
were we'll be happy to do that
thank you thank mister great
thank you very much from santa
denkin representative of home
please thank you mister
quickly in a rural um
rural employers do we know what
counties are benefiting the most
sure.
Mr chair representative we don't
have a breakdown of spending by
county I can give you the uhm
the area's debt are eligible if
you'd like sure so there it's
every in everywhere in new
excuse to find as rule except
for albuquerque forming ten last
cruises or something right as
well santa fe and then a ten
mile zone around all those
cities every else's rural.
Thank you and so when as there
as we're creating these as we've
created and mentioned this
incentive and there is no cap
is a
with the intention because of
inflation and and growth of a
need and housing as well and if
you don't have those answers is
that something you're going to
be looking at as your time and
um
accountability to
what we're doing with this tax
incentive mister chair
mr chair representative when i'm
hearing for your question is uh
the reason this tax expenditure
exists I think it's an
acknowledgment by the
legislature that there are
different costs in rural
communities that self-evident
but your point there's a lot of
other considerations like the
indexing uh that that haven't
been made and so
as we will you be looking at
those as your doing further
analysis like how this is
benefiting with
the growth factor in the need
for housing and those sort of
things because this would I mean
to my knowledge and the reason
why I you know where we have
done these things as speak
because of the costs of living
in our state and I represent
center fee and so and the
highest cost of living areas and
job creation is.
There's job creation around
sound of it or insanity but
people don't necessarily live
there so i'm wondering how we
connect those things thank you
mr chair
mister chair absolutely I think
that cost benefit analysis gets
at exactly that point it would
be considering the
the value that housing the need
of the housing the cost the
benefit of that
so we haven't gotten there yet
but sounds like there's interest
so we can definitely start them
structurally process thank you
mister chair may be a few other
things but really to that point
and how much money we've really
invested in the housing efforts
for our state entire to the the
tax incentives that we're doing
I think it's very
something I would and I think
the rest of us would appreciate
analysis on thank you great
thank you very much
in behind chairline please thank
you mister chairman thank you
brendan for the presentation and
thank you for the presentation
of your name but I apologize
nonetheless great work fantastic
new tool that we have at our
disposal and I am also reminded
by chief daughter is that
they're that the staff will be
working on the other economic
development meant investments
that we have in this state so
that hopefully by the end of
this year we'll have a report
car in all these that we can
begin to see which ones are
working which is are not so
thank you mister chairman
excellent thank you very much
next we're going to go to
represent that then we have
representative dixon
thank you mr chair thank you for
the presentation as a very
eliminating I thought I I was
very curious about how these
things had work do you think
there are other or better costs
effective alternatives to
achieve these goals like just
direct grant making or
a direct investment have you
thought about that.
Mister chair representative and
a really good question it's a
little outside of uh these taxi
reports but I can I can give you
my give you my perspective I
would see there economic
development literature
tends to estimate the impact is
being higher when they're more
when an incentive is more
targeted and so when you can you
can tip a business decision you
can see for sure that this
business would not be open but
for this state investment that's
when it's going to be the most
cost effective and in general
tax policy applies to all
businesses and so you might not
have that level of specificity
so I think to your point I think
the literature I would say there
are more effective ways to make
these kinds of investments.
Mr chair thank you thank you for
that answer in i'm curious or
these are just option to these
tax credits are just open to
businesses are they open to non
profits.
Mr chair
representative no
I don't think they would be open
uhm these are get it eligible
and I don't think it unprofit
would be
to be eligible
I mister chair and and and thank
you for that answer I I just
want you to know that in rural
counties most of the start up
operations so really non profits
you know they they they only
differences they don't try to
make a profit they try to break
even but it's really service to
the community and most jobs
probably are starting
I think a lot higher than forty
thousand but they're probably
starting at forty thousand are
they open to are these tax
credits opened or these not tax
credit if it's are these credits
open to like a
health agency that would open.
I cheer representative thank you
for the question are given the
job training incentive program
requirements that that
eligibility can be found online
are one of the uh business
industries that is not eligible
as.
The.
Mr chairman also curious about
the the high quality job I mean
how do you
high cost per job is it
justified by the type or the
quality of the job itself that's
what i'm curious about could you
speak to that.
Mr chair representative.
I think that the the economics
on the literature has looked at
those questions looking at
quality life of the job
retirement benefits these kinds
of things uhm these tax credits
are just looking at wages and so
more narrow not considering the
quality of the job like like
you're mentioning but that said
you know that that's important
consideration.
Thank you very much for
observation plan.
Thank you mister chair thank you
brendan and magay for this
excellent report I have several
notes but I just want to take a
minute to express my
appreciation for you guys for
diving in and using rammied so
that we as a legislature can
make informed decisions on tax
expenditures and actually
understand the return on
investment and cost benefit so
thank you thank you thank you.
Excellent okay I don't see any
other questions ah think really
good questions beginning from
the committee we can clearly see
that there's a great deal of
opportunity here and are excited
to uh now that lfc as we
understand other you know
executive agencies including
economic development department
have this tool and were excited
to to use it and uh yeah
appreciate both of you
gate we're gonna ask directors
to lead to take us through the
large expenditures report again
sort of a look ahead this is
helpful as we go through the
rest of the week a lot of some
are some of these big
expenditures are going to be
very relevant to what we'll be
dealing with so i'll turn over
to the director
so thank you mister chairman
just real quickly and tap we I
thought it was important to just
bring it to your attention
because it's going to some of
the information contained in
this report is going to help
answer questions you're going to
have for the next two days on
what the status of the twenty
million dollars is for child
welfare behavioral health and
see why if d or what's the
status of the big investment in
certificate training and higher
education that's contained in
this report I think it's a
snapshot in time of expenditures
we don't have a higher red
expenditures and shares that
there's a bit of a limitation
there it's a point in time and
we we may not see incumbents for
personnel so it's something
that's not going to answer all
of your questions but it will
certainly help highlight things
the other thing I think is
important for the committee to
consider is once we get to the
close out of some of these
appropriations
agencies feel under a lot of
pressure to not revert money and
try to just spend all of it and
I think we want to resist the
temptation of spend what you
need to get the job done and if
there's money let's left over it
goes back to the general fund
and we'll have to make a kind of
an informed decision on a case
by case basis on.
Are we over appropriating for
something that creates an
opportunity cost or were you
able to just be more efficient
should be congratulated for it
you know as an agency so if
you're reverting you know four
percent of the appropriation I
really wouldn't sweat it if it's
like none of it's getting
expense and you're in the
legislative session and they're
asking for an extension that's
going to raise them red flags
and and he should have
conversations with them about
the ability of the of the
appropriation of the or the
special project so thank you
mister chairman great thank you
very much director that's very
helpful we can take these home
if you want to I don't just
obviously bring them back
tomorrow that's going to wrap up
quick note
kelly reminded me for folks who
are going on the natural
resources tour tomorrow please
where comfortable for where
because there's going to be some
walking not a a ton but it'll be
some walking outside those will
be the sub committees in the
afternoon when we break up for
that with that thank you members
very much big things to the
staff were adjourned for today
the martyrs
martyr steak house and i'd had
your drive safely but head over
