Last year's work plan, Uh, was
treated in the session and and
what got through and what
didn't. So we're gonna We've
asked, um
Xander and Andrea to, um
Go over that with us, and then
we'll we'll just launch right
into planning for this coming
year.
Great. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
so, Yeah, we'll go ahead and
just get right started to it.
Um, the first bill that was, uh,
endorsed by L HHS, Uh, that we
have on the list is house Bill
33. It was
Oh, yes, There's these on the
goldenrod sheets. They were in
your packet.
Right? Yeah. So you can follow
along
So how school 33 was the
prescription Drug Price
Transparency Act, And I mean the
title of the act is pretty a
pretty good explanation of what
the bill does It really just
forces every entity in the
prescription drug supply chain
to provide data to the office of
the superintendent of insurance
and really increase transparency
in the pharmaceutical supply
chain. Um, and then the O SI
ends up putting, uh, annual
report out on like pricing data
and and stuff like that. Um, and
that
Ended up passing through the
legislature and it was signed by
the governor.
OK, the uh oops.
Sorry.
The, uh next bill on the list is
house Bill 34, and this was an
appropriation and the purpose of
the appropriation was to conduct
a study to look into a state run
substance Use long term rehab
facility, and I believe it was
gonna be in Albuquerque and, um,
this one pass through, Uh, HHHC.
but it died in appropriation.
And House appropriations.
Le Let me also REM remind the
members that the House bill two
did include $20 million
Or behavioral health expansion.
And that they cut it up this
year, they cut it into 2 $10
million.
Funds, 10 million to the
Behavioral Health Collaborative.
And 10 million to the Children,
Youth and Families Department.
I was on a conference call last
week with, uh
The head of the
What is it called a healthcare
authority. Humans still Human
Services Department for another
few weeks and and she said all
that money has been spent. We
are we We, It's all it all has
to go for Children's services,
and we've allocated all of it.
Which
I did not think was either of
those things was the case. So
that's something we want to
really make Sure we follow up on
What are they doing with that 20
minute because we thought that
would expand behavioral health
services not just for Children,
but for substance abuse and some
of the rest of the things that
we need.
Yeah. And Mr Chair, we will make
sure to have a secretary Army.
He'll come and and speak on
that. Um, the next bill that we
have up is house Bill 35. And,
uh, this was really an
appropriation to, um, boost. Uh,
grow your own program at UN M.
Um, it's called the Communities
to careers program.
And you know, it's just trying
to get young people interested
into health professions and and
get them in that pipeline. Um,
the bill, uh, died in H AFC, and
I didn't find anything in house
built to about, uh, that
specific appropriation.
Mr Chair. The next bill is House
Bill 38, and this would have
created a task force to study
the feasibility of creating and,
uh African American Affairs
Department and this one died in
House Consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, and I don't
believe there is any anything in
the budget.
Uh, the next one up is House
Bill 67. This was an
appropriation to increase
funding and support for, uh,
County and tribal health
councils. Um, the bill did die
in house. Uh, appropriations in
finance, But, uh, House Bill two
included a $3 million
appropriation, uh, for health
councils, and and, uh so they
got a a decent chunk of what
they were looking for.
Um, Mr Chair next on the list.
We have house Bill 94, which is,
um, a bill that would have
required the health care
Authority Department to do
yearly studies on conditions in
the direct care worker
workforce. These are the people
who, uh, work with folks who are
receiving waiver services and
the point of the studies. Um,
would be
Recommending higher Medicaid
reimbursement rates for
providing these services, um and
to ensure adequate compensation
for the people who provide them.
Um and it passed through HHHC,
but it
It died in house appropriations.
And and, of course, that's what
Roberts testimony largely
Was during public comment today.
All right. Next up. We have
house Bill 104. That was the
statewide public health and
climate program. Um, it would
have required you to establish a
statewide public health and
climate program. Uh, that would
you know, address the, um cross
between public health and the
way the the environment affects
it. Um, but the bill ended up
dying in in house
appropriations.
Mr Chair. Next up is, uh, House
Bill 163 and what this would do
would expand eligibility for
different categories or
additional categories of rural
health care providers, Um,
giving them a tax credit. Uh,
and the bill passed through HHC.
But it died in the house
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
But, um, we wanted you to
No, that the bill ended up
getting grafted onto house Bill
252 the omnibus tax package and
that passed and was signed by
the governor.
And and did it include all of
those professions? All those?
Yes, Mr Chair. I did.
All right. The next one is, uh,
kind of an interesting story. So
it's house Bill 262 it was
trying to ban uh, not compete
provisions for veterinarians and
veterinary technicians. Um, the
bill, uh, did die. But the uh,
Federal Trade Commission in
April, uh, issued a final ruling
banning employers from enforcing
the non compete agreements. And
so that ban on non compete
agreements would cover
veterinarians and veterinary
technicians.
In addition to many other
classes of workers.
OK, Next up, Mr. Chair Senate
Bill 32, and this one would have
created a reimbursement program
Such that boarding homes would
be provided with $200 a month.
Uh, for taking in residence
living, Um at the, uh, the state
Why? I don't want to say State
Hospital. I'm sorry. The
Behavioral Health Institute at
Las Vegas or the UN M Adult
Psychiatric Center, and this one
died in
In the committee's committee.
Yes, we We didn't get a
governor's message out.
We asked for one and did not get
one.
Yeah, that's actually gonna be a
pretty familiar story for the
rest of these, uh, bills, except
for the one I'm about to cover.
Um Centerville 33 was, uh, in
appropriation to the Children's
Trust fund and the next
generation fund, um, it was 6
million to the Children's Trust
fund and 4 Million to the next
generation fund, Um, House Bill,
two included an $800,000
appropriation to the Children's
Trust fund. I didn't find
anything specifically for the
next generation fund.
So I got some of the money, but
not all that they were.
Uh, Next step is Senate Bill 34
and this one would have expanded
the prescription drug donation
program. Um, but this one, too,
died in SCC.
The next three. I'll have the
same fate. They did not get a
gubernatorial message, right?
Correct, Mr Chair? Uh, yeah. Uh
so we'll we'll just run through
the last two. Pretty quick, um
Senate Bill 35 was, uh to, uh,
ensure that medic, uh,
medication assisted treatment,
uh, was provided, uh to
juveniles in substance ubi
treatment programs. Um, there
was a couple of mechanisms that
it would do it through. Um one
like, uh, any, uh, entity that
didn't provide
Uh, medication assisted
treatment to Ju. Uh, juveniles
would be denied Medicaid funding
for services to juveniles.
Um And then it was passed over
for the last one. OK? And the
last one Senate Bill 44 had to
do with healthcare licensing
changes. It would have done a
couple of different things it
would have compensated board
members who serve on the health
care professional licensing
boards that are attached to RLD.
And it would have required um
certain application waivers for
licensing fees. Um
And renewals and this one same
fate.
Any questions from the committee
or any discussion of any of
these bills. These all now
potentially could be part of our
work plan for this coming year.
Yes, Senator. Thank you. Mr
Chair, the ones that were passed
and signed, perhaps, um
Before the end of the interim,
We could have a mini report from
like the superintendent of
insurance about
Pharmacy transparency, things
like that. So the ones that
passed maybe we could have a
little report. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um I'm
particularly interested in in
bringing up uh, the statewide
statewide public health and
climate program again and having
some further discussion on that,
and, um, myself and
I'll speak more myself, but a
representative, uh Sarana, and I
have been talking about this
issue through a house
appropriations as well. And
we're, um, supported. I was
supportive of this this bill,
but, um, I think the through the
interim working this through the
the the process would be
beneficial and I'd be interested
in in working on that piece.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yeah, I think that's I think as
a general policy if we can get
If you we've been trying to get
our our recommendations for
appropriations to the LFC, but
we can't. I mean, it is just the
timing is such by by September.
They've already got things
pretty well, Gilled.
But if we think of it as these
are our recommendations for next
year's budget, and then then you
build it in right at the start
of the process, you know it. It
means we can't
Get something done right away.
Necessarily.
It would be difficult but at
least for the following year,
whatever we come up with this
summer
incorporated into the budget for
the following year. Thank you,
Mr Chair. If I may, uh, comment,
I think just with our extra
staff out of C staff and is
having that this this better
relationship
That we really focus on this
budgetary items so that we are
Guard ourselves towards that,
and that we have that, Uh,
That line of comm direct
communication with al of C, so
that that we initiate these
these types of specifically the
budgetary items that we are.
We're really focused on. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Yeah, And so the LOC staff that
are here are gonna be picking
up. They're making notes of this
and underlining them and putting
asterisk by certain ideas that
we have. So I think you're
absolutely right. It will be a
big It will be a big assist to
have that additional staff
working with US Senator
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and I was going
to just, um, elaborate a little
bit that I mean, instead of us
going in front of FC for 15
minutes in October, um, to tell
them what
We were when the budget's
already done and we 15 minutes,
Um, everything we cover is, uh
Not adequate. Shall I say now?
we have people who all during
the Inter are going to be able
to take stuff back. And so I my
hope fingers crossed is that we
will actually be able to impact
the budget as it gets developed
because we have folks who who
know we exist. And which I
sometimes I think members of the
LFC didn't know we existed. Um,
and when they wanted to do a
subcomittee on, um, health care,
like well
We're here so
Fingers crossed everybody
positive energy that having
these folks with us, um at all
of our meetings, we won't be
there begging in October to, you
know, get the leftovers.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, mister. Chair. Thank
you for the, uh, report, um, to
observations.
This is
Gonna be difficult to
coordinate, but I think we're
gonna come across certain issues
as we go through this summer.
And if we can look at the LFC
schedule if they've crossed
We then report to the C.
Um when they're bringing up a
similar topic.
Because they're not getting our
import and their only getting on
whoever kind of happens to be
there, but a again it's a It's a
tough it's gonna be tough, but I
think if we can look to see
where LFC is looking in areas
that we're looking at, and we've
discussed it if we could bring
have a a formal time short time,
at least to make them aware of
what we've learned because we do
more depth than they do as my
experience.
Um
Secondly, uh, it it's certainly
my hope and as we look to the
future, uh, we appreciate the
LFC adding staff and we have the
LSC staff, but
Help us really becoming the
biggest issue in the state, and
it's my hope that as we saw
education was a major issue, not
a constitutional amendment or
whatever it was that started the
LES C, but the complexity of the
issues we're dealing with in
their financing and so forth,
Would would really, uh, benefit
from you may think this is
excessive, but if you go to
Congress, they have multiple
staffs working on these issues,
and they come up with
Good policy, and I'm hoping that
we see this beginning of
additional staff as the
beginning of a substantial
evaluation research study in
other states policy development.
as we address our issues, But I
just I'm I'm hoping this is a
new beginning. And but I would
like us to think expansively on
how this is going to evolve.
Thank you.
And what it
Senator Silvia Lopez.
Thank you. I think it is very
important that we give input to
them. But it's and we've been
talking about us going to them.
But also maybe they should come
to us, too. When they're talking
about budgets that we have, um
A lot of ideas about so it would
be nice if you know what I mean.
Like we knew when they were
meeting. Um we knew what the
topics were. And and they, um
Sought out some perspective. You
know, they get the agency to
testify, but then they don't get
what we got, because usually the
agents agencies testify before
us on a lot more in a lot more
depth than than they do with, um
LFC. So I just just ways of
enhancing those, uh, ties and
relationships.
Well.
Yeah, And I think the fact that
that there will be staff from
the LFC and every one of our
meetings they can
Be the conduit for information
that, uh, well, you know, there
is a a report being prepared for
the LFC members on this topic,
and it's gonna look into these
aspects of it, and then we could
have some input that way.
Absolutely. And the reason I
raise it is I. I had the
opportunity to see. Um, an
agency report to the LFC.
And that same agency reported to
us.
Not that it was different, but
the depth was amazing the level
of depth
Yes, representatives. Thank you,
Mr Chairman, just to let you
know we already did our I
remember on LFC. We already did
our work plan, But, um, in our
next meeting in Gallup, we we're
doing a legislate on legislate
legis. Legislate that on, um,
Healthcare Authority, and we're
talking behavioral health
provider, network expansion and
expanding evidence based
practices and performance
measurements. So you are a part
of it. And if you look at the
grow, most of it went to child
and health and all this versus
anything else So we really do.
Look at you guys, and we know
how big you
Important you are so But you
guys can always talk to our I'll
listen, if you wanna say
anything, and I can put it out
there, But this, um the bill you
had, I think, Uh um
Representative Thompson. Did you
have hospitals 163 So
The climate one
No, that was not mine. OK, well,
that one I'd like to work on
because I I'm looking at Methane
and Co. Two and all the things
that affect the kids. But, um
Yeah. So if you need help, I'm
I'm OK. OK, then we should
probably talk in because I do a
lot of that, too. And I try to
be very vocal on LSC about the
top of the clear.
Thank you.
Representative Ferrari.
Um, thank you, mr Chair and just
to reiterate, I think when we
hear the agencies are going for
budget money, um somehow if we
can help reinforce their need to
C for office of guardianship,
they were short $400,000 of
their budget. They needed a lot
more. And, um, for us to weigh
in, Um, I think would be really
important if there's a way to do
that.
Yes, Representative. One more
comment. Um, And as we're
talking about a better
communication and better, um
Wednesday representation if you
will, uh with our other
agencies, I would also, um
Look at what the executive is
doing and when she's having like
our aging and Long term services
Summit, and and, uh, these
conferences that that, um the
executive, um hosts and that we
have that that participation
level as well. Uh, I went to the
the conference on Aging last
year and I was the only
legislator there for the I know
others came at different times
or whatever, but I didn't see.
Uh I think it's really important
because those are the issues of
this committee that are really
where we really take a deep
deep.
Driving to the point of maybe
collaborating with the executive
and hosting maybe a a policy.
Um, discussion or something to
that matter, because that's how
prepared this committee is.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
There was a bill that we had
also
The ones that that accumulated
all of our expansion of the
healthcare workforce.
And that
That
Got pieces of that got included
in house Bill two. Do you? Do
you have a breakdown of of of
what the various pieces happen.
I know we got a few things in
not the whole thing, by any
means. Um uh, sorry, Mr Chair.
That bill wasn't officially
recommended by the the, um
Committee, So I didn't look into
that. But I can and I can, uh,
put that breakdown into an email
and send it out to the whole
committee. I. I think that would
be helpful. Yeah, because I
mean, we had asked for
Um, money for
Oh,
Additional salaries for the
medical school. We had asked for
additional increase in the re
fees.
Um, there was, uh like Title
four E matching matching money
it accumulated up to be about
$100 million. It was things like
the increase in the in the
reimbursement for Medicaid.
We're part of that, Uh, bill,
which did get included in House
Bill two, although maybe not as
high a level as we had
recommended.
Right. Well, like I said, Mr
Chair, I'll look into it, and,
uh, we'll send something out
later this week. Uh, uh, Report
to all of you Good.
Any other.
Yes, I. I just, um
Are. Are we having the joint
meeting with the tax committee,
uh, to deal with the alcohol?
Well, that's one of the things
we need to talk about here
today. It's premature. My
question is premature, OK?
We have. We hadn't
We? We hadn't
Decided what we're gonna do yet,
so that but that's what we'll do
now. Anything else on last
year's session? Any other bills
that you you thought we were
following that?
It's OK.
Thanks X
Thanks,
representative John.
Did I understand you, right? You
wanted to hear about any bills
we wanted to proceed with that
didn't
Heard last last session. Is that
what you're looking at any any
bills that we might be
interested in?
Um, supporting as a committee,
Um, the, um I don't remember the
number. The one remember Philip
Houston of Lifehouse in
Carlsbad. Do you remember how he
gave us a presentation in Rio
Doo, and there's just a minor
problem with them. We need to
change.
Um, we need to make a change in
their ability to keep emergency
drugs on hand because they have
to work with the a local
pharmacy. And if they have
someone come in, who wants to
detox and it's not during
pharmacy hours.
They have to refuse them. They
have to tell them to come back
some other day it is. It's a
It's a simple fix. And, um
representative Thompson signed
on to that bill with me, but we
didn't We didn't get anywhere
with that last session, and we
just need to do that.
Yeah, for sure. Let let's add
that to the list of of the
possible bills. You remember the
number of
Yeah.
It should be easy and it doesn't
cost money.
Yeah,
Are we supposed to be bringing
up the other things like the
alcoholics side to,
you know, things that intersect
with other committees and what
we did last year and and I don't
know if you found it helpful.
We made a decision early on in
organizational meeting of what
were the
The main topics that we wanted
to make sure we got
Several days of of of of of work
done on
And then a 2nd 2nd tier of other
things that we wanna make sure
we cover during this interim,
and then we tried to organize
them around. Um
Similar topics so that we could
bring in people who would be
experts.
And then at the end, we would we
would, uh, endorse legislation.
Um, but hopefully the main
topics would might spawn three
or four bills apiece. That was
kind of the thought. What we
what we did last year was have
people email us a Li because
there's no way everybody's gonna
think of everything that's
important. Plus, we just don't
have limitless time. So if it's
OK with you, mister chair to ask
members to, um to send an email
of things that they want, they
would like I mean, no promises
that we're gonna be able to
Everything cause even though we
have five days more, um
We could use 5000 days more and
not be able to cover it all. So
that's my suggestion is we kind
of follow that same thing. Where
send an email to Xander and, uh
and Andrea in the chair and I
and we'll, we'll kind of keep a
running list.
Um and
Bennett.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. Um, the
since the schedule's changed
quite a bit in terms of not
overlapped with water and
natural resources, I'm gonna get
to be here some quite a bit and
I understand that in the past
year or so
You've spent like two or three
days on one topic.
And I think that there are some
topics that get lost.
Because of that.
And I would just ask that when
we send in our recommendations
or ideas that, uh
We look since it's a two month
um
Legislative session. We could
discuss quite a bit during the
legislative session, so I'd like
to make sure that we consider
some of those things that might
come up. Thank you and mis Mr
Chair. We did do a deep dive on
workforce. Behavioral health, I
think and CYFD, um, for our
first three meetings, but then
the rest of them were pretty
wide open. So so it's just I
mean, and I think maybe we
should start with trying to
figure out what our 33 1st
meetings are going to focus on.
And, uh, you know, it could be
that they're the exact same
things because we haven't fixed
workforce.
And we haven't fixed behavioral
health. I don't know if that's
how we wanna do it. But But, uh,
just get those big umbrellas and
then we fit the smaller, you
know single pills into other
places during their calendar.
Yeah, uh, following following
along those lines if we could
identify the three major topics
That would give us our first
three meetings.
And and we can add things to
those meetings. It doesn't have
to be exclusively that topic.
For example, When we're talking
about CYFD, we might also want
to talk about
Early childhood programming that
feeds into it, or that spins off
from it. Uh uh.
But then you could send us other
topics that aren't one of those
main three and we make sure we
try to cover all of them during
the rest of the the time. Um did
you have something we
need
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, we need
to have the work plan drafted
by, uh next Monday because to
get approved by the Legislative
Council, So if you get those
ideas into me by like, say
Friday morning at the latest, um
so I can have some time to put
that, uh, work plan together and
have it approved by the council.
Do we do we have. I mean, we
don't have to write in. You
know, um, Didi waiver provider.
I mean, we don't need to get
that granular in our work plan.
Just kind of tell us what What?
How much how much?
How deep how much? How de How
detailed it has to be and and,
Yeah, Uh, thank you, Mr Chair
and and Representative Thompson.
We don't have to get a very in
depth in the work plan. Um so,
really, you can't like if if you
don't want your idea to make it
into the work plan, you can take
a few weeks even to get the
ideas to us, But, um, for the
the work plan, we're gonna
definitely wanna hammer out.
what? These, uh, original three
main focus. Topics are and then
some broader ideas on
On top of that, like, um like
disability issues and things
like that, so it doesn't have to
get too far into the weeds. Um,
but if you want it as part of
the work plan, I'll need it by,
uh Friday morning.
Representative, Mr Chair and
vice chair. What FC does is they
do as mentioned by
representatives. We do, uh, we
have what's called the Legist
sta where they do the deep dive
and really focus on on those
agencies or those those topic
matters. Um, it sounds like
that's kind of like an
organization thing that
It's relatable to what we're
trying to do here. I know we did
it last year and the year
before as well. And I just want
to say maybe
Um, find out what those legist
topics are for LFC as well and
how maybe some of our top ideas
maybe fit into those and have
kind of a crossover, uh, and a
better connection with with
those issues because they'll
they'll take those deeper dives
in in those, um, whether it's
cfd, or it's um, which has been
the topic was last year's I. I
can't say offhand what? The what
we focus we're gonna focus on
LFC this year. Um, but we I
think we should know.
As well to for the chairs,
purposes as well as we're fining
this this information
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senator.
So a little thank you, so it
doesn't feel like this is
premature. Now, Um, I really
wanna encourage us to meet with
the tax. Um, the tax committee.
Uh, I spoke to representative
CAA, Um, yesterday and, um, she
indicated a strong interest in
that she had indicated that to
she wondered what were. The next
step was and I didn't know what
I said I would raise it at this
committee. Um, I think if we're
going to move the needle on the
alcohol tax
She's a chair. She's um, the
vice chair of the tax and Rev.
The for the house, and then they
have a tax committee Interim
committee, which is called the
revenue Something Stabilization,
right. Um, because I am we need
to, really, I think, help that
committee understand that This
isn't just about finances that
this is also about, um, policy
alcohol policy. And you know the
fact that we haven't raised the
tax on alcohol for, um, now, 30.
It's gonna
32 years makes it more and more
uh, accessible, especially to
younger people. And so they're
looking at it. I think just
generally its committees tend to
look at it as a tax policy
thing, and if we could bring the
policy discussion into it
Because you know there is a lot
of tax policy and so I really
want to encourage us to do it.
My understanding What she said
to me is there was there is a
day that they were overlapped.
Right now.
This is what she told me that
there is an overlap today. And,
uh, I said, Well, that would be
a bummer because
If it's not together, because
then I'll have to choose. Have
they picked picked out where
they're meeting.
Um, I'm not sure that they have
The Yeah or you're unrested.
OK, well, then we should get
somebody who knows.
So it's in September. The 23rd
and 24th. There's an overlap. We
only need one day with him. I
wouldn't Mr Chair
Uh, it was either last year or
the year before.
That NCSL and another national
organization came to revenue
stabilization to do a report on
alcohol tax and how our state is
totally
For lack of a better word
screwed up in terms of how we
tax technically
on how we tax different types of
alcohol.
And so while it was not about
social policy at all, it really
was about getting our house in
order and trying to identify how
to tax alcohol in a better way
and to change rates so that it
would be fair to, uh all
segments of the industry and so
a lot of times, um, the social
policy gets voted on to make a
cheaper when we do our
endorsement of bills, and so
sometimes the committee
Like
You know, uh
The child tax rate. We always,
you know, support that, but
that's a specific
recommendation that we then vote
on. But the whole alcohol thing
We've never even resolved.
How to clean up and
Change how we
Tax alcohol.
And I think it's totally
worthwhile to look at the social
consequences of both tobacco and
alcohol, but we have a bigger
problem.
With just
Cleaning it up.
Miss Mister Chairman. Uh,
respond. That's exactly the
point Last year, they focused on
on, uh, equalizing it or
whatever, um, and did not take
into account the social policy.
So I think it'd be a shame if we
if we actually made the change,
and it was just about equalizing
it, which would actually have
the result at least the way it
was presented of making it
cheaper. Um, for Children and
poor people was just
unbelievable to me. Um and so
I think it it would be really
beneficial for for the full
picture of alcohol taxes, not
just the equalization of the tax
a again across
What did they the
I'm not sure Equalization is the
right word, but, um, making it
so that
More expensive alcohol was taxed
equitable or whatever that more
expensive alcohol was taxed at a
higher rate.
Um, which would mean like the
little miniatures and whatever
would actually go down in price?
Um, And I think that we should,
um, have some say in some, uh,
evaluation of what That would
mean.
OK, um
Well, let's finish up the, uh
are you gonna ask? Talk about
alcohol tax. Um, why don't we?
Why don't we, uh zero in then on
on trying to have a joint
meeting with R
in September?
And I don't know. I don't know
where they're gonna be. And I
don't know where we're gonna be,
but we can adjust it afterwards.
If we have
Ari always meets in
sane.
Well, then that's pretty simple.
We could we could, either. What?
What is our meeting in
September?
It's the 23rd 24th 25th so we
could we could meet the first
day in Santa Fe with them and
then have
The other two days.
Somewhere else close enough by
that we could get to it.
You know, maybe Las Vegas or
To
Espanola. Even anybody want to
go to Espanola?
Yeah, no, they they always host
this really?
Oh,
Don't tell Senator Jamil is
Um, I'm going to be going to a
National Alcohol Policy
Institute forum next week and
yes, so I can bring back some
information, too. But I just
when we have the if we go to the
behavioral health deep dive, I
think this is really important
that we include You know things
that, um affect, like aces and
Uh, gun violence and things like
that. And how alcohol and
tobacco both, you know, um go
into the substance of abuse and
then also how important
prevention is to avoid all these
behavioral health problems lined
with something else. Senator
Hickey, then representative
Kates.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Two
observations when, uh, just came
up from representative Ferrari,
and that's her going to that
meeting and and coming back with
a lot of education. Um
As I've researched a number of
topics, there are a number of
national organizations that are
really moving on healthcare
issues, the National Academy of
State Health Policy I would
recommend to everyone here. It's
good. It's better than N CS L.
um, just the depth of what
they're doing, But the point I
want to make is in and this
comes down to, um, our, uh,
support staff and and both
venues is beginning to look at
it.
Up the topics. Can we bring
someone from those
organizations in to tell us what
leading states are doing? And
and they and and both N CS LNB,
Uh other organizations are are
identifying leading policies
that are already showing impact
There are results so again, it
it adds to the agenda, but it
brings us so much more to work
with when we
Something is working in another
state, or there's a pattern
where it's working, so I would
just request that the staff look
at that and see as we coordinate
our agenda. You're thinking,
bringing them in as as resource
people as a resource. You know,
we did some zoom, uh, people
talking on some stuff, but as a
resource of what appeared to be
best policies, and I think that
will help inform us to in
instead of us kind of going
around. Kind of, uh, our
intuitive
Experiences or areas of
interest, but also really look
to see where the wheel is being
invented at its round and it's
actually rolling. And, um
So that that's just one
suggestion. The other is Xander.
if you could put an asterisk on
the schedule, we turn in to, uh
uh, the Thank you. Yeah, That
has to be a, um, You know, we're
We're just starting with this
and I know topics came up last
year. We wanted moron.
Uh, more more information and
and well, it wasn't on the
schedule and the I I'm hoping
that what you turn on, it puts
an asterisk on the bottom
subject to change at the
committees. Um, well, her and so
forth so that we don't get so
locked in. And then as we go
later in the year, maybe reserve
some time for some things that
we're gonna wanna have come back
to. I remember that happening
over and over again last year
that we wanted more depth, and
so
Uh, but first the asterisk and
then this. This is a an evolving
agenda rather than locked in
stone.
Yeah, I think
I think we generally can add
topics and even miss topics that
we might have listed it
depending on what what's
happening.
Representative Kate
I thank you, chair and vice
chair. So, um, just so
clarification. We're gonna be
sending emails to the chairs
about, uh, proposed bills that
we want to carry and and
requests If, uh, we are asking,
uh, the L HHS staff to do
further investigation for the
data of those bells. And then,
um, my dog in the fight and
continues to be my dog in the
fight is we create policy here
and
We don't put audit loops in our
policy, and I don't understand
why not?
And so there's a lot of what and
I'm not talking about financial
I'm talking about C, uh, meeting
the the the the compliance or
the criteria? Um, who is
following up? How are they
reporting back? Who are the
reporting to where is their data
And I wanna be mindful of that,
as we move forward for new
policy. But there are a lot of,
uh, questions out there as well.
So when I send this and do you
want me to CC Xander on this as
well?
When I send the bills, I'm gonna
also have these questions that I
would like, um, followed up with
and then we can tuck them into
the different agendas we have.
It might be something as simple
as in today's report, Uh, they
talked about how there is a
federal, um
Uh, a federal rule against
states using Social Security
money. That was, uh, a death
benefit for Children in foster
care, Um states have been
capturing Social security the
money, saying that they're using
it for their welfare. And then
when you turn 18 you have no,
um, nest egg to move forward in
and they cautioned us saying,
Well, we may want to bring back
that bill to make it
Statue just in case
What's coming down from the
feds.
Um
Uh,
Is, uh, changes, but I think
that
III I want. I want that looked
into to see what kind of rule
change it was made. Uh uh, at
the federal level, that would be
one of my questions. You know, I
have other questions. Uh, I
we've heard, um
Uh, we heard from the secretary.
Uh, Representative Thompson and
I, um Se secretary ril that, um,
uh she will be requesting from C
MS a moratorium briefly on the
current audits in the DD waiver
programs as she evaluates the
criteria and the training but I
have yet to hear confirmation
that that has happened and one
will and what the process.
So there are a series of like
just dangling questions out
there that I think that this is,
uh we should be capturing that
as well as bills. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, Mr Chair and
members So your ideas don't have
to be built. It can be. We need
to hear more about the
guardianship program. I You
know, I'm not sure that there's
a bill to be had there. So don't
think it's that you have to have
come up with a solution, or, you
know, sometimes we just need
more information and and so
Don't limit yourselves in terms
of well, I haven't quite figured
out how to solve that problem.
Sometimes we need presentations
to help us figure out what the
best ne next steps are.
Uh, Mr Chair Just on point. With
what? Uh, representative cases
was was discussing and having
accountability or things that
are audit audit.
Audited. Um, I think
So we have the hearings. And
that's why we have these
questions. And we have the
authority as legislators to ask
those direct questions to those
agencies, and also a lot of that
information does come up and you
know, with the financial budget
and the the information we get
from LFC and the reports that
that they provide and also
report some other
Uh, committees, uh, to show that
So I don't know if you can
elaborate on that. Or maybe we
can talk. Discuss that later,
but I just wanna
Know that I understand what
you're you're talking about,
because I think there's there's
um measures are in place. I
think it's how we
Um
formulate our hearings and our
communications and and how we as
legislators have the authority
to ask in directly interact
with, uh, agencies. But I, I
probably need some more
information because the the
checks and balances from the
Financial part as you said it
wasn't about are there but
through those financial reports
and everything we get the leg.
the information and reports down
from uh, Legislative Finance
Committee, which they do an
amazing job in my opinion, so
I'm just a little confused,
Mister. Check may respond, Mr
Ch So, So Thank you very much.
Representative. Yes, I don't.
Um, I do believe that we do have
definite checks and balance
financially and audit. I'm
talking about compliance and on
many different levels in many
different ways.
But just as bring back to an
example in our public comment
today, um, with Robert Keel, so
we we get a list of here's our
A&E. We have X amount of abuse.
X amount neglect, exponent
explication.
uh, exploitation, But we don't
have, um, what was done about
it? What were the findings? Did
it go to criminal court? Did it
Did somebody lose their license?
Did somebody get rep? Uh, place.
Get the number and that is not
finishing your auditing loop,
And that must be re, uh
Uh, must be. I believe, um
Uh, required
From this legislature to the
agencies for them to be able to
provide that. And if that means
that it needs to be put in
future bills so that we have
that audit report, then I. I
hope that we are mindful when
we're creating policy with that.
Thank you.
Um, great discussion. And and I
my two colleague
representatives. Thank you for
your your pointing these things
out, Um
There are now II. A lot of
pieces of legislation require a
report be given to the
Legislature, and we don't know
they they get written. We don't
know what happens to them, and
we don't know if there's any
follow through. And so the point
I'm making is that these are all
really important things and
again in Congress. They do have
oversight committees and people
who do. Did you actually do what
you said? You do as a follow
through by the executive branch,
and, um what?
I'm hoping going back to my
first comment on expanding the
staff for health that we think
of another, uh, another group of
staffing. However, it fits in
that goes out and does read,
reads the reports where they've
been requested when they are
I'm hoping going back to my
first comment on expanding the
staff for health that we think
of another, uh, another group of
staffing. However, it fits in
that goes out and does read,
reads the reports where they've
been requested when they're not,
uh
Deep enough for their issues.
Bring them to our attention, but
that they are the ones who are
seeing that there's follow
through and, uh, actual, uh,
implementation and then if there
are real issues with getting
implemented like you can't hire
the staff because the salaries
are high enough, etcetera. We
understand that and put that
into future legislation to
support him. But what I'm
arguing for is additional staff
to do just this for us and
report back to us because none
of us have the time for
Kind of in depth to assure that
things are are actually
happening. My mental health
parity. Did they hire all the
people? Are they getting it
done? You know, I kind of know I
have brief conversations, but I
don't know that they're really
getting it done and they're
having the impact but having
someone who could study that and
come back and do a report would
be greatly helpful. I. I would I
would just hazard the, uh,
recommendation. That's the kind
of thing that the LFC
Do when they when they follow up
on these things, So we do have
that capacity. Also, Xander
reminds me that the librarian at
the Council Service, uh, keeps
track of any leg. Any wording in
any legislation that says a
report will be made to such and
such a committee by such and
such a date. And and then that
librarian advises the staff and
and so one of our last meetings,
we always have an opportunity to
get all the reports. But
Getting the report is not the
same thing as knowing whether
anything ever happened because
of it.
Right? And, uh, Mr Chair
colleagues, I, I would reflect
back on, uh, what representative
cases? Just said it's not only
the financial I mean, this is a
different role for LFC when we
originally envisioned it. It
would be policy, too.
It. The policy get implemented
and executed and carried out as
well as are they following their
budget.
Yeah, I think I think they're
they're studies actually get
into policy more much more than
just fiscal issues. Yeah.
Um
Uh, yes, mister. Chair, I'd say,
uh, this is a great
conversation. I'm really
enjoying it. Um, And I hope I'm
not speaking too much, but I
would I would. I'd say we have
to also be careful when we get
into, um, issues with with, uh,
legal or, um, personal issues,
and we'd have to move into, you
know, um
Executive session and those
sorts of things I just want us
to be. I mean, that's what I'm
hearing a little bit. There's a
little overture of that. So I
just want to say that we have to
be careful on, you know, with
those in depth conversation when
if there is or if there are
legal issues surrounding them,
and those sorts of things and
and and again, I think that the
benefit of us having C members,
Uh, staff now will get into
those in these in depth things
because it's been my experience
that they have the most in
depth. Uh, information and
reports aligned.
With how that meets their budget
requests and and kind of that
report card and, um, that will
transfer over to this committee.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So sort of,
um, I wanted to bring up also, I
know that we're gonna be really
doing some deep dive into health
care, right? Um and really want
to make sure that we look at
what's driving the high cost of
health care. Um and I also
wanted to piggyback off of what,
Senator? Hi. Um
Hickey said I was gonna call
you, Heinrich, um
in terms of bringing in, um
experts from other parts of the
country, Um, in terms of some of
the things that they've done so
that we're not reinventing the
wheel but also wanted to add in
that we might want to think
about bringing in experts from
other parts of the world, Other
countries as well to look at
what they've done, um, in their
countries, so that we now we
could do it over Zoom.
Yeah. No, we don't have to fly
them here.
There you go. Yeah, Yeah. Yeah.
Um, but but, yeah, I. I think
that there's a wealth of
information out there that we
could learn from, Um and not
saying that we're gonna like,
take what they've done and and
plop it into New Mexico but
figure out what fits for us,
right? What? What's gonna work
for us?
The other thing is that I also
wanted to, um, just kind of
throw out there, you know,
healthcare, behavioral health or
such huge issues for for the
committee and at some point in
time do we want to think about
creating subcommittees for those
two pieces? Um, I see. Rep.
Thompson shaking her head, but
I'm just, you know, just
throwing it out there thinking
about it. I know it would add
more days. But you know
something for, um, to really
think about Chavez. We did have
a behavioral health subcomittee.
And AD D subcomittee and nobody
ever came. Well, I, I mean it.
It was it was it it? It kind of
lost the importance when it was,
you know, five people instead of
the whole it it just it didn't
work. I chaired the behavioral
health and it I mean that it was
just not it.
Somehow, Maybe maybe things are
different, but we would have to
take those days out of our
already days. Right? That's what
I'm saying. I know that we would
need additional days. But so I
mean, something to think about.
Um and then the other piece is
that you know there may be other
pieces of legislation that we
might want to coordinate with
other committees. Um, you know,
last session there was, you
know, conversation about, you
know, mergers, acquisitions,
Private equity. You know, that
might be something that courts
and corrections is also
concerned about. So maybe
thinking about having a, you
know, joint meeting
You know, with that committee as
well to so to sort of keep that
open.
In the recent past, We've had
joint meetings with Indian
affairs.
And with, um
Uh, courts and corrections.
And who else? I guess that's it.
And and then with the
Now with text stabilization.
Of representative Ferrari and
the senators to Phoenix. Thank
you, just to, um
Kind of, uh, brainstorm with a
representative Chavez's, um,
idea.
Is it possible for us to have
subcommittees? Um, that we did
by zoom without, you know, per
diem and things like that, that
we might if there was, you know,
special pockets of interest that
we could, you know, Carry on.
Ideas.
As a kind of a work group. I
think I think you absolutely any
any any. Um, uh,
You know, four or five members
of the committee that wanted to
get together and elaborate a
little bit on, let's say tax
policy, or CYFD, or the Cara
program or any of those things.
certainly, but it would be
unofficially. It wouldn't be
part of the committee and, uh
and it wouldn't be on our agenda
and you wouldn't get any pre
diem.
But we could report back. Yeah,
you could always say, you know,
Five of us met last Saturday,
and here's what we came up with.
Oh, I think the senators
senators defendi then
representative, Thank you, Mr
Chair. This is not about, uh,
work groups, but last, uh,
during the last session, uh,
Senator Steinborn tried a couple
bills.
And he's not on our committee,
but I thought they were
important bills and they were
not germane, but they it's about
hospitals.
In particular, not health care.
individual health care
providers, but hospitals that
did not accept
Medicaid, Medicare or the
insurance plans of our own
state.
And they were, uh, shop.
Uh, for which ones they would
take. And so you couldn't walk
in the door. Every person could
not walk in the door and be seen
by that hospital, And he was
trying to address that issue in
the southern part of the state,
but I think it's worthwhile for
us to look at the entire state
so that we don't have. We
already have a issue with people
being provided health care.
And we don't want rejections at
the door.
So maybe Cassander and I'll send
a little email. But I think
that's an important topic to
follow up on that,
Um
Representative. I mean, Senator
Lopez, followed by
representative Lua.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair.
And if I am correct to hear that
we will probably have a hearing
with regards to CYFD.
We? Yeah. We definitely need to
have a hearing whether that's
one of our three priorities or
not, is gonna be one of the
things we decide now, and I know
you're You're, uh uh, Senate
Memorial Five Commission, uh, is
gonna be working simultaneously,
so we definitely would want to
have a an opportunity to get
your this would be later Mr
Chair.
As we progress cause we're just
starting, so this would be later
for a report out for us to come
in front of the committee.
Um, But if I may also ask for
consideration, if when we do
this, Cfd, um
Discussion information et
cetera, is to make sure that we
include juvenile justice.
It's not just child protective
services, but it's also a
juvenile justice.
Um, I have some concerns with,
you know, the governor's, um
Suspension of Juvenile Justice
Alternatives initiative that was
that's still in existing
executive order. But there are
so many other issues that come
up and it's also still part of
CYFD. And I would hope that we
would make sure that we have
time dedicated
Um do juvenile justice and also
what's happening within YD, DC
and other things.
Oh, and one more thing, Mister
Chair. I'm sorry.
Um is when we're talking also we
were talking about, um
guardianships.
Um, not just with those, um, for
for adults also, but those with
a a disability but also to make
sure that we include Ofra.
Because that's another for the
guardian of items with regards
to Children who could
potentially be entering the
foster care system or those who
are part and they're also court
ordered.
Um, So that would be, um
However, if you all determined
to do it, but for guardianships,
at least to make sure that we
include those areas excellent,
And at least this year, they got
a budget.
Yeah, it wasn't the case last
year, so right, Thank you.
Um, Representative Leja. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I would add under
the behavioral health topic in
Um
Working with representative
Chavez as well and having that
joint, uh, session with C CJ
with the topic of
Of competency, civil commitment
and diversion programs with our
local governments and
understanding Budgetarily what
is being done in our local
governments? What is needed
through our our state agencies
and, um, I believe that would be
that time for us to work with C
CJ and have a joint, um, session
with them and and figuring out
how we're addressing this and I
know again, I'll say it again.
This is something where looking
forward to address in a special
And you and I sponsored
And the legislation this past
session. I think it's a bigger
picture. I think that last year,
J did a really great, uh, a full
day on talking about behavioral
health in our our court system
and the judiciary systems. I
think that we need to
collaborate with them on that.
Thank you.
Presented Thompson Mr Speaker,
Well,
Mr Chair just coming into the
building. Um, I think we should
maybe
Um, figure out our three big
topics and then cause a lot of
these will fall under them. Um,
And of course, as I've said
before, we're not gonna have
time to get in. I mean, you
know, medication, assisted
treatment and and foster care. I
mean, there's just so if we
could spend this time now coming
up with our three deep dives,
um it is hard. What do we do?
That's easy on this committee.
That's Yeah, That's that. That's
why we needed five extra days.
Last year, we had, um
Health care workforce.
The need to expand the health
care workforce. We had CYFD and
we had behavioral health. Those
were our three broad topics.
Anybody one to suggest we
deviate from those three
Does anybody feel like there's
something that would be even
more important than one of those
three? Let's start with, uh, you
and then.
Thank you since the special
session, at least a couple of
bills are going to be dealing
with the with the behavioral
health. Um
In in the context of commitments
and also in the context of, um
Of the competence being with
what that's gonna do, I think is
gonna create more need for
services and
Last year, one of the things
that we did it that I thought
was very important is really
learn how much we need to build
out these systems just for our
existing population.
And so I'd like to see what we
could do early on in terms of
evaluating what we have
available and how I mean I
listened very carefully to what
they said about whether we have
sufficient funding.
Um for behavioral health
services now and whether we have
enough to if we have this
expansion that would be required
if the governors proposed two
bills.
Were to pass.
So, uh, anyway, so that is both
supporting one but also
emphasizing timing and the other
issue. Um, I don't know if it's
more important than any of those
three. But senior citizens, um
What's happening now is a lot of
senior citizens. Social Security
isn't covering enough. Um, they
don't have retirement plans, and
so they have to work.
And what they're finding is
incredible Age discrimination,
They're finding their skills are
out of date. They're finding
that they don't even get
interviewed. Just, um if they
wanna start businesses, they're
met with all kinds of barriers.
And so it would be, um
Kind of a look at what's going
on with our seniors in our
state. Because people have been
telling me I, I can't make it on
what I'm getting, and I can't
find a job.
So, um
It's a bigger issue than that.
But I can't tell you how many
constituents have been talking
to me about that recently.
So I wanna put it out there.
Um, just a comment about the
The, um
The need to expand our
treatment. Resources for
behavioral health. You know, the
dilemma was
If our current resources
Are underutilized.
I mean, we know that they're not
sufficient, but theyre half
empty. They're only serving half
the population there licensed to
serve as Kelly was mentioning
this morning.
It becomes very difficult then
to justify an expansion.
You know, Building another
alcohol treatment program or
something like when the existing
one is is I. I understood from
last year that it wasn't so much
the the facilities as it was the
bodies the people to do the
work.
Yeah,
Yeah, that's I mean, I think
that the the workforce continues
to be an enormous So getting
them together. Um, because we
spent a lot of time on health
building, you know, talking
about the need for health pro
providers, and we just make make
sure that behavioral health is
peace is part of that.
Senator. Let's see
representative Chavez, then
senators to Phoenix.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair. I
OK, so one of the things that we
haven't talked about.
Is housing.
And that's huge.
Um
And so, I. I wanna throw that
one out. And then of course, you
know.
Health care is on the list,
right?
Um, but I think housing we need
to
Have some conversations.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair. I think
we should keep CYSD on the list
because I think we will continue
to have, um not just, uh,
reports back from the task
force, but we will continue to
have many, many bills introduced
during the session. And so if we
have a better understanding
Of what's really happening. We
will know how we personally
should react. The other thing is
if we had a big health, uh
Topic. We could then put in the
workforce under it the access
under it and the financing or
something like that. But like
there are many parts to health
care that, you know, we still
wanna look at. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and this is
the everyone knows. This is my,
uh, my heart and soul is Didi
Waber stuff. Um, and it's
A small program, but it's been a
problem.
For 30, plus years. Um so I I'm
not saying that we need to do
one of our three deep dives, but
I think we need to spend some
some real quality time hearing
from providers hearing from
families hearing from from folks
because it's It's always been a
little You know, we'll we'll
we'll up the Medicaid rates 2%
and that will fix that. Well,
nothing has ever fixed anything.
Um, or nothing has ever has ever
fixed everything. So just
thinking.
And it trying to finally you
know, we we have ended the
waitlist, at least in name, but
we really aren't providing
services. Um, and the dad that
we had this morning who talked
about his son eloping, and I
mean, my son used to be in a
Loper and it's
Garden. Scary because they're
not afraid of cars. You know
they they so I think now is the
time that we really
Take a deep dive into the DD
waiver and start trying to fix
it instead of put, you know,
miniature band AIDS on chest
wounds.
Thank you Chair and thank you,
vice chair, just as, uh
An add on to, um, our vice
chair's comments. Um, maybe we
could, uh, in one of our many,
uh, locations have a field trip.
Um, that is about that. It's
providing Didi services. I just,
uh I come from that background
as well. And I find that so
many very, uh, intelligent and
good hearted legislators. I have
heard things, um, that come from
them that they may not
understand is, uh, not
Um, compliant with the way the
policies are and or how services
are given. I also think that
there are there is a culture in
the DD community of a dignity of
wrist and and the dignity of, um
self
Uh, being making decisions on
your own. Uh, despite they may
not be a decisions I wanna make
for you, but you get those
decision. I think that
understanding that culture is
something also, we can bring
forward with other issues that
are presented to the
Legislature, not just during the
regular session, but maybe
during special session to
understand competency.
And, uh, and the dignity of
risk.
I have not heard anybody say
those three are something more
important than those three. I've
heard people say. Besides those
three, here's some other things,
So you feel comfortable making
those three again are our
priorities and then adding in
the housing and the senior
citizens and the DD waiver and
and anything else that we come
up with. Certainly there's lots
of other stuff we could cover.
Um, Senator Lopez, Mr. Chair,
everything we deal with falls
into mental health.
If we look at it, there's a
relation. I mean, we could cover
just have mental health and I
think everything can then funnel
underneath it. But I'm just just
just to stay.
Thank you.
No education.
Yeah, I. I know one of the
people I I really want to hear
from this year is, um
The or the or the I forget her
name now.
NHN age eight. What they're
doing? Yeah. Catherine Ortega?
Yeah. And and? And and Courtney,
uh, building building on what
they're doing, how we can be
supportive of it and take it.
To scale.
Because they they they're
working in. I think six or seven
counties already.
What could we do to help them?
Move it along.
Cause I don't I don't see us
really getting a handle on CYFD
until we have that kind of
resource.
Yeah, mr. Chair. I believe there
was funding specifically for
that. And so in the budget, and,
um
I think that's you do a lot of
the work from this committee.
There is funding for it. So can
I get Kelly for Anna AJ? Um, in
our
Funding to the book.
A small amount a large amount.
Uh enough.
I don't
Um, I do not have their budget
on hand, but I believe they get
a significant portion over
several $100,000 from the state.
I'm happy to pull that number
for the committee and get back
to you with an answer.
That'd be great. Thanks. Thank
you, Kelly. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I'll just say
behavioral health is is in
crisis as we've all noted
through these years, but I think
it's that to me. It's the top
priority for us and moving into
anything we're doing. But I'd
also um
Look at some of the priorities
that were moved from the
executive's office and and
housing and those sorts of
things and have those those big
discussions here as well,
because I would assume that
those that didn't get over the,
um
Or get signed, or, um, through
the pro the legislative process
that they'll be again added to
the, um 60 day session and
housing and everything else do.
Um, affect everything in the
topics we have in this
committee. Thank you.
Well, then. Oh, Kelly, did you
have something else?
Mr Chair. The recurring budget
is 2.1 million for N AJ, and
they also received a $500,000
special.
OK?
Representative Kate
I already have four
organizations who have
volunteered to be our tour
guides. If, uh, well, I'll bring
to the the chairs. Uh uh.
Attention. Thank you. Now, uh,
we when we met with, um
When the, uh
Vice chairman and I met with, um
The staff from both the LFC and
Council service. Um
To prepare for this meeting. We
said that we would meet in
Albuquerque in June, and one
reason for that was, um
The any any KC found. It is no
no, It's not the only case C.
It's a, uh,
The any any KC found. It is no
no, It's not the only case C.
It's a
uh
it is NEEKC. The N UK C
Foundation, uh, will have a
representative in Albuquerque on
that date, Uh, the date of our
meeting, so we thought it would
be too good an opportunity to
miss. So we're gonna have a
presentation on
On what they're doing with the
department and what they work
around the country tells them
ought to be done to improve
child welfare services. Um, we
could make
That Albuquerque meeting Focus
on CCYFP.
Um
If we wanted to one of the other
things we have planned. Uh, for
then is the, uh
Is the, uh CFD 101 presentation.
Um
So that it might fit in with
that very nicely.
Um, is that does that also you
and M has offered to host it.
Um somebody else did, too. Who
else was I think CNM also said
they would host it.
But CNN
Representative Martinez. You
wanna host it too?
Sure, we could do it in my
backyard.
Um, Mr Chair? Um
One of the things that that I'm
I'm interested in when we talk
about health care, and and
Attracting more practitioners.
I'd like to be able to talk
about
The fixes that we did to me last
year if it's helping, if if
that's really an issue, how do
we improve it? How do we leave
it alone? Get out of the way.
Um, but I do think that that is
worth a discussion.
Angels treading and all of that
fear, fear of angel treading on
you or something of that sort
of
That would take probably a joint
meeting. I would think
You know for us to weigh in in
the face of courts and
corrections, whatever they
whatever those lawyers would do
would be kind of I but
It's clearly an issue that we've
not fixed yet.
Uh,
Senator Hickey.
Just, uh, so many mixed signals
from everywhere and doing
something doing nothing. Um,
because it is such a hot
investigation into fixes. So
I don't know that we're gonna be
able to add anything to it. It
it is clearly an issue. It's
clearly an issue that that has
not been resolved.
The only way I can see it really
Being a result is if both sides
can sit down at the table. I'm
not sure where the vehicle to
accomplish that particular
negotiation. The governor ought
to be stepping in on that.
To be honest, instead of calling
a special session on this topic,
she should take all that energy
and put it into med Mel. I think
this this special session we're
we're
Running toward on crime, but not
really on crime on four bills
related
Very tangentially to crime
doesn't make a lot of sense to
be honest, but
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think
that was a very, very wise
insight. It has to be addressed,
but it has to be addressed by
the parties. I mean, we can all
rehash consequences and so
forth.
That the two parties need to be
brought together to come up with
a solution. Bring their facts
bring their observations and
work that through. Um and
Probably that needs to happen
out of the executive branch.
Um, rather than
Uh, here and I'll have whatever
is worked out will have to be so
clear. But, um, I know I think
there I know there's interest in
the physicians wanting to have
those sit downs that that's all
I know and and and some
Uh, attorneys have expressed a
similar desire.
but I think the executive should
take it on. But it is. It's an
important issue. I don't want to
diminish it in any way.
Well, does anybody have any
objections to making the focal
point of the July meeting of the
June meeting?
In Albuquerque, the third
through the fifth through the
seventh.
5th 6th and 7th CYFD.
Now, If we have it at UN M,
they'll probably wanna have some
UN M related stuff. But that
doesn't have to be the only
meeting we have in Albuquerque.
We could come back later in the
year and have one specifically
on the health sciences center
And all of that other
conglomeration of of issues that
they bring up
Is that, OK?
OK, so let's aim for
Albuquerque, CYFD.
Then July. It's the first
through the third.
We're heading right into the
Fourth of July holiday with our
meeting. Uh,
Where should we hold that one?
The vice chairman may not be
able to go to attend it if it's
too far away from Albuquerque,
so I was gonna suggest
Sokora
Meeting in Socorro or another
one in Albuquerque. I think what
do you think?
Opportunity.
That will be our only
opportunity to do something in
preparation for the special
session.
And so I'm thinking that maybe
Albuquerque or Santa Fe makes
sense cause those those two
locations maximize attendance.
Is to go back to Albuquerque in
July.
Yeah. Or or or Santa Fe or or at
least maybe even Los Lunas or
something. You know someplace
that maximizes attention. Uh,
attendance only because that's
really will be the only
opportunity we have to look to
see what the gov. What The bills
are that are being proposed and
give our input into the
Well, the only the aspect that
affects our unless she adds
something to what she's already
said. She's going to have us
here. It's just the the two
bills dealing with civil
competency and criminals.
The civil commitment and in
criminal court. Competency. I
know, but it would be good for a
committee to weigh in, and I'm
not saying it would. I'm not
saying this should be about
that. I'm saying that's the only
opportunity like maybe it's only
half a day or a day or whatever
it is we do, but it would be
great to maximum and maybe have
it at the early part. If people
are gonna take off on the third,
I'm just really emphasizing that
that will be our only
opportunity to weigh in on those
two bills.
Good. Good point. Other other
discussion. Yes.
So that's kind of late. I mean,
my understanding from our
leadership is they wanna see
everything pretty much buttoned
up.
By, you know, before the special
session starts, so this is only
two weeks before, so I'm not
sure how. How flexible anything
is gonna be. I mean and and what
our leadership told us is if if
Sides can't come to an agreement
beforehand and have all
everybody have their ducks in a
row. We will just sign me die.
Oh, OK. Well, um I mean, maybe
that would suggest at least
spending some time on June 5th
and seventh addressing the
issue. I know. We said the
overall would be CYFD but at
least spending
Maybe. I don't know. At least a
half day, um on on on it. If
it's too late, I, I understand
what you're saying those two
issues because neither the pen
handling you're not big nor the
enhanced penalty for firearm
possession by a felon.
Neither of those really touch on
our committee. Well, the
panhandling does in a way in
with regard to homeless people.
I mean, you're right. It's First
Amendment issue, but but it's
you know how homeless people are
treated I? I don't know. I maybe
we don't wanna deal with it. But
for sure, the other two Senator
Rodriguez and then ST Mr
Chairman. Thank you. I didn't I
was just indicating that I
think, uh, senator to have had
your hand up, Senator. No, thank
you.
It wasn't me. Thank you.
Miss the terror. I was just
gonna make a comment. I think
from the instructions that we
got it has we have to go
someplace that can webcast and
receive comment, so that pretty
much limits if we went to, um
Valencia, UN M. Valencia has a
has that capability is letter
has that capability Lots of
places in Albuquerque. I'm sure
Rio Rancho does so we just have
to keep that zoom thing in mind.
That is an issue.
I think New Mexico protect us
too, so we could go there.
N MS use certainly, Uh,
I had a request from the social
task force. That's why I thought
Alvin silly was gonna stand up
and say that this morning, but
he didn't and I for for us to
have a meeting in Portales this
year, ENMU one of our meetings
in the fall, E and MU is opening
their MS W program this fall.
And, uh, the director of that
program, Doctor Moyers.
I can't think of her first name.
Um, has had invited us to have a
meeting in portals, and I think
they probably would have that
that same cap capability.
Any other comments about the
January I mean the June meeting,
We could if if if people really
want to discuss what's gonna
come up during the special
session in this committee, we
could do that as
One half of one day of that
three day session.
The June I was thinking of the
one that we had already
scheduled. Then in July. Where
do you wanna go? If we go to
Albuquerque in June? Do you want
to go back to Albuquerque in
July? Or do you want to go
somewhere more enchanting than
Albuquerque?
Mr Chair, I. I would, uh, just,
uh
On behalf of my constituents
like to tell you about the great
city of Rio Rancho.
And, uh, we have, uh,
capabilities of the rearrange of
public school training center.
We have to Maya and Santa Ana.
Uh, hotel there as well as some
pretty wonderful restaurants and
hotel facilities.
What? What? My little simonich
say if we meet at
Ta
Yeah, I'm but if we met at the
rear Rancho
Public schools or whatever you
have
the hospital we we? We had to
rearrange your meeting at at the
Presbyterian at the rest. Yeah.
So there's some of is that Does
that sound good? Are we getting
far enough?
For out of town. If we go to
rearrange you are we talking
about July? Still, Should we go
up north where it's going to be
a little cooler?
We're going in August. Oh, well,
July is gonna be hot. Just I'm
just saying
And what would be the topic.
What's gonna be our focus? I
mean, the the the advantage of
doing it in rear range is we
could make health care the the
focus and do it do it there.
But we'll meet inside. I think
we should meet inside a
representative in deference to
your point that it's hot in
July, and and we're probably
gonna have a hard time getting a
a quorum because it is that
holiday. I mean, you know,
people go places for it's the
Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
before a Thursday fourth of
July, so it's
Real kind of we can't
I mean, this will be a real test
of your commitment to the
committee and health care
workforce for that one.
Well, Sandoval Health care
workforce.
Yeah. And yeah health care,
workforce and health care. More
broadly,
I think behavior health is its
own. Yeah.
No.
Workforce, healthcare, workforce
and access.
Then, then, in July. That's then
the the meeting that bridges
July to August, July, 31st and
August 1st. And second is the
next one. That one we probably
should head North.
Last year we went to Taos and we
went
Do we go to Las Vegas last year?
Yeah, we did. We went to State
Hospital
house was I don't think we went
to
we didn't go to T last year.
Oh, yeah, Let's go to Tao City
House,
OK?
And that'll be on behavioral
health.
Place.
Zulli Zul's cafe. Then hold me
eight or 10 people at one time.
Uh, tas behavioral health.
And that'll be right after our
special session, so we'll be all
we'll all be in real cordial
mood
and Cooper and
So
This. This special session is
taking place right in the middle
of an election right after the
primary, when people will be
knowing at each other's teeth,
you know, with their teeth at
each other's knees.
All right. Um then we have our
August 26th through 28th
meeting.
But that when we probably maybe
portalis
Yeah, well, a couple of days
before labor Day. When is Labor
Day? I don't have my I don't
have the right calendar. Second
of September. Yeah, So, so it's
a good four or five days before
Labor Day.
For us.
We're doing.
Where? Where are they mean?
Oh, yeah.
Have this committee is also
the
many
issues on the east side of the
state.
Yeah, but that was on the 23rd.
Mr. Chairman, I think you
mentioned the 23rd for Santa Fe,
Right. But did you want the
other two days close to Santa Fe
also since we're gonna be here
then is that what you meant to
just wanna make sure we're on,
You know, they make us come back
by no.
Well.
Do you think it's likely that
water and natural resources
would meet in Socorro in in
August?
It's September. No, no, that
would be the August 26th or
28th for
no for Sakura, and then we would
do
Portalis in October.
We should do portals in October.
And then September 20.
Oh, is that is that the day
rest? It means the 23rd. We'll
meet in Santa Fe and then the
24th and 25th in Espanola.
Mister chair. Maybe some of the
pueblos here in the north.
Meet an Espanola one day at, uh,
OK at the at the casino in
Espanola, we could do it. OK, we
can get Santa Claus. Well, Santa
Clara is going under
construction, so they're not.
That would be hard because
they're directly in the SPLA.
But OK, we can get is just north
of Espanola. And then we have
you know, there's Los Luceros.
There's K
Meet an Espanola one day at, uh,
OK at the at the casino in
Espanola, we could do it. OK, we
can get Santa Claus. Well, Santa
Clara is going under
construction, so they're not.
That would be hard because
they're directly in the SPLA.
But OK, we can get is just north
of Espanola. And then we have
you know, there's Los Luceros.
There's pa
and Buffalo Thunder. Uh, they
have facilities there. I. I
think it would be nice to to do
that. Mr Chair.
Chairman. There's also like that
the committee states that
Northern college
Mr Chair Northern is also very
good. Usually I kind of I don't
know that
I
either one, OK,
what do we wanna say? Espinola
and Santa Fe and then Espinola.
And Espinola could be broadly
speaking. The Pueblo, uh, a
casino.
Yeah.
We never go to San the
I think I think every spot we've
picked has Internet access
remote comment.
Yeah, the community college is
good.
We? We
Is the only meetings I've been
to there, though it's been a
tiny, cramped room in
the Yeah, they're they're they
are doing some revisions and
remodeling there so they could
be done by then. I mean, we
could check with them. We'll
find a place. There's plenty of
places. There's plenty of places
I think, OK, we gave. We also
did our was it, um
A real task force out at the in.
I'll call it at the, um, the
cultural the
The exper. This is the
agricultural station. Yeah, the
Yeah, There's well. That's
Hernandez as one as well, you
could. I mean, there's a lot of
places to go. There's just not
thank you, Mr Chair. There's
a loss. We've had committee
there. We'll find it.
So we'll do
Well, we're gonna be huddling
around the Santa Fe and
Albuquerque mostly, but we will
get to Portalis and we'll get to
Tufts.
Yeah, we were there last year.
So
Rancher, I'm chair. Yeah, we're
still we're still going to Rio
Rancho.
Aren't we? Did we disagree with
Mr Chair? I thought we said
Corrales, I forgot to write it
down.
Are we glad we're back to
B.
We are already I think we went
to. I think we were in
Do you remember? Andrea? Did we
go to Sandoval Regional? Is that
where we have? Were you at the
meeting and rearrange your
It was before you, I think
Been four years, then
actually and and
Um, but
we have Ross Medical Center.
Yeah, it's a good one.
What? What? What? What? You and
M has a branch. What is the UN M
hospital there?
Let's let's try for that. They
got
from C MS. Oh, that's better
than my main campus.
Oh, it was, um, pres didn't fill
up. Of course.
Um, I mean, no, I'm just Yeah, I
just There's a lot of
Oh, just just, um, the the D.
Actually, it was enough. Um, the
the F is that they never had a
dedicated person to the things
which is mostly false and safety
that the leapfrog survey does,
so they just kind of filled it
out on the fly, Which is never a
good thing to do. Um, but we
know that Presbyterian knowing
that could happen to them just
didn't fill it out. So, um, they
they are they
Have dedicated people. And
believe me that the ears that
have burned over that from the
fourth floor are huge.
We don't
OK.
Um, OK, so I think we have our
our map worked out in our
calendar.
Mister chair. Could you go over
it? Yes. OK. So July June, 5th
through seventh will meet it.
UN M in Albuquerque.
And the focus will be CYFD
July 1st through third, we'll
meet in Rio Rancho, probably at
Sandoval Regional.
And the focus will be health
care, workforce and health care
access.
That'll be give you and have an
opportunity to present if we
meet at Sandoval Regional.
July 31st through August 2nd.
We'll meet in Tao.
The focus will be on behavioral
health.
August 26th through 28th. We'll
meet in Socorro.
And we we We won't have a
primary focus. We'll just start
broadening our interest beyond
that. That's when we deal with
seniors and
Housing and everything else we
get. We get to
Um
Did he wavered all of that?
September 23rd through the 25th.
We'll meet on the 23rd or join
one of those days, a joint
meeting with rest here in Santa
Fe.
And the other two days we'll
meet in Espanola.
And no particular identified
focus yet to that meeting.
October 21st through 24th.
We'll meet in
For tells
And we'll we'll meet at the
university. They they have a
social work program. That's just
starting their mass. They'll
have their first master's degree
cohort of students.
Mr Chair, and then we're back in
Santa Fe for November 1919
through the 22nd notice a couple
of those meetings that went in
Portales. I don't know we we may
want to go to Portello for two
days in Roswell for two. I'll
tell you why. Because it's a
four day it's a four day meeting
that one's four days and so is
the November meeting.
Mr Chair In terms of the, um
October meeting that's right
before elections, So I'm
guessing we will be missing.
Some folks by going that far. I
mean, and I don't know what the
answer is, But folks are gonna
say I need to be home to for my
election. You know to all that,
and I can't take four days and
go, You know, 300 miles or
whatever it is so just just to
consideration.
Good point.
I haven't been paying any
attention to the election,
right? Yeah. Um, I I being in a,
um
Pretty split district That's
gonna be that is a
consideration.
Attendance good point.
OK back to the drawing board.
How how about we go? Let's just
switch the Ku and Roswell.
I mean, Socorro and portals,
So we go to, uh, go
with water.
Oh, that's because it was the
water and water committee.
I haven't sent the email yet.
Well, this this is unresolvable.
We can't We can't figure this
out.
Subject.
Uh, well, one possibility would
be to do
Gotta be here.
Yeah. Do July 31st through
August 2nd in Port Alice.
Ellis. Yeah, That's three days
We could do Portalis for two.
Roswell for one, something like
that.
Mhm
and then But then we're still
back. We still have four days in
to and that's kind of far away
for
So I mean, wherever we go that
that for that should be the
Albuquerque meeting Reo Rancho.
We should probably switch Rio
Rancho to that one.
Yeah.
So we move. We move. Um
OK, everything gets juggled now.
OK, so we do
OK. So June is in Albuquerque.
July is
Um
So
oh, that's right. Water,
So we're locked into Socorro for
August that last meeting in
August, OK?
Um
What was I thinking? You were
gonna move portalis up to July I
was gonna move that to where Tao
is now.
And then
Instead of rear Rancho to
Oh, so Tao would be July 1st
through third and then
Is that, OK?
And then, uh, October would be
in Rio Rancho.
Right before the election.
Yeah, yeah.
October is rear Rancho. So let's
go over it again. I think I
think that tell me if we've
created other problems that we
besides the vice chairman, not
being able to make it.
OK, June 5th through seventh in
Albuquerque.
July, 1st through third in Taos.
To
Um July 31st through August 2nd
in Portales.
August 26th or 28th in Socorro.
September in Santa Fe with rest
Step and Espanola.
And then October Rio Rancho Now
we were gonna have it rearrange
it was gonna be our health care,
workforce and access.
That's now in Taos.
I think that's OK.
We can still have presentations
on health care and Rio Rancho
later on.
And that that's the closest
we're gonna get to. That's the
closest to perfect with the
election and special session.
Four days in a row.
Yes.
Be extremely so, yes.
Yeah, we'll find one in Rio,
right? It'll be good.
And they're CNN and UN M branch,
too.
Seeing them or no, Rio Rancho is
easy, and we don't need to pick
a building now because we don't
know what else they may have
scheduled. So if we have a town
we the the staff pretty much
knows who in the town would be.
Available.
OK, Then there, there's a couple
of other things I wanted to
bring up one.
We need to know.
Where we stand with the studies
that we, um
Commission last year.
Is there, money left over?
And if so, do we have to spend
it before June 30th, and we
should commission some
additional studies with that.
Cuz. Then we have a whole new
bunch of of of work related to
Drivers of health care cost cost
drivers of health care.
Uh, that begins after July. But
if we have some remnants of the
budget for studies
I would like to see us identify
it and and and commit it before
the end of the year, so we would
have to do that at our June
meeting.
Look into that.
And did we get all the reports
that we of the studies that we
commissioned last year? I think
we did.
You had one. Didn't you have one
Senator Hickey? Didn't you have
one? Your mic's on? By the way,
Didn't you have one that you
commission now You just turned
it off. Yeah.
OK?
Money left over from last year's
studies.
Did we spend it all? And did we
get over these things?
We got the reports. Um and I
have them and I can distribute
them in and do a talk through.
Um
The actually I. I don't know
That was money that I think you
put aside. I don't know the
accounting on that. Well, we'll
get that and and in June, we'll
decide what to do with it. Yeah.
So be thinking if there's some
additional work that you'd like
to see done
On background information
related to health care, health
care, workforce, health care
access.
Behavioral health. We could We
could commission a study and use
some of that money to do that.
That's right.
And and Excuse me, Xander,
you're gonna look for that
money.
What are you going to look for
that,
OK, OK. I mean, I have a number
of ideas. Obviously, I always
do. But, um, you know whether
they're worthwhile or not, I'm
not going to look into how to
spend it. I'm gonna see how much
OK? Yeah, because there are some
follow ons to those that might
be helpful. Now. One other thing
I wanted to get the committee's
input on, uh today.
What other aspects of CYFD
related issues H we want to have
presentations made in
In June.
Xander has some that I gave him
and and and that other people
have suggested. But if you had
some that you wanted to add to
that we could try to put
together panels that would make
all those up.
You pull
That'd be great. OK, good
representative Jones. Thank you,
mr Chair. So I missed the first
part of what you were saying.
You were just telling us to
communicate with Xander about
what? We want to just bring it
up today so we can add it to the
list of things I've already
given to Andrew to try to cover.
Make sure we get covered in in
Albuquerque in June around CYFD
So things like the KA program.
What's happening with that?
That's what I was gonna say. I
notice in significant
Presentation this morning.
They've got eight new P. I think
it was 86 or eight new positions
for Kara. They have a family
services division budgeted, but
that doesn't kick in till July.
1, so I don't know what's going
on in the means And we don't
know what their plan is.
And we don't know.
If the plan makes any sense.
Yeah. I have some specific
questions for them. I was at
LFC. I believe it was LFC. I
came all the way up to
Albuquerque to see the
presentation. The secretary
present, and she said that they
had hired all of the navigators
We talked about in the summer in
Albuquerque and that they were
ready to start in January. And I
want to hear about that. I wanna
see how they're doing.
Yeah. Yeah, that would be good.
I'd like to get a good report,
You know it it It struck me that
there's a limited number of
hospitals in the state that have
Kara eligible kids.
Born.
Verse.
And and it would it. It seems to
me that that that data ought to
be readily available.
That Presbyterian had 43 UN M
had 72 Rebus had
18 whatever.
But there are going to be some
that had zero.
And so you're not talking about
40 hospitals you're talking
about maybe tops a dozen in the
whole state memorial. Maybe, and
some of them would have only had
one or two.
Maybe there was one and two can
carry. Maybe there was one in
Las Vegas. I don't know. Las
Vegas doesn't do birth. Santa Fe
probably has a bunch. But if you
had those, and you just put
navigators at those hospitals
you'd cover 90% of the problem.
I. I would
Yeah.
But let's see what they say.
What else Besides Ka or CYFDD?
You want to cover
Staffing and training.
You know the Yeah. And and and
For the support of contracts.
Oh, those those kind of
contracts. Yeah.
But they have they have a lot of
contract services for things
like all faith receiving home
for, um
Um
Oh, the runaway shelters the
youth runaway shelters. Uh, a
lot of other service co
contracts for people who do the
evaluations of of, uh of kids. A
And I've heard that same thing
that that the that the there's a
huge lag time in getting those
approved and getting them paid.
And that it creates morale
problems. Did you have something
you wanted to add to that?
Kelly.
Um, Mr Chair. I remember skinny.
so we had with you and your
staff are gone. That was related
to this. And so we had proposed,
um, looking at some of their
title E for funding for
so that's a huge issue.
Actually, right now, we're
expecting the department to come
in with the deficiency for not
pulling down federal revenues.
Um and then I believe doctor.
Hernandez has comment. Yeah. Oh,
Sorry. Um, so there was a care
report a program evaluation that
was done last October, Um, that
the LFC did that you could hear
And then the other thing is
equal laws were revised two
years ago by the state.
Um And so an update on that
would be interesting. Those
might be useful. Yeah, The thing
about the Carroll report is that
we have a we've gone through
another secretary and and two
different staff people in charge
of that since then, So we just
wanna update What are you doing
now about, you know absolutely
good.
And and I appreciate the the
positions that are being filled,
But I would like to know the
Uh, criteria of who is filling
those positions? The navigators
is not something I can find on a
university degree, so I need to
know what those are. Thank you.
Other stuff.
Senator Lopez and Mr Chair just,
um, again for the issues that I
had raised earlier for juvenile
justice to make sure that
there's a report out
Um, especially with the incident
that happened in Bello County.
Um, but also there's a facility
in Farmington and other places.
I think we should have also an
update as to what's taking place
there.
I think they're four.
Just four places. Yes, sir.
Yeah. Um And of course, this
won't be our only opportunity to
discuss CYFT. But if we could
incorporate it into the cause we
have the guy from, uh Danny
Casey Foundation is going to
make a presentation.
And and there was something
else. Oh, higher Education
Department was gonna give the
report that we thought they were
gonna give us tomorrow
afternoon. They said they
weren't ready with it. And that
includes things like how they're
doing the loan repayment
programs how they're doing the
endowments for the social work
programs. How they're doing the,
um
Um, supervision and internship.
Fund that was set up by by the
FC by the House bill two.
Is that money getting out the
door or not, and because the
universities have been
complaining to me that,
alternatively they've also been
complaining that they've been
told they have to spend it all
by the end of the year, although
it was an endowment fund, so the
idea was that they would only be
spending
And why the endowment fund was
given to the universities
instead of to the State
investment Council, like every
other endowment fund, uh, it
higher red needs to answer some
questions that just don't make a
lot of because we've been
getting information that does
not jive with what we thought
our intent was.
And their re their reports on
how to make graduate education
in the behavioral health fields
free
And so, um, Mr Chair, the other
thing that I wanted to raise,
too, is in terms of the
stipends, stipends, not
behavioral health. Um, folks,
um, not being able to access
those stipends for their
students. The other thing in
terms of CYFD also is, um,
foster care and treatment.
Foster care. I think we need an
update in terms of what they're
doing to recruit and retain
foster parents. And then also,
um what's the landscape for
treatment? Foster care, and that
report may not necessarily
From CYFD. Because they're not
doing, uh they're not the ones
that are really doing the
treatment foster care, but it's
other, um, agencies that are
doing that.
And you bring up the sore point.
Um, this will now be the fifth
successive summer interim
Interim Committee hearing on
CYFD were the issue of kids
being kept overnight in the
offices comes up.
And why we still every year ask.
What are you gonna do about it?
Oh, we have this plan and every
year the following year, there's
still kids in the in the
offices it makes it does not
make any sense.
I know that everybody would
prefer to have foster homes for
these kids. But if you don't
have enough foster homes, why
don't you have a contract with
an organization that would house
them with a professionally
trained staff instead of putting
them in the offices? They for
five years we've been asking the
same question.
Um, Mr Chair. One of the things
that I learned recently was
that, um, see, where is sort of
normalized kids being in
offices. They're calling them
office stays. So if there's
isn't a foster home available,
then it automatically go to the
Foster stays.
They have a receiving center,
Um, at the pine tree office
building. Um, that isn't even
licensed.
That's what CYFD is located.
They're serving meals from it. I
don't know what they're doing. I
guess that's another question.
We should ask.
Mister chair in terms of that,
Um, it's we We need teeth.
essentially, um, the same thing
with the all payer claims data,
you know, or or the medicated
medication assisted treatment.
We say do it. We give you money.
It doesn't happen. And
basically, nobody seems to care.
Um it's the same thing with
special Ed. You know, we can say
Oh, you're not doing this and
the district says OK, we'll fix
it never does anything and so we
need to
Oh,
wow.
And enforcement.
You your microphone. There's
Yeah, I well, the week Sorry You
moved it, I. I hope that we
could. I mean, just again. It's
it's we're boiling the ocean. I
get it.
But
Establishing some really
Formal oversight functions of
this committee.
If that is part of our purview.
And it could be professional.
But it can be tough.
I mean, and without that, you
know, with the papers here, and
I mean whenever it just bringing
things to light, and then again
Expanding staff.
To actually follow through with
what's going to be done if that
was a formal function of this
committee, then then, then the
the agencies would do something
about but when they know that
it's just a passing fancy, and
we can put it on the shelf. They
will do it, II. I haven't
Well, I've worked in government
and I've done that in government
for certainly done it and
Other jobs, Corporate whatever
you know. Oh, they're just
excited, you know, pass and that
I think is what happens in the
agencies. Their so short
staffed. They say, what can I
put on the shelf? And rather
than saying, Oh, wow, I'm gonna
be on a hot seat.
And be accountable.
And when they know that and
people it makes a big
difference.
And I don't know how to put that
in in a way that this is a
Not show and tell anymore. This
is
What did you do? And why didn't
you do it?
And what are you gonna do about
it?
Good point.
Um, we expect you to fix that
right? We get right on
and
Representative Stravinsky. Mr.
Chairman. I don't know if a
joint meeting with courts,
corrections and justice was
raised, but it strikes me that
This kind of enforcement might
be a good topic for that
meeting. Could we look at
putting something into the law
around? Office stays, for
example, um or other areas where
We haven't had compliance.
We? We? We didn't bring up a
joint meeting with courts and
corrections. We we We did talk
about the possibility of
Putting in some time at our
Forget which meeting Uh uh. July
July 1st through third meeting.
Which knows in
Else.
Uh, on
Whatever legislation is coming
up for the special session,
dealing with courts and C with
the next meeting in June.
Oh, OK.
Because
Oh, yeah, OK.
But but that wasn't gonna be
jointly with the course and
corrections, so I don't know how
our schedules mesh with their
Yeah.
They're looking at
Raised it in terms of, um it's
been a little of probably a
couple of hours ago in terms of
looking at the, um acquisitions,
mergers and private equity in
doing that. Yeah. So yeah.
So maybe we could do both of
them at the same time.
Miss.
Mr Chairman. I have their
schedule up so they have June
5th.
In Santa Fe is the one direct
overlap.
Um and then
November 2021 in Santa Fe.
Would be the other overlap.
That's it?
Yeah. The plunder the the LFC
Staff this morning mentioned our
hospitals are struggling.
Well, the hospitals may be
struggling, but the hospital
systems are doing very well
nicely. Thank you, And um and
the hospital executives are just
flourishing.
So I
You know, it's just hard to see
any any. Anything we can do
until we have some authority
over their financing.
What we how we could intervene
in that cause right now. They
they they shine us on. They show
us the data that shows them as
losing money and we need to
increase reimbursement. We need
to increase special funding for,
Uh uh, Senator Munoz got all
that extra funding for the
Gallup Hospital. I don't know if
they if that's really going to
change anything in Gallup in
terms of services, but it sure
will make some executives of
In Tennessee in Tennessee. Yes.
Uh, I keep coming back to this,
but this is something that when
we talked about additional
staffing now, let's see that we
wanted to look into
It's amazing. Uh, if you go to
the National Academy of State
Health policy you can now in a
legible way, read hospital cost
reports that all hospitals have
to fill out. You can they have
distilled down the data to very
revealing
Profitability, different lines
of business compensation and so
forth. And so, uh, and there are
the
Ah, other studies that were done
by, um
Uh, the California institute
that came out two years ago.
There is plenty of data to look
at hospitals. They've just never
been used to transparency, but
but we can dig it out. We we say
that the all claims payer
database will help it will, but
it's also if you can read a
hospital report.
That see they have to file with
C MS under penalty of perjury.
Um, they, uh they're very
complex. But if you can read
them, you you can know their
business. And and I only know
this because I ran a health plan
in Mexico health connections and
before we negotiated with every
hospital, we hired a firm to
come in and go through that cost
report, And then we'd offer
Medicaid and they say, Oh, we
lose money on Medicaid. It could
never happen and we go well.
Uh, your last hospital report
showed you're making money on
me. Medicare? Excuse me on
Medicare All we just fill that
out. Oh, well, we happen to have
the Inspector general's, uh, C
MS S phone number right here. So
we get him on the phone and tell
him he didn't really mean what
you put down on paper. And And
so that's what I'm trying to
tell you. Is that real world
experience We can really
understand hospital operations,
and I hope that that's a
function that eventually
He gets into C because, as I've
noted in different occasions,
uh, back in 2013, New Mexico was
the fifth most profitable state
in the country for hospitals.
Um, that's excluding, Of course,
the rural. I mean, that's a
different story, but and when we
did it again through one of the
studies studies that we
commissioned last year they were
had dropped to number eight.
Um so it
You know, I've I've I'm my hope
is that we are able to pay
professionals more in one manner
or another. But where's the
money gonna come from?
It. It can come from more
scrutiny over what the hospitals
are using the money for and
spending on and it's not that we
have to have legislation. This
works in other states by
transparency to the public.
And that is really changed.
hospital behavior in the number
of other states. So what I'm
saying is, we have it. What we
need are the per personnel maybe
contracted to give that
information to us.
Just a reminder. Oh, yes. I'm
sorry. I sorry, Mr Chair. Uh, so
I just finalized the report.
That'll be, uh, heard by the LFC
next week on hospital costs, uh,
reviewing hospital cost reports
and we'd be happy to present
that in front of this committee
as well.
First. What is it? June 4th
fifth through seventh probably
fits better in July, 1st through
third with the health care
workforce, you'll be around in
July.
Hm? Uh, July. Why don't we try
to schedule that in the July 1st
through third meeting in
wherever that is now, T Oh, T,
you'll love to go to Taos.
I hope you've looked on the
Nasby website and and can
interpret it for people. It's
it's
What needs to be charged for a
hospital to break even, which
includes a certain amount of
profit and depreciation and so
forth. It's an incredibly
revealing tool, and we need to
get that out to the public.
That's how hospitals change
behavior. That's what's been
proven in other states.
So just a reminder to the
committee.
Um
Put down in a in a
Email to Xander.
Topics that you want to make
sure get covered that we haven't
already brought up here today.
So that we then have a universe
of possible topics and we'll try
to. We can't guarantee that
we'll cover all of them, but
we'll try as best we can to to
cluster them in a way that makes
it possible to get at them.
To at least have
A few minutes spent on each of
them and and and try to get, uh,
issues identified that might be
converted into legislation.
When when do you want it?
Yeah, when? When do you need
so? The, um
So the work plan will go in
front of the Legislative Council
on next Monday. The 13th and so
I I, You know, I once it's
approved. I'll send it out to
everybody and everybody can take
a look at it. Um and then, for
the longer list of everyone's
ideas. I can send that out
sometime next, make sure you
include in a list that you
submit to the, uh, Council
service the possibility of a
joint day with a
Uh, courts.
Crossing corrections in November
on, uh, hospital acquisitions
and financing and mergers and
yeah, and I'll reach out to the
staff, OK?
OK, so get your list to Xandra
in the next few days. Then he'll
get it back out to us, and we
can always add things later.
If you if if suddenly something
strikes you. Jeez, I thought
that would I thought Nancy would
certainly bring that up. But she
didn't. So then we have to add
it in.
Now that you brought this up,
truly, um, I just wanted to
mention I hadn't talked to you
to representative Thompson also,
um the, uh, about having UN M
the telehealth. Uh, echo
program. Um
To give the presentation. We'd
like to see where they are on
provided services to the rural
communities and all over not
only rural but to see where it
is especially with the shortage
of physicians and specialists in
those communities. Doctor Aurora
would be willing to come. I'm
sure if we invite him
Yes. The new programs. Thank
you. Thank you, if if I made on
that if I made on that point,
um the there are some new tools
out there that are extenders of
medical care, um by someone
who's acting for the doc. I
mean, with a camera and so
forth, you can actually do more
than just look at the skin
lesion. Um, you can actually do
a visit and get the information
and, um, I've talked to them
about bringing them
But, um they would be the ideal
source for car extension. They
they're mostly education. At
this point, they they don't do
actual
I mean, they they do advice, but
they don't
Uh, do the care at the moment
when someone's scheduled to come
in, particularly for a
specialty is because a lot of
information between the I always
say it's in the history you get
a little bit more in the
physical exam and getting that,
um, really could extend a lot of
specialty care and then
unfortunately, they'd have to go
somewhere for a procedure. Thank
you.
All right now this is I think a
historic moment. We will finish
an hour early in the history of
this committee. I don't think
we've ever finished an hour
early.
But we're out. We're out of
practice. So by next time
sharpen up your next time, I'll
have to have a gavel to to keep
people.
Tomorrow morning At nine
o'clock. We start with Medicaid
101, Eric Chenier.
And then we have Ruby and
Esquivel doing behavioral health
101, So bring a lot of
questions. Put them on the
hotspot.
And solutions.
So thank you all. Thank you for
your attention, and, uh
