these businesses while they grow
and work through the valley of
death as Casey mentioned, um, we
also help them secure
non-diluted funding to do a lot
of the early R&D that's required
in these early stage companies.
We work with them on insurance
and accounting and securing
equipment and space, um, we also
coached them through
fundraising. So the goal of
Roadrunner is to exit our
companies with a first check and
a first customer. So we wanna
make sure that they are in a
market where they can sell and
they can grow, and then we
gladly, happily pass them off to
our other venture fund partners,
um, often also backed by the New
Mexico SIC to
continue to grow.
So we source funders, not,
excuse me, founders, um, in
several different ways we work
with uh founders and residents,
which are people who might have
identified an industry that
they're interested in, and they
have some idea of a solution,
but they need more time to find
a technology solution to a
problem.
So we will literally employ them
and help them do that research
to find a company to found. And
then we'll found it with that
founder. Um, we'll also work
with founders who already have
an idea, but nothing else. Uh,
perhaps they've incorporated,
perhaps they haven't.
Uh, the third way we work with
founders is companies and
residents. So a handful of
people who are working on a
company but need more support in
perhaps finding customers,
finding market, uh, building a
product. So our areas of
interest.
Advanced manufacturing, advanced
energy, and advanced compute.
So, um, while we touch on things
similar to what NewSpace does,
we certainly believe new space
is best at aerospace, um, and
try and funnel those companies
towards KC and focus on other
areas, um, obviously, Quantum is
growing in this state.
So we are interested in the new
quantum companies that are
coming. Obviously, some of them
are much too large for what we
do, but we're hoping to get some
ideas of perhaps gaps in the
market where we can start
companies that will support this
growing industry.
Um
Really, we feel like New Mexico
is a great place to do this
work. We have the National Labs,
we have the support of the SIC.
Nora and her office are always
coming out with creative new
grant opportunities that have
really helped a lot of our
companies, so we just, we want
to see more of that. This is an
early ecosystem. We have a lot
of excitement, a lot of people
who are working really hard to
make it happen, um, and we want
to be part of that growth. So
Roadrunner has
tried to create follow-on
programs to help support the
ecosystem at large. We're
working with a lot of the other
venture funds that are in the
state. We're working on also
building more facility space for
these companies to have labs to
work out of, to have machines to
use similar to what Casey has
built and is continuing to
build, um, happy to answer any
other questions about the
investing space.
Great. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon. I'm Denise
Holmquist, and I'm the senior
director of product operations
with Quantinuum. So I'm the
industry representative on this
distinguished panel panel here,
and I have had the pleasure of
working a little bit with Nora
already and, and Maggie and
Roadrunner, and we're excited to
now
Get to know New Space a little
bit more and to establish a
presence here in Albuquerque.
So I'm gonna, uh, thank you for
the invitation. Thank you for
all that you're doing in the
legislative areas to really
promote quantum computing and to
promote our innovation.
I wanted to talk a little bit
with you about who we are at
Quantinuum.
So we are a clear leader in
quantum computing. We are a
global company and we were
created back in 2021 with the
merger of two other companies,
so we were born out of Honeywell
quantum solutions here in the
United States, and then we
merged with Cambridge Quantum
Computing, which is a quantum
computing company based in the
UK.
So we've been around for about 4
years, I would say the
technologies is um we're, we're
incubating prior to that merger,
but we really brought those
companies together to build a
full stack company. I'll talk a
little bit more about what that
means, um, on their next slide,
but first a little bit more
about our company.
So we do have almost 600
employees across the globe and
we're in 9 different sites
across the globe. We're very
excited to announce that our
newest site is gonna be right
here in Albuquerque, and so
we're we'll be uh happy to
invite you to our open house
that we're gonna be having
during IEEE Quantum Week in
September and we're very excited
to start our presence here in
the state.
You can imagine that, and we'd
like to thank Nora actually and
EDD because they helped us make
that happen. So we learned a lot
about incentive packages. We've,
uh, she connected us with area,
who helped us actually select
the location. So great support
with the state. So we really
appreciate that.
You can imagine that in quantum,
uh, we have very highly
technical expertise, so we do
have of our 600 employees, over
400 of them have degrees in
either PhDs or master's programs
and some of those come from
right here in New Mexico and
some of our leadership
positions. So we really do
intend to partner quite a bit
with universities and
educational organizations to
really promote the pipeline of,
of the physicists that we need
to run our company.
We do operate for commercially
viable quantum computers today,
3 of those are here in the
United States and we have one at
a customer site in Japan that we
operate.
And look for the news in the
next few months, we'll have our
next generation quantum computer
launching soon, so watch for
that.
These quantum computers have
really uh established a presence
in the global eco ecosystem and
have been the subject of many
scientific papers and we've been
able to achieve many world
records with the capabilities
that they have.
And we really do try to protect
our technology. We know that
this, there's a lot of secret
sauce in what we do, so we do
have over 130 patents across the
globe.
I'll go on a little bit to talk
about this what full stack
means. So a full stack quantum
computing company of which we
are, is truly everywhere from
the hardware, so the actual
quantum computers to the
software and the algorithms that
actually run those computers. So
at the base of this, this
ecosystem, you can see our, our
hardware systems. There are
other systems in the world and
we partner and learn about those
other modalities in quantum
computing as well, and we try to
structure our full stack to be
supportive of those.
in addition to our own systems.
We have this middle section with
products like Ticket.
And Nexus, these are developer
tools, so these are really the
tools that help folks that are
writing the code that goes on to
the hardware to actually do that
seamlessly, to do that most
efficiently and to be able to
get the most out of our, out of
our quantum hardware.
And then the top of the stack is
really where you'll find the,
the applications and the use
cases. So these are the
scientists and the researchers
that are really focusing on,
well, what can quantum do in the
next few decades and in the next
few years.
And how can we impact the world
with this new technology.
You'll notice that we are also
looking at quantum AI. That's a
big field for us. We really do
believe that quantum and AI are
very synergistic.
And we really do believe that
both of them are necessary for
each other to partner, to really
scale and to really make um
Take, take technology in the
compute world to the next level.
We really envision in the future
having data centers that would
be a hybrid mix of having high
performance computing in the
classical world, as well as
quantum computing that helps
take things to the new level.
So as I mentioned, we, we are
the first commercial qubit
builder, if you will, to
actually um
Make a meaningful commitment to
have a site here in New Mexico.
And we're very excited about
that.
And um a real our decision was
really based on a few factors, I
would say. Certainly, you've
already got great assets here in
the state with Sandia National
Labs, with Los Alamos National
Labs, with the university system
that you have here. We've been
partnering with those for years
and we're really looking forward
to having a facility here that
will be
co-located with those so that we
can really increase that
collaboration.
What we're actually going to be
putting here initially is a
research and development center
that's gonna be focused on
integrated photonics, so
photonics is the science of
light.
And you'll see lots of pictures
of light on the slide there, but
what we need to do to scale our
quantum computers in the future
is really direct this light and
miniaturize our applications to
really scale the computers to do
the most powerful compute in the
world.
So I wanna focus on maybe 3 main
areas of why we're coming to New
Mexico and what we think that we
can bring to New Mexico.
It's in job creation and
workforce development.
Maturing the technologies around
quantum and attracting entities
and startups.
Partnering with these folks
here, they're doing a lot of
great work in that area to
actually build up the supply
chain that we need for quantum
computing.
So in the area of job creation,
it's critical for us, as I
mentioned, to have a pipeline of
educated folks that not only
know Quantum, but also our
engineering. Oftentimes, um,
people think it's just gonna be
physicists that do quantum, but
actually a lot of the physics
for quantum has already been
figured out. And now the work is
really in the engineering and
it's really in figuring out how
do you make this thing really a
physical reality and so we have
a lot of engineering.
fo lk s and technicians.
those types of rules as well
that would be helping build the
systems and build our test beds
that help us innovate the
technology.
And then surrounding that
certainly are aspects of running
a business, so you need
everything from HR to finance
operations to supply chain
management. So we definitely see
that as we scale our presence
here that we'll have those types
of roles as well.
In maturing the technology, as I
mentioned, we've already been
partnering with the assets that
you have here, and we really
look forward to having a place
physically that folks can come
to, whether that's, you know, to
come and test.
Similar to this, having labs,
having spaces where people can
come test their products,
whether that be and training for
um educating folks. We envision
having internships where people
can really have hands-on
experience with many quantum
computers in our test beds, so
we're excited to bring that to
the stage.
And then on the supply chain
side, so right now the supply
chain for quantum is, is pretty
brittle, and a lot of it is
international and not based here
in the US, so we're really
interested in partnering with
states that are willing to bring
companies in that are willing to
take that technology, bring it
to the US so that we've got a
little bit more national control
over it, if you will, and also
just having it in close
proximity to where we are in
building these systems.
systems and helping the quantum
ecosystem here in the US.
So I think that it, you know,
and I think that also just being
able to co-design with those,
with those, um,
Supply chain vendors and
partners, I think that what we
can bring, we've been partnering
with quite a few of them already
internationally, and we really
want to continue that
partnership with them and, and
hoping to bring some of them to
the state here as well.
So continuum overall, we are
just very excited to be on
location here in New Mexico, and
we really want to be a catalyst
as you grow your technology
ecosystem here, and we hope to
really be a magnet that can help
build quantum technologies here
in New Mexico. So thank you for
your time.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Uh, we're gonna go straight into
questions. Uh, we've got a
number of folks. We're gonna
start with Senator Padilla.
And we'll go to Representative
Dickson and keep going from
there.
Uh, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation,
everybody.
It's one of the subjects I love
the most, as you probably know,
uh, I've enjoyed doing work in
this area in the legislature
since I got here, but, so I have
just a couple of questions,
Chairman, um, on the, uh,
newspace nexus. Thank you for
all the work you've done for New
Mexico for all of the many,
many, many years. So thank you
and I, I just love that we have
your office, Nora just moving
along and trucking along doing
all these wonderful things.
But my question for you, uh,
Casey is, uh, so how does
investment work? So I heard
that. I was like, well, how, how
do these startups get some
money? How do they move along?
But how does it work for new
space nexus, do they put money
into newspa New Space nexus to
get to help you to bring other
entrepreneurs into the
environment or how does this
work? I think they should, but
so far they haven't. Um, the way
we have worked it with our
company.
I, uh, we have a specific
program called the new Space
Ignier and you'll see they come
in at different levels of
readiness.
And, um, but we also outside of
the program navigate a number of
companies. So the companies come
in.
We assess where they are, what
they need, and we, um, sort of
have tailored navigation plans
for them, we help them, uh, get
to, so, so we'll work with them
whether they need a
demonstration, um, they need to
get to experts. We have an
expert network that has about
55, I think we're at like 55
where they're investors,
government leaders, um,
academia.
Um, industry that come in and
really go work one on one with
these companies to help navigate
them. We get them ready. We
then, uh,
Develop a investor network of
which we have a few investor,
uh, few of the investors that
are stronger partners, but, you
know, like Roadrunner, you know,
we work with a number of
investors, so then our third
stage for these companies is to
showcase them. So we showcase
them to, uh, whether it's, we,
we call the money side, if you
see on the slide, I call it my
bow tie, where you have all your
innovators coming in.
And then we, we really worked
the relationships of the money
side, whether it's a government
contract or an investor or even
partnering with other companies,
and I say the magic happens in
the not in between where new
Space Nexus lives. So after we
navigate, we showcase them to
these investors, uh, to the
government, uh, funders, and
that's where we've been able to
help, you know, get these
companies to the winds, and
right now in the 1st 2 years.
of our that specific program
we've helped these companies get
to 59 million, and this is, you
know, where the company say it's
attributable to our, our
programming and helping them,
so, so that's what we do right
now is we just really keep the
relationships with
The like these investor networks
and then um and then the
government contractors and and
work with the companies'
individually, but I think that
the investors should
Should help pay for that. No,
right now we have a what's
called a partnership
intermediary agreement with Air
Force Research Lab, which was
initially funded through Senator
Heinrich's office, so it's
allowed us to through that grant
really test out these processes
without charging the companies
without charging the investors
to be able to help navigate
them. I, it's coming to an end,
and we're hoping to renew that
with some support from the state
or from um more.
Federal funding, so we could
keep doing good things.
I thank you and thank you,
chair, and so maybe the next,
uh, whoever wants to answer
this, but, well, I guess maybe
new Space Nexus could answer
this one too, but what percent
are staying here in New Mexico.
So graduating from here and
setting up shop down the road or
somewhere in New Mexico. Right.
Well, so, and if you see our,
our uh logo, I mean, our
corporate name is New Space New
Mexico. We rebranded to uh doing
business as new space nexus and
the reason was a number of
companies did not realize.
That we would work with them,
and I'm a believer in working
with these companies, bringing
them in from all over the
nation, and we have a number of
companies that we get to through
our conferences, through our new
Space Alliance that come and
once like especially the nighter
companies, we, uh, I haven't
looked at the exact stats
lately, but it's about a third
of the companies are New Mexico
companies and so we help them
grow, but uh, um, of the other
2/3, we're
Now working with about 10 of
those, so we've worked with 50
so far. We're working with about
10 of the companies to set up
and we try and set up meetings
with EDD or with um, you know,
attorneys that are trying to do
this, this, this facility they
can use as a sign up as a user,
uh, you know, they, they're part
of this, they can use this as
their address, as they're
starting up some of their
programming. So we have about
10.
companies right now that are in
different stages of setting up
in New Mexico, and that's where
I'm a believer in reaching out
nationally because when we come
here, like I say, we showcase
the companies to the investors
or to the government folks, when
we bring them here and they see
this ecosystem, it's almost uh a
set conclusion that they want to
set up some kind of office, they
see, you know, there's these 3
Space Force organizations that
have over
2 billion annual budget in
space. Sandia Labs and um Los
Alamos. I think this is a low
number. They each have about a
500 million budget in space
they, um, you know, we have all
these resources like a number of
the companies that are sort of
in the launch, we're working to
get set up at Spaceport, so.
Anyways, it's going well, very
good. I don't know if anyone
else want to comment. I'll just
be quick chair. So thank you.
Um, so is higher ed engaged and
are they showing up here with
all of their degrees and skill
set and everything, or they also
learning here, uh, what they
need to do to take on, maybe
they've got this really wonder
like when I started my business,
I had this very wonderful,
beautiful idea and everything,
but I didn't have a clue how to
run a business. And but there
was a lot of trial and error
there. So is, is there a piece
and a component to New Space?
that helps them understand how
to run their little business
before they get clobbered by,
you know, some other issue.
Somewhat we do help them with
kind of their messaging and
their promotion, but as far as
like how to set up we have
different partners that'll help
with like the attorneys or um
the incentives of the state,
like we don't.
Try and do that also. We right
away and that's why that.
Initial chart showing that whole
ecosystem is any success we have
has been through working with
all the partners in, in the
state.
If that answered, sir. Maybe you
were gonna make a comment as
well.
Thank you to add to that part of
what Road Runner does is
teaching those business elements
because so many, so many of our
founders have very big technical
experiences. They have PhDs,
they have a huge amount of
knowledge, but don't know
QuickBooks because why would
they? So we make sure that our
companies exit the studio with
clean books, with clean cap
tables with proper employment so
that they can be successful.
stressful in what they're doing
and not fail for reasons that
they don't need to fail for.
If I may, uh, chair, Senator,
I'll also just add, um, that is
an aspect that my office focuses
on as well, so we have a
business assistance program. We
have 4 contractors in sector
specific that businesses,
startups in those sectors get
free services to them, you know,
we, we pay our contractors, um,
uh, to receive business advice,
uh, to your exact point,
especially when we're dealing
with what we called hard tech,
deep tech. It's a lot of folks
who have the technical expertise
and maybe not the how to
and a business expertise, so we
do what we can to add that into
the equation.
Uh thank you, Chair, and I'm
assuming that there's a lot of
things they can learn from by
doing that. So they're not
reinventing the wheel in areas
that they don't have to and they
can focus on their core
competency. And then the last
question I have, chair, I know
others have probably questions
as well. I, uh, maybe this is
for Quanttinuum and thank you
very much for selecting us and
wanting to be here and we want
to do everything we can to help
you succeed here. I, I can
assure you, I personally am
working on that and
Representative Sanana and I,
Sanana and I are working on that
together. But um,
Your power needs, your power uh
uh needs for your, what, what
are, are you working with all of
us here to make sure you have
all the power you need, because
I'm told that it is just
Explosive, the amount of power
that you're going to need to
really build what you're trying
to build, so.
Yeah, so that's a good point
that you bring up, Senator.
Thank you for asking the
question and chair, um, actually
the modality that we've chosen,
which is ion trapping, takes
significantly less power than,
say, a superconducting modality,
which is where you'll see the
chandeliers, the pretty, the
pretty gold chandeliers of a, of
a quantum computer, those need
to be chilled at a very extreme
level. Our technology doesn't
need to be chilled as much, so
we don't use those dilution
refrigerators.
So our power consumption is
gonna be much less than some of
those other modalities.
Wonderful. Thank you, chair. I
probably have 58 more questions,
but I'll stop there. So thanks.
No, this is great. And thank you
to Senator Padilla for uh all of
your work in this area. Truly,
it's, and this is a great
opportunity. We'll keep going
down the line, um.
Representative Dickson and then
Representative Chatfield and
keep going from there.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
Senator Padilla and I could just
spend a whole day um on this uh
subject. Um, I'll try to, um, be
quick with questions. Um, I may
have one at the very end, um,
if, if there are other things
that light up. Um.
I want to focus, Mr. Chair, on
place-based location and um
Denise, uh Miss, sorry, Home
Quest is Home Quest. Um, you
mentioned, um, some of the, the
reasons that Albuquerque in
proximity with Sandia, um, why
that can be helpful. I'm
wondering um if there's anything
that you'd like to add to that,
um, and then if, um, other folks
have insight into why.
Uh
Building an ecosystem is so
important and why the
place-based.
You know, having that close
proximity, um, is a desirable
asset.
Sure. Thank you, Chair, Vice
Chair.
I believe that
It's kind of like, um, you know,
seeing things is believing
things, touching things and
being able to really experiment
on actual systems. There's not a
lot of people that understand
quantum computing and it's a
highly complicated area. So
having vendors, having
collaborators be able to come to
our labs and actually see things
working and testing their
products to make sure that they
will work in the quantum
ecosystem, I think is vastly
important. So having the
abilities to
here to partner with, continue
our partnership with Sandia Los
Alamos, and to bring in new
technology and new partners, I
think is very key.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, if I can add, um, I think
this gets to a lot of what we
focus on and, and kind of a a
guiding lens of what we do in
economic development,
specifically in science and
tech, um, doing place-based.
Growth, innovation as opposed to
just things happen to happen in
a place, right? We want the
place to be kind of the
grounding element, the
attractor, um, one of the things
that that encourages similar to
what Denise says, uh, is
collision. I know Road Runner
talks about this a lot. When you
have a place where all of these
elements are occurring, you
could get somebody working in
one area, colliding with
somebody working in another area
and that yields something new
and you have the tools.
In that environment, in that
place for them to work on that
thing, that new thing together
that wouldn't necessarily have
occurred had they not all been
in a shared ecosystem. Um, we
talk about the labs a lot, of
course, as incredible anchors
and assets for uh New Mexico's
science and tech economy and
industries, um, and a
place-based uh thesis is really
um for us focused on what can we
leverage from that, what can we
build on top of that. So for
example, when we first started
talking to Quantinuum, right?
Hinda was really kind of the
anchor of the draw for their
presence in New Mexico, uh, I
would say in addition to UNM's
uh graduate program in, in
quantum physics, um, and so for
us at economic development it's
how we latch on to those um core
competencies that already exist.
We didn't have to do anything to
put them there, um, and what do
we add on to them and how do we
leverage them so that this
continues to be the place where
people come to use and leverage
and grow from those unique
attributes.
Yes, when we first got started
in 2019, we had a number of
leaders who brought together
and, and just like what will be
the, you know, what's needed,
what's the strategy and the
number one
Um, ask from these companies is
having a way to collaborate.
Having a way to run into those
customers into these investors,
into each other, and it's been
really amazing with our new
space igniter program, we have
probably 4 different projects
that have gotten funded at a
pretty good levels with them,
uh, partnering together and
learning from each other, so
that collaboration, that
collision that Nora speaks of
is.
very, very important.
I'll just echo what they said.
Founder density is really
important to us at Roadrunner,
um, not all of our founders are
in state, but we do.
Push as much as we can to get
our founders to talk to each
other on a weekly basis and
learn from each other. They
don't always want to hear it
from their investors, you know,
we're old and stodgy, clearly,
um, but they, you know, they can
learn lessons from each other
about how to run business, how
to hire people, or just think
through problems in new ways
because they're so microfocused
on what they're doing. So having
an active ecosystem just allows
the founders to collaborate
really across sector in a way
that will only help New Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for that. I, I
like, um, uh, founder density
collision, uh, collaboration,
those are uh place-based thesis.
I took, took those notes, um,
those are really good, uh,
phrases. Um.
Non-dilutive capital, uh, Ms.
Newman, you mentioned that, um,
as you know, something, um,
Important for startups and um
Miss Sackett, that is, uh, an
area that the department has
grown in in terms of those
grants, but I'd really like to
dive a little bit into why uh
non-dilutive capital is so
important for um the companies
that you guys are working with,
like, why is it different from
um the SIC money specifically or
you know, venture uh funding and
yeah, thank you.
I can start and then if you want
to go, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Vice Chair, absolutely. So when
we talk about non-diluted
funding. What that is referring
to is funding does not diluting
ownership, equity in the
company. So typically investment
is con is seen as being diluted
funding, so it is diluting the
equity stakes, the ownership
percentages in that company. Uh,
so all venture capital, uh, is
diluted, I think it's pretty
fair to say.
Um, right, they're taking a
certain percentage equity stake
in ownership of the company in
the idea that that company will
then later succeed and either be
acquired or IPO and there's a
return on that investment, um,
so what my office works in is
non-diluted funding, which is
great for founders because it's
free money, essentially, right?
It's funding for them to advance
their technology, uh, for their
business to grow, for them to
work on business development and
it does not
their ownership, their equity
stake. It is also attractive for
their uh investors, right? Uh,
they have a certain percentage
percentage of their stake when
there's more investment that
affects their percentage numbers
as well, uh, and so it is
attractive all around and so,
um, SIC funding at all let
Maggie speak to that a little
bit, but that's on the, the,
the, the diluted side, the
funding that we operate with is
non-diluted and so it's grant
funding, um, it is EDD has
grantmaking at the
We provide grants to, uh,
businesses for business
development purposes, um, and it
does not affect their equity
stake in any way.
It's really quick. The uh Mr.
Chairman Wester, um, the, the,
you know, the funds that we have
helped the companies get to
where I said about 2/3 of it is
government contracts. So having
the, you know, the 3 Space Force
organizations here, the Air
Force Nuclear Weapons Center,
um, getting, helping these
companies get to SBIRs, all of
that is non-diluted funding too,
so, um, so beyond the
there's a lot of federal dollars
that we could help the, the
companies get to without
diluting their ownership.
Um, Nora covered that really
well, um, at Roadrunner, we
focus on deep tech, hard tech.
It takes a lot of money to build
these devices. So having free
money, having R&D funds is
really important to starting
these businesses, um, our
founders don't want to give up
50% of their ownership to us in
order to get the funds they
need. So while we are a very
small team, we do employ a grant
writer, so that we can
and get federal funds, SBIR
STTR, state funds, those that
Nora's office, um,
Offers
Um
And we're actually very proud.
We've gotten an average of
$500,000 per company through
non-diluted funds, which, you
know, just add months and years
onto the companies's lifespan,
so that they can get to that big
investment check where they can
give up larger stakes in their
company because their company is
worth so much more.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair. Yesterday, I think uh a
number of us were fortunate, um,
to go to Sandia National Labs to
learn about quantum, but then
also a visit visit a company
that
has benefited from non-diluted
funding, um, and sort of talked
about.
I don't know that it's
necessarily in the valley of
death for that company, but just
how it's absolutely critical
because of where the company is
at that point in time that, um,
you know, other options aren't
really feasible, so, um, I
thought that was, that was
fascinating and I'm, I'm pleased
to hear that uh there are a
number of avenues uh for
companies, yes.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, if
you don't mind me just building
off of that, uh, since you're
referencing grid flow, uh, one
thing I'd just like to mention
is that, uh, so as you
mentioned, some of you met with
um ridflow yesterday, uh, who is
one of the inaugural recipients
of our Advanced Energy Award,
um, and one of the great things
about the advanced energy award
was it marked a dramatic
increase in the award amount
that EDD was making. Previously,
the two grants we had um that
the Office of Science and Tech
had were much smaller dollars.
members, which are still much
appreciated by the companies,
they'll tell you, um, but they
are limiting. It was it was a
smaller dollar number, um, it
didn't allow for
Anything transformative, I guess
I'll say. And with the advanced
Energy Award, it was a pilot
program at first, and we wanted
to scale up those amounts to see
how effective can we be with
these brands, and the result has
been overwhelmingly positive,
and I think part of that you saw
with um Chuck Cole yesterday and
gridflow, um, but all of the
awardees from Advanced Energy
Award, uh, have been proof that
we can effectively responsively,
right, with your taxpayer
dollars we're being responsible
with them, but scale up the
award amount for a
much larger results and economic
impact from these startups and
make a bigger difference and uh
speed up their growth much
quicker.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Last question, um, just, um,
what are some if if each one of
you could potentially answer um
what is a key challenge that is,
that still exists, uh, for the
folks that you work with so that
we can start thinking about what
are some of the next things, uh,
where the state has an actual
role.
Um, so if you don't have an
answer now, that's fine, um, but
I'd love to hear those thoughts.
Well I think that the area that
you're, the HB20 addressed hits
them all cause it's
infrastructure.
Workforce.
Um, support to the industry.
Um, that's kind of like the
incubator services of what you
had. And then also to keep
supporting their research or
like funding grants that is
non-dilutive to help them get to
that next stage, and as they get
to that next stage, as uh Maggie
brought up that there their
value goes up and then that's
the point where, you know, they
can go talk to venture funds to
getting that bigger investment,
but
I think, you know, those those
areas you hit them dead on.
Um
In the legislature last year.
And I think
Keep going with that. It's real,
it will, it really will make a
difference.
Thank you, chair. Thank you,
vice chair. Um, I would say for
us it's, you know, really the,
the things that you have done
thus far have really been
beneficial and being able to
know that it's a state that's
wanting to learn about quantum
and wanting to invest in quantum
has been instrumental, and I
think that it's important to
learn about quantum. It's, it's
a complicated subject,
certainly, but I think that
taking the time to learn about
it, taking the time to
understand.
There are different modalities
in quantum computing, it's not
one size fits all, and so I
think there's a lot of different
avenues that the state can take.
I do believe because of the work
that's already based here with
Sandia and the integrated
photonics world. I think that's
a really great place to start,
and I think we're gonna see in
the quantum industry certainly
that supply chain buildup.
That's gonna be the next big
step.
For Quantum Industries, and that
will then feed into us being
able to develop even more
powerful hardware, which then
lead into those greater
applications of the hardware and
solving those world problems
that classical compute can't
actually do.
happy to follow on to that.
We're excited to learn about
Quantum. We are excited to
license technologies out of
Sandia, out of Los Alamos, and
start some of those quantum
companies. Hopefully we can
build a lot of partnerships, um,
as we move forward with this new
industry in the state or
Built growing industry in the
state, certainly not new. Um,
We
You know,
I guess just building off of
that, a challenge we face that
is real nitpicky, so nerdy stuff
here, um, licensing technologies
out of the labs and universities
is not as simple as you would
think. A lot of people want it
to happen. A lot of people talk
about it happening, but the
actual happening is a long
complicated process, um, and if
there were a way for the state
to unite around how to license
technology. Obviously there are
some harder factors.
with the federal labs, but the
state universities, you know, if
everybody was on the same sort
of schedule contract.
path.
To license would make the life
of founders a lot easier, um,
transferring IP transferring
ownership is just a really messy
process that is only made more
challenging with a lot of
bureaucracy. Um, so it's not
even a, a funding request from
you right now, but just thinking
through what it takes, um, to
make that happen so that we can
grow the quantum industry, for
example.
Mr. Chair, um, I think the main
obstacle we continue to see
would be density. We're still
small in ecosystem, um, that is
changing and improving as we
grow, um, but there is an
element of density that we don't
have yet. That just comes with
time, I think, I think we're
doing all the right things to um
continue growing that ecosystem
so that we have greater density,
but I will also piggyback on
what Maggie said, and this is
something that my office plans
to work on this year as well, so
happy to chat with anybody uh
members of the committee
interested in that as well, um,
of licensing, specifically from
New Mexico institutions of
higher education, um.
Much less in our realm of
control is um is from the DOE
labs, that's a federal process,
um, though they have been very
good partners in trying to
identify new ways, you know, to
work within their systems. But
within, you know, uh, New Mexico
higher education institutions,
that is wholly uh a local uh
controlled element. And so
that's something my office plans
to work on this year as well.
Not
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Dixon, and thank
you for, for the work and
sponsorship on each uh B20 with
so many other partners. We're
gonna go to Representative Lujan
and then Representative
Chatfield, Representative Lujan
will have to depart here shortly
or San Luhans. Thank you, thank
you so much, um, uh, the
innovation is incredible. I
really, I really appreciate it.
And I'm just gonna, uh, for the
sake of time, follow up like.
What Representative Dixon just
let off and what you gave us as,
you know, next steps. One thing
I did invest in, um, I think it
was my first year, uh, or 2
years as a legislator was to
develop a um or work towards a
DOE collaborative center. I put
$100,000 of, of my grow fund at
the time, I guess, or junior
fund at that time before it was
the grow.
To, to work with local
governments and to work with our
labs do and, and uh higher
education to really create this,
but it fell through for other,
for reasons I'm not gonna get
into right now, but
Have you all developed or have
we worked to develop something
in that kind of collaborative
nature.
What the process, uh,
My the collaborative I was
working with was to identify
Anderson Anderson School of
Business at UNM to be kind of
the focal, uh,
Uh, higher education unit, if
you will, and then work with
work together and, and build
this um build this out. Is there
a way of doing that? Thank you.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative.
That is a great question. I
think one thing that comes to
mind for me is the DOE boost
program. So this is a program
out of um primarily out of
Sandia that, uh, speaking to
sort of what we're talking about
of of
The ease of licensing lab
technology and their um desire
to do what they can to to make
that easier. They created a
program, um, that accepts
applications from entrepreneurs
and matches them with lab
technology to in the hopes of
assisting them and spending out
on licensing that technology.
Um, so that is a program with a
lot of uh focus in New Mexico,
so grid flow yesterday was a DOE
boost program company, um.
I don't know that that has a
higher ed component that you're
speaking to, I think that's a
great idea, um, especially for
that entrepreneurial element. I
don't know that that currently
um has come together quite like
that. Uh, so that's something I,
I'd certainly would love to talk
more about.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
really love to sit down, talk
with you how this this can be
because we do have the hubs of
Sandy and also Lane up in uh
northern New Mexico, which we
really, we have these centers.
By nature, by what they do,
centers of excellence, if you
will, and how do we collaborate
and really make that work when
we have the the federal
component as probably the lead
component of how you're going to
grow and expand because the
amount of money that we're
giving you helps and it
increases what you're able to do
and
We just need to do more of it
and and um I think we're going
to talk about the nature of all
the other components like, uh,
infrastructure of water and all
those other things, but
congratulations. I think this is
something that
New Mexico can be proud of.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, next we have
Representative Chatfield and
Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, I think.
That y'all have got up and
walked around in my question a
little bit, you said, oh, when
you sat on this side of the
deal, you're like, yeah, and
then everybody else asking, but
I'm gonna ask it anyway because
I think it's important. I think
it was last year we were told
that the US and China were in a
very close race when it comes to
quantum.
And that the federal government
intended to
Create
Several, maybe 5 or 6.
quantum centers.
Uh, around the United States.
And uh that
You know, if you, if you got one
of those centers.
Uh
would be very fortunate for for
New Mexico. We all know that.
Can you tell me
What would be
The federal government, do you
have any idea what would be the
commitment by the feds.
What type of commitment would be
required by us?
And are we in the running?
Mr. Chair Representative, um
Sorry. Um,
That's a fantastic question. So.
I think what I'll say is we are
in a sense, yes, I suppose one
of the questions is, is the
answer, um, I cannot remember,
forgive me, what specific
program is the 5 centers that
you're referencing. I do know
what you're talking about, but
we are, uh, kind of in that
vein, um.
We are, um, New Mexico has a
proposal into the National
Science Science Foundation
Regional innovation engines
program.
Um, ours is a quantum moonshot,
and it is to exactly the point
that you were talking about,
that it is a national security
prerogative that the US reaches
a certain level of quantum
computing before China does. It
is imperative to national
security. We have to be China,
um, and we are really clear that
New Mexico has the unique
Footprint and assets to be the
linchpin of that, uh, that
difference. We have two national
labs with world leading work in
quantum. We have a very strong
DOD presence, uh, and so we're
really clear about our
potentials in that. So we are a
national semifinalist for that
award, the NSF award would uh
provide $160 million over 10
years. Um, it's the program is
called our proposal is called
Quantum Moonshot, um, and it is
has a specific
national security focus. Um, so
it is not the exact program that
you asked about because like
forgive me, I can't recall
exactly which agency that's
from, but it is very much
aligned, and so that is
something very much on our radar
that we are actively working
toward. Um, we have our next
step coming up with the NSF
soon, uh, and that is absolutely
an avenue that we're looking at
to pursue in quantum computing
as well.
Ice chair, chair. I think that,
um, and Senator Representatives.
I think that certainly in
continuum, we are interested in
following where the money is and
understanding what types of acts
are available at a federal
level. We have heard of these
hubs and certainly our presence
here in New Mexico was really an
attempt to attract some of that
funding here to New Mexico, so
we do believe that as a leader
in the quantum technology realm
that that should help the state
and securing some of those
funds.
I know, um, Mr. Chair, uh
representative Chatfield, I know
you're talking about quantum,
but with regard to space, um,
we're in the same race, and
there are a number of things
that um New Mexico can be that
leader to help our national
security by um the investments
that are going forward with the
state to support a lot of the um
federal efforts, but
We're in the same race in in the
space industry as well.
So
Mr. Chair, members of the panel,
other than a gazillion dollars.
What can we as a legislature do
to help push you forward to help
make you successful.
Well, first, that gazillion
dollars is a good thing.
Um, I just think that um
Leadership
And strategy.
As we have seen from the
legislature this last year.
Just please keep going with
that. Please go with that. We
New Mexico, we, we have so much
here.
And we have so much potential
and I think sometimes our own
Selves don't
Understand that. And so as a
legislature, please just keep
going with that strategy with
the direction that has happened
this last year, and it'll, I
mean these 4 tech areas that
were identified, we, we can be
the leader in every one of those
with the quantum with energy,
bioscience, aerospace. Please
just keep
Keep pushing. That's all I ask.
As we are an emerging ecosystem,
I think selling New Mexico as a
cohesive place for innovation is
really helpful. Having all of
you as spokespeople for the
state, uh, for what can happen
in the state.
You know, we're, we're sort of a
flyover. We're a place that
people haven't necessarily
considered, but it's not for
lack of resource. So everything
we need is here. We just need to
be on the national stage. We
need people to notice. We need
people to know that New Mexico
cares about innovation and is
working towards innovation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Thank
you, great question. Uh, we're
gonna go next to representative
Little, then Representative
Sareana, then Representative
Duncan and go from there.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Um, I have a question, my
We were talking earlier today
about starting early and at the
medical school, getting out into
communities, talking with
students, trying to get them uh
interested in the topic of uh
medicine or healthcare, and I'm
curious, I've been really
excited to learn more about this
area, um, of opportunities and
as leaders, uh, Mr. Chair, I'm
areas as to uh what outreach
is being done with New Mexico
schools, science fairs, I mean,
I'm not sure what exactly it is,
uh, but I would love to hear
about that, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Little, uh, thank
you for the question. I do have
to say we, as part of
Looking at these gaps and
challenges of the, of the space
industry and the companies.
A huge one is workforce.
And so we have a partnered with
Workforce Solutions, secretary
Na Nayer and um and uh and
industry.
And um government and have a
put together what we call
pathways to the stars.
And our hope is that as we put
some of the processes in place,
it could be used for other, you
know, we're doing it.
As a first space industry, but
we're looking that it hopefully
it could be a framework that
could be used for other
industries sectors as well, but
the key idea is that we, um,
You know, we get in at that
early childhood train um set up
things for that inspires these
young ones, um, you know, to go
into the space industry, open up
their eyes that it's more than,
you know, launch vehicles and
astronauts in space, there's way
more opportunity and then as
they go along, we keep them in
that path, and um, and then
start having, uh, you know,
doing internship,
pre-apprenticeship.
programs, we are awarded a
pre-apprenticeship, uh,
workforce program at a workforce
solutions, so very honored to do
that, and then the final part is
really helping keep connected in
with some of these uh
folks that may be already
working in the space industry
and might want to come back. The
big part of where this is, it's
this holistic approach where we
partner with the space company,
so it's not just, you know, the
space companies we tell them,
you can't just
Um, expect at the, you know,
when you're ready to hire to go
find the hires, you need to get
in the trenches with us and help
inspire these students, help
keep them on track in some of
these programs, and then, and
then do the internship. So we,
uh, brought on a new uh person,
Kathy Steen, who's running our
pathways to the stars and like I
said as hopefully we set up this
framework and we meet our goals
and it it could be expanded to
other industry sectors.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
one thing I'll just add on to
that, um, you may have heard
about it at Sandia today is Q
Camp. So, uh, Sandia National
Labs is really strong in working
on quantum workforce. This is
specific to quantum, um, but one
of their programs that I'm so
excited about is their training,
they have a curriculum and it's
active right now and they're
training New Mexico teachers to
understand quantum, uh, and to
be able for them to be able to
teach their kids, their
students.
about quantum, so they have, you
know, age appropriate curriculum
for a variety, I think I believe
through K through 12, uh, so
that they can do exactly what
you're getting to a kind of
plant that seed really early,
um, to of science and
specifically in quantum, so that
that's not sort of a mystery
word that comes later down the
line. I think Denise will speak
to some of their efforts on this
too, uh, but I'll just add, I
think one thing in my sort of
wish list that would be left, I
would love to see is um my boss,
Secretary Black, when he was at
the chamber, I think
everyone's familiar with the Bro
be proud, um, truck, right, for
the trades. I think it would be
amazing to see something similar
to that for our for science and
tech sectors that we focus on.
Thanks, Mr. Chair and
Representative Little. I think
at Quantinuum, we have a very
robust internship program, and
we would certainly plan to
expand that here in New Mexico
with our R&D center here and
speaking of the QA, thanks Nora
for bringing that up. We did
sponsor 5 teachers this year to
attend QA. So I think there are
many opportunities and we are
certainly, as I mentioned
earlier, interested in
developing the pipeline for
quantum technologies and
engineering technologies
throughout our company. So we're
certainly happy
to participate in those
workforce development efforts.
Uh, I'll also just shout out CNN
who is building boot camps for
these emerging industries, um,
obviously they've had their
coding boot camp for a while,
but starting this fall, they're
gonna be launching a quantum
workforce boot camp.
So we are, you know, as a
community trying to capture all
elements of that science and
tech workforce, um,
It is a quantum boot camp. You
may or may not know this. I
didn't know this. It's a lot of
similar skills for
semiconductors, so these are
people who could go work at
Intel, who could go work at
Sandia or who could go work for
Quantinium as they grow. So it
is a newly developing program
over at Sandia or at CNM excuse
me.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair. I'm, again, I'm
really excited to hear about all
of the
Developments that are coming to
the state of New Mexico and I
look forward to um the
opportunities for our littlest
ones to become involved and
interested and eventually become
part of the workforce that
It stays here. Thank you. Thank
you so much for share. That's
the end of my question. Thank
you, Representative Little. Uh,
next we have Representative
Sareana, then Representative
Duncan.
Hear it now.
Thank you for your presentation.
Um, I have to say, uh, you're
the 3rd panel this year that
I've seen that I've listened to
you that's been all women, and
the year before it was a
cybersecurity panel. There were
6 of us, all women, so it's,
it's, it's a norm now, so that's
a good thing. Um, but, um, so
when we talk about energy, New
Mexico energy is huge, water's
huge.
And I know you kind of skipped
over how much energy is used,
and I, and when we were at
Sandia they talked about Q-Tip,
the the the teachers and kids,
but um they talked about
Uh, now using less energy to, to
cool things. So where is, is
that something quantum can solve
that problem as far as energy
use or?
Anyone?
Sure, I or chair and
representative, I can uh talk a
little bit to that. So a couple
of elements around energy, I
think, as I mentioned, certainly
ourchnologies use less energy,
and because quantum computing
will be able to calculate and
compute things faster, it will
be able to even be cheaper, we
expect in the future then high
performance computers and the
huge data centers, we, we won't
have a huge footprint there.
From an energy power consumption
perspective.
I think also some applications
of quantum computing that we're
looking at in the energy field
is today there's a lot of energy
loss on the grid, and we really
believe that there's some
technologies and some
applications through quantum
computing that can actually help
reduce that loss. Therefore,
being able to channel the energy
in the right direction. So I
think there's a lot of
opportunities that honestly, we
probably haven't even tapped
into yet that can really help
the energy sector.
Thank you. I think that's just a
big um in New Mexico, energy is
big and water and uh so that's,
that's good to hear. So thank
you so much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Representative Saana. That's
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Myself and a few other
representatives uh were at an
event last week and.
And uh we were talking to a
scientist and, and
Um, she related that, that if
you
And I'm gonna get this wrong. I,
I know, I don't even know how to
spell this word.
But if you give
Um, do a, a, a very technical uh
problem with this quantum
computing.
And, and she said,
If we do very, very technical
dive into this that will use as
much energy as you use the
entire year.
As an individual.
And, and I said, you've gotta be
kidding. She said, no, I'm not
kidding at all.
And, and she said as we learn
more and more, and you may be
right that there's some
technology out there that we
don't know about yet that might,
might take less, but she said,
as we do more and more, it's
gonna take more and more energy.
And she said, please.
You for quit trying to kill oil
and gas.
We need the energy, she said
solar and wind will not take
care of what we need.
Do you disagree with that?
Mr. Chair and Mr.
Representative, I do believe
that the demand for energy is
only going to grow with AI
technologies and the amount of
data that needs to be processed
across the globe. It's gonna be
extreme. So I think all avenues
of energy.
Preparation and, and is going to
be necessary. I do believe that
there are different
Levels of energy that will be
used across the quantum
modalities, so I think it is, it
is important to get informed and
understand what those are and um
as I said in the ion trapping
technology. We don't need the
amount of energy as they do in
the superconducting energy
specter, they don't, we don't
need to cool our systems as much
as they do, and that's really
the main source of energy use in
quantum computing.
Mr. Chair Representative, one
thing I'll just add to that, um,
uh, I just had a very timely
conversation with some folks at
Sandia who uh were working
through helping me identify.
All of the different sort of
future technology applications
of New Mexico, or sorry,
technology applications of
quantum, specific to different
regions, um, and industries in
New Mexico. And what
specifically we were talking
about energy and kind of all of
the above, right? Um, all of
these new kinds of technology
that are, we may not even have a
grasp on yet that will be
unlocked by quantum science and
quantum technologies to enable
new elements of techno of
energy. So different kinds, it's
a lot, there were a lot of words
that I don't know how to say, to
be perfectly honest, but
different kinds, um, of
geothermal, different kinds like
all elements in all regions of
the state across all modalities
of energy that New Mexico has
strengths in. There are future
applications for quantum
technologies to further unlock
those. So that's kind of the
lens that I look at it with.
Oh, I'll quickly add and then I
think Casey also, um, aside from
quantum, I will say that our
office is always working on
energy efficiency in general.
We've done a lot of research
into data centers, which is also
a big user of energy in New
Mexico, uh, trying to find the
technologies that will reduce
the use in general and work to
solve those energy suck
problems. Uh, so that's
something that's very much on
our radar in general outside of
quantum.
Um, but obviously quantum is a
piece of that as well.
Suches if I can add one more
thing, you unlocked a very fun
one here, clearly, um, that you
may be familiar with, um,
Lightning Doc, which is the
geothermal, uh, energy plant
outside of Animas, uh, owned by
Zanscar now, um, so that's a new
ownership, and they in sort of
their revitalization of that
plant. They use um AI to
identify the best place to
drill. And so I think Denise has
talked about the future
collision of quantum and AI, um,
but that's an example of some of
that kind of future element.
be happening right here in New
Mexico, they use AI geothermal
could be, you know, a little
tough when you have to know
where's the best hot rock to
drill. And so they have
identified a way to use AI to
identify where that best place
to drill is and because of that,
their plant in Animas in New
Mexico is now the most
productive geothermal plant. Um,
so it's pulling down all these
different elements of technology
and innovation and finding the
best way for them to work
together to produce more energy,
absolutely, to your point.
I want to add the sort of the
space aspect of energy, um,
what's really, really cool. We
um have put together some
proposals to grow some of the,
the space energy companies
where, um, basically the New
Mexico has this expertise in
solar between our DOE labs, also
in nuclear, um, you know, with
Los Alamos, there's a number of
companies that come out of that.
I don't know if you know Rocket
Lab.
For Salero provides the market
share of space energy with their
solar panels to all the space
systems in orbit today.
Uh, so 50% of space power comes
from Albuquerque, and then, uh,
recently, the Air Force Research
Lab has demonstrated space solar
power beaming, and one of the
tech demonstrations have been
done with the UNM in partnership
with UNM. Cosmac and right over
there, hopefully this afternoon
you're going to see a demo on
that. So, uh, basically space,
the energy, whether it's solar,
nuclear, or
the actual uh distribution of
that power in space and also to
Earth is really exciting and
again an expertise area of our
state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm,
I'm glad to hear all of that.
Um, I'm a, I'm, I'm a guy that's
gonna use everything we possibly
have, uh, and whatever
technology that we can find in
the future, that's great too,
but uh I'm still saying as that
lady, that scientist said, um.
Don't kill what we have right
now because we don't know what
we don't have and what we don't
know yet. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan.
Uh, OK, I don't see any other
questions uh from the committee.
I'll have a, a couple of quick
questions. Uh, one particularly
sort of, well, I guess it really
applies for, for all four of the
panelists. Um, and director Lee
suggested it, as we start to
think 3 and say 5 years out.
Um
I think there's, you know, you
see a ton of broad support and,
and really pride from the
legislature, uh, and we're
getting to see what you all are
doing. What are some markers of
success as we sort of go further
into that 3 and 5 year period.
Uh, I think, you know, we need
to think about it, particularly
as we, you know, we're
approaching the change of uh
gubernatorial administration.
Um, and again, this is something
where we're getting to see
firsthand and hearing profound
pieces, particularly as it
relates to uh sort of strategic
competitions with China and
others that are, you know, that
are elemental for, for our
nation and very important to the
world. Talk me through and talk
us through what success looks
like 3 and 5 years from now. And
as part of that, if you wanna
add anything about other
Suggestions for us to be, you
know, sort of
Yeah
Making that success either
larger or half smoother or more
quickly, uh, clearly we're,
we're all ears for that as well.
Whoever wants to start.
Mr. Chair, um,
I think, uh, from my
perspective, success in the next
few years, looks like a number
of things. One, to what I spoke
to earlier, continued density,
right? So we're a small state,
uh, but we have incredible
strengths and assets in these
fields, um, but we're still
growing in that, in that
ecosystem. And so additional
density in terms of more venture
deal activity in our companies,
um, you hire caliber companies
growing out of New Mexic.
Mexico, um, we're starting to
see some really great success
with that. So off the top of my
head, there, there's a really,
um, there was a recent great
example, uh, ubiquity is a
company based out of Los Alamos,
um, that licensed Los Amos
National Labchnology, um, they
had a ton of recent big
milestones all wrapped up in in
uh in a small time period, um,
they acquired a smaller company,
which is a big milestone for a
startup, uh, and they are uh
closing a $20 million
fundraising round.
Um, they also have signed a uh
exclusive deal with uh solar
manufacturer to apply their top
technology to the company called
First Solar to their
photovoltaic cells. Um, they
were also one of, um, EDD's
inaugural Advanced Energy Award
recipients. Um, and so that kind
of activity from, um, you know,
what is still small, New Mexico
start up with New Mexico
technology is huge and so
continuing to see um additional
density of deals and business
growth.
Um
As well as uh continued success,
uh, ideally with our large scale
coalition funding proposals that
we're looking to pull down. Um,
so we were awarded a tech hub,
uh, in conjunction with Colorado
and Wyoming last year, um, and
we're semifinalists for our NSF
Regional Innovation engine. Um,
there's also uh there actually I
I apologize, there are two
semifinalists from New Mexico
for the NSF Regional ovation
engine, um, one in quantum and
one in water and energy.
Um, and so that continued
success, you know, we're, we're
batting, we're hitting above our
weight, uh, in that sense and so
continued success in that field.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
I agree with Nora on density,
and I think, um, you know, for
new space, we look at the small
and medium.
Space, uh, company as our sort
of our customer, yes, we get
funding from federal sources and
state and um even private
sources to help us do what we're
doing, but we're trying to um
grow these companies, so really
an outcome is, is more
companies, more jobs, more
opportunities for our, our, uh,
workforce. And so I see it's
it's and a success in.
that the legislature supports
these offices or these
organizations that are doing are
putting in place.
These sort uh resources and the
infrastructure and the help so
that that those that uh industry
grows and the jobs grow, and
then the workforce has
opportunities.
Uh, for Roadrunners, I mean,
echoing what we've just heard,
you know, that snowballing
success is big. Finding that
sort of first big company that
hits the national stage that
will draw attention to our state
that'll make people want to come
here to copy that, um, I think
we feel very supported by the um
EDD by the SIC for sort of
paving the way to let us do the
work, uh, to let us build those
companies, use all of the
resources that exist here to
do that work and we're just
gonna sort of keep plugging
along until we can find that big
winner, um, and everything
points to having that
opportunity in state, whether it
be in space, energy, compute,
you know, it might be quantum
with all of the
Engine, the, you know, all of
these little programs that are
hopefully coalescing right now,
but having a supportive
legislator having a supportive,
um, ecosystem really helps us to
do the nitty gritty work every
day.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
say, you know, 3 things from a
continuum perspective, we
certainly would see success in
achieving our road map. So we
have a technological roadmap and
that's really requires us to
And innovate in this integrated
photonics areas, that's really a
key to our achievement of that
roadmap and so we're really
looking forward to partnering
continually with the labs to
make that happen.
I would say that um by the end
of the decade, our plan is that
we will have launched computers
that are actually, we call it
quantum advantage in the in the
space, which basically means
that they can do more than a
classical computer can do today.
So that is on our roadmap. We've
been very successful in
achieving our roadmap to date
and that would, that would be
successful for us if we can
continue to partner with the
assets that you have here to
make that happen.
I would say a second area is we
really want to build a customer
base for our products, and so
that would be an area of success
for us is to see that we
actually have customers here in
New Mexico that are wanting to
purchase our products, our
computers, our applications in
the space.
And then I would say, thirdly,
that we just want to be able to
see development of this supply
chain. So really being able to
make that a bit more robust so
that we've got the reliability
and the structures in place to,
to support all of the quantum
industry.
Great. Thank you and uh
This is thank you all very much,
uh, committee, thanks for the
great questions. We're very
excited also for uh the tour and
sort of the hands-on portion
that we'll do uh later. Just
want, so thank you very much.
Um, we're very excited to
continue this. Uh, we're gonna
ask our uh final panel to come
up.
Um, that'll be, uh, uh, Rob,
Secretary Black, and Secretary
Naier, um, as they're coming up,
maybe we'll, so if members can
turn to tab E.
Um
And this is uh Legistat, uh,
hearing. This may be our sort of
first one is sort of as more of
a full committee this year,
maybe, maybe not, um.
But
Um
Really appreciate um our
analysts, uh, wanna say a big
thank you to the secretaries and
just sort of note that both
Secretary Nair, Secretary Black,
your good work was referenced in
the previous panel and
throughout, so we're, this is a
very collaborative process. It's
also meant to be quick and so
we're gonna, in, in the sense of
uh sort of wrap it or, or pretty
condensed presentations, uh,
good work from our analysts,
which we always trust on. And
then for us as members to um you
know, be quick with our
questions. Feel free to go
deeper. If you get an answer,
you want to sort of dig deeper
and we may, I may askrector Seli
to do just sort of like the two
minute version of Legistat. So
this is an opportunity for us as
legislators to go deeper with
agencies.
In concert and guided by our
excellent analysts, um, uh, and,
and again, it really rewards
sort of quick to the point
questions, dialogue back and
forth between the secretaries
and us as legislators, um, and,
and obviously the thing to try
and avoid for all of us, and I'm
giving a good example of it here
is sort of going on a little
long. Um, yeah, so, uh
with that.
Yes, I'll turn it over to
Director Sali.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
committee members, so we have a,
a new analyst that will be uh
taking over, you know, as Rachel
moved into the deputy spot. Uh,
so our new analyst will be
working with CYFD as well as
Workforce Solutions, and she is
Doctor Carly Malone, who uh
worked for LFC, uh, a couple of
years ago and left us to go get
a PhD and a law degree from
Vanderbilt, and then I work in
DC and a couple of different
areas, so we're very happy that
she decided to come back to New
Mexico and to work for
So, thank you.
All right. Uh, so, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Rachel Garcia, and I am
passing the torch, uh, on being
the LFC analyst for Workforce
Solutions, uh, and with me at
the table, uh, is Julia
Rodriguez, who uh is the analyst
for the Economic development
department, as well as secretary
Serena Neer, who is the
workforce Solutions secretary,
uh, and then, uh, Secretary Rob
Black, who is the economic
development department
secretary. We're gonna be
working um Juli
from a brief staff brief behind
tab E titled Legistat, that
first page is just the context
for how we structure the
hearing.
Um, and, uh, what I'll do is
very briefly, as the chair
mentioned, the way Legisat works
is we focus on a couple of key
performance challenges with you
all and keep coming back to
those and then ask um
departments to give action
updates related to those. The
two key performance challenges
we've been focused on, um,
broadly our workforce
development specifically labor
force participation and then
economic development. This
hearing will be a little bit
more nar
focused on STEM and trade
related industries within those
contexts. Um, and as a reminder,
kind of led just that revolves
around kind of those key
performance challenges, we'll
give you very, very quick
updates via the brief but aren't
gonna go into much detail. We'll
pass it over to the secretaries
for brief presentations, and
then, um, you all will have the
opportunity to engage in
questions. Um, again, I'm
working from a brief that looks
like
This
And at the very end, you'll find
recommended questions for the
committee if you'd like to kind
of have some, some starters
there. Um, but I'll I'll pass it
over to Julia. She's gonna kind
of give you an overview of the
brief on the economic
development side, uh, and then
we'll turn it over to the
secretaries.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you. My
name is Julisa and I'm the LFC
analyst for the Economic
Development department. I'm
gonna quickly walk you through
some, some of the points in the
legistat um so this legis that
we're talking about economic
development and workforce
training specifically in the
science and technology target
sectors, um, this legisstat is
building off of two previous
legisats we've done with you
all, specifically on the
economic development side, um,
last year we did one on
The agency's efforts to build
the science and tech target
sectors that they've outlined in
their um
Statewide, uh, strategic plan.
Um, so you've also heard about
the challenges of integrating
initiatives across these two
agencies, as well as with higher
ed and our public education
system.
Um, so we know that the entities
target sectors as that are
outlined in their strategic
plan, um, require advanced
skills that um we are cur that
some some lack with some with
some that are lacking in New
Mexico, um, which means that
we're having a hard time meeting
industry needs, um, these skill
gaps contribute to
underemployment, um, hiring
challenges, and also bus um
hinder business attraction.
As far as employment in these
sectors on page two of your
legistat, you'll see two graphs
that have to do with employment
and employment growth in these
sectors, um, as far as
employment, these sectors make
up roughly 6.6% of New Mexico's
total employment, um, as far as
growth with the most recent data
we have, um, between 2023 and
2024, these sectors have grown
by roughly 11.6%. That's around
6000 jobs.
s
Um, as far as investments, you
all have made significant
investments investments into
building an ecosystem and
providing resources and policy
to support growth in these
sectors. Um, if you go to page
one of your allegisat, you'll
see a um
A table with one time
appropriations related to
science and tech, um, mostly to
the economic development
department. Um, aside from these
one time appropriations, you all
have also increased EDD's
reoccurring budget, um, in the
past two sessions in the past 2
years by 6.4 million,
specifically for the Office of
Strategy, Science and
Technology, which is now the
technology and innovation
Office, um, that funding, that
reoccurring funding, a big
portion of it, 5 million, was
just for the agencies.
the division's general grant
programs, um, and initiatives.
So, um, because of all this
funding, both reoccurring and
one time, the state has a
variety of tools available to
support growth in these sectors.
Um, we're talking about from the
staff capacity side on the state
side, um, to funding for
physical space, um, incubator
support, um, grants and um
And all that. So, you also just
heard from Nora Sackett from EDD
about all the programs, grants,
and initiatives, and a lot of
that is for entrepreneurs and
young early companies, um,
mostly centered on science and
technology. Um, so some of the
key questions that we will want
to ask the agency today is how
they're measuring growth in
these sectors. Um, how we know
or how we will know if we're
performing above the national
growth, um, just based on all
these eventsments that you all
have made, and also how we
How do we know if we're getting
a return on investment from the
appropriations you will have
made to EDD, um, I'll now pass
it over back to Rachel to talk
about um the workforce.
Um, and Mr. Chair, I'm just
gonna point you to a few key
appropriations related to
workforce development as
background context on page 7,
there's a lot more information.
The key thing to know is much of
the state's investment in
workforce development exists in
the K-12 system or in the higher
education systems. Last year,
um, we estimated when it comes
to workforce training
specifically, the state was
investing about 135 million, but
much of that is actually in
higher ed.
Um, within the workforce
solutions department, the agency
largely relies on federal
funding, much of which comes
from Woa, but you all have made
some specific targeted
investments um through state
revenues for workforce
development and I, that is on
chart, uh, in the chart on page
7, some key appropriations. So,
um, largely non-recurring. Uh,
last year, for example, 17
million through the community
benefit fund, um, there have
been about in total
about 1.2 million available to
workforce solutions for
pre-apprenticeships, um,
A variety of other
appropriations and then about
9.6 million for apprenticeships
available to the agency this
year. Um, so that's kind of the
backdrop in terms of funding and
what you all have made available
to the agencies. We'll pass it
now over to the two secretaries
to give brief presentations
about kind of how they're
working related to that
performance challenges, um, and
how that's going.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
wanna start by uh recognizing uh
the loss that we had in our
division of our labor relations
Deputy Director Katie Sartorius.
She died unexpectedly last
Friday.
Um, she was a young leader with
a real passion for her work,
especially at the human rights
Board, um, if you
Believe in these things, please
keep her family, including her
one year old son, Bodie and her
husband Dylan and her parents,
um, in your memory. And if I'm a
little off my game, it's cause
we've had a, a rough week. Uh,
but onto happier things, thank
you to our analyst, um, Rachel
Mercer Garcia. We're gonna miss
you, doc, but um we're excited
to work with uh Doctor Malone
and uh as always, thanks to my
DFA analyst, Guy Stone as well,
and my deputy secretary, Marcos
Martinez is here today too.
So moving on to slide 2,
we, one of the first
conversations I had with um
Rachel about this meeting was,
well, what do you guys consider
to be STEM, when we're talking
about stem apprenticeships and
pre-apprenticeships, and, um,
we, you know, we have done some
work in the labor market review
a few years or maybe last year,
and what you see there is a, a
great chart that our team put
together called the Periodic
Table of STEM occupations in New
Mexico, so I'm not going to read
them all, but when we talk about
how are we going to
track our progress in these
areas. For our data, it's really
important to identify uh
occupational codes and uh
industry clusters, and so that's
what this chart is sort of
showing you. Um,
You notice that healthcare is
not considered STEM, which I
think is weird cause it's
science, uh, but so in some of
my data later, I'll talk about
healthcare, but just so you
know, higher ed sometimes counts
medical or some of the that
stuff as stem, they kind of
divide the, the health care
world, um, but in the workforce
world, we generally don't
include healthcare as part of
STEM.
Moving on to slide 3, you know,
Julisa talked a little bit about
the mismatch between the
educational profile of New
Mexicans over 25 and what the
STEM fields demand and so this
chart just puts that all
together for you and so the blue
lines are the percentage of jobs
right now in New Mexico that
have that educational
requirement, and then, uh,
typically for entry into the
field, and then the, the orange
line shows what New Mexico's
population over 25's educational
attainment is. So
you'll see that, that we have a
lot more folks who have uh some
college and no degree or less,
whereas that only accounts for
about 7% of STEM jobs in
contrast to 70% of STEM jobs in
New Mexico requiring that
bachelor's degree, but only 17%
of our population having that.
And of course, we have yet to
see the impact of the
opportunity scholarship and all
the other great work and
investment the legislature has
made in those numbers.
Moving to the next slide, which
is slide 4. we have this year we
received $600,000 for STEM
pre-apprenticeships, but I
wanted to give you the data on
all the pre-apprenticeships that
we've done so far, uh, that are
already in the STEM world. So we
are sitting at over 1250
pre-apprenticeships since we
started this program in 2023.
And we've identified, uh, these
ones about 242 were in STEM
professions, and I divided them
here by science,
technology, energy, and then the
healthcare as well. So they're
about 19.5% of our total uh
pre-apprenticeship, uh, cohorts
to date, and you'll notice also
that um we have are building
with using some of our federal
grant money, we, uh, gave out
grants to 6 different um
organizations to build
pre-apprenticeship programs. Uh,
so the new space nexus, of
course, as Casey mentioned, is
one of those recipients. Stem
boomerang is also another
recipient. So we should see a
a lot more um
Oops.
Synergy there with those
investments and the investments
that you, you made in us last
term.
And then moving on to slide 5,
we, we were also asked to
include the skilled trades, so,
uh, that is talking about,
again, our pre-apprenticeships
to date in the skilled trades
and, uh, generally in our world,
we consider there to be
industrial skilled trades, which
are like machinists and and
people in the manufacturing
industry, transportation,
skilled trades, which is like
automotive, those sorts of
places, and then construction
skilled trades, and so you'll
see that we've had a ton, about
331 of our pre-apprenticeships,
a little over 25% to date.
have been in the skilled trades
with MC3 being by far the
biggest contributor to that, and
for those who haven't heard our
presentation before, that's, uh,
a partnership that we have with
uh the local 412 plumbers and
pipefitters as well as a number
of different employers where,
uh, students do 120 hours of
classroom instruction followed
by 280 hours of work-based
learning, and then they
transition hopefully directly
into an apprenticeship, um, been
highly successful, trained all
over the state. It's been
been really great.
Moving on to slide 6, regular
apprenticeship, so, uh, over
2500 active apprentices at this
moment, uh, predominantly in the
trades, we had 328 completions
in calendar year 2024, and
that's about right, right? Cause
a lot of, a lot of
apprenticeships are gonna be 4
or 5 years. Uh, and then
overwhelmingly these
apprenticeships are in uh the
trades, but we do have a few in
STEM, CNM's ITAP program is a
really great one, information
technology, uh, we have a
geotech.
Apprenticeship as well as a fuel
and water analyst, which is sort
of focused on, on skills needed
in the oil patch. Uh, so those
are our numbers over there and
of course, you're familiar with
the great investments you've
made in the apprenticeship
system.
And then, uh, moving on to slide
7, other stem and trades
initiatives, so, uh, of course,
you have heard many times about
the Bro, be proud track, which I
did with my buddy Secretary
Black here and now we get to do
with Leslie from the chamber,
uh, continues to be highly
successful in exposing people to
the trades. There's also a
healthcare module on there.
There's a welding module, which
is considered an in industrial
trade.
And we even talk about 3D
printing. There's a 3D printing
station on there, so it's got a,
a pretty good um balance,
although we would love to have
more. Um, we've also taken uh
Bro be Proud into the
corrections world, which is just
been a personally incredibly
satisfying uh project for us. We
went to all the minimum security
correctional facilities, and
next week actually federal
probation and parole is gonna
bring their folks through this,
so we really want this to be a
way to expose people, even if
they're not young, if they may
be still at the start of their
career journey, we want them to
come.
the truck. And then that second
picture, um is uh a uh
commercial driver's license
program that is also inside the
wall. So, um, that truck is
being driven by an inmate at
Springer. We had a class of all
11 women from Springer, um,
earned their CDLs, and they
actually got to do on the road
driving. Um, so that was a
pretty special experience for us
too, but also just critical to
not just the skilled trades, but
to pretty much everything and
every one of your districts. You
need more.
DL workers. So, um, we're trying
to make them. And then uh we
have the infrastructure career
pipeline program. So this one is
a blend of federal dollars that
came to the Department of
Transportation, and then, um, we
use our program of
pre-apprenticeship and our, our
employees and then uh CNN has
put in some of the grow money
that you've invested to uh for
the non non-credit programs and
industry recognized credentials
that 20 million per year. Some
of that is going in there and
then um those students are
automa
ma t ically after their
pre-apprenticeship,
automatically placed into jobs
with either a Department of
Transportation or because of
that grow money we've been able
to work with some other
employers, both public and
private.
And uh then of course we have
our clean energy sector
strategy, which is part of our
larger energy sector strategy.
We have some private funding for
that. Uh, we have the pathways
to the Stars program that uh
Casey talked a little bit about
and the community benefit fund
is, is, uh, has a number of
components that are gonna um
increase the STEM workforce.
I'm, I'm going fast cause that's
what we're supposed to do here,
but I'm happy to go into more
detail on that. And then, uh,
the last thing I wanted to
highlight was our uh foreign
credential cross.
Program. So this is really a
benefit to both employers and
foreign trained individuals. Um,
there are services that will
crosswalk your foreign degree
with the skill set that an
employer in the US might need,
and, uh, so, you know, uh, folks
have to have work authorization
to to really um be able to take
advantage of that cause they
need to, to have the job on the
other side, but we think this is
gonna be a, a really great
initiative and hopefully boost
some of the workforce
availability. We hear all the
time about people who are
trained in engineering, and
they're working, they're driving
an Uber because they can't get
those credentials crosswalked,
so hopefully this will address
that problem. And with that, I
will pass it on to Secretary
Black. Thank you.
Thank you, Secretary, uh.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Vice Chair,
uh, it is always hard to follow
Secretary Nyer.
Uh, she is doing amazing work
and it's a pleasure to be able
to continue to work with our,
uh, from my time as the head of
the Chamber of Commerce to now,
uh it is uh been a really,
really robust partnership, and
it's part of the reason I think
we are seeing success on the
economic development side is
because of the work that she's
done with her team.
Um, I, I'm gonna keep this very
brief so we have lots of times
for questions. I really wanted
to go through and give you a
quick update of what we've been
doing for the last 22 days
since, uh, the new laws have
been in place with the new
programs that uh you as a
legislature saw fit to give us
the responsibility to implement.
So I'll start with, um, the
first page site read in SB 169
and the, and the decks that you
have, um, the
What you'll see there are the
drop-down pens are sites that we
have already evaluated. So we
have done site character
characterization around the
state as part of a pilot that uh
chairs Small and others helped
support last year. Um, we have
not done full analysis of that.
Once we have our site readiness
board in place, we'll review
those, those sites to determine
their, whether or not they are
strategic economic development
sites.
But I wanted to let you know
that we have already analyzed,
uh, those, those 28 sites. We
have a list that's longer than
that, that we're now, uh, we
have, um, uh, a contractor in
place to continue this site
characterization work, and we
are starting that as we speak,
we are, my team is currently
interviewing staff to support
the site readiness andreport
programs and those advisory
councils, um, so that is
happening literally today while
I'm here. So that is uh SP 169
is in in play. Uh, FD 170, uh,
this is the utility
pre-deployment bill. We have
already received an application,
uh, from an investor owned
utility for our review, uh, for
SB 170. We, and we've spoken to
the other two IOU independent uh
or the investor owned utilities
and we expect applications from
both of them uh within the
month. So there is an interest
to pre-deploy that.
Capital, uh, working to get
sites ready so that we can be
quicker to develop that.
Um, next, our trade ports, Bill,
um, this is one where there is
$50 million of infrastructure
dollars that the legislature put
into this fund, um, it is again
one that we are working to set
up currently working to set up
the advisory council for and
working to hire, and we are
interviewing for the staff to
support this effort. Um, and
finally, uh, you heard from uh
Nora Sackett, who's running our
TO office, uh, the, with the uh
92
million dollars of funding that
came out from this last
legislative session, um, there
is a lot happening in this space
already. Nora has done
incredible work. We should be
able to announce the 1st $25
million out the door for the
quantum innovation hub, the
first week of August. So again,
we
Didn't have a law in place until
22 days ago. So we're moving as
fast as we can to responsibly
deploy the resources that you've
given us to do that, to make
those investments in New Mexico.
Um,
She is also have a full slate of
of new staff to support the
deployment, the effective
deployment of these funds that
are those jobs are posted, uh,
and interviewing for. So again,
we're, and we also have council,
uh, contracted to help us on
rule making for all these
various programs already in
place, so that we can be ready
to run. Uh, the other part about
on the, on the, the technology
and innovation office, there is
a $40 million matching.
or support program that will
work with university labs,
private sector to build um in
different types of grants to
build, uh, coalitions often
these sort of things happen with
the National Science Foundation.
We're not sure how that federal,
those federal funds are gonna
flow. Um, but as part of that,
there is an advisory board that
we are currently standing up.
That board by statute will start
meeting at the end of September
and we'll be ready to deploy
that at that time. So with that,
I will pause.
And, and we can stand for
questions. Great. Uh thank you
very much, Secretary Black.
Thank you, Secretary Naer. uh,
Secretary Ny, uh, thank you for
sharing about Katie. We'll ask
for just a quick moment of
silence, uh, in her honor, and
then we'll go to questions.
Thank you very much.
OK, um,
So thank you, thank you to the
analysts. We're gonna go
straight to questions, uh, and I
will, we can sort of jump around
here a little bit. Um, I'm gonna
sort of go first and, and really
go off of the our LFC, um,
And, and I'll start here with
Secretary Nier, um,
The moving folks and you've
talked about this in the past,
sort of from the stands down to
the field and then onto the
field stands to the sideline to
the field within the STEM space,
are there anything that you've
seen that's working or any sort
of, yeah, talk us through
examples of where we may be
seeing that so that we can look
at, look forward to expanding.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, a
couple of things, I think our
reentry programs are, are a
great one of taking people maybe
from the very top of the stands
and moving them in at least onto
the bench, hopefully directly
onto the field. Uh, I also think
that our partnerships with adult
education, so the, uh,
individualized education and
training, I think it's called,
but I always get it wrong.
They're IET programs, so that's
where you are learning, and
you're getting your either your
high school equivalency or your
uh English
language, um, skills improved,
and at the same time, you're
working towards an industry
recognized credential, and then
that, that um curriculum is
supposed to be paired together.
So like if you're learning
English and you're getting your
CNA, you are learning the
English you're gonna need as a
CNA, um, that program is also
really powerful from again,
taking people from all the way
to, to maybe not even having
those basic literary literacy
skills, and so really not being
a player in the job market all
the way to having a full
credential.
And the legislature, uh, it's
not in my department, but I
always feel like I have to
recognize the great work that
Doctor Gallup is doing over
there at HED with the IT and
with the considerable investment
from, um, the legislature. The
other thing is, uh, it's to us
it's sort of a hand to hand, uh,
game, like we have to be in
community finding folks and
making sure that they understand
that we're there when we need
them, uh, when they need us,
and, uh, so our field offices, I
think, are the other part of the
equation for finding people in
and actually being able to get
them from that really hard to
reach place into sometimes um
some training intensive jobs
like STEM.
Thank you for that and just one
quick follow up, um, what do we
know about sort of the folks who
are not on the field.
That that that over 25 uh age
group that's not in the
workforce. Is there anything um
new that you've either learned.
Can you talk us through who that
population is. Obviously, some
portion of that is incarcerated.
Um, our folks who are currently
incarcerated, but yeah, help us
visualize who who that workforce
potential workforce, yes.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so, um, thank you for
the investment of $750,000 in
this fiscal year to do a study
to actually find out a lot more
about that population. I believe
that that RFP is either closed
or getting close to being closed
for, for to start that survey.
So we're excited about that. But
what we know is who is
underrepresented in the labor
market relative to other states
and it's men, uh, sorry, but
men especially uh 25 to 45, that
kind of
they are, um, underrepresented
in the labor market relative to
other states. Um, we actually
have a higher proportion of
women, um, with one child under
the age of 6 in the labor market
than we do, uh, than other
states do, and that's probably
thanks to the investments in
early childhood education. Uh,
we don't know much about the
educational profile of those
individuals though. I mean, we
can make guesses, but hopefully
we'll have a better sense of
that after we do the survey work
and then, um, we, we also don't
have a great sense of the
geographic.
distribution. Again, survey, uh,
and then finally when they, when
the Bureau of Labor Statistics
asked nationally, uh, why people
aren't working. They end up with
about, uh, 10 to 15% saying that
they, there's no job that
they're qualified for 10 to 15%
saying that they are um pursuing
education right now, another 10
to 15% saying it's family
obligations, and then everyone
else says other. So again,
that's why we have to do this
study, but that's, that's as
much as we know.
um, in the study, we should have
preliminary results from that
when.
Or results Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, we're trying to
push it to go fast so that by
the time we're in front of you
with the session, we can at
least have some preliminary
results. Awesome. Thank you very
much. Uh, OK, we're gonna keep
going. We're gonna go to Brooks
Saint Vincent and then Senator
Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Secretary Mayer. You
mentioned a few things and I
just wanted to follow up. So you
talked about CDL drivers.
And we have had so much disaster
and stuff going on in Lincoln
County.
That we heard for CDL drivers.
And you mentioned that there's
women that are wanting to drive
trucks and I would love to put
the first women fleet together
in Lincoln County where it's all
ladies and just throw them out
there and, and see what they can
get done.
Um, the other thing is
operators.
We don't have enough operators
and um
I don't know how many people
you're turning out that I see
your simulators and stuff here
that you're working on, and I
don't know how many people you
have ready.
To hit the ground running as far
as that goes, but there's a lot
of places like Lincoln County,
Water County, that, you know,
could install probably a lot of
CDO and, and heavy equipment
operators.
And um
The last thing that I wanted to
ask you is, I didn't hear
anything about timber trade, any
kind of a timber trade going on
and we passed quite a bit of
legislation this last year.
Because we have to start
thinning or we're gonna keep
flooding. That's, that's really
what's going on. So do you have
any um ideas on
putting some timber trades
together.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent's, first
of all, you know, we're just
sending all of our love and, and
our team as well to, to help out
and re-endorse so we love that
community. Um, absolutely, let's
get that first woman uh cohort
of drivers down there. We'd love
to see that happen. Happy to
make you work, happy to work
with you on that. We do have a
$2 million dis uh dislocated
worker grant from the feds for
that area. Um, and it's to train
and place and, and help
employers find
Uh, exactly what you're talking
about both on the CDL and anyone
cleaning debris. So I'm happy,
uh, especially my deputy
secretary can give you a little
more of the detail on that, um,
but you're right, in terms of
heavy equipment operators, we do
have one program that is in
corrections where they um
actually leave the facility with
the heavy equipment operator,
um, certification, so we are,
you know, we're trying to expand
in that area, but I think there
is a just a little gap of people
understanding what that is.
And so as we work more with K
through 12, like, you know, none
of none of our kids that I want
to grow up and be a heavy
equipment operator unless their
parent did it, in which case
they were probably like, hey,
this is a great career, I want
to do that too, right? So we
have to bring awareness to the
trades earlier and earlier, and
that's what be Pro be Proud is
about, but I think that we also
have room to do that in the
middle school space. Um, as far
as, uh, the timber industry, so,
uh, it's interesting, we were
actually working with ENMU
Riidoso on developing a career
pathway, they have a wildland
fire management program and
then, uh, Highlands has a
forestry program and what we're
trying to do is to capture, we
have a lot of AmeriCorps
participants, especially down
there in Riodoso who um are kind
of doing this stuff and then
they finish AmeriCorps and they
just kind of wander off. So we
were trying to find a to find a
career pathway for them that
would move them straight into
that educational program and
then into uh an apprenticeship,
um, our federal funding for that
was cut, but we're gonna fill it
with um community benefit fund.
instead. So that is one of the,
that is probably the only um
forestry pathway program we
have, but again, happy to hear
other ideas, um, cause we do
have some good training programs
here. We just don't have, um,
you know, I think a very clear
pathway.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, uh, I was in uh
Las Vegas, uh, New Mexico last
week, meeting with um a company
called Old Wood.
Um, they are the largest
manufacturer of firewood in the
Western United States. They sell
firewood from New Mexico into
Canada.
Um, if you go to Home Depot,
Lowe's, Albertson's, you're
buying their firewood from New
Mexico, especially the pinon.
Um, they also make hardwood
floors. They, what they've
talked to me about is the cost
to get
Burntwood
Or excess, you know, fuel.
And firewood's great for that,
right? You can, it, it doesn't
have to be a certain width of,
of, of wood. Um, out of the
forest and the cost of doing
that costs more than it is in
southern part of the United
States to get virgin wood.
So we need to figure out kind of
where some of those breakdowns
are, and I'm going to be working
with Secretary Kinderine to, to
help, uh, try to align that
because we think there's unique
opportunities in the forestry
area, working, and we can
certainly, we'll be working with
Secretary, but would love to
work with you, uh, and Lincoln
County area and how we can align
that. I know that the, there is
an effort from the Mescaleros to
also set up a rehabilitate the,
the logging area up there, the,
the timber facility.
And we, you know, we're, we
stand ready to support that with
Lia and other support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you to both of you secretaries.
It's really nice to hear that
we're being innovative and
trying to figure out what to do
with this burnt wood because
there is no shortage of it. It
is everywhere. And right now
it's still viable, you know,
it's still the cellulose and
stuff in it is still good. We're
just trying to find out a way to
utilize it and they did bring
in, you know, a lot of our, our
racehorses, they sleep on.
Woo, wood shavings, premium wood
shavings, and they're soft and
nice and they smell nice. um,
and we had a $2 million plant
brought in and they were, we
were running all of that timber.
Through the uh horses dolls and
it was really working and then
our track blew out again. So now
we're not, we're not utilizing
that wood. So I, I thank you
for, you know, trying to come up
with some economic ideas and um
if, if you get down my way, I
would love to be able to work
with you and show you where all
that good wood is that we can
get rid of. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for
representing Vincent. Uh, next,
we have Senator Trujillo, then
Senator Tobias. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you secretaries for being here.
Um, I just wanna make sure I,
you can't hear me. Let me pull
this closer.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna
Squat on your land here.
Um
I just wanna make sure I'm
understanding this graph. So the
oranges color is what our actual
education levels are and the
blue is what's required to be in
a STEM field.
Mr. Chair
Sorry about that. Mr. Chair,
Senator Trujillo, um, yeah,
it's, we took the number of STEM
jobs in the um state and
Divided them by uh the average
entry level education required.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. So interesting to me
that so much of that resides in
the bachelor's degree,
particularly since the 1st 2
years of getting your bachelor's
is really just
core curriculum, it's not really
getting deep into STEM. It seems
like I would love to see as you
dig into that project that
you're looking at. Is there any
way for us to flip those over to
the associates, which would
absolutely focus on STEM and or
are the jobs just saying you
have to have a bachelor's degree
without looking at can that be
obtained through an associate's
degree. Am I making
sense
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator uh
Trujillo, this is something that
I talk about all over the state
which is employers start need to
start looking at their minimum
qualifications and
disaggregating them into what
they actually need. We can do
that using the Work Keys tool.
We can do that using sort of uh
credential cross walking.
There's lots of ways to do that,
but I, I completely agree that
we probably need that. And when,
you know, we, we actually first
did this chart with just the
number of occupations, and it
was still that spike, so it,
it's
surprised me as well, but that's
what the data says.
Um, Mr. Chair, Secretary, thank
you. So, I wanna say, uh, just
point out on page 6 that you've
got a significant amount of
individuals in the construction
apprenticeship program, 2500,
that's great. I wish I'd had
this information yesterday, um,
because the industry we heard
from, which it was great to hear
from the industry. They were
complaining about the lack of
education in construction
workers for home building.
And then they morphed into
making licensing easier, easier,
and quite frankly, they're
talking to the wrong person.
It's as easy as it can possibly
be, uh, to get a license in that
industry. So this is really good
information. I'm gonna pass it
on to um Mr. Traynor.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Trujillo, I will note
that most of the construction
apprenticeships don't
necessarily focus on the skills
for residential construction, so
we, we have identified that
there's a gap there and that we
would, we are working with um
both the home builders and uh
some of the union side uh
training programs to try to fill
that gap, but, uh, yeah, in
general, lots of construction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
secretary, so I'll, I'll take
that back. I won't, I won't
contact Randy, but I, I will say
that.
We do need those skilled trades
for home building. If we're
gonna meet the supply and demand
that we need. That is an
incredible skill that's
necessary.
I want to point out one last
thing for you, and I know you
already know this, and I
probably sound like a broken
record, but the kids count
score.
We get dinged significantly in
our adult education.
And it's, you know, when we talk
about we're at the bottom of
the, of the list for where it's
a great environment for kids to
live, and it's not all in
relation to education. It has to
do one of the indicator
indicators is family, and it has
to do with the family's adult
education, and so,
Doing these things, whether it's
stem or anything else is going
to help us in that analysis of
New Mexico being an actual great
place for us to raise children.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Secretary
Black, I would like to just
touch base about this list here
of one time appropriations to
significant amount if I'm
looking at it properly, that's
like
111 million.
800,000, so almost $112 million
of one-time funding. What
Is that gonna last longer than a
year, or are we looking at
having to replenish that or
what's, what's the long-term
strategy for that money. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for the question. Um,
And thank you for the
legislature for entrusting us
with those funds. Um, there are
some of the, one of the largest
buckets that you see there, the
40 million, is not, that is in a
fund that is not does not
required to be expended year
one. but many of these other
funds are.
So the innovation hubs, uh, so
that's the quantum innovation
hub, uh, that was dedicated for
20 million or up or 20 million
or more. And then additional for
overall 30 million for those
innovation hubs. That needs to
be deployed and spent.
This calendar or this fiscal
year.
So there are a variety of these
funds that our job is to
Deliver into the community so
that there's those dollars are
flowing, and they're effective,
but, um,
We will need to be talking an
ongoing conversation about how
we make sure those, where we've
put those monies that those
investments are relevant to what
the legislature, the state of
New Mexico wants to accomplish
here in with our, with our
economy and our, our people, um,
and where do we, how do we keep
that continuity? Because if we
do stop and start.
That's the worst thing for
business. Um, if you're not
creating continuity
predictability, um, whether
that's on a regulatory tax or
investment side.
Uh, you lose folks. And so I do
think it's, it will be something
that we'll have to have an
ongoing conversation about.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, secretary.
So, do you have, uh, and I know
we've already kind of talked
about how are these dollars
going to result in employment,
do you have some measurable
Guide standards that you're
going to be able to come to the
legislature in January and say
to us, here's the money that
came back into the, uh, whether
it's GRT into the general fund
in one way or another. Here's
the benefit. So please keep
giving us this money. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I think
that's a great question. And,
you know, I, I started the
presentation with a lot of
activity.
Activity is not a great
measurement.
We want to look at outcomes. Uh,
but we also heard the chair talk
about these sorts of investments
typically take 3 to 5 years to
really start to mature.
So I think what we have to think
through, and I, I asked for the
partnership of the LFC and
Jolisa has been a great partner,
but others, what are the
outcomes that we want to be
measuring.
That aligned to this. I mean, I
know that from my side,
My mission is to bring families
out of poverty.
Uh, in this state and to create
a better place to do business.
That's the mission statement.
That to me says, I want to go
from 46 in median income to 43rd
or 42nd.
Over the next few years.
But that's a whole of government
approach, right?
And we want to go higher, but we
also want to be realistic. But
that's still a significant bump
in medium take home income. That
means all of the, the industries
that Nora and the committee has
been talking about. Every one of
those industries has a higher
average wage than median wage.
So we can track along with our J
tip, along with our incentives.
What are the job wage levels?
Are they above median wage? We
need to make sure that's where
we're keeping our, our job
averages and we can look at and
happy again, the set targets
with you.
Because I think it's really
important, we're most effective
when we're working together to
define what success looks like.
And then we're clear as to how
to measure that and then how we
get there. Because that gives
you clarity how to budget. It
gives us clarity how to execute.
And I think I, I welcome the
partnership of helping us to
find not just measurements of
activity, but measurements of
outcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary and both secretaries,
quite honestly, we have a lot of
concern about the um the 3B bill
that is going to potentially uh
reduce uh those individuals who
qualify for or or using uh
Medicaid and so I, I hope as we
like look at that balance, like,
But we don't forget that what
you two are doing in your
agencies is trying to help us
get to a point that they don't
have to call. They don't need,
they won't qualify anymore for
Medicaid because they don't need
it because they're going to be
getting insurance from their
employer. So thank you for the
work that you do and I just
wanna make sure that we get
enough information that we can
support you in this, but it is
making a difference, but that we
don't forget, Mr. Chairman, that
this is part of the elimination
of
poverty in our community. Thank
you. Great. Thank you very much,
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Tobiasin, and then Senator
Padilla.
and then.
OK, thank you. Um, first of all,
Secretary, thank you for um
recognizing Doctor Amber Gallop.
Um, she's amazing. She's done
such great work.
Um, I've been working with her
on her adult literacy program,
um, I'm appalled to think that
we're number one in adult
illiteracy in the nation and
that speaks to what you just
said, Secretary Black, we have
got to raise families in New
Mexico out of poverty and in
order for us to meet all these
goals, to have alignment in the
vision that you're talking about
for our state. I think it really
starts with adult literacy and
even when we look at our
education, our public education
system.
And teaching children how to
read, how to count, if mom and
dad are not educated at least
with basics, the fundamentals.
It makes that job that much
harder for our educators. Um, so
thank you for recognizing her.
Um, what would you say, and I, I
know that, um, Chairman Small
kind of touched on this a little
bit with some of his questions,
but what would you say is the
number one challenge currently
in engaging people in the
workforce.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasson,
when I, you know, once a year we
bring in all of our field staff
and I ask them this question,
uh, because I feel like they,
they know their communities
pretty well, and they will tell
you that it is housing
instability, um, lack of
transportation.
Substance abuse and domestic
violence.
And I doubt anybody is even a
little bit surprised um at that
answer, but that is what they
will say when they lose contact
with that person who finally got
up the courage and the energy to
come into the office and ask for
help. Those are the reasons that
they never come back, and so,
um, you know, it is a um perhaps
not a, a statistically uh
relevant uh observation, but I,
I do believe our, our people in
community when they say that's
what they see.
Thank you for that and Mr.
Chair, I would say that that's
another one of those
fundamentals that I think as a
community, as a state, as
legislators, we're going to have
to have at times some
uncomfortable conversations
around what are the fixes.
And I think there's going to be
a lot of layers to that, um, and
somewhere in the middle is gonna
be that sweet spot that we can
all feel good about where we can
see the outcomes that, that we
need to have so desperately. So
thank you for that, um,
Secretary Black, um, you know, I
was a huge proponent of the
trade ports. I'm so thrilled
that we're moving forward with
that. Um, so I have a few
questions. What are the main
trades or certifications that
you anticipate are needed for
those trade ports in what time
frame will we need them?
And will we have the workforce?
Mr. Chairman, thank you,
Senator. Thank you for the
question. Um, I think
My hope is it's actually quite
diverse.
Um, because part of what we want
to do, we, we're hearing from
folks who are interested in the
trade ports is a lot of that we,
we talked about CDL, that's
gonna be an important moving,
moving goods and equipment, the,
the forklift up the, the heavy
equipment operators are going to
be important.
Um
We're talking about the need for
refrigeration as a key component
for trades and, and moving
goods. So a refrigeration HVAC.
So I think most of your skilled
trades are gonna be aspects that
are going to be very important.
Um
This legislature has made
unprecedented investments in uh
CTE development, career
technical education, um, and I
think as long as we stay that
course.
Uh, and as long as we keep, and
here's the other thing that is
really important. It's when you
have gaps that you lose your
workforce. So, um,
Especially for construction and
those sort of jobs, hopefully
with the trade port piece you
get a grounding where
The skilled trades can go home
every night at the same place.
If you were building
Large
Wind farms, you're building, um,
A large manufacturing site off,
you know, in, in a, in a rural
area. It's often that those
workers are are going back and
forth.
Um, if we can ground them in one
place, it allows them to build
that.
Community, stay local. So I
think that's one of the benefits
of building out these sort of
infrastructure investments that
are local that allow us to keep
a skilled trade force here in
New Mexico where we're not
dependent on individuals coming
from Texas or Colorado or other
places to fill those jobs. So I
think it's really going to be a
lot of the skilled trades that,
that are, they're gonna be
there. Um, but I am optimistic
because of the work that
Secretary Nneer is doing, that
the work that the legislature
has done and the unpre
in ated amount of investments in
CTE and workforce training that
we will have a workforce to
execute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Secretary for that. So
really what you're talking about
is, is building an ecosystem
around these, these ports and um
that's exciting because that,
that's more than just those
workers. It's a whole new
community centered around um
those ports. Um, and I will just
give you a, a hint on finding
workers, especially for the
heavy equipment. If you remember
some of my, uh, somewhat jokes
in a Senate Finance during this
session are senior attorneys
that work in our city
counties make less than our
heavy equipment, um, workers, so
they may be willing to have a
career change and an increase in
pay, just an idea for you. Thank
you so much.
Thank you very much, Senator
Tobiasson. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you to the
presenters. I always love
hearing from you guys. Uh, my
questions are gonna be focused
on economic development. I
thoroughly enjoyed, uh, working
with you, Mr. Secretary, and
your team on the utility
readiness and the site
readiness, and, um, so those are
the questions that I have today.
So onsite readiness, I heard you
speak of 28 sites, and you said
there are others and you have a
vendor that's gonna come and
help you with that kind of stuff
and how do you get your property
on that or your site on that
list to be analyzed in part of
the overall database.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, great
question. So the 28 sites were
sites that our team went out
last year to and talk, and they
were all public sites. So these
were all county, city, uh,
public lands.
Uh, our field teams solicited
those uh jurisdictions to apply
if they had sites that had 50
acres or more contiguous.
And were zoned industrial or
could be zoned industrial, cause
that's really where our focus
is, because that's the type of
job creation we're focused with
site readiness. And um
So that's what was really that
kind of grassroots outreach. Uh,
this next round, uh,
Private sector also has the
opportunity. So we did it, we've
we've communicated through our
channels again through our
teams, but we're also doing very
direct outreach. I have sent
individual letters to every
governor of every tribe, Pueblo,
a nation in New Mexico.
In the last two weeks, I've been
to the Za Pueblo and the Piccari
Pueblo, having conversations
with the governors there, uh,
because I want to be proactive
and soliciting their engagement
with the site readiness program.
Um, and this will be an ongoing
evergreen project. So we have a
contract for this, uh,
consultant for 4 years. So as
sites continue to open up, or
they do, they're ready to be
developed. They can apply and we
can send folks out to, to review
the.
those sites. So it's an ongoing
outreach, but I encourage, if
you have uh sites in your, uh,
communities in your districts, I
would absolutely encourage you
to work with us to get them to
see if they're willing to have
us.
Do that site characterization
work.
Uh, thank you, Chairman.
Excellent, Mr. Secretary. I'm
glad to hear all that. I just
hope that we're, we're sort of
proactively ahead of the curve
and really reaching out to
people to to get this thing as
robust as possible. And, and I
guess my next question really is
just gonna be, are you gonna uh
have this in a, in a public
facing website that I'm over
there in Tuscaloosa somewhere,
and I, I really want to open up
this underwater basket weaving
manufacturing, you know,
widgette, whatever factory, um.
Do I just go to the database,
type in all of my
characteristics and say, oh,
there's 17 places. I can do that
in New Mexico or how, how's that
gonna work?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, that's
exactly how it's going to work.
Uh, we will have an interactive,
uh, interactive dashboard that
lists all the sites that have
been that applied through our
program that we have been
characterized as strategic
economic development sites, a
developer will be able to see
what the power is to that site,
what access to water, natural
gas, all the characteristics for
development. What are its,
what's it's best used for?
What's its transportation
infrastructure currently or what
it needs to be.
All of that will be available on
our website in real time, and we
will use that to market those
sites to businesses around the
US and around the world so that
not only are we helping provide
that, that because of the
legislature able to provide that
service to do that site
characterization. We'll also be
there to market that on behalf
of the state and and those
landowners. And so, Chair, what
if I really love that particular
site because of its location,
but it needs, uh, water.
Is the site, your, your, your
searchable website or whatever,
is it going to say that? Or is
it just gonna disqualify a site
from being on the list. I, I
don't know how else to put it,
you know, that, yeah.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh, it
will, it'll, it'll say that. So
it will list the, it'll
characterize the site. Um, and
part of what that will do for
you as legislators and those who
appropriate
Capital outlay.
We're gonna give you the most
efficient pathway to make
investments in your community
for economic development
purposes. So we will tell you
where you've got potential
industrial sites. If you add
water, if you add broadband to
this site, you've now made it
much more competitive to its
peers, uh, in the state or
nationally. So you'll have all
of that information, and I think
it's, from my perspective, as
you think about capital outlay
and potential capital outlay
reform, we're gonna give you a
pathway to efficiently spend
those dollars on.
key infrastructure in your
community.
OK, that's great. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I just kind of a
la Dixon and Padilla our, our
show that we do every year. So
the OEA is also, is it, is, are
the, is the site gonna also
publicize, you know, it might
not have everything you need,
but hey, by the way, there's
this whole other program in New
Mexico that helps you get that
site exactly how you want it to
be from a, a utility standpoint
for commercialization.
Senator, that's a great point,
and yes, that will be part of
the, the, the marketing. But the
other part that I should have
mentioned is there is $24
million.
That this legislature put into
the site readiness fund. So $8
million a year for 3 years, that
is specifically designed to be
deployed to help those sites
become more ready. So once we
have our site readiness, uh,
advisory council up, uh, once
we've certified a site as an
economic strategic economic
development site, they will be
able to apply for funds for
water, for uh broadband, for
environmental review so that we
can again assist those
communities.
uh, with getting those sites
more ready.
Wonderful. And then my last
question, chair, is just along
the lines of the utility
readiness. I think it's probably
the one that I have the most
sort of like worry about, um, on
a scale of 1 to 10,
Um, how likely are we to get
that rocking and rolling within.
The time that you still have for
the at the moment. Maybe you are
taken into another
administration and maybe both of
you because you're so wonderful,
both of you, but I'm I'm very
concerned about starting things
and then how are we going to
start all over again in 18
months. Mr. Senator, uh, to not
to quote, but I will quote, uh,
a movie. This one goes to 11.
Uh, we will be
We've already got an application
in.
And I've already spoken with the
other two investor owned
utilities who are planning to
apply within the next month. My
hope is that we start getting
some
Co-ops as well.
But the IOUs are very interested
in this program. So I
Uh, again, we, we're reviewing
a, a program, literally June
20th was or yes, June 20th was
the first official day that that
because it didn't have a budget
component, that statute was in
law. I got an application that
day. That's how excited the IOUs
are for this program. Now, we're
going to review it and it might
not be, we, we'll see if it's
appropriate, you know,
application. But I'm excited by
the interest that we're hearing.
So, I absolutely believe that
come this time next year, there
will be multiple sites uh going
through that PRC process, um,
that, that you helped establish.
Thank you, Chair. Let's just
hope the PRC feels the same way
you do and the way I do, uh,
outstanding work to both
everyone doing all this work.
It's, I, I really, on a weekly
basis, I am asked about these
two pieces that we did together,
and so I'm just very proud of
that work and I, you should be
very proud of it too, and your
team. Thanks. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Senator Padilla. Uh, great
questions, members. Uh, I'm
gonna ask sort of one last one,
and really, really want to say a
big thank you and a good job to
the members. Um.
So, uh, secretaries and also for
um our analysts, um,
Uh, the, uh, an evaluator,
sorry,
the, uh, so we'll see you again
probably, you know, November,
say, um, what are say 3 action
items and this is, again, we
wanna hear from the LFC as well.
What are 3 or 4 action items
that we're gonna be evaluating
and talking about then items
that you'll wanna share from,
from your end, uh, as we, you
know,
go into crafting this next
budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, uh,
I think the big asterisk for us
is what's gonna happen with
federal funding. Um, my
department is 90% federal
funded. So as you watch, uh, in
the, the uh proposed cuts to uh
the workforce system are pretty
extreme. Um, the current federal
budget proposal eliminates uh
Wagner Peiser, which I call the
big front door to the workforce
system, Title 3, it eliminates
adult education, um, which, of
course, we all love Italy.
el im in ate s AmeriCorps and
Job Corps, and then rolls all
the other programs together and
cuts them by 33%. Now, is that
actually gonna happen, your
guess is as good as mine or
maybe a little better, but, uh,
that would be our first priority
and um
You know, I've had some good
conversations with uh the
members here about, we're not
gonna ask for anything that
doesn't work. I think those were
your words, chairman, um, so,
you know, there could be an
opportunity here to do the great
work that we're doing for um
less overhead with less rules
with an easier way for people to
access it, but that would be
our, our number one. the one
that I think is most likely to
totally be gone as AmeriCorps
and I think um we have
AmeriCorps service members, uh,
here in the
Committee, uh, Senator Trujillo
and uh that is an amazing
program that again we are just
trying to make more career
connected. We're trying to keep
those people in New Mexico, so
that's the one that I would also
expect, and then, uh, you've
heard me talk about
pre-apprenticeship for so long,
and that continues to be one
time money, um, whatever data
you want us to bring, we will
bring it. We believe in this
program. It's the brainchild of
my deputy who's here today, Mar
Marcos Martinez, and um, you
know, to, to honor.
is uh 30 year legacy at this
department. I'm gonna make a
hard push to make that money
recurring, so you can expect to
hear that too.
Mr. Chairman, I think, um,
My hope is, is that we're going
to have a very productive fall.
Um, so there will be a lot of
positive things to talk about.
Um,
Regarding the key areas that
we've been focused on as a
state. I
We're really trying to be
intentional about where we're
making bets, but we are
We're making investments about
where we believe we are uniquely
competitive as a state.
And if you think about what that
is,
And the combination with our
national laboratories, it's
advanced energy, advanced
computing, and things that blow
things up.
When
Fission fusion, and fracking
were all invented in New Mexico.
And how are we
Holding those technologies here
to grow our economy to benefit
our citizens to power our state.
And we were very excited about
the announcement of Pacific
Fusion last week and their
interest in building their R&D
facilities here.
Um, you know, that technology
started with the Z machine in
the 1960s at Sandia National
Labs.
Um, we still have the companies
that built that, that
technology, built that the
actual facility.
They still build and partner
with Sandia. Nobody else has
that kind of construction
capacity around the world.
So we have some unique
opportunities. So, uh, the, the,
let's keep, let's keep the those
investments so that we don't
have gaps. So that would be one.
part of those announcements that
we see coming.
are going to be important
opportunities for Lita and JT.
Um, while we greatly appreciate
the investments and trust of the
Legislature and the new programs
that we have.
Lita and JTip are two of our
most successful long-run
programs and neither of those
funds received any dollars this
last session.
So I would ask that we consider
those because I think
Uh, we're going to need those
investments if we are going to
close those deals going forward.
Um, so those are really the key,
key components for us. I, we,
but forestry was also mentioned.
I think forestry.
An outdoor recreation are two
areas that
On a rural side are really,
really important as we think
about how we don't just focus on
the corridor, the Rio Grande
corridor. Um, and I'll share a
very quick story with you,
Senator or representative
because I think it's, it speaks
And Silver City last week for an
outdoor wreck, uh, facility at
the waterworks in Silver City.
On Friday or Saturday, I was in
Picaris Pueblo for a ribbon
cutting for a bike, a mountain
bike trail.
That is world class.
That, uh, our outdoor recreation
department put $500,000 into the
tribe found another $200,000.
And it is, um,
There were people from Europe.
Kansas, Colorado, Arizona,
California at this ribbon
cutting, saying this is one of
the best parks, public parks.
In the world.
Because most of those sort of
parks where you and these are
the X Games type. We were
watching kids flip flips.
In the air on bicycles.
That they built at this, at this
on the pueblo.
They also have a bump track. So
a bump track is, it's, it's a
mold bunch of moguls kind of
thing, and it's, you get on your
bike and you never pedal, you
don't have brakes, which
I am not doing that. But these
kids were doing it, and one of
them was 5 years old doing this.
But it's the largest Red Bull
certified bump track in New
Mexico on the, on the Pueblo.
It is going to drive
A lot of people to that
community.
A lot of people with 810 $12,000
dollar bicycles.
And they've created a hub. Now
you tie that in with angioar
which has a similar type of
infrastructure.
Uh, the potential of doing
something in Santa Fe. Socorro's
looking to do something. Can we
do it at Sandia Park or Sandia.
The, the ski slope. All of a
sudden, you start creating a
real economic drama.
And I think those sort of
investments when we think about
rural New Mexico and how we want
to get people outdoors and the
values that those gov the
governor and lieutenant governor
talked about from the tribe.
They wanted to get their kids
something to do during COVID.
What they've built there, they
have an indoor swimming pool,
climbing wall.
Trampoline park.
Skate park, the bump track, and
now this world class, uh,
Mountain biking trail. They're
gonna have, it's, it's, they're
creating economic wealth for
Northern, northwestern New
Mexico or northeastern New
Mexico, and I think if where we
can play a role in helping
support that sort of innovation,
that would be really exciting to
me.
Great. Thank, thank you both
very much. And unless any final
thoughts.
I
Mr. Chair, on the workforce
side, what I might offer is to
the secretary's point, you know,
there is potential change at the
federal level related to
workforce. At the same time, you
all have made some pretty
significant investments in
non-recurring in programs funded
through the state. There are now
several years in and so really
thinking about what are the
outcomes those programs are
currently producing, not just
number of participants, but how
are they, how are they
experiencing outcomes related to
either engagement in the
workforce, uh, or attraction.
too, and how does that kind of
compare to some of our status
quo programs, as you all may
face kind of prioritization
around workforce investment
going forward. And then the
second one I would offer is um
Uh, maybe some planning around
the community benefit fund, the
secretary alluded to some
different ways the agency might
plan to use those funds, you
know, they were appropriated
against it also a changing um
federal landscape and so when
when opportunity kind of as the,
the fiscal year moves forward is
um planning around the community
benefit fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and I'll add to
that for the economic
development side, um, kind of
tying to what Senator Trujillo
was saying, you know, tracking
employment growth in those
sectors, but comparing it to uh
the national changes, so really
understanding is New Mexico
actually growing.
Faster, stronger than what the
the national averages are doing,
um, and those are specifically
for those target sectors, um,
Going a little bit to like the,
you know, forestry and what
Representative Vincent was
saying, you know, looking at the
breakdown of those jobs, um,
by like rule versus urban New
Mexico, um, just because we know
that a job created in some of
these rural communities has a
bigger impact on employment
compared to just like when we're
thinking about the I-25
corridor, um.
And then another point and
Secretary Black was
Mentioning this, um, you know,
there are ways that we can
actually track how much or how
New Mexico's per capita is
increasing. We know that data
and we can also see like if, you
know, if we did want to improve
from like the 46 to the 43rd
let's say, like we can see that
number and that's like a very
clear number. Um, so those are
the three things that I would
add, and then just general like
community benefit fund how EDD
is gonna plan to use their
funds. Great. OK, thank you all
very much, uh, secretaries, uh,
made a great job.
We're gonna wrap that portion
and now I think it's on to some
wonderful refreshments and I'm
very exciting tour. Uh, please
talk us through how
Do we wanna take a couple of
minutes or do we wanna dive
right into the tours?
Go
