Hey Bob, can you hear me?
Bob.
At 39 and 23% respectively. I
think what I'll highlight here
is that when it comes to the
percent of residents that are
enrolled in this program. New
One.
for both Medicaid and SNAP. And
so any changes to those two
programs in particular.
compared to other states has a
disproportionately larger impact
here because many of our
neighbors and colleagues depend
on these programs.
Um, so if you go to page 4, I
was asked to talk a little bit
about what shapes health
outcomes, what shapes health
disparities, and on page 4, you
can see on the right hand side,
the key drivers of long term
intergenerational poverty, and
these have been identified by
the National Academies of
Science, Engineering and
Medicine.
At the Healthcare Authority
we can move the needle on, we
can move the needle on several
of these drivers, like child and
parental health, um, family
income, wealth, parental
employment, but we can't move
the needle on all of them. And
that's where I'm grateful to you
all as the legislature for the
more macro level look you all
have and being able to shape all
these other drivers that you see
here.
um
you know
when I'll talk about it in the
next slide, but the family
income and wealth and parental
employment is particularly
important because of the
healthcare authority.
We're here for New Mexicans when
they need our support, but as
you can see on page 5, and I
know, I know these are, um, a
little
these graphs can be a little
confusing, so I'll, um, what I
wanted to highlight is that
though the healthcare authority
is here for New Mexicans when
they need financial support when
they need healthcare coverage
access, um, I would say to all
of you that increase inequality,
and particularly stagnant wages
for lower income workers over
the past 40 years is the
persistent factor in the
promotion of intergenerational
poverty. And these two graphs on
the slide help to illustrate
that. And so on the left,
basically what this is saying is
that if you're born in 1940,
you had a 93% chance of having a
higher income than your parent.
If you fast forward to 1980,
that dropped to 57%.
Um, and it continues to drop
even further, um, on the right
hand side of the map, the, the
areas that are shaded in blue
are counties in which children
will grow up and reach um a
higher level income as compared
to their parents. And so you can
see in New Mexico, there are a
couple of counties that have
that, but by and large the state
as a whole, um,
there's
it's, it's difficult for the
persistence of that
intergenerational poverty across
families remains.
So I, I wanted to frame what I'm
about to say, like the rest of
my presentation in that context,
because on page 6, despite the
persistent inequality.
childhood poverty in New Mexico
is declining
and it is declining in large
part because of investments in
large part of those supported by
all of you here in New Mexico's
safety net services and
programs.
Um
child poverty, when you think of
the time period, 1993 to 2019,
child poverty across the country
fell by 59%. It fell in every
state, including in New Mexico.
It fell from 31.5% in 1993 to
10% in 2020. I'm one of those
kiddos in that cohort. I was on
Medicaid and SNAP as a kid. It's
part of why I do what I do
today.
um
uh, you know, more recent
investments in the Safety net
program, um, data from the US
census came out last year, have
shown that these safety net
programs have reduced the child
poverty from us being among the
highest in the country.
Um, we're down to 17th in the
country and so it's at 8.9%, you
know, it's still not, I'm still
not satisfied with that, um, but
that is a significant decrease
in the experience of our kiddos,
um.
I will talk about this a little
further, but the recent federal
changes, both in Congress and
the administration level are
likely to have adverse impacts
on that trend we're seeing.
Um,
on page 7,
what you see here is a map of
the social vulnerability index
by county.
New Mexico was one of the most
socially vulnerable states in
the country.
The social vulnerability index
is a measure by the CDC, the US
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
It's an evidence-based metric
that is used to calculate a
community's vulnerability to
stress, and that could be a
natural disaster. It could be a
public health event. Um, I, I'm
biased, but in my position as a
deputy secretary for the
Healthcare Authority, I would
couch these recent federal
changes as a future public
health event.
And so when I talk about um the
changes we will see in Congress
and the changes that we will
have to implement in the
healthcare authority. I ask you
to consider in mind, um, how
this event will create further
stress on our more socially
vulnerable communities in New
Mexico.
Um
over 60% of New Mexico counties
fall into the highest social
vulnerability index, Quartile as
evaluated by the CDC.
McKinley County, for example,
Donana and Bert and Leo are
among the top 5 most vulnerable
counties in the country.
Um, Ria Riva County is also
among the most vulnerable, um,
in the state. And when we think
about rural counties and rural
communities, particularly
Northwestern New Mexico,
southwestern New Mexico, um,
these areas tend to have higher
social vulnerability because of
the entrenched intergenerational
poverty, limited transportation,
um, a more limited healthcare
infrastructure, uh, compared to
their urban counterparts.
Uh.
OK, so on page 8,
um, I, if there's anything you
take away today, um, as it
relates to the changes at the
federal level. I really just
want to emphasize that
regardless of your healthcare
coverage provider, regardless if
you're on Snap
these changes affect every
single New Mexican.
These changes that are to come,
um, because Medicaid is the
largest payer of healthcare in
New Mexico currently as our
ability to
you know, reimburse providers,
reimburse health systems,
changes in the years to come.
It's possible that cost will be
passed through to people on
private insurance.
Um,
we think 6 to 8 rural hospitals
may close in the next 18 to 24
months because of the changes in
the Medicaid program.
Uh,
there will be an increase in
uninsured individuals, um, and
that will likely lead to higher
acuity.
higher cost, more crowded
emergency departments.
and, you know, we don't talk
about this too much, or we don't
emphasize it enough, I think at
the healthcare authority, but we
have over a billion dollars in
SNAP revenue that comes into the
state every year and that
supports 1700 New Mexico grocery
stores, farmers' markets, gas
stations, and convenience
stores. So in a community like
Terra Maria, that's that revenue
is very important, um.
On the right hand side, this is
a map that illustrates the
decrease, the percent decrease
in jobs. As a result of the
federal budget reconciliation
bill that passed Congress and
New Mexico ranks the highest in
the country. There is a
projected, um, decrease of jobs
in this state of 1.7%, and I
think that is one of the ways in
which we see
that social vulnerability in
action, like that's how you see
it, like operationalized, like
manifest itself, um, is an
economy's ability to sustain
itself when, you know, we are
fiscally year 25 budget is $15
billion.09 or 10 billion of that
is, I'm sorry, I think 12
billion of that's for Medicaid,
and we're anticipated to lose
probably $2 billion in revenue
and in the years to come.
So on page 9, just at a very
high level, the
these are the changes that were
enacted in the Federal
reconciliation bill.
um,
for the first time across the
country, there will be community
or work requirements for folks
enrolled in the Medicaid
program.
and an ability to attest to a
degree of working, um, it could
be schooling, volunteering, for
example.
Currently, folks on Medicaid and
SNAP only have to reapply for
benefits once a year.
Uh, the, the federal bill is now
requiring a twice yearly
redetermination
Um
certain folks, certain legal
residents who were eligible for
SNAP and Medicaid are no longer
eligible for those programs and
on number 4, there will be a
reduction in payments that we
can give to providers. So I'll
give you a, a specific example.
Um, thanks to your support as a
legislature, you all helped to
pass a healthcare delivery and
Access Act that provided over a
billion dollars of revenue,
additional revenue to New
Mexico's hospitals. Presbyterian
Espaniola, for example, has
received $24 million. Holy Cross
has received $19 million because
of this bill.
Um, calendar year 2028, unless
federal guidance changes or the
law changes, we will not be able
to continue the healthcare
delivery and Access Act in the
same way we're doing it today.
And so these hospitals will see
um
less revenue come in to sustain
their operations.
So on page 10
uh what does this mean? What do
all these changes mean for New
Mexico, um
over an almost 10-year period,
it means we're gonna lose $8.5
billion in federal Medicaid
revenue
We think 88,000 New Mexicans
will lose Medicaid coverage, um,
42,000 New Mexicans will likely
have copays. That's also for the
first time in the Medicaid
program.
um
and as I mentioned, the 6 to 8
rural hospitals may close. Um,
there's early estimates that we
could experience a 4% increase
in the number of New Mexicans
who are uninsured.
On page 11
um
the changes in staff on the
right hand side, you can see
just how the snap funding we
get, it's overall total impact
on the economy, including the
jobs it supports.
Um.
there for the first time, states
are going to be required
that the administrative funding
we get to run the program.
um
we're going to have to pay more
as a state for that, and
depending on our payment error
rate, um, we may have to pay
more. And I will say, um, we
have more time to improve our
payment error rate. We have a
couple of years potentially and
so
um, we are, that is one thing we
have in our control.
and we're gonna, you know, be
collaborative in how we work
together to do that. Um, other
snap changes include work
requirements, um, the twice
yearly eligibility and um just a
reduction in benefits for many
New Mexicans, which you can see
more on page 12, um,
every single person who gets
snapped say in New Mexico will
likely see a reduction in their
monthly SNAP benefit.
Uh
55,000 Mexicans will be subject
to work requirements as relates
to SNAP.
We think about 20,000 New
Mexicans, um, could lose their
SNAP benefits altogether. And
so, and this doesn't speak to
what we want to avoid, but you
know, we are worried about
individuals having difficulty
being able to provide twice a
year all the documentation
that's needed to prove that they
are still eligible for the
program.
Um, and then this is my last
slide, and I will be finished,
um, on slide 13.
the healthcare authority also
administers the healthcare
affordability fund. So this is
revenue that the state receives,
um, that
we received from insurers and
the healthcare affordability
Fund provides premium assistance
to individuals and small
businesses who get um their
health coverage through Bel New
Mexico, the health insurance
exchange.
Um, thanks to you all in
creating the Healthcare
Affordability Fund. If we didn't
have this fund, um,
there could have been between
23,000 and 38,000 New Mexicans
who would have lost their
marketplace coverage.
But because we have this fund,
and we're projecting a much
smaller number of New Mexicans,
but still we're projecting
between $3200 and 8600 New
Mexicans losing their
marketplace coverage because
there's the federal bill um
eliminates a lot of premium tax
credit assistance that these
folks get.
Um, and there's they're
shortening the open enrollment
window, and there's a couple
other administrative barriers.
So,
with that, um, happy to take any
questions and thank you for your
time today.
We'll, we'll do questions at the
end if you want to go to wake up
first.
Oh, there. OK
Here you go. Is that better? OK,
right.
OK, so let me just introduce
myself and usually when I make a
presentation, particularly
related to mental health, I'd
like to give a little history of
who I am, so that people will
connect my passion to what I do.
and what I believe
needs to be done in terms of
changes in the community.
Um
my name is Trinidad de
Jesoagueo, but actually my name
is Renida de Jesus de la Cruz.
I was born in Puerto Rico
I came to the United States when
I was, uh, my 5 or 6. I was
raised in Spanish Harlem in New
York City.
in 1969. I came out to New
Mexico to nursing school.
And my journey has brought me to
here.
I've, I've, um,
traveled, um, my husband and I
and my kids, we've traveled to
different states in the, in the
Northwest, southwest,
uh
uh, California and back to uh
back to Taos, where my husband
is 7th generation. Uh, I'm just
a foreigner.
I have 2 sons. My youngest son
is Joaquin that um you you're
aware of, and my oldest son,
he's an internal medicine at
UNM, uh, and I say that because
when we're looking at all of the
data that you're that that
you're just went over related to
poverty, you know, how can we
help our children go through a
healthy pathway
educational pathway, so that
they could come out um
healthy and uh and contribute to
society.
Um
I made a, a, uh, an introduction
here, um, and I'm, I'll try to
keep to it without diverting,
but the um used to uh doing
that, um, as you well know, I
sit at the board for the Holy
Cross Hospital, um, so my
background is in psychiatric
nursing as well as in mental
health clinical social worker,
where I got my PhD at the
University of Utah. Uh, we lived
in Utah for 9 years and living
in Utah, uh, taught me a lot of
things about the healthcare
system as
well as how you can uh implement
a healthcare system.
that really um
addresses the needs of the
community and really, really,
uh, um, practice healthy
communities and that I have not
seen in any other state that I
have been in. So when um.
when we're looking at our
current and future impact in the
healthcare services, behavioral
health, substance abuse, misuse
in this northern region of, um,
New Mexico, and we're looking at
the Medicare Medicare cuts, um.
how, how does that look for us.
Right now, we're doing OK, but
in the future, because we know
that that wonderful bill that
was signed, it's gonna get here,
OK? Um
even though that bill has not
gotten here, as a mental health,
uh, nurse practitioner, um,
I have become very aware of this
house services are delivered.
Um, and I wanna share two
examples because it is very
important that we understand,
particularly, um, the impact of
limited healthcare services to
people with severe mental
illness and those uh individuals
who have addiction problems. And
in our lives
a lot of times uh we tend to
ignore that, but I'm pretty sure
that all of us know someone.
if not in our family
but someone that we know that
either has a severe mental
illness or if not an addiction
problem.
And what does that do to that
individual and what does that do
to the community?
Back in 200 and 5. I submitted a
grant uh to the state.
uh to what is now the House
Authority.
Um, uh, to get funding for uh an
ACT program, which is the uh uh
assertive treatment program for
people with severe mental
illness, which is a 24
wraparound service uh for these
individuals.
Um, I rented for 5 years, um,
and then I had to leave, uh,
once the, uh, nonprofit
imploded.
but
there was one individual, uh,
that
was closest to her heart, um.
His name was Monty and Monty,
everyone knew Monty and Taos.
Monty would hitchhike, and he
would hitchhike with a purchased
refrigerator.
where I purchase washer right
there in the road.
and people would just pick him
up and take him home.
That's how Monty was and that's
how well people knew Monty.
Um, unfortunately, Monty's, um,
mental health, um.
increased mental health status
increased as well as his alcohol
use, which made it even worse
for him, which made it even
worse for people to wanting to
take care of him.
Uh, he developed real poor
communication and that really um
angered people that he
communicated with as well as
angered him because people were
not uh helping him how he wanted
to.
The Lord in the the short and
the long of this was the, uh,
Monty became homeless, um, and
last Christmas, um, they found
frozen to death in front, not,
he didn't die then, but they
found him frozen in front of
Albertsons.
And um as
as a professional
um, healthcare provider, we, uh,
have an, uh, a code of ethics
that we do not give our
telephone information to our
clients know that we allow them
to contact us.
Well
guess who broke that code
Monty. You will call me at the
house. And I go, OK.
should I completely deny
his calls
Oh, how should I handle this
I did not deny his calls. So
there's always some great areas.
Um, so Monty would just call me
to let me know what he was
doing, and I would just want to
know whether he was on
medication, how he was doing and
stuff like that.
Uh, but then he stopped calling
and that's when he really went
downhill. And when, uh, then his
brother called me and his mother
told me about um his uh incident
of being found in front of
Alberts and Frozen. Uh, he was
taken to Holy Cross Hospital,
the emergency room, and from
the, excuse me, from there he
was transported to uh an
inpatient facility in
Albuquerque, and 2 weeks later,
he passed.
Um, it really hit us a lot in
the community, his passing and
how he passed. Um, he was black
bull from the provider services
in the town of Taos.
OK? And this is why I'm bringing
this
uh upfront because um
one of the things
that we know is that people do
not understand people with
severe mental illness.
and um knowing, uh, and I've
worked with the this type of
population is it becomes very
difficult for the family to also
hang in there to provide
services because they burn out
as stressful.
Um, so it's understandable. But
when the providers
refuse to provide services to
them. That's not OK. And so, um,
we had a memorial for him this,
uh, uh, a month or two ago.
And I learned, uh what I did not
know about Monty.
His parents had transitioned
from Switzerland to Brooklyn,
New York.
and in 1948, the uh transitioned
to Taos, New Mexico. I did not
know he was a born Tulseno.
Um,
and, um.
it was just interesting to meet
his family, his grand-grand
nieces, nephews.
and here a lot of story about
Monty.
Uh, uh, so I'm gonna just stop
there about him, but because I
also want to give you another uh
little history of another
person, so that you can
understand when, when I continue
talking about mental health
services and uh as well as the
need for the support for
hospitals and particularly in
the rural com in the rural
communities, why is it so
important? We have a, uh, um,
and she's still alive. We have a
female who it's also a long term
generational from Taos.
I mean she was uh she was a
cheerleader in high school.
Everybody knows her. OK. Um
but she also had her, um, a
breakdown.
And with her breakdown, uh, then
she started using the nice
little what they call fentanyl,
which is not fentanyl. All this,
uh, powdered drugs in the
community. And so where does,
where does she land in, where
does she cycle in and out, just
as Monty, at the jail.
OK.
Um
She lands up at the jail, um, I
was working at the jail of one
time as a mental health
provider, and I will go, OK, so
what are these people doing
here?
They will be there for 67
months.
locked up 24/7
because no, there won't, there
isn't a hospital?
in the northern area that will
take these people away.
They get stabilized at the
emergency room of the hospital,
or they get stabilized at the
gel.
And once they are stabilized,
once they go through the court
process, then this.
discharge back to the community
without any follow up.
So then in a month's time
they're back.
if they don't die
OK. Uh, so these are the two out
of many individuals, uh, that I
just want to bring to the
foreground because when we're
looking at the behavioral
system.
in New Mexico, it is broken.
And families and uh people who
need the services know that
better than any one of us.
I go to a lot of meetings and
people tend and that's uh one of
the reasons I don't have, uh,
you know, uh, numbers,
percentages.
OK
Providers tend to put out
numbers out there in very nice
numbers.
But in reality, what does those
numbers project?
When we are the ones that are
providing the services. When
we're seeing what they're going
through.
So the system is broken, we have
to do something about it. Now,
saying that, how are we gonna be
able to fix it.
when Medicaid, Medicare
fundings.
are taken away from us
We're lucky we have the
hospital, but what's gonna
happen when those cuts hit?
How many hospitals have already
shut down in New Mexico.
How many more are we going to
lose
And I'm talking about the rural
communities. We lose Holy Cross
Medical Center.
I was gonna use a real famous
word, but I'm going to bite my
tongue. We're gonna be.
we're gonna be in the deep
OK. Um
where are the people going to go
for healthcare?
for mental health care
If you have ever lived out in
this part of the, like we were
driving over here, who were
saying, my God, whether these
people get healthcare around
here.
OK
What people in Taos uh uh Questa
Penasco to be able to access
healthcare or mental health
care. They have to drive all the
way down to Santa Fe.
And if there is a bed available,
they have to go to Quesa, they
have to go to um, um, Masila
Valley.
for inpatient
So what are some of the things
that impact how we um
the reasons why at times we do
not support
the need
for uh the funding for these
facilities.
is what we, when we look at the
stigma behind.
people with mental illness and
those individuals that have
addiction problems. And we say,
well,
it's not happening to us
Well, unfortunately, and I
always say this when it comes
knocking at your door and you're
not ready for it.
you're gonna have a big mess in
your hands
So
I want to give you a definition
of what is stigma.
How do we address the secrecy
and shame link linked to the
mental health and substance
abuse use and misuse to
normalize how we accept and
communicate our emotional
reactions in order to develop
trust with community members
that can lead to acceptance
without shame.
in
a assist them to engage in
recovery and well-being for them
and their family members.
And there are many different
ways of stigmatizing people, um,
and I have seen it myself, um,
it's not easy.
um to develop relationships and
communicate with individuals who
are in a psychotic state.
I have been hidden
I have been poured
water, coffee.
I've been coldcocked
Um
but I've never brought charges
because understanding
um the behaviors, understanding
the way the brain functions is
very important for us to be
able.
uh to address the issue
Um
so
when we have a perception and
the community on um folks who
have these type of uh behaviors,
uh, it does, it does them harm,
more harm than good.
because then we do not
prioritize
the funding that is needed
for the healthcare and mental
health care for these
individuals. Um
the one of the, the female, uh,
patient that I was talking
about. We had to hold her at the
jail for 7 months before what
we, what was called before Las
Vegas, um, hospital in Las
Vegas, New Mexico. Before they
approved to even have her there.
And we had to go through the
court.
We had to have the judge
force them to take her in. And
we had this 7 months, 78 months,
and she went they admitted her,
she was there for 5 months.
She came out.
She was beautiful
She was great
but then the munch is back in
jail
I go, what happened
She went back
to all lifestyle
She didn't have any type of
support, no type of uh treatment
coordination.
And so she went back to old
habits, and this is a continuous
cycle for a lot of our community
members.
And it's very, very painful to
see that. And I, I say that
because as a provider, uh, it
becomes very, very painful for
me to see.
Knowing, uh
the ability that individuals can
function and contribute to the
community.
When there aren't the resources.
that they need. And as we know,
New Mexico as a whole is
underresourced. But in the
northern part of the state.
is way underresourced.
and way underserved
When you were talking about the,
the Northeast and the Northwest.
I was just sitting here and say,
OK, let's see. What about North
Central? That, OK.
That's an area that's not talked
about either.
And we are
we have huge lack of resources.
When the Medicaid funding is cut
and the Medicare funding is cut.
What do you think is going to
happen to all of those nice
providers who are for profit.
You think they're gonna say
They're not gonna stay
It's gonna impact the emergency
room staff.
because a lot of the, the lot of
the clients are gonna be taken
to the emergency room by law
enforcement or their families.
They're going to cycle into the
jail.
and that's going to put a burden
on the jail staff.
So what are we going to do
We
the incident of suicide is gonna
increase.
Uh, incidents of healthcare, um.
need to go to increased.
Hopefully that Holy Cross
Medical Center.
does not join one of the uh
hospitals and institutions that
were closed because of lack of
adequate funding.
We think about that, we talk
about that.
And a lot of us are fearful
What, what are we going to do
Who's going to come to rescue us
Particularly the elderly
You know, transportation is a
huge issue. Um,
how do people going to be able
to get the uh the care that
they're gonna need.
Particularly if they have their
son or grandson in the jail.
I have a uh
what
I do this
I'm sorry, I'm looking for,
yeah.
This is a sheet
It's uh it's confidential. It's
no, uh, no, no names here.
But these are the sheets
the
2022
of all the young folks in the
jail.
I total 131.
out of those 13199 were
Hispanic?
91 Native American.
21 Caucasian, and 3, black
Americans.
ranging from
21 years of age.
19
the oldest, 45.
So what's happening to our young
people?
And this is gonna get worse
So
how can we combat all these uh
challenges in our rural
communities.
How can we, um,
build a path for these young
people, um.
to go through the educational
system and a professional place
in life versus.
incarceration
because we are losing our young
people. I do the mental health
evaluations for the court.
And um
it's really interesting to sit
and listen.
to the path that these
individuals had taken.
from elementary school to junior
high school to high school. A
lot of them do not finish high
school.
because of their criminal
justice involvement.
A lot of them comes from family
that have problems with
addiction.
When we look at um
a lot of the intergenerational
families in the northern part of
the state, um.
I don't know what's going to
happen.
to the families, because there's
no one left to take care of them
or their family or their land.
So what
I experience of New Mexico and
northern New Mexico in 1969,
19170s when I came here, it's no
longer does no longer exist.
So I'm making this plea to you
to really
uh look at um
Will you understand these
changes.
One of the things that I have
been doing aside from my mental
health, um, for the past 7
years. I've been um
doing community health workers
training.
My nonprofit is uh certified by
the Department of Health, uh, to
do the trainings. And I do it,
uh, I do hybrid, um.
I do in-person and uh in
virtual.
And I get folks from across the
state, um
a lot of times they they drive
up to Taos to come to the uh
trainings.
I get people from the uh tribal.
areas
And why is that?
When you look at uh services,
whether it's health services,
mental health service, substance
abuse services.
Um
I had, let me give you an
example. I had a client come to
uh come to uh to my office for
help.
And during the time that she was
there, she was crying.
And she told me,
I was not going to come to see
you
And I
ask her why not? and she said,
Because I went to a a provider,
medical provider.
And I was expecting that person
to help me understand whether I
had.
and
um there's a term in Taos.
uh, if you, if you're from the
area from up here that you could
understand. I, she was a
Telania.
OK.
And um, and she told me, she
said.
I asked this doctor to explain
to me what she was saying.
and she told me, I'm not here to
educate you about what I'm, what
I'm.
communicating to you. I'm just
telling you.
what the results are, right?
She said, I didn't understand
what she was telling me.
So when we're looking at
providers from that level of
education and experience. And
they are unable to communicate
to our community members.
Community health workers are
that navigator.
that link
If we're really looking at how
to make our communities healthy
earth.
Community health workers are
from the community. They know
the community. They could
communicate to the community. A
lot of the providers we get are
not from our community.
Understanding the whys behind
it. And one of the things that I
tell people, um, when I talk
about this is when I, when we
moved to Utah,
that was the first time I ever
really got to talk about
Mormons.
I didn't know who they were
And my, one of my concerns was,
oh,
and I'm gonna get accepted am I
ever gonna get a job there?
We were there for 9 years.
And by the time I left, I was in
an administrative position.
in one of the uh mental health
uh services.
And they did not want me to
leave. When I submitted my
resignation because we were
moving to California. They asked
me, the executive director
called me, said, uh Trinidad,
why are you leaving? And I go,
oh, my husband got offered a
position in San Jose State. And
he said, 00, he goes, you stay.
We want you. And like I said, I
wonder why they want me to stay,
but.
that to me told me a lot.
That to me told me that how I
was providing the services to
the community was something that
was being acceptable. I was not
judging them.
from their church, uh,
religious, uh, beliefs.
I was.
helping them as the individuals
they were. And a lot of times we
have to ask ourselves, how do we
penetrate a community to provide
the services to the community
members when we're not from the
community.
And that's the same thing I do
in Northern New Mexico, or in
New Mexico, totally. I'm not
from here.
I do not go sane
I know more than you
No, I want to know about your
community. I want to know how
you, how you, you'll deal with
this type of situation.
so that I can help you
And the community health workers
are the ones that are able to do
that. Understanding that the
providers don't have the time at
a lot of times, particularly
with the demands of the
healthcare system, the
reimbursement.
15 minutes and that's it you
have for to uh to have a a a
session with a client for
behavioral health, mental
health, the hell are you gonna
find out what's wrong with the
person in 15 minutes.
But that's a limited time
And if you have ever done any
contact with someone, uh, that
has mental health uh issues. 15
minutes is not gonna get you
anything.
My
they might flip the table on
you.
That's about it
But anyway, so when we're
looking at, you know, how can we
really address the uh the health
and behavioral health um
problems that we confront in our
communities and the community
members. Uh, one of the ways is,
uh, the implementation and
increase of of the community
health workers.
and community health workers'
roles, um, they'll, they have 4
different roles that they could
specialize in.
That's why our saving graces
right now.
Uh,
because of the demands, uh, that
the health, uh healthcare system
has, and the issue of the
reimbursement.
I really, I really, uh, uh, am
concerned about our providers,
our facilities
uh, particularly the, the
hospitals.
uh when these cuts come down.
How are we gonna survive
Do we have uh enough helicopters
to be flying us.
to the major hospital
We don't have transportation
So anyway, um.
so I'm gonna be closing with um
what approaches can rural
communities take to meet. These
identify challenges in providing
mental health services as well
the healthcare services.
You know, what are those
approaches that we can?
Um, one of those approaches that
I
really support
and understanding the whys
behind it.
is the need to develop
collaboration among the
providers.
The way that the finances are,
um.
implemented uh for providers to
get the financial uh
resources they need to do their
jobs is very challenging.
And what it does is pit one
provider against the other.
So we all functions in silos.
We don't want to tell you where
I get my funding from because
you'll apply for it and you take
it away from me.
which then uh makes um.
the provision of healthcare
services and the health care
services very difficult. I know
someone was asking about detox,
uh, and, um, hopefully, um.
the detox center. I worked there
one time as the director.
Hopefully the detox center will
open soon.
we're hoping
I cannot give any more than
that. But that's something that
is highly needed.
Again, a lot of the the
detoxification of an alcohol and
drugs is done at the jails.
and they get detox and they go
back out into the community.
Who guess who's waiting for them
out there?
Have had several young folks who
have been released and within a
week, uh, here that they have
passed away.
So,
um, yeah.
we need to look at very uh
various ways to approach the
challenges that we have in our
community.
and the challenges that we are
going to face in the next 2 or 3
years.
I would hate to see our towns
become ghost towns.
but that
if we do not come together.
to support our communities
So what we need also is to call
out for a standard of care
services in our communities.
that will provide continuum of
crisis services.
that will end the revolving door
of the emergency room visits, a
rest, incarceration, and
homelessness.
And with that
thank you very much for
listening to me
Any questions
Thank you both for your
presentation today. Um
I have a few questions unless,
uh, the members, uh, want to,
uh, a couple of questions, uh,
I was curious earlier you
mentioned that there would be,
that you're anticipating 6 to 8
hospitals closing in the next,
uh, book the next year or so, or
24 months. Why is that if it
affects of the that bill won't
go into effect until, or the,
the funding changes won't go
into effect until 20.
So the hospital association of
Mount Chair, members of the
committee, uh, has come up with
that estimate. And so if you,
you can, I can put you in touch
with Troy Clark, who's the head
of the hospital association. You
can go over that methodology
more closely, but I think
there are potential
administrative changes that the
US Department of Health and
Human Services can take now
without that are separate from
the bill. So for example,
um,
the Medicaid reimbursement rates
that we have in New Mexico are
among some of the highest in the
country. So for primary care,
behavioral health, we reimburse
those services at 150% of what
Medicare pays for.
We suspect that we don't know.
that the feds may change their
mind and may no longer grant us
the ability to do that. And so
that won't take they they could
do that tomorrow if they wanted
to
Um, there's other changes that
they're doing by way of just
their administrative authority,
the continuous enrollment that
has allowed kiddos to remain in
Medicaid from ages 0 through 6,
they're rolling that back and so
it's the combination of the, of
the changes that are in the
bill, and these other
administrative policy changes,
um, and it's also, I think,
uh
some of these
we have a, we have the largest
percentage of private
equity-owned hospitals in the
country here in New Mexico.
And I think they're just
you know, I can't speak to what.
you know, decisions are being
made, uh, you know, corporate
offices, but I think they're
taking, they're looking at the
landscape of what's happening
and how the markets might evolve
and.
they may make decisions in the
future sooner within the next 18
months to 24 months.
Um, and then I, one other brief
question I was curious, um, for,
um, for you all, uh, the
community healthcare worker
workforce. Do we have an idea of
how large that is throughout the
state, or how many folks are
trained in community health to
be community health workers.
Uh, I can, I cannot give you any
numbers, but I know that there's
um a pretty large uh uh
trainings um group of people.
Um
and, and more so once and, and
this is something that we have
to look at. Once uh Medicaid was
approved to reimburse for their
services, then the numbers
really went up because then, you
know, you, you, you want to
employ them, you're gonna be
able to um to get paid for them
for their services, uh, so then
you have, you had a a increase
in people wanting to, uh, um, to
train for that, which also
impact the
workforce.
uh, uh, on the, on the resource.
Uh, so, um,
there has, it has grown, uh.
uh.
and it's gonna grow depending
what happens with the Medicare
reimbursement, uh, because for
the Department of Health has
done, they also has implemented
a uh virtual training that
people could take through their
platform. So there's not just uh
one avenue of people, you know,
take uh being able to get
trained, this also, you know,
the avenue from uh the
Department of Health uh platform
that is also very encouraging,
as well
as people being able to get
certification for a peer, uh,
which is very needed as well for
people with addiction. So yeah.
And last thing that you know, it
was interesting when you were
talking about the, the age range
that you saw and the folks that
were incarcerated in 2022, um,
19 to 45, and it's something
that me and the vice chair talk
about pretty frequently that
you have a generation of, of a
lot of New Mexicans, a lot of
times in the north that they
were taken out by addiction. And
that's why you see so many
grandparents raising
grandbabies, and you go to
church and you see it all the
time, right? It's adorable
babies with these older folks.
And I do look at that and I see
it also, you know, through the
lens of that we're looking at
from land grants, and we see so
many land grants that are still
being run by the elder
generation. We're not seeing
that new generation come in as
well. And the, yeah, exactly.
And so the concern is really how
do we how are we
rehabilitating that community,
not just for their own
well-being and their own family,
but for the longevity of the
community and it really seems
like those numbers that my, my
hope and I, you know, something
again, the vice chair and I
speak a lot about that we'd
start to see that shift, right?
You know, there's a, there's
been more lawsuits throughout,
there will be opioids, more
awareness, it's great, but then
fentanyl rolls in as a new, as a
new challenge. So, um, just
something that I, I wanted to
mention that again that that
lost parent generation, how are
we going to recover from that?
Like it, it's you're not gonna
have it.
Yeah, you're not. I mean, I
could see it and and it's very
sad and that it's not only New
Mexico, it's nationwide. You
know, um, uh, if they're in a
unable to perform any type of,
you know, any type of activities
and uh for the community. Uh,
they're gonna die.
That's, that's the bottom line,
because now with all of these um
uh synthetic drugs that are
being out there. Uh, in fact, I,
I, I heard this the other day
and I, it almost wiped me away,
um, my, uh, my intern. I have a
a master's level intern, and she
was telling me that, um, she
also does some work, uh, teaches
at the school, and she was
telling me that um.
one of the kids
uh at the school
gave another kid, uh, this
person, this kid had a sack of
cookies and she gave this
ellicate cookie, a cookie, and
the other kid and the kid took
the cookie and she overdosed.
I go, I told, excuse me, what do
you say? And she said, she
overdosed from the cookie. So
it's not
anymore about
you know, the drug for adults or
the drugs that are out there
being sold. It's also what's
being put in the food.
and for the children
which I never had that concern
when my kids were going to
school, you know, that level,
particularly in elementary
school, but if kids are being
sent to school, we contaminate
it.
food to give to other children.
What are we, what are we doing
this a society?
That's my concern
and that is happening. Yeah,
it's interesting. I have a few
young kids and this, you can't
share snacks at school, and I, I
left. I said I would have never
had a snack at school if nobody
ever shared with me growing up,
because if we didn't have money
for snacks or any good ones.
And, uh, and so again, I was
like that's weird to teach kids
not to share, but that's, that's
what we have that's why these
rules are in place. Thank you
both. I, oh you mind if I just
ask a couple questions. Uh,
absolutely. Representative
Cullen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so, and I'll be honest, I
haven't been following the
Medicaid issue as much cause on
my
other committees, we haven't
discussed it as much as I know,
like health, but I, I do have
some questions because
we know within this
administration, a lot has
changed. I mean, it has been
works for the federal
government. One day we thought
he was going to be out of a job
next, we're fine. So I mean,
everything that's been kind of
in place, you know, the sky is
falling, then the next day it
changes, so, um, and, and that
was when you brought up the
question is is how do we know
these hospitals are going to be
going away when, um, you know,
we're not looking at some of
these outcomes till later. So,
and I will follow it, but more
closely, but I'm wondering where
we're getting some of these
figures, like at least 88,530
New Mexicans will lose coverage.
And my understanding, and so
then I go back over to here,
since when you're looking at the
majority, 70% of Medicaid adults
are working in New Mexico. My
understanding is that a lot of
the loss of Medicaid benefits
will be for people to have to go
to work, but we have a lot of
percentage in there. So where
are we getting that number
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Cole.
uh, our team put that together
ourselves. We did an analysis
and we anticipate those folks,
what, what we anticipate will
happen is that
folks will fail to comply with
the work requirements, like just
having difficulty in either
complying with the work
requirements or submitting the
documentation necessary to
comply with the twice yearly
renewal of their benefit. And so
there will be this cycle where
they will go off Medicaid, but
then they may show up at the
emergency department or a
hospital, be redetermined that
they're eligible, then they
re-enroll. And so we're going to
see this period where people
roll on and off of coverage. And
so,
that's primarily where we're
getting that number from.
And Madam Cha, and haven't we
seen that a lot in the past. I
know that I've
you know, when I was on school
board, we would see that and try
to get our students to apply for
benefits because a lot of them
wouldn't apply for benefits, and
then they kind of go on and off.
So, this isn't something that's
new, it's just that we're going
to have to reapply twice per
year versus once a year. Is that
correct? Um, Madam Chair,
Representative Collin, work
requirements in New Mexico are
new, and the twice yearly
determinations will also be new
in New Mexico. So it used to be
once a year. Yes, I'm
And now they're just going to
require twice. And so,
in the work requirements and
since 70% that's on Medicaid are
working, according to this
analysis that you have. Is that
correct?
Um
Cause you're showing not working
is 29% of on page 9.
Yes, that is correct, um, Madam
Chair Representative Collin, uh,
yes. OK, so, so really we're
looking at 29% versus an
cause you have the, so that's
where I'm just trying to figure
out the figures of 88,530. So
you're thinking that's the
amount that's not going to do
the extra step of filling out
the paperwork uh that year, plus
get the work requirements and
then I see the other one, the
elimination of covered legal
immigration statuses, victims of
human trafficking. So um
so those three is where that
number is pretty much coming
from. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative Collin, not
necessarily. So the 29% of the
of the adults that are not
working in New Mexico, they
could be carryovers, they could
be full-time caregivers. And so
there are certain populations
that are exempt from meeting the
work requirements, um, and
they'll continue to be exempt.
And so,
we are anticipating that it's
it's possible that a combination
of all three of those
populations you see on the pie
chart could loser coverage
because they're, you know, just
failing to, you know,
successfully reapply and submit
all the documentation twice a
year or among the working age
cohort that they're failing to
meet the work requirements. And
so I, I, I don't want to say
that 88,000 came from that 20%,
29% on that pie chart.
Um, it could potentially come
from any combination that you
see there.
Madam, so we're really just
speculating on these numbers at
this point, correct? Uh, Madam
Chair, Representative Collin,
um, during the unwinding, and so
during a COVID-19 pandemic
period, the federal government
permitted states to um keep
folks enrolled in Medicaid
during the pandemic period. And
then a couple of years ago, as
those flexibilities rolled back,
we unwound those flexibilities,
and
we did a pretty aggressive
campaign to have people reapply,
keep their benefits. We saw in
that period that lots of folks
who are eligible, um, did not
reapply and so lost their
benefits. And so at one point
during the pandemic we had over
a million New Mexicans enrolled
in New Mexico Medicaid, um, that
number has gone down, um, to
around 800, I think 40,000 now
in part because some of those
folks, some of that
1 million cohort, um, it was no
longer eligible, you know, once
the pandemic period ended, they
probably had access to employer
insurance and moved on to that.
But the amount, the large
percentage of folks that we saw
in that unwinding experience,
who didn't reapply, that helped
to inform in our analysis about
the anticipated number of people
we think will turn on and off
again, and so that unwinding
from the COVID experience is
a a recent parallel that we're
using to inform our analysis.
OK, yeah, that we were seeing a
lot of that. I mean, just on the
years that I was on, like I
said, on school board, who would
apply, who, who were, would have
been eligible just didn't apply
at all. So I, I, do you have a
copy of the, is it possible to
send me the full analysis of how
you guys work these numbers. Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Collin, we do quarterly Medicaid
budget projections with the
legislative
Finance Committee staff, and we
just had a recent meeting with
them. I can share a copy of that
presentation with you. You'd be
happy to do that. Uh, and if
you'd like to share it with Ian,
I can also, sure, perfect.
And,
and mountain Chair, I just, um,
I phoned my friends, um, at the
Community Health Worker program,
and they told me there are about
1000 community health workers in
New Mexico.
Thank you. That's good.
And um, Madam Char, and I just
wanted to say that my uncle was
a Monty and so I'm very familiar
with the behavioral health
but my Mochi was 2001 in
Colorado Springs, where there
was a lot of services, and so he
was in and out of staying with
family or living on the streets
or doing better, getting
treatment and then being off.
So, and we were fortunate enough
that we got a call from detox,
my husband and I, and we took
him in because they were full
and he passed away in the middle
of the night while he was
staying with us. So we were
fortunate that he did not die on
the streets, but, and we also
have family members that have
died from
you know, from overdoses and
families and friends. So, you
know, it's been going on for a
long time, so we obviously need
to deal with the behavioral
health. We saw it really
increased during COVID.
and we haven't been able to
recover whatsoever off of that,
especially with our youth. So,
um, definitely it's, you know,
something that I know the
legislatures, that we've been
working on trying to get more
and I know it's really needed to
across the state. So thank you
for your work.
Thank you as well. Thank you.
Representative Herrera,
thank you, Madam Chair. I just,
I just want to get, uh, the
dates straight here on it. I
think SNAP benefits were cut as
of July 1st, is that, am I
correct in that?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Herrera, um, this
is also, we're awaiting federal
guidance on a lot of these
changes also, and I, I should
have mentioned that at the
start, but we anticipate the
reduction in SNAP benefits, the
SNAPork requirements, the snap
changes, we think they will take
place October 1st of this year.
That's the beginning of the
federal fiscal year and um we
haven't heard any other
guidance.
to say otherwise. So we're
planning for that October 1st,
2025 effective date. All right.
Uh
and, and Madam Chair, that
these revolving dates are, are,
it makes everybody crazy. I
mean, you know, I, not that I
wanted him to start July 1st,
but I think that was a first
date, and then they changed
that. Is that what happened?
Madam Chair, Representative
Herrera, I believe in earlier
versions of the reconciliation
bill, they had more aggressive,
um, or sooner time frames, but
ultimately we're thinking it's
October 1st for the snap
changes. And uh we passed
legislation so that all kids got
free breakfasts and lunches. I
know in this state, and I think
we were using the SNAP benefits
to.
uh work those numbers together.
Was that correct? Uh, Madam
Chair Representative Pereira,
you may be thinking about our,
um, sunbox program. So we do
have uh free breakfast and lunch
for the kiddos, and I believe
that's administered by the
Public Education department.
But at the healthcare Authority,
we just got support and funding
to launch the Sunbucks programs
so during the summer breaks,
kiddos have access to um lunch,
um, to food during summer break,
so New Mexican children have
that's a new benefit too.
I'm, I'm just trying to fag it,
figure out, Madam Chair, what
we're gonna need for next year's
budget to keep free lunches and
breakfasts for our kids because
uh I'm pretty sure that 48% of
our kids are on Medicaid, uh,
right now. So I, I think that's
a terrific meet in our states in
every single district. I don't,
I don't think we have many
districts that don't need it,
but I, I'm just trying to figure
out that number, so I don't
expect you to give it to me
today uh on the spot, but I
think that's what we're really
working toward, you know, when
we, we, you know, like I said,
we do have a $3 billion reserve.
We're lucky. We're one of the
lucky states. I don't know what
I'd do if I were in Nebraska,
but, you know, we, we've got
some money here, but we know a
lot has to go to Medicaid, but
you know what, we also need to
take care of our kids, poor
kids. So, so that's number uh
Alex that I'm looking for, that
we're looking for and uh if we
could get that by September,
that would help. Thank you.
Again, thank you both for your
presentations. It was a
wonderful example of empirical
and and uh and experiential uh
uh data that we had. So thank
you both. Uh, next up, we're
going to hear from the Abacu
Lang grant. Uh, if we can have
Victoria Garcia come on up.
uh, we're going to check if
they're here right, oh, yeah.
That.
I was going to say? I was
OK
But we wait, if you are in
Nebraska and tuning in, my uncle
has a jazz concert coming up.
very wonderful jazz musician, so
I see that
all of Nebraska.
check
Thank you.
you know my husband Dennis
sounds familiar
Yeah, let me, let me see if I
have a card. I can give you a
card. I don't know if I have a
card here.
And then
I'll ask continue.
Yeah, he probably does cause I,
I know a lot of people talk
about me. Good afternoon.
impressive for just a second.
Good afternoon.
I'm Victoria Garcia, president
of the Abiculan Grant, and I'm
also principal at the Abbeyke
Elementary School, so I did
catch a tail end of the SNAP
program for the schools and uh
it is
a necessity. Uh, we see some
students, there's times at 10
a.m. when kids come in late that
I will gather anything I can
find in the cafeteria just to
provide for those kids that do
come in late.
and didn't even have a chance to
eat breakfast at home.
because of situations going on,
so that was really awesome to
hear that you all were hearing
that.
Um,
it's just a real quick synopsis
of what's happening at Abike,
um, I didn't, excuse me, I
didn't have time to, uh, put
together a handout, um, it, we
just started school last
Thursday, and the day before
school, uh, opened. I was given
a directive that I'm teaching
5th and 6th grade math and
science and principal.
So,
um, yeah, um, so it's been
pretty crazy right now. Um, so
first of all, uh, we've used the
legislative funding to refurbish
our, which used to be the old
Abeke clinic.
Um, so we, we used our capital
Outlay money. We're just waiting
to get. I ordered the art piece
that you, you, what we're,
you're supposed to order through
the legislative funding. I'm
waiting to hear on the piece
that we had ordered and um when
we finished the project, I found
out that we couldn't get water
from the Abecu Mutual Water
Association to that building,
because there was an entity that
owned the
the property across from Bodie's
that would not let us use their
water line to connect.
so, um, I had a contact look and
found that there's water lines
that go underneath the highway
to the clinic, but in the, but
during all of this, that piece
of property across for Bodies
went up for sale.
So it was uh I had to rush and
jump, and we purchased the
property. It became a bidding
war, so I sat out there one
afternoon and I kinda, I looked
at what the growing rate for
property was, and then there was
one, so it's 12 acres, 1 acre is
irrigated property, which in
Abeke an acre of irrigated
property is going anywhere from
60,000 to 65,000 per acre. So
then I
figured 40,000 for the dry uh
for unirrigated property, and
then I kind of figured out the
improvements on the property,
um, and I came in $25,000 under
the uh
the uh what do you call it? The
appraised value.
So we went ahead, purchased the
property, so we own the building
where the post office is, so we
have a source of funding through
the USPS and then there is
another small business which is
the, we have an ice cream shop.
It's called the Frosty Cow, and
then we have a hair salon there,
but that that property has a,
a wide array of potential behind
the where the frosty cow
and the hair salon is, there is
space for trailer spaces.
There's 10 slots, so we have
discussed and we would like to
create er eventually turn that
into an RV, uh,
camp in Nare Park.
So we have
some capital outlay money for a
playground. So in front of
behind the
post office on front of the
frosty cow, we came up with a
site where we're going to put
our playground
and it'll be fenced in and all
that great stuff for our kids to
have a place just to walk down
the pueblo and go and have a
plate safe place to play when
the school building, when the
school is closed.
um
also, parents can go in, buy an
ice cream, watch their kids as
they play.
We also host the Farmers' Market
every Tuesday afternoon.
So myself and two other
gentlemen rolled up our sleeves
and we went in and uh they took
him back hose and a skid steer
and we cleared out trees. We
created a parking area so that
we wouldn't block the egress of
any of the buildings or use the
parking lot to the post office
and that way the businesses
wouldn't have their egress
blocked in case of an emergency
that way
um emergency vehicles could
access the buildings.
So
on top of that, um, a gentleman
that lives in Abeke. He's not a,
a, uh, grant member. He's the
community member that's moved
in. He's worked for several
corporations. He's an engineer,
but he's worked for the large uh
computer companies came to me
and told me, did you know that
New Mexico uh tech in Socorro
put out a um
some research that they did on
geothermal.
Abike sits on a hot bed in our,
uh, communal lands.
So
he asked me, would you like to
sit down and let's have a tea
and let's discuss this. So we
did.
and at our annual meeting, I
took this to our membership.
Our members ship said we said we
would like to hear what
potential we could have.
So, um, there's a huge
corporation down in Los Lunas.
Facebook, that is wanting along
with PNM Meta, they are wanting
to see what the potential of a
closed loop system for
geothermal would look like up in
our land grant.
So I met with the secretary of
Energy and minerals, energy, and
I forget her name. I think it's
Melanie.
and I met with a representative
from um the company from Meta
and
I shared some of the concerns
that some of the people have had
is when the traffic going
through the residential area to
get up there.
and uh told him we would like to
see if it was to work out that
the
that the traffic would come
through Espanola and through the
back
through what 31 mile road is
they would need to do some uh
fixing to the, to the roads
because of fires, some of those,
the roads have been washed out.
uh just to keep, if it was to
happen. So September 6th, we
will, I will be meeting with uh
Miss Melanie, and I forget his
name, whoever the director of
economic and finance for
economic development for the
state is, um, and a
representative from these other
uh companies, myself and a board
member. We're all gonna go up on
up there on a field trip. Look
at a proposed site. After that,
we're going to have
a um membership meeting for our
members, and we will give them,
we're asking that.
some of their scientists,
geologists, would go out and
answer the questions.
Um, we do have a few
members of our community, of
our, of our, uh, Abikian Grant
that do have questions regarding
something like this, but it
could be um a win-win situation
for the Abiquian grant, and I
did share that I would like to
see an internship program by
this company for our youth, so
that they would be provided
jobs, training, um, if this does
fly, I would
like to meet with the uh
president of Northern Community
College so that we could see an
added bachelor's degree in
geology, um, and then, um.
we would like,
I, I expressed that our people
are more capable of pushing a
broom or operating a shovel.
and it would also be a win-win
situation for our neighboring
communities, not just Abike, but
El Rito Canones, coyote gaina,
uh canilon, Savoya, these people
could drive in and have a means
of
work.
That would be more than working
at Bodies pumping gas or working
in at the Abbey QN uh cleaning
rooms.
So if this is something that my
our membership.
does vote on, um, it's, it's
something huge and I'm very
excited about it. Um, just for
the potential of economic
development for our community.
Um
it's
we, we just want to hear from
the geologists. I have a uh
family member that's connected
to the Yates Corporation down
south, and they did the same
thing down south. My son, my
nephew is married into that
family, and I do know that the
Yates did do uh the same thing
on their property.
So, um,
I, I, I think see it as a huge
potential for our people, but it
would need to be, if it does
happen, it would need to happen
with a lot of control.
and a lot of our people having a
say.
Yeah
Wonderful.
and uh thank you.
One thing I just want to mention
briefly too is just so folks
know, Ian is putting together a,
Different land grants so that we
can kind of keep track. Uh, I'm
gonna go to Representative
Herrera.
Congratulations, Victoria. That
I mean, you, the first time I
met you, I, I was kind of
overwhelmed. I'm thrilled that
you're the principal of AIQ
actually. I know it's a big job,
5th and 6th, but I'm thrilled
that you're the principal, and I
won't say anymore than that, and
um
I just want you to know, uh,
you could also ask the lab who
has specialists in, uh, you
know, uh, thermal.
uh power to, uh, aid you.
And uh they would do that free
through their community programs
through Kathy Keith, and I will
text her right now and ask if
they would, you know, give
somebody to you to because these
are tough decisions, you know,
when you have to make scientific
decisions and, and you don't
have that background or degree.
And that's their office exists
to help help communities in the
North, uh, with the, with, you
know, they don't take a stand
one way or the other, they just
give you, you know,
the factual stuff that you need
to know and your community needs
to understand, so I think, um,
well, Linda works at the lab
too, so it's not like we can't
help get that for you. So, so I
just want to say that and um how
many members do you have in your
online community right now. Uh,
we have, I would say, about 50
to 55 active members.
Um, our membership is like 75.
However, we do have some that
live out of state. They usually
come in
for our annual meetings, then
we've had a few people that have
passed on and have not uh
transferred their membership or
their memberships haven't been
taken.
And, um, I'm just curious with
this uh acquisition of the, of
the new property. Uh, what is
your, what is your anticipation
of your annual income now for
the uh for the land gran. Well,
at this point, our, our annual
income, I would say, is about
I would say is about 20,000 at
this point renting out both
buildings. However, we are
wanting to create a um once we
get in the RV park, um, hunters
are always looking for a place
to camp, and that will, um, you
know, there's all the
conveniences of the metropolis
of Abiquiu, you know, they'll
have bodies, and there's the
Abeuan, and they'll have
uh, you know, right at their
fingertips so they can buy their
baloney and they can get their
gas and their beer and head on
up to go hunting, um, but also
come back to a warm shower and
all that good stuff, um, in the
back, we have 1 acre of of
property that is irrigated land.
So we have thrown it around as
to making having something for
the youth.
to have a community garden for
the youth. We've also discussed
there's some people that would
like to have a garden that do
not own land within our, our
community that they could have
lease it out to somebody and
they can, we can do it as like a
lottery.
uh
for the property. So we just
acquired the property in
December, so we are
you know, going through the
growing pains of managing the
property. Uh, this last summer,
I had to spend, I painted the
interior of the post office
myself because um I could not
see. I saw what the schools paid
for professional painters to
come in and paint the schools,
and I was not gonna, I, I could
not see us spending that amount
when I could just go in and
paint on my Saturdays and work
around the
the postmistresses work hours.
We also are acquiring an I
included this that way we'd only
pay one time for a survey and an
appraisal. We, um, are acquiring
the Joe Ferran gym, which was
built by Georgia O'Keefe before
I was even born in the 60s and
um
the Catholic Church
owned it,
and then they turned it over to
a gym board, and there was a
clause in there that if that gym
board ever ceased to exist, that
that
building would revert back to
the
Catholic Church
Well, the Catholic Church is
not, does not have the means to
run the place, and we use it for
funerals, weddings, um, we use
it for graduations. We use it
for our youth to practice
basketball. We, there's a
that gym also has a huge
potential for our community, so
um, I did put in our IIP. I'm
asking for funding because A, we
need to make it ADA compliant.
The steps are, are, are not
feasible, and 2, we need to
upgrade our restrooms, then
we're, our next, our next
funding that I'll come to you is
to help us with um the heating
and the cooling system in the
summertime, you want to cook in
there. And in the wintertime,
it's very cold.
And then eventually, what we
would like to do if our other
projects um work is our
long-term goal is to uh put in a
commercial kitchen.
so that we can provide
um
activities for our elderly.
and for our children. Meaning
our four Hers if we have a
commercial kitchen, can go in,
um, make their 4H projects,
they're jams, they're canning,
they're cooking or for farmers'
market that these people would
have access to a commercial
kitchen. There's also one room
that we would like to put in a
uh exercise equipment for our
elderly and for our youth and
for our working people
Not everybody can afford
treadmills or has the space for
this type of equipment and then
open it up for the youth for
free play and during the
summertime, our public library,
who has a reading program, who's
also partnered with the school,
um, they offer the summer
summer, uh.
the food program so that it's
not going to Abbey Elementary,
but the library is providing the
meals they had 15 to 20
students, children coming down
every day for reading program
activities and their meals. They
asked if they can go in to use
the gym. So I told him once we
fully acquire the gym, then we
will work with them so that our
children have a safe place to
play, because Abike has turned
into a little
tourist attraction in the
summertime, and we don't want
children in in harm's way.
Uh,
thank you for that, uh, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Victoria, and
uh also available to you is a
capacity to do a strategic
planning and a business plan.
And it sounds to me like you
might need both of those things
uh to help your community and if
you need that, if you are
interested, see me after the
meeting and I'll talk to you
about that because that that is
available to you at no cost
through the cogtu, and um
uh, you know, you have to work
with them and uh but I, I think
you're a major candidate for
that. That's all I have missed
Madam chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
McCullen. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Actually, I just wanted
to applaud you the through your
whole thing. I mean, it's just
amazing work that you're doing,
and I haven't met you before. I
haven't heard anything about
your lamb grant before, but I
mean, you're definitely
uh doing so much for your land
grant and for your people. So
I'd um just listening to that
was just amazing and you're
continuing, um, the funny thing
is, is that I was just in
economic and rural development.
Earlier this week, Monday and
Tuesday, and it so happened we
took a tour of Meta, Facebook,
and also um we had a
presentation about geothermal.
Um, so what I would, um, and it
was a pretty good presentation.
So I will um try to probably get
together with the ink cause you
have her contact information,
correct? Cause there are some
other resources that they had
brought forward at the economic
development that I will try to
get to you as well, um, for
that, and, um, and I'm glad to
hear all that you're, you're
doing over at your land grant.
It's just amazing, so thank you.
Thank you. Senator Thornton
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I too want to applaud you for uh
uh.
for your efforts here, Ms.
Garcia. I, I, I'm thinking, can
we clone you because you,
you're, you're doing so much.
You're not the principal math
teacher, president of the land
grant.
and, uh, economic development,
marketeer, all the whole nine
yards. I mean, I applaud your
entrepreneurial spirit, I think
that's really, really necessary
for this time and that we're in.
And so we need more people like
you, um, I, I, I also wanted to
express, uh, something about
the, the geothermal stuff. So my
question to you was, first of
all, you are aware that we have
a lightning dock in Lordsburg,
that is a closed loop binary
system, and I didn't know if
that might be something you may
want to go down and just to
visit to so people to
get a sense of what that is.
What I wasn't clear on was
whether or not the the one that
you're talking about building up
here would be a prototype plant,
or are you talking about a large
scale power plant? Was it just a
prototype to see if the system
would work in this sort of
environment, or are you looking
at a bigger plant that would
actually maybe power the entire
area. When, when I met with the
uh
with the person with the
representative from that
company. They would like to put
in, it would take 13 acres
and it would be a closed loop
system. um
the
the majority of the
of the traffic would be the
actual construction of the
thing. We looked at five-year
contracts.
So that every 5 years, it would
be um up for renewal.
Um,
and just below Abbeke, about 9
miles east as the crow flies,
um, that huge substation that
you saw coming north of Espanola
is not owned by Heme Mountain
Electric, it's owned by PNM. And
that's where that, that's where
that would be tied in through.
Yes, sir. OK, so this is the,
excuse me, madam chair, this
would be a big plant then
that could power other areas of
the state. Yes, sir. They're
looking at potentially 1000
jobs. Very good. Oh, then we
should do everything we can to
help you with that and, and if
you're, if your folks agree to
something like that, I think
you'll get a lot of support from
the rest of the state because,
uh, we're looking for those
kinds of jobs, renewable energy,
the, the whole nine yards. It's
sort of fits all the bills
everyone's looking for. And, uh,
and I think we have one of the
few states that have that
capability to be able to do
that, so. Yes, sir, um.
my brother's an engineer and one
of my cousins is an engineer
that are on the board and on the
membership and they had, they
explained to some of the members
that this is not fracking.
Fracking is something different
because you're breaking the
rock. What this is a shooting
down water to create steam. Now
there may be a little bit of uh
cloud seeding
um, but it wouldn't be enough to
potentially create
uh major damage.
Uh, this is New Mexico and we
can use um all the moisture we
can get, especially up above
where we have our cattle.
Uh, this year, we were blessed
with rain, but there's some
years that it's um
it's a dire situation and we,
we're all having to uh come
together as as the cattlemen. I
also own cows
And um
decide what, what all we're
gonna do if we're gonna cut down
our herds or what we need to do
to uh for for our animals.
But
yes, sir. OK. Thank you for
that. That, that's all here.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Garcia.
geothermal. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair. My, my mic isn't
working.
And maybe the battery went up.
Um, you know, Victoria, I was
gonna ask you that if you're
still running cattle. Yes, sir,
I am. I, uh, my son is finally
21, so we've expanded a little
bit and his um his roots are
from up here, so he, he has
Forest Service permits to run in
in the uh Savoya area. Yeah,
so, and now we have, we have
horses and uh yes, I, I wouldn't
have life any other
way. It, it builds character
amongst children and, and, uh,
the best, the best babysitter
was ever our horses.
Yeah.
Yeah, well, Madam Chair, you're
just, you're not just uh kind of
uh the, the run of the mill type
leader in this area, you're kind
of really an outstanding.
and illustrious
uh leader Chica leader.
you know, in this area and um
um
and we, we kind of, uh,
appreciate that those of us that
have been
in this land grant struggle for
decades.
Then it really applaud and
appreciate people of your nature
and your determination and your
willpower to
keep the needle moving till we
put it on full.
Yes, sir. And, uh, you know, you
didn't go into the history of
the land grant. It's really
important.
Abiquila's really unique land
grant.
You know, and you've got a lot
of things going on the land
grant that we were really amazed
with.
you know, kind of address that
in a while.
but um
you know, uh, you're not the
regular
kind of Spanish predominantly
Spanish type.
uh, and, um, inheritance type
land grant, you're basically uh
a new set of land grant
which is a full-blooded
detribalized economically
uprooted Spanish-speaking
Catholicized.
Bomba Indian
and a lot of your ancestors come
from Hopi.
Hopi country. Yes, sir.
And you told me man and sure
that you did a DNA and it popped
up.
You know, in fact, Madam Chair,
and members of the committee,
Abiki in the 1920s when the
United States was going to the
Indian reorganization Act.
AstabiQ if they wanted to still
continue to be identified as a
land grant.
or as an Indian pueblo.
You know, and uh so that was
really, really uh interesting in
terms of your history, but
that's so typical ma'am chair
about 90% of our land grants.
They're infused with that kind
of full-blooded Indian.
um
um
kind of addition
in our communities
And I just so happens that uh uh
EQ kind of really.
um
was predominantly a genizaro.
in terms of its starting
families.
and um, you know, uh,
at one point, Madam Chair, in
the, in the history of, of IBQ
is uh they were about to lose
their common lands is about
15,000 acres.
And um you guys changed your
status.
because of the delinquent
property tax.
and you created a livestock
association.
at the urging of the federal
government.
who was willing to give you a
loan
uh, to pay off the delinquent
taxes, and you guys took up the
offer.
The thing is that that
um Livestock Association status.
uh really didn't empower your
land grant,
right?
Uh, so when we created, when we
modernize the statutes in 2004
and made uh
land grants Poli subdivisions of
the state.
I recall that we approached you.
and we asked you if you wish to
become a unit of government.
And you guys, uh, didn't say no
and didn't say yes.
But a group of us came down and
we spoke to you guys at the gym.
Remember? You know, and you guys
then made the determination
within a couple of weeks.
that being a political
subdivision is the ultimate of
empowering your land grant.
because there's a lot of
uh, a lot of ifs.
with the livestock association.
and more important is that it
can be
kind of consumed illegally.
by the Thomas Catron types that
are out there.
you know, and, um, so we were
really appreciative that you
guys went that route.
um
and it, and it's paying off.
Uh, it's paying off in terms of
what you guys are doing, Madam
Chair.
Um
also, um
the, uh, some of your people
Remiio Archuleta.
He was a genius
He probably didn't have much
education.
He passed, he's passed away. His
son is still with you.
and Max
and he's just as
savvy as his dad, but he doesn't
quite have the gamut of
knowledge that Remijo did
And when we, when we first went
on a tour up to the Mirs up the
land grant. Yes.
Uh, all the way to where it ends
on uh the foothills of the Hemes
almost bordering
uh, I don't wanna say him as
Pueblo, but the hemas mountain,
um
to mejo kind of, uh, showed us,
Madam chair
this really unique valley, and
they have a specific name for
it.
And in that valley, it's a,
it's, it's a mountain high
valley.
and they would plant wheat
Your elders, your ancestors
would plant wheat in there. The
citos, yeah, and you know, madam
Chair
uh
one cluster of that, the wheat
seeds.
of the wheat
plant
is at the Smithsonian Institute.
in terms of the most nutritious.
uh most hardy
um, most qualitative.
um, wheat.
in the US
coming from AQ
you know,
there's down trends, Chicano
land grant, you know, producing
the most high quality weed in
the whole world, you know, and,
uh, so, um
uh but you guys have a lot of
history and, you know, Madam
Chair, I was really
amazed by your youth.
um, and you have an excellent
teacher
that does the Hopi dances. In
fact, when you guys
were wanting to revive the Hopi
culture, the Hopi, your Hopi
ancestors from Hopiland
came down
and taught the old dances
to the community
and you continue that tradition
to this day. In fact, we saw
some of your dancers at the
state capitol.
for Trioa Lupede and they were
amazing. I'm telling you.
You know, these beautiful young
ladies just doing that
traditional Hopi dance.
they've been doing it
for decades now that your annual
fiesta.
you know, and, uh,
but most important
is, I think you have a really,
I, I think you have the roots of
a really powerful.
learning experience
with your youth.
and around the issue of
Cannisaroism
because I saw a PBS.
documentary, having to do with
rural libraries in New Mexico.
And one of the projects right,
right here in IVQ.
You know, and it was young
people
I'm gonna say mid school
uh
high school age
and they were kind of sharing
their culture.
sharing their values
sharing their traditions and
their customs, and these are
young Kiros.
and I was all mesmerized.
by their level of
of um
of hope
you know, of tradition of
custom.
and uh and I think it lends
itself well to developing some
type of unit.
that teachers can teach,
utilizing these youth to call
kind of give them some training.
you know, because of the, of the
potential that's there. And um
so I wanted to kind of, I don't
know if you've seen, if you've
seen that documentary, have you?
Man, I may have. There was one
documentary where I, I also
spoke.
and it aired on PBS also. Yeah.
My son may have been part of
that because when we had 3
doctoral students from UC
Berkeley that did a um.
they did an archaeological dig
up on our Mesa, and it it with
uh in the pueblo and my son was
on the uh he was hired as a
student. I think he was 1314. So
every day he was hiking that
Mesa, um, and they were, they
found out that on top of that
mesa that there were gardens.
They were square gardens, and
they use the natural rain
fa ll to irrigate the mesa isn't
totally flat. There's a grade to
it. So they would put their
gardens on the end and they
actually actually found some
small, uh, remains of corn and
other little items that they
found, um, and we were just, I
was just at a meeting a few
nights ago. I don't know if you
know of David Mananais. He is a
scout for the movies. He's
brought a lot of movies here.
Uh, he was uh instrumental in
bringing les Multima, which they
filmed, um, most of that at in
in Abike.
So, um, anyway, the professor
from UC Berkeley, John, uh
Sunseri, June Sunseri, he
there was a, is a proposal to
release the dissertations in a
book.
And
uh some of our people from Abike
that were part of this project
would also be part of the book,
and they asked me to also help
them with it.
So,
um, he's looking for funding out
in California at this point, um,
and our board was, um,
we were amenable to working with
them. That way, um, our
membership would have the
dissertations in book form as to
what they found in our proper,
in our lands.
So also, um, I'm also part of
the library board in Abike
and um
I'm kind of like you guys. Are
you Jamaican? That's how they
are too. Well, you know, Abbeke
is near and dear to my heart,
Um, my grandmother's great
grandfather was the General Jose
Maria Chavez, that owned the
Georg'Keefe.
home. His brother traveled the
Spanish Trail and owned what
they now call Chavez Ravine, AKA
Dodgers Stadium. So I, in fact,
the general was married to a
woman from here from Tierra
Maria, and he's listed as one of
the original um.
land grant because the wife
didn't, wasn't listed, but the
general Jose Maria Chavez was
listed. Um, when he was 86 years
old, he sued the United States
federal government on behalf of
the Abiquiu Land Grant, you sued
him and uh Reyes Gonzalez sued
for the uh the surveyor general.
And so, you know, Abby Q is in
my blood. It's northern New
Mexico is in my blood and, and
who I am and um I try to teach
this, our culture at school.
Last year that our children uh
performed at the legislature. I
took the day off
and when I walked in, I'm going
to get emotional, but some of my
children ran to me and told me,
put their arms around me. I
thought they were going to knock
me down and tell me, Miss Vicky,
we love you and you love us, and
you're the best principal in the
world because you're here to see
us, you know, and that speaks
volumes.
We are overworked and underpaid
in the schools.
but
it's what we are passing down
just like as was passed down the
history to me. It's very
important that we pass that down
to our children as well, and
that they also understand that
um there's nothing wrong with
operating the shovel. I go, I go
and clean ditch when it's my
date, when we have the community
day, but like I tell the kids, I
do it because I want to, not
because I have to, that they
understand that they have
choices in life.
and that we can do menial work
if we want to, but there's, but
they can also do more than that.
and understand who they are,
because this is why students,
and I've always said this, this
is why kids turn to gangs
because they gangs have a
culture. And if we don't teach
our students a culture. It
doesn't matter if you're brown,
white, orange, blue, green,
whatever, you know, walk of
life, wherever you come from,
that you'd be proud of your
culture and that students, the
youth, understand where they
came from
and what culture they come from,
because then otherwise, they
want to belong to a culture.
And if it's not taught to them
and instilled in them, you're
brown, that's awesome. You're,
you're, you're white. That's
cool, you know.
your, your Native American,
you're African American,
whatever color you come from,
whatever walk of life that you'd
be, that you're proud of that.
And then no, we, our people did
not just rape and pillage the
village. We also had
contributions to society.
and you are all good
people and you all come from
good.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I, I think
you know, that RVQ lends itself
well to doing some kind of
Hollywood type film
We don't do enough of that, you
know, when I was chair.
uh, for the longest time, I kind
of harped at the land grants to
try to
how to get our word out.
to get the word out of our
customs, our traditions, our
struggles.
you know, through the, through
that form of media.
uh film
is that we, we, we, we haven't
done it yet.
But I think IVQ lends itself
well to that. So does your
neighboring
Langren in Terra Maria lends
itself well to that.
And I think there's a professor,
Madam Chair, at Highlands in Las
Vegas, that's starting to look
at doing exactly that.
and, and, and extending uh
invitations to land grants to
take him up on his offer to use
his students to kind of begin to
develop the groundwork for, for
that possibility.
Yeah, I wanted to, last thing I
wanted to ask um.
what's going on with the 32
acres El Rancho del Padre. And
the reason I bring that up,
Madam Chair, is because
this was the first, uh, land, uh
acquisition and transfer, uh, of
one of our land grants, uh, that
this committee helped broker.
And there's a long history and I
won't go into it. When the final
analysis, the game and fish did
an outright transfer, no
monetary exchange.
of 32 acres that they had been
holding on for some time for
decades.
Right along the Rio Chama is
kitty corner from Bodie's, uh,
right off the, the Rio, Rio uh
Chama.
and um that was a first land
grant in the history of kind of
the, the, the modern legislature
under the new statutes, uh, with
a land grants going back to
2004, that was able to kind of
help broker.
uh return of land, you know, to
one of our illustrious land
grants. So what is happening
with those 32 acresentative
Garcia and Madam Chair, we
we worked with the soil and
Conservation upon receiving that
property because it was
inundated with um water thieves.
known as Russian olives or
monkey peanuts.
and salt cedar
So we went in and we got a grant
and we cleared that area
Um
and we have turned that, we use
it as communal lands for our
spring, um.
grazing
at this point, we have looked at
commun of developing property
there for what we want to put,
we're eventually going to put in
our 12 acres, but behind the
post office, and that was
putting a KOA park. We had a, we
did an economic development
study on that.
Well, the membership said no. We
don't want to destroy that land.
At this point, we are having to
do some erosion control because
of the river and in the spring
when the Corps of Engineers, uh,
releases
a lot of water
It is eating at the banks, this
last year we had to refence
cause our, our fences were just
hanging, hanging in, in.
in air because the, the river is
eroding, so we are looking at
ways to try to um
so that it doesn't erode as
much, but we do use that and the
cattlemen, we take turns on
using that, and it's also Game
and Fish would love it because
every day on my way to work in
the wintertime, it is, I have
pictures of, uh, on my phone,
not that exact property, but
right across where I have seen
up to 60 and 100 elk in there at
a time.
Um, last year, on my way to
school at 7 o'clock in the
morning. Somebody that purchased
land, um, that doesn't believe
in fences because it, it
destroys their ambiance of the
river, and this is a fence out
state.
He was, he was pushing about 40
cows onto the highway as I'm
headed to Abbey Elementary. So I
make a U-turn, park my car. Good
thing I wear boots and jeans to
school. Um, got a stick and I'm
walking the cattle. Parents are
stopping. What can we do? Like
go open the gate. So because I
had buses and parents coming in,
and I did that would have could
have been a potential disaster.
So we do use it for for our
cattle. I put
the cows in there. They stayed
in there until all the uh
cowboys and one cowgirl could go
in there and load them up on our
trailers and and uh trailer them
out.
but it is used and um
we're just trying to maintain
it, you know, from the, the
river totally
um destroying the property.
Well, I'm sure that was kind of
a really.
uh, arduous struggle.
that the land grant went
through, uh, first issuing those
32 acres to the pasture or the
church back in the late 1800s.
and then for some reason or
another property ended up with
the state transportation
department and game and fish,
but
with a quick claim title
and that's, so that's the, the,
we did a title research, um,
certified autosearch, usinging
Junior monies, and I was the
first land grant that came up
with a really clear cut uh
fraudulent
uh holding of a, of a, of a
illegal land title. And when the
gaming fish saw that, they
didn't hesitate in doing the
transfer, you know, so that was
cool. Um, and I chair, lastly,
um
um
you know, the, uh, the gym.
um
we had one of our first meetings
there.
in 2003, 2004.
Uh, we had another one there
with the, we're looking, you
were looking at
uh becoming a unit of
government, the change and uh we
also had a meeting at the your
school.
and when we had the meeting at
your school, it was in need of a
lot of repairs.
and there is some issues that
the money wasn't.
fully coming
And so what, what finally has
transpired with
modernizing your school there in
terms of some of the needs.
You're talking about the
elementary, yeah, the elementary
school.
So
the Abekilementary is a
beautiful building
However, um,
it hasn't been properly
maintained.
and we have beautiful vigas,
port, we have corbels, but that
one needs to be treated.
Hasn't been treated
Um, we do have issues with the
water.
The waters, they had to put in a
filtration system for the water.
Um, if we are gone for summer
break, the cooks have to let the
water run cause it has the smell
of sulfur and the water does
come in, um, the color of the of
the sand out of the dirt
outside, kind of a red brownish
color.
Um
it's a flat roof, so it leaks.
In 2012, there was a bond that
passed and we were told the
school was going to be um
that it was going to be a
refurbished, um, we're in 2025
and we're still waiting.
Another bond passed.
and they painted this summer,
but not with a leaky roof.
um
so
we
we, we border the US Forest
Service.
So I have pushed that we
fence off
the access to the arroyo last
spring. I took a little hike and
there was an illegal filming
happening. So I called my dear
friend, David Monsons, and he
said, do not go out there. I
will. He went out there, asked
for permits, and they closed up
shop and they took off. Um, I've
had to go out, call the state
police, because we have had
hunters
uh with out of, out of state
because they want to go up what
we call calon del delcore Copper
Canyon up above to hunt, and
they are coming on to school
property with firearms.
You can, I mean, they may not
have any intentions to hurt us.
But if you're cleaning, you
know, you're ejecting out your
bullets and one bullet stays in
stays in there. We're outside
playing or a bullet, a stray
bullet goes through a classroom
window that could potentially
hurt or kill somebody.
Um,
so I've had to go out there,
leave notes and tell them not a
party public parking lot, and
please go to uh the gates close
at 5 o'clock. You'll be locked
in.
Um, I think word has gotten out
that they have this crazy
Chicana that's the principal
there and she'll go and ask you
to leave. Uh, so that has kind
of um
subsided. However, when they
built the school, let's say that
this, this is our property, this
whole table. They built the
school on that corner.
So part of our little road going
in is partially in the Forest
Service.
So
there have been talks of
redoing how we enter our school.
There have been talks of
rebuilding another school.
at this point. Um, right now, I
keep telling maintenance, we
have a critter problem
We used to have security behind
the school. The minute that the
security was asked to leave
cause it was, they weren't law
enforcement. They were community
members. The minute they left
and took their cats and dogs, we
are inundated at this point with
groundhogs.
with tussas prairie dogs
So
well
those type of garments are going
to bring in bigger varmints.
Last week I was in a classroom,
saw some coyotes just walking.
Last year in March, I was
leaving a PAC meeting, which is
a advisory council, the parent
advisory Committee, um, parents
left. I was locking up the
building, turning off lights
and
with the
parking lights with the, with
the
outdoor lights.
A mountain lion ran not too far
from where I was.
so I, I booked it into my car,
got in my car as fast as I
could.
and I had to lock the gates. I
was looking around praying that
um the mountain lion wouldn't
have me for dinner. So, um,
those are issues that, like I
tell our administration, I may
go to work in boots and jeans,
but there's a reason for it.
Um, we have snakes, we have all
kinds of critters out there,
because that's what happens when
you have your lovely little
prairie dogs.
They're going to bring in
it's a
food chain
and they're gonna, they're gonna
bring in coyotes and bobcats and
mountain lions
Well, thank you for that
that's where we're at there. And
um
uh, you know, you're a
distinguished leader up here and
we really appreciate you and
you're still kind of going
strong. You're making a big
difference, not only for your
mercy but you know, for the
surrounding communities and uh
and I'm willing to kind of help
out with the funding for the
gym.
You know, it's kind of a hub of
the community and
you know, thanks to Georgia
O'Keefe, uh who built it, it was
her money that built it.
And uh in fact, we talked about
this at one time that the church
should just kind of turn it over
to the land because the church
has no uh possibility of
generating revenues to kind of
maintain it. So I'm glad it's,
it's happened. Yes, and you know
surrounding communities use it
for graduations, weddings,
anniversaries, 50th
anniversaries, and uh it's,
it's, it's work, but it's worth
it for our people.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Garcia. Thank you
so much for presenting today.
Um, that was wonderful, and
again, we'll follow up that if
there's anything that uh might
be necessary. Thank you. Thank
you. Uh, we'll welcome up our
next two presenters, uh Manuel
Lewis of um the um sorry, Manuel
Luna, sorry, of the Office of
the State Auditor and Jeremy
Klaas, um, he's with Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management Department for the
state. Last time we met, these
two folks had presented and
talked a little bit about the
technology they're using
now, how it's benefiting some of
our, our land grant communities,
especially in terms of, um, of,
uh,
uh, maintenance and auditing,
but also in terms of of uh
emergency needs as well. So I
know that came up again today,
and I just wanted to bring that
up as well. Um, yeah, all right,
so I will hand it to YouTube.
We're a little bit behind time
but not too bad. So, um, we'll
go ahead and have you all
present, and we can have more.
We just received uh Manuel here
uh yours if you want to go to
get started. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for
inviting me out here and, and
speak again about some
technologies, emerging
technologies out there that are
helping in that specifically in
the auditing process and just
general financial compliance,
um, as you know, there's many
challenges out there in rural
New Mexico from having poor
internet connection to having
long distances to a a a post
office or or other um things
that we take for granted in
larger municipalities or larger
areas that have higher
populations, but, um, we have
some technologies that I see a
lot of um land grants and sekis
and other small
um, political subdivisions of
the state are really taken
advantage of and our
advantageous to them, um, kind
of bridging those gaps, um, and
we've also the office of State
Audit have also instituted
things too, recognizing the
issues that we see with um these
rural entities and having
trouble and we've, we've, we've
updated our OSA connect system
to specifically and um revamping
it to have digital signature.
Um, you'd be surprised, um, how
many people don't have a scanner
out there or um or a printer,
let's say like paper is
becoming a, a thing of the past,
even though I printed this on
paper right now, but it's
becoming less and less and I
just I think people are just
more conscious of this, you
know, you can have everything on
your, on your cell phone in
particular. So we've, we've
instituted those changes in the
office and we're gonna continue
to take advantage of new
technologies, um, here, um, at
Dot Oter, but I'm kind of mobile
document scanning is probably
one of the biggest things that I
think is advantageous for um
rural communities and um they
can, there's a bunch of
different platforms out there.
Adobe Scans, um, you know,
Genius Scan, you, your iPhones
Androids, all of those things
now are, are, are pretty skilled
at. I mean, we have, I mean, I
guess what they say a cellphone
now has more technology than the
like the first space shuttles
out there. So you could do a lot
of things with a cellphone now
and actually modernizing kind of
a lot of our technology to be
viewed on a cell phone or maybe
a tablet. Um, it's very
advantageous for um our rural
communities and um I think most
people are probably better at
using the cell phone than they
are using a laptop or a desktop
computer. Those are becoming
even farther and fewer between I
see people connect their
cellphones to their TV
s now. Um, and not even have
actual, um, um,
computer anymore. Um, secure
file change, uh, secure, um,
file exchange. So these are, um,
if you're not familiar with
that, it's like SureLink or
OneDrive or Google Drive. You
may not even know you have it on
your phone or your phone or your
computer, but we're using those
now specifically in um auditing
and when you're you're
participating in your in your
audit engagement with your IPA,
you can just, they have a secure
portal, you're just you're
uploading your documents, no
paper involved, you know, I'm
using your cell phone to take,
uh, taking pictures or scanning
your in
vo ice s or, or whatever your
financial documents that you
have and and exchanging those
back and forth with um your IPA,
um, or even in the office of the
state auditor, I use it all the
time. People are scanning and
and uploading things for me.
Um, also the signature thing
too, as well, just the general
e-signature, we've been through
that with Off state A, but like
DocuSign, Adobe Scan, you, all
of those things are very, um,
are very useful and our, our,
our stand up within the court,
um, with DocuSign, those are
legitimate ways to sign
documents, legal documents. So,
um, utilizing those things in
rural New Mexico is, um, is, is
very, it's helpful for them to
report and be timely on the
reporting and expanded broadband
and satellite. I know that I
know that New Mexico has done a
lot to expand our broadband. I'm
seeing that.
We're seeing that in the office
too as well, where people have
access to um uh access to um
data connections and things like
that and satellite internet. I
know we have Starlink and
there's other, other platforms
that are coming out there as
well, um, having those as well.
I mean, I know there's a mobile
like people on their travel
trailers now have Starlink and
so expanding access to role, um,
rural communities to have those,
um, would be, um, would also
help in the, in the, um, help
with them and their financial
compliance. And then kind of the
kind of the impact
s of all these, these new
technologies means, um, reducing
the costs and, and, and the time
needed for compliance,
especially where many of them to
many communities when they
actually get access to this
technology, they may be many
years behind it now they can,
they can bridge that gap a lot
faster with this technology and
having people in the community
that know how to use these
technologies as well. And it's
kind of this, this, I mean, we
out everything that comes around
living in a rural community, to
all of this, all of these
technologies kind of just help
make it a little bit easier
cause what we want, we want to
make it easier for people, so we
do it more often and we have
more trans
par ency um on these public
funds and some people know as
well, you know, I've access from
anywhere, you can get access to
people's information, reports,
all those things from anywhere
we're at. Um, if we just expand
this access to for to Mexico. So
if you have, I stand for
questions, Madam Chair. Thanks.
Hi
Madam Char, thanks for having
me, Mitty. um, thanks for uh
bringing me up here again to
talk about some of the
technological advancements that
we're using at DHSEM, um, I
think probably just briefly
going over kind of what we do,
right? We are the organizing
entity at the state level.
that um assist and help with
communities, um, municipalities
that experience disasters and so
we're also the flow through
entity for FEMA dollars as well,
so, um, we at the state are the
applicants, our jurisdictions,
land grants, all those sort of
things would be um our
subapplicants and we help
manage, uh, projects, identify
damages, uh, work with these
local entities to
start in the response and the
long-term recovery associated
with natural disasters and so I
think the last time I was in
front of you all, I talked about
um, some of the work that we
were doing up at Los Vihiles
land grant, right, so we had put
together, um, a common operating
picture, and so that's a
geospatial sort of database that
we are using, and we utilize a
lot of other different data
layers to build that map. So it
looks at some of the damage that
was caused, specifically in that
area that was a hermit's Peaca
Canyon fire, right, so we were
talking about burn severity. We
work with USGS and some
private contracting that we
contracted through some of our
grants from FEMA and our hazard
mitigation program to model
debris flows and outflow
modeling so we can see where
those also, uh, where some of
the impacts and the model from
those disasters will intersect
with critical infrastructure.
right? And so that's roads,
bridges, culverts, all that sort
of stuff, and so that specific,
um.
common operating picture that we
built for Hermit's Peak A
Canyon. That was specific to
that area, but was working with
Los Vijilles. We've identified a
specific area that crosses a
county road where we are working
with them, designing and
engineering some projects there
and working with NRCS to
actually utilize their EWP
funding to implement a project.
I think the one thing, uh, and
so that I think from a land
grant perspective is showing
that.
if it's a public entity, a
quasi-governmental entity, we
can work with those entities in
eligibility as far as FEMA goes,
right? That's where that goes,
we also out of the state and the
DHSEM office out of the recovery
bureau run a state
- ru n disaster reimbursement
program. It's very much modeled
on the
public assistance on the FEMA
side, but it, it's where we can
actually help entities that we
don't meet the the state
threshold for a federal
declaration, and that's all run
out of off of funding from
executive orders out of the
gov's office, right? So we have
that ability to do, um, you
know, small if if there's
disasters because throughout New
Mexico, I think the one thing
that we have learned here at
DHSEM, it's not if, it's when,
right? We've dealt with
4 large federal disasters in
the, in the last 4 years, we're
currently working on another one
in Riodoso. But what we're
utilizing out of all of these
disasters is this common
operating sort of picture and
trying to utilize that and
expand it across the state.
and we've got some assistants
out of Senate Bill 33 that
recently passed, and that's the
Fire Act that's working closely
with state forestry. We're
mapping some high severity, um.
areas that have the potential to
be impacted by wildfire. It's to
address so preloading some of
the disaster response that we
can issue and some of the
mitigation to identify in these
areas, but it's also to assist
and help with the identification
of those high risk areas for
insurance issues as well. But
again, this is going to go out,
we're trying to expand this
common operating picture across
the state, identifying critical
infrastructure, working with our
federal
and local partners in
identifying that and
understanding what we would need
and then working with our local
governments, our local emergency
managers across our 33 counties
to make sure that we build and
we're, we're capturing
everything. I think the other
thing that we are working at and
looking at
So the emergency operation
center is also run out of the
Department of Homeland Security
Emergency Management, right? So
that's where we actually do the
response local emergency
managers contact us. We elevate
our levels, coordinate resources
and start our response efforts.
We're trying to, uh, we're
looking at buying and purchasing
software, it's called Crisis
Track, which will go out and
work with our 33 counties across
the state, work with them to
identify their um.
critical infrastructure, map all
these things and get insurance
policies. So ultimately that
will preload these areas in
these communities, for when a
disaster happens, we will have
some of that preliminary data
available so we can move forward
and it's a lot easier to do our
preliminary damage assessments
because ultimately when a
natural disaster occurs in these
areas, we have to go out and
assess the damage. We have to
look at a cash value for
everything that is not covered
by insurance.
and that is what goes into our.
threshold calculation for FEMA
to request a federal
declaration. That changes is
based on er the census data and
all that sort of stuff, but this
tool will help our.
counties and our local
jurisdictions, be able to
identify and do that preliminary
damage, like kind of preload a
lot of that information to be
able to assess and respond in a
much.
uh faster and more equitable
way.
And so with that, Madam Chair,
we'll take your, oh, you know
what? I take that back. I
I did, so I, I do need to shout
out, it's not necessarily
technological advancement, but,
um, want everybody to know,
especially in the land grants in
our small, smaller jurisdictions
along with this last session, we
did get Senate Bill 31 passed.
That's a non, or what is that?
That's a zero interest loan,
disaster loan program, right? We
got $50 million
allocated for that fund, and it
is going to be used as a credit
facility, so entities that are
affected by federal disaster
because one of the caveats in
the legislation is that you have
to make sure that you have a
FEMA eligible public assistance
project. So it is on a federal
disaster. It, it provides
upfront money to be able to
actually in in cash for these
projects to actually get
implemented and started because
again, the FEMA, the federal
government
and um
sort of public assistance.
framework is based on
reimbursement bursements,
therefore, this is a
reimbursement, but it's going to
be a cash facility we're
managing that in concert with
DFA if anybody has any questions
or want more further
information, we can be that can
be found on the DFA website.
We're also, um, conducting a
webinar outlining the
application process. It's gonna
be online, it's through
AmpliFund. That's actually going
to happen tomorrow at 1:30.
Um, but all that information can
be found on the DFA website, but
then Madam Chair, I will turn it
back to you. Thank you. No one's
ever taken away.
I, I apologize to me.
I'm, I'm not.
I'll let the committee briefly,
uh, Representative Preta.
Uh, thank you. How much, how
much money do you directly have
in uh in Homeland Security for
disaster relief, like how much
do you have like 10 million
there that you can spend when
some something happens.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Here, uh, we don't.
Um, yeah. I actually knew that,
but, um, OK. And I tried to get
legislation last year and I hope
this committee will help me this
year to get a fund for you guys
because, you know, I'm the one
that makes the calls all the
time because we have all these
disasters in Rio Riva, I mean,
Rio Dosos had their share. I'm
not going to say we're the only
ones, but we certainly have our
share up here and um uh so, you
know, water goes out all the
time, everything, you know, and
we
just, we, you know, I know what
you guys do. You bring up those
trailers that we don't even own,
and you borrow them from
somebody else and you fill them
up at Awasana, who gives you all
that water for free. And then
you go put park that trailer up
at Gayena, whoever's, you know,
can't get water that day, and,
and it's just, it's just, it's
just everybody has to, it's like
when we pass a law that really
goes around the anti-donation
class, and we have to bend
ourselves in circles to get
these services. So I again am
going to try as a member of
appropriations to get you guys
attend $10 million fund. The
governor has some money, but
that's always questionable too
whether or not she can use it or
not or how much she has. And it
just seems in this time of
climate change and drought, when
all these communities are going
to run out of water or
something's gonna happen.
We need to, we need to give
these guys some money, uh, and
I, they just don't have anything
to go on, so I, I'm just
bringing that up again. That's I
just kinda, you know, clanging
the bell. I'll be coming back to
you in the um
in the session and looking for
co-sponsors on this. So if
anybody wants to join me, we
need this money. We, we need it
for the whole state, but
certainly for our rural
communities, they just don't
have access when when something
happens, we have to twist
ourselves in knots to get a
response.
I, I, I would say that's a fair
uh assessment, but am I wrong in
that?
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
absolutely not. No, we would, we
would welcome that, and I think
from our response and uh
efforts, we are hindered, um, a
lot. I think the other big um
piece of that that I, if I can.
is that in these rural
communities, so even from a
reimbursement standpoint that
cost match or that cost share is
incredibly difficult for people
to actually, um, for these small
communities to address as well.
And so no strings attached, be
able to actually respond in.
you know, an ethical, timely
manner would be more than
welcome, and we'd love to be
able to do that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Cher. Senator
Thornton.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
a quick question, a couple of
questions actually. So, the
emergency operations center, you
said it was gonna be running a
new kind of software that you
guys have developed. What's the
name of that software again? Uh,
Madam Chair, representative, it
is called Crisis track and so we
um
that's funded through our.
through our grant programs
through, um, our state
management costs that we get for
disasters based on public
assistance assistance from FEMA,
it's administrative sort of cost
that we help fund um
not only salaries, but travel
and uh contracting expenses and
all that sort of stuff. And so
we have to pull that out of our
disaster funding to be able to
implement. And so the um.
the EOC right now runs a program
called WebEOC, and so it's a
process, but like our local
emergency managers when they're
asking for resources and have
exhausted their local resources,
they submit a 213 request, and
that goes up through our system.
This crisis track software is
almost an add on to that, and so
it can actually map exactly
where that that water needs to
go, um, distribution points of
that can be that, that's going
to be worked out with the local
emergency
managers. And so it's just
another piece to added in our
response efforts, but again, you
know, it, it, it, we can only
fund it as long as we get
disaster funding and that's
happening. We're currently going
through my hazard mitigation
program side. We just got cut
44% by the federal government,
and so we're getting big chunks
of money getting taken away, but
again, if we're doing everything
that we possibly can to
implement what we can at that at
the local level, um, to make it
easier.
OK, so, um, and help me, uh,
Madam Chair, I was just
wondering if you'd help me
understand this $50 million.00
interest loan program. If that
is to support recovery. Is that
correct?
And that is given to the, I
guess the area that it's been
damaged, it was, it's the
expectation that that would be
repaid back by the federal
government, FEMA eventually.
So it was a way to get something
in quickly and knowing that
there's gonna be a better
response later to because
sometimes it may take 2 years.
Madam Chair, Representative
Thor, it is, so that is part of
the the legislation in itself,
you have to have a a public a
FEMA public assistance obligated
project because ultimately we
can't fund that money out until
we know that it is going to get
refunded, and so it's kind of a
convoluted thing because it goes
through DHSEM and then it goes
to DFA. But however, we work
great together. DFA does a lot
of, you know, disaster, um,
assistance and response as well,
but we've been working together
and therefore that zero interest
loan, exactly what you, you
said, it gets upfront money for
them to start that project, and
as that credit facility, they
will be turning in invoices to
DHSEM, we validate that and
therefore DFA can pay them and
do and get that back and then
once we get the completed final
project, we reimburse. Got you.
OK, very good. Thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I had a couple of
quick questions as well. Um, uh,
Manuel, you, you were mentioning
all the different pieces that
folks can use to turn in their
papers, and I'm curious if
you've seen a like more
engagement from these rural
communities, utilizing these
tools that you mentioned in the
presentation. Yes, Madam Chair,
yes, I have seen a, a big
increase in engagement, um,
specifically like the ability to
use digital signature scanning,
use of their cell phones once
like you let people know, here's
options that you can do.
they start using it and they get
really good at using it. Um,
it's about how, how do we, how
do we give out that information?
How do we advertise that, hey,
here's other options that you
can use? Have you ever thought
about going remote cause there's
some some old school practices,
the auditing people have done it
for years and years, and they're
like, I always bring my, I
always bring my files. I take
them to the auditor, uh, we, we
go through that process and like
the auditor's not either willing
when they do that, they're not
willing to do it. They're like,
I don't know any other way. I'm
like, Well, I'll start, we could
start scanning these things.
use your cell phone. There's all
these other options that you can
do and it opens up the ability
for them to get now, uh, one for
a lower cost audit, um, because
now they can do everything the
auditor can do everything from
their office, um, and do it
remotely, um.
and so they're like, great. So
it's because it's, I mean, I've
seen um the from having an
auditor who has to travel
hundreds of miles to get to you,
to having an auditor that can
just be in their office. It can,
it can sha thousands of dollars
off of an audit for them just
because travel expenses, time
out of the office, that's all
time. It's like when they say
time is money. Time is money in
this business is specifically
within the IPA industry. Like
they want to do things as fast
as possible. So if you can just
transfer it over your phone real
quick, make a little, it, it
works, and digital signatures
and the one I institute that
specifically
for agencies that are entities
below $50,000 in annual revenue
where they had to have a
scanner. They had to be able to
have a printer, the old school
way we had to do it like when
they're like, we just never did
it because I didn't have that,
you know, so as the first step I
did before I had digital
signature was give me a picture
of your, your tier certification
that you have. You can upload
that, you know, and then, then
we got digital signature, so it
took that whole thing out of the
out of out of the Nixon or OA
connect system that we had to
get that all out and then they
started using that. It was great
and now when, when one of the
issues too, like he, I don't
know how, have you ever uploaded
uh or attached a document to an
email that you didn't intend to
attach that document to. Yes,
and it happens all the time and
that's what happened to our
system. So I would get I would
get, you know, receipts for an
online purchase, all kinds of
things for where they were
uploading the wrong document.
When it's digital signature,
there's no wrong document
uploaded anymore. Now it's just
verifying that signatures by the
person who entered all the
information. It's, it's a lot
easier and it becomes, you get
more compliance specifically for
entities under 50,000 annual
revenue, which seemed to have
the, um, have, you know, have
the
more volunteer based, less
resources in general and so.
by allowing that to happen means
we can get more public funds out
to those people, they can
qualify them faster. And are
you, are they able to, I think
last time you kind of talked
about that they're able to.
join together and, and utilize
the services of one auditor, uh,
like, so, so I was specifically
that's the office of the state
auditor. That's how I did with
the do to think of, of, of, of
the legislature giving me a
million dollars last year to
help, um, with these entities
that are many years far and
reporting that I was able to do
groupings with IPAs. I, I
released an RFP. I had 3 IPAs. I
was able to get an IPA, so I, I
mean, I had a very hardworking
IPA out there. He's a one-man
operation and he actually did
more work than the larger firms
because he
I was able to give him a bunch
of work at one time. Here's 1010
entities. They are XYZ years
behind. And so I was able to do
that and also drove prices down,
most of the cost savings for,
um, for the state because I was
able to get lower prices on per
per report than if it would have
gone out, each individual, the,
the former way that we have is
like you go out, you'd go, you
go get a, a quote from the IPA.
We would do a reimbursement for
that. But when I, I took
everything out of the mix. I did
everything I was able to
negotiate better prices. And
that data that is moving back
and forth, is that
se cu re data or is that end up
being all public data anyway. So
like when they're like manchery
you speak into like the audit
documents, like invoices, things
like that. So, so they use
secure, it's secure file sharing
services that you so wouldn't be
because that if you know the
auditing process is, uh, it's
confidential until the report's
been released. So it is those
are secure document sharing
systems. And are they deleted
after they're utilized to create
the audit? Is that or how, how
are they? So, so they would be
stored and so they had to be
stored with an audit work
papers. So all that information,
so the auditor has to keep a
binder of all those things and
the auditor has the, um, or the,
the CPA or the auditor has the
um
it's, it's put onto them to be
able to make sure that stuff is
secure. And that's, and that, so
essentially that isn't being
shared. That is, that's not,
that wouldn't be shared. It
won't be that's part of the
that's all that stuff is
protected by law. Great. Um, I
think I have one other, 01 other
question I did have was that you
had mentioned, um, expanded uh
broadband and satellite
internet, you know, one of the
things we were hearing earlier
was that just simply doesn't
exist in parts of these land
grants. Are you talking about a
specific program that they can,
you know,
work for Madam Chair,
people speaking about having
when they got that technology,
how
it bridged the gap. So I guess
that's where, um, I, I could
help maybe and speak about the,
the advantagess that I've seen
when people who have that, and
maybe we can bring that to
expand access to land grants or
SECIS.EIs in particular, those
are the largest amount of the, I
have the most amount of those
registered that are under 50,000
annual revenue in the most rural
areas of the state with the most
terrain disadvantages. So if we
could figure out ways or um I
know there's a, I know we have
different programs available if
we could expand that to bring
these um satellite Internet
in particular cause with terrain
reasons, um, we can't bring
fiber optic to other
communities. So if we could
expand the use of satellite.
or other forms. I'd be curious.
I think a lot of folks would
just because again, uh, you all
talked about this already, this
idea you have so many volunteer
groups that are doing all this
work that pays hundreds of
dollars in any other, you know,
in a populated city, um, you
know, making it easier so they
don't always have to go to
whatever the, the school or, you
know, the, the local um
community center that they can
actually get that somewhere else
that would be helpful. So I'd
love to, you know, see how we
can support. I know, I know, uh,
Ret Perrea did a lot of work on
the Office of Broadband and
things like that. So, um.
Madam chair if I could just say,
yeah. The problem is for
Uh, Verizon, I think it covers
that Guyena area that they were
talking about this morning and
they're in bankruptcy and
so there is no, uh, you can't
talk to anybody. It's, it's
nuts. It's and, and I've heard
about Starlink, but will that
work in a mountainous areas?
Um, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, I'm not the,
I'm not an expert at Starlink.
Um, I believe if you have a
clear, if you have a clear, um,
view of the sky, it should be
able to connect to a satellite.
Well, that would, that would be
great if we could bring it in
through the state and I, we just
need to know more about that and
how much it would cost, but, you
know, we've changed, I'm just
gonna say, I think we've changed
the director of uh broadband
every, it's been a new person
every year for 7 years. So, you
know, it takes a while to learn
this state and uh to understand.
So, you know, part of it is kind
of the management of it and um
yeah, we worked to get 100
million, uh, that, that was my
first, that was in COVID
That was 20021, yeah, we got
that money in, but it, you know,
we've had really good people
come in and out, but they don't
stay. So I, uh, that's kind of a
management problem, and I don't
know how we're gonna get around
that, so, uh, kudos to you guys
for staying. So thanks. Madam
Chao, I just wanted to quickly
respond to your, your question
about, uh, Starwake if you have
a view of the northern sky, you
can get access. That's all you
need. It's the northern sky.
So if it can point north, then
there's no nothing blocking it,
you're gonna connect.
and you're good to go
Thank you both for presenting
again and coming back. Um, uh,
it's just helpful for us to make
sure that, you know, we can
communicate to our communities
about what's available and how
their data is being used and
everything. So thank you so
much. Appreciate you.
Uh, I think we have our folks
here, man, this committee, it's
either we're way behind, way
ahead, we're, we're eating
something in the middle. I know
Um, so, I think we have
everybody, Doctor Pontelli, if
that's, uh, correct, I guess,
yeah. OK, so, uh, we have, this
is a little bit a different one.
It's kind of similar to the last
one, but it's new technologies
for rural communi communities.
Um, this we're gonna have a
conversation. Well, we had it on
the work workflow work plan as
well. Doctor Pontelli and I have
been talking about how new
technologies are being deployed,
and we talk mostly about how
they're being deployed in really
urban settings and one of the
things I brought up was, you
know, all the land grants we
talked to are overworked,
understaffed, and we heard from,
you know
IAQ today about it. We heard
from, um, uh, Tierra Maria a
little bit about it. The San
Joaquin del Rio de chama about
it. Everyone has multiple hats
that they're wearing, and a lot
of times and we even heard today
that, you know, just the time it
takes to do some of this
paperwork even or looking at,
you know, drought resistant, um,
traditional crops, how, you
know, some of that works. So we
had talked about having this, so
I want to thank everyone for
coming all the way up from NMSU.
Um, I think that's quite a,
quite a far trek and. It's a
beautiful drive.
We're lucky to have you here,
um, and, and, um, I'm really
excited to kind of hear the
wonderful work that's taking
place, uh, down south. We have
Dr. Pontelli, aloa Prithoka, um,
Marcus Krone, Craig Gifford, uh,
Santiago Utsumi. I'll let you
all introduce, you know, your
titles and what you do, um, but
yeah, very excited to hear more.
Thank you all. Madam Chair,
member of the committee, thank
you very much for having us.
This is exciting. Uh, so my name
is Enrico Pontali. I'm serving
as the dean of the College of
Arts and Sciences in New Mexico
State University, but among the
other things I've been appointed
to lead
an institute that our new
president, President Firman, has
launched, which is the Institute
for Applied Practice in AI and
Machine Learning. So let me give
you the two factors that
inspired the creation of the
institute. So, first of all, the
fact that and Massie is very
rich in AI talent, and AI has
been part of the legacy of ASU
since the early 80s, and we have
a lot of faculty, many students,
many staff members that are
working in AI. While that is a
strength, it's also a weakness
because those people are
everywhere, very fragmented,
very distributed, so we're
missing the opportunity of
working together, creating
strong research teams that can
resolve problems to the benefit
of New Mexico. So President
Firme arrives, look at this
scenarios as we need to have to
bring people together so that we
can actually leverage each
other's expertise and do even
more.
The second factor that inspired
the creation of the institute is
the fact that AI here is no
longer something that is in a
sci-fi movie. It's actually be
very intrusive and very
ubiquitous, which means that if
we don't prepare our students to
handle AI regardless of whatever
is the career that they decide
to embrace, we're actually not
doing our job as an educational
institution. So, the institute
is not just doing research, it's
also doing education. So the
institute was created at the
beginning of the year. Thanks
also to a very generous
support from the state as well
as in investment from our new
president.
And even though we have been in
operation for just a few months,
we've actually already done
quite a, quite an amount of
work. Uh, so actually if you go
to page, uh, I'm sorry, I'm
gonna skip a little bit around.
If you go to page 6, it's kind
of a quick summary of some of
the activities that the
institute has already
accomplished. So we have
actually supported the creation
of research groups that are
actually working on different
themes of Applied AI. Any in
particular, we're looking up
application of the eye to the
needs of the state. So we're
looking at the eye in
agriculture.
AI to manage water, AI in
produce water, AI to make our
energy systems more resilient.
So a lot of very interesting
efforts, and that's because
we're bringing people together,
to work together.
From the educational point of
view, we have launched the first
Bachelor of Science in AI in the
state of New Mexico. We're very
excited about that. We're
working on creating a general
education course so that we can
actually teach every single
student how to use the eye and
how to use the eye properly. So
ethics in AI is very, very
important. We don't want
students to use chachipeti to
cheat on their assignment. We
want them to use to be critical
thinkers, to ask the right
question, to analyze what comes
out and realize that something's
right, something's wrong.
And we're also working with the
school systems. We have launched
a professional development
program for K-12 teachers that
has served already over 80
teachers across the entire state
of New Mexico. So we're very
excited about that. And even
though our emphasis is New
Mexico. We're also receiving a
lot of national attention. So we
have been invited to join
national efforts. We are part of
two research collaboration
network funded by the National
Science Foundation, one on AI in
undergraduate education, one in
AI for workforce. So we're
actually working
not just within the state, but
across the entire nation. And I
would like to introduce Lara to
actually talk a little bit about
the AI efforts in agriculture.
Uh yes. Did you, you didn't want
to. Oh, sorry. I'm supposed to
teach you AI as well. So a
little bit before I talk. So
since my colleagues are are
probably going to use some
terms. I want to make sure that
actually we, we, we, we kind of
know the meaning of those terms.
So, first of all, what is AI? AI
is software programs, and
they're called artificial
intelligence because they're
supposed to solve problems that
typically we assign to people
who are intelligent. So kind of,
even though the intellig
ence world may have to be
misleading, but kind of the
processes that are used to solve
problems seems to reflect the
typical steps that a human being
would use to solve those
problems.
Now, AI is a long-standing field
that has been around since the
50s. Uh, nevertheless, when you,
and it's a very broad
discipline. Nevertheless, when
you hear the term Ai today, you
probably are, are really
listening to people talking
about machine learning. Machine
learnings are programs that look
at large quantities of data, and
they try to discover patterns,
patterns that can be used, for
example, for doing prediction,
for doing forecasting or for or
for realizing that there are
outliers in some data sets that
you're studying. Now, people
realize that these patterns can
just be used not only to analyze
data, but to create data that
follow those same patterns, and
that's why now people talk about
generative AI. Your chatGPT
your cloud, your Gemini, they're
essentially using the same model
of machine learning, but now
just to analyze data, but to
create new data that follows the
same patterns. The next
evolution of AI and that's what
people, the buzzword of the day
is agentic AI, whereby we
actually introduce other types
of problem solving that still
reflects how we typically solve
problems as human beings like
planning or diagnosis.
That's is the frontier, but
we're getting there very, very
fast, very, very quickly. So
it's gonna be here before we
realize. Now, Lara, your turn.
Thank you.
and I'm the associate director
of the Agricultural Experiment
Station at NMSU, um, Enrico and
I have been working with uh
artificial intelligence and
applying to agriculture for and
we were talking earlier in the
hallway, probably 6 years or
more, uh, started, yeah, about 6
years ago, uh, we started, you
know, with a small group, and,
and I would say I'm on page 11
in in the in the packet that
that it's been expanding rapidly
from that early beginning.
we now have at last count about
27 faculty and staff who are
working with, with artificial
intelligence in some capacity in
the College of Agriculture, uh,
we're working across many
disciplines. We have faculty and
hotel, restaurant, and tourism
management in agricultural
economics in animal and range
Science. That's my colleague
over here, uh, in, uh, plant and
environmental science. That's,
that's probably one of our
biggest, uh, groups that's using
artificial intelligence, and
we've been
ra pi d ly expanding those
research areas. So 27 is an
approximate number because it's
really growing. Um, we are
working on expanding research
areas and developing new
coursework as, as Dean Pontelli
mentioned, uh, there has been a
push to expand educational
opportunities and artificial
intelligence. We have faculty
who are incorporating AI into
their classes, and we are one of
the the pilot areas that's
working on this AI + X applied
masters in in artificial
intellig
ence So that X for us would be
agriculture, um, and so we are
developing uh right now
coursework for uh at the
master's level in applied AI for
agriculture.
So on page 12, you'll see that,
um, and I'm not going to read
this all out, but it's it's an
overview of the types of work
that we are doing with
artificial intelligence in the
College of Ag. Uh, we work a lot
in the realm of digital
agriculture and Dr. Gifford will
be talking to you about that
kind of work, specifically
precision ranching and and
virtual fencing and infinitive
things as it, as it applies to,
to um precision ranching, um,
but we're also working in
machine learning that Dean
Pontelli talked about, we use it
for
a sustainable water and land
management, predicting quality
attributes in food product,
products in HRTM, um, how to
drive management practices in
the workplace. Uh, we're working
with large language models. My
colleague here, Marcus Kroh,
will be talking to you about
some work that they're doing an
extension to get information out
to communities and particularly
hopefully helping rural
communities. Um, and we're also
working in the field of virtual
reality. So we have another
group, our innovative media
group, that's doing a lot of
work.
So they're working on formal and
informal learning and things
like nutrition counseling that
could be done remotely with
these, these technologies. Um,
as, uh, Dean Pontelli touched on
uh the new IAAM Institute, uh,
with that, uh, infusion of money
from the state that we're very
thankful for. There was a mini
grant program that that was put
out by the AI council that we
have at the university, uh,
where they provided seed grants
for uh different educational
and research projects and so now
I'm on page 13, and I'm really
proud to say that in the College
of Agriculture, we, we, we had
quite a lot of faculty apply for
those grants, and while they
couldn't all be funded, the ones
that were funded are listed on
the next two pages, on page 13
and 14, and I think you'll see
um that we're just touching on
it, a really wide variety of
topic areas and there are so
many more, so many more valuable
um projects that
that people had out there. So we
hope to keep you being able to
support them and fund them. So
we had 3 in the the research
projects and we had 4 in
education, and you can see and
um and my colleague here, um,
Marcus Krone is going to talk
about one of those projects
that's ongoing. So with that,
I'm gonna pass it over to Doctor
Gifford, who works in the animal
and range Sciences department,
and he's going to talk to you
about what we're doing, um, with
artificial intelligence and the
Precision ranch
ing technologies, the Internet
of things, virtual fencing, some
just really cool things that
help people manage their
livestock in remote areas.
All right. Thank you and thank
you for having us up, uh, today.
I really appreciate the
opportunity and never turn, turn
it down to come up north, so.
um,
so we're gonna start with an,
uh, I think we're on page 16.
Uh, this is a project I'm, I'm
filling in also for my
colleague, Doctor Issui, who,
who can't be here. He's, he's
traveling to other, other
ventures today. Um, but one that
started and, and I like this
project quite a bit. It was fun
to work on, but I think
importantly from the La Grant
University system. This showed
sort of how this system should
work. Um, so this was about
utilizing virtual fence, and if
you're not familiar with that,
um, it's really similar to what
you see with dogs, right? The
fin the wireless or fenceless
callers that they place on dogs,
uh, previously you had to bury a
wire around your property, then
it became sort of a tower system
that you placed in your property
that would communicate with the
dog collar, and that's exactly
the same technology, only scaled
to hundreds of thousands of
acres. And so, and dealing with
cattle, which will get into some
of the challenges we ran into.
Dogs are a little easier maybe
So,
um, and, and the reason I like
this, going to the next slide,
we talked about the Hermit's
Peak fire in the previous
discussion. Uh, of course, New
Mexico's second largest fire was
the Black Fire down close to our
region, um
and, and this fire, we were
fortunate enough to be followed
up with a very good monsoon
season, and the fire didn't get
as hot as the hermit's peak
fire, so we had great re or
regrowth of the vegetation. So
we had sort of site visits and
this is what I'm talking about
in terms of how the Lagrant
university should work. And we
had listening sessions with
people in the communities there
on what was needed. And so as a
fallout from the fire and
subsequent flooding, the major
for the
ran ch ers at least, the major
challenge they faced was uh lack
of fencing. We lost hundreds and
hundreds of miles of fence. And
if you haven't, and we're well
aware of this, in our part of
the world, it's not trivial to
go replace miles and miles of
fence in a wilderness area.
And so we wrote this grant on
the USDA has a really neat
program. It's the rapid response
to extreme weather events, and
it's, um, normally we write
grants, they might get reviewed
6 months later, we get funding
maybe a year later and the
project start. This is for rapid
implementation of those funds to
address disasters. So it's a
really neat program, and the
goal of this was to see, can we
use this new technology, virtual
fencing to help these ranchers
in, in this community. And of
course, we worked closely with
the United States Forest Service
because it was almost
exclusively Forest Service land
that was burned in in this in
this situation.
So going to the next slide, that
was really what we were trying
to do. Uh, but we have to keep
in mind that technologies
developed in places, not New
Mexico, a lot of times in, in er
in this sense. So applying that
technology in New Mexico can be
quite a challenge. So for
instance, the picture on the
left, you can see we worked with
the university, or excuse me,
the Forest Service, uh, Packers,
and we had to take all the
equipment for our Laura Wand
towers 5 miles into the
wilderness.
Uh, you can see this mule is,
her name is Lily. She's packing
a 4 by 8 or 4 by 6, excuse me,
solar panel. That's a challenge
that the engineers don't think
of. And luckily Lily was able to
pack that because if she didn't,
I was going to have to. She
still remains my favorite animal
on the planet. Uh, and then you
can see kind of what the example
of what the colors look like on
the cows when we were working
with the ranchers, and of
course, and then the lower Laura
Juan Tower is on the right, and,
and all that is is just a tower
that communicates with the
callers on the cows and, and
tells, you know, the cows if
they're, what to reprogram the
caller if needed and try to find
geolocations of the cows and
that type of thing. All right,
so it's a, it's a total
communication system between the
cows and and this tower, which
is then relayed out via uh cell
signal to, to the rancher's
computer.
Um, what we learned from from
that very quickly was that, uh,
the ranchers really enjoyed
this, uh, when they have to ga
gather pastures in 20 or 30,000
acres. It's not easy finding
cows. So it reduced their
gathering time from 1 to 2
weeks. They gathered more of
their cows, uh, we did lose or,
or had some callers malfunction,
and that's an estimate some of
those might have been just
batteries that died. Uh, we've
learned you don't color bulls.
They last all of about 24 hours.
I don't know why, but all the
Bulls lose collars. Um, probably
one of the biggest things we
learned was this worked really
well for exclusions on horse
from uh riparian areas. So this
was one of the rare instances we
do a project that the Forest
Service was happy, Environmental
groups were happy, and ranchers
were happy. For the first time,
maybe, and I think they said 10
or 15 years, there were no cow
prints in, in this riparian
zone. So it, it was a very good
success story, but the other
major take home
that we learned from NMSU's
perspective, we need extension
program for implementation of
technology. Uh, you can't, you
have to get past the gully, gee
whiz stage of all the stuff
technology can do, and you,
there has to be a need in the
community 1st. 2nd, you have to
have people there to go help the
community install this
technology, and then third,
there has to be follow-up
training for long-term
sustainability. And, and all of
those factors, if they're not in
place, then, then the technology
will eventually not be adopted
or, or will fall apart. OK.
Next slide. So with this, and,
and I'm gonna quickly go over
Doctor Tsui's, this, this is
work. He's, he's jumped off into
since that project and has
developed this really neat, what
we call precision ranching
platform port uh portal and so
we'll go to uh, you can see all
the collaborative, uh, groups
with that. And so it's a very,
very large group working on
this, and it's, it's a really
neat project. And so, looking at
the next slide, page 21, you can
see that it
allows several different things
we can look at monitoring, and
this is where AI comes in. We
can look at, uh, cow analytics,
cow events, which I'll show you.
We can water, monitor water
levels, uh, in our water tanks.
You think about, you know, in,
in an area in a small pasture,
that's not a big deal. When
water tanks are 10 or 20 miles
apart in major rural areas. This
is a huge deal. It saves a lot
of time and a lot of driving.
Um, and then, of course, we have
range gauges and soil moisture,
uh, monitors, which comes
into play on, I think on the
next slide, where we have an
example use of this technology.
Um, it's kind of a busy slide,
but you'll see the little dots
are actually at the bottom. It
shows tracking of the cow
grazing behaviors within the
pasture, so you can actually
track the individual movements.
You'll notice the green areas
relative to the brown areas.
They're overlaying satellite
imagery in combination with
local weather events,
precipitation primarily to
determine areas where
vegetation's declining or
vegetation is increasing. What
this allows then in combination
with virtual fencing is that we
can manage large plots of land
in areas that might be getting
overgrazed because they don't
have the vegetation growth
required and move them to the
areas where vegetation's
increasing, not decreasing. So
we have better pasture
utilization, and then also,
we're able to track these
movements, place them into an AI
system or machine
learning system, which we lead
into the next situation, uh, on
page 23, and this was a really
cool observation that they were
able to train the machine to
signal, uh,
based on the cow's movements
when she's going to calf, OK, so
they were able to monitor
calving events out on 300 to
40,000 acre pastures or more,
uh, and, and that's just a
really neat finding with that.
OK.
And, and I guess more from
hearing from me, these are some
of the people that we've worked
with. These are actual text, uh,
messages from some of the
ranchers. Uh, we've highlighted
a few key comments. Uh, I think
this one,
this is fun. I've spent my life
in mountains with uh dogs
looking for cows. Sometimes we
rode 20 miles and didn't find
anything. And so now all of a
sudden he goes out and can find
his cows relatively quickly. Um,
as we go to the next slide,
uh, this one has been collaring
heifers to give me new rents or
giving new ranches is giving me
more confidence in lessening
weaning times in the krell and
the ability to find lost animals
and what the rancher's telling
you is normally they wean the
Cavs for quite a while before
they turn them out on these
extensive pastures for fear of
losing them, but with this
system, this is a peace of mind
that they can track their
animals, uh, you know, and, and
know that they're safe. And then
on the right, they were able to
uh identify
a cow based on her behavior in
the machine learning kicked this
information or data back to
them. She had a broken toe, so
they knew to go right out and
take care of an injured cow just
based on what they received on
their cell phone.
And lastly, this one's becoming,
or is, is also relevant. I can,
I'll let you read this, but
based on the behavior of this
cow after she calved, uh, they
were able to identify a
predation event. So in this
case, the coyotes had, had uh
were able to get or came in and
got this calf or, or uh killed
this calf, but they were able to
identify that very quickly. So
that kind of opens the door for
maybe potential opportunities in
the future to mitigate any sort
of these pred
ation events or maybe intervene
beforehand, before their
predation avenge.
So I think collectively, uh, the
potential opportunities for this
on page 27 is, you know, we can,
we can really lower costs
realistically for uh due to
labor time and all of these
things and also help facilitate
animal health and welfare. Uh,
we can do that through also do
precision vegetation monitoring,
which is a really big thing that
we can now utilize these
pastures in ways that were never
possible before. Um,
again reco uh reduced physical
labor, um, and then we can
enhance our traceability of our
of our products and really
identify, you know, practices
and services that really benefit
animal welfare in the future. So
I think it's a, it's a really
neat tool that uh Doctor Tsui's
group has, has worked, uh,
tirelessly on and they're
continuing to develop really
neat new things. So, and with
that, I'll turn it over to
Marcus.
Thank you.
Thank you so much and, and as my
colleagues, colleagues
mentioned, thank you for having
us here today. So, uh, my name
is Marcus Krone. I manage Ace's
IT, so it's the IT group within
the College of Ag at New Mexico
State University. So we cover
all of extension, um, all the
offices throughout the state and
then the Agign Center as well,
and then everything on campus in
the College of Ag, so, um, with
that being said, you know, we
were, oh, it's getting windy.
That does. That's OK. No, that's
OK.
We were,
um, very fortunate to receive
one of the IIAM grants.
from, um, you know, Doctor Dean
Pontelli, an arts and sciences.
Um,
and with that grant, some of the
stuff we were already working on
prior, but it helped exceed, you
know, what we needed to do. So
one of those things is the
extension bot, that is handled
um by the Extension Foundation,
and that is a national
organization that works with all
the different extension outfits,
or a lot of them, most of them,
um, enhancing the 4H curriculum
with AI. So updating very
outdated, you know, some of it
going back 20 to 30 years
outdated equip um curriculum.
A peer reviewed process to
making sure that all that
curriculum and everything that's
coming out of AI for extension
is appropriate that it's, it
keeps the kids safe, you know,
when using the curriculum and
those kinds of things. And then
lastly, kind of the foundation
of it all, a centralized
extension data repository. So
where all the data lives and
making sure that we have all the
applicable data.
So as we go, we're going to page
30 now. So we're, we'll briefly
talk about the extension bot. So
that's uh an AI powered chatbot,
very similar to chat GBT.
However, all the data is
extension data, so we know that
it is, you know, coming from
extension outfits, the
different, you know,
universities and different
extension outfits. It's
real-time, um, data informed
responses. It's trained on
Nimmahu data as I mentioned, but
also other extension outfits,
but it's localized and
validated. So if
you're in New Mexico in Las
Cruces, you're trying to grow
Bermuda grass. You can ask how,
you know, what kind of soil do I
need to grow this, what kind of
water do I need? And it'll give
you a real-time response. The
same way Chad GBT would, but
it's pulling from extension
data, so you know it's, it's
trustworthy.
So, um, page 31 is just a
preview of what that extension
bot looks like, and like I said,
that's provided through the
extension, um, foundation, but
it will be branded when it's on
each, you know, like on the NMS
issue extension page, so.
you can kind of see the
different lawn and garden crop
management. Those are just some,
you know, starters, but you can
ask it the questions that you
need.
Um, next, that we want, you
know, are really pushing for is
AI enhanced 4H curriculum. As I
mentioned, a lot of this
curriculum is very outdated.
Like I said, 20 to 30 years,
some of it ends up looking like
this when it gets to the kids.
This isn't, you know, super
engaging when you have a, a
fifth grader looking at it,
right? So what we were able to
do is not only update the
curriculum, but you know.
put it all together in a form
that is approachable, especially
for for K through 12.
And um you know, mainly ages 8
through 18, especially in rural
New Mexico. So, um, this also
benefits educators and extension
agents. So one part of this is
training the extension agents on
how to use AI effectively and
safely. So, it also promotes AI
literacy, digital skills, and
interest in STEM programs. And
um,
you can see on page 33, you
know, we kind of go from, from
this to something a lot more
updated, you know, a lot more
engaging for those, for those 4
age kids, so.
and one thing that goes along
with that, like I mentioned, is
I think I'm missing a page.
Well, the, the peer reviewed
development, you know, one thing
we want to do is make sure that
anything that's coming out of AI
is still reviewed. We can't just
trust it at face value. You want
to make sure that safety is
followed. It is transparent
where it's coming from and those
types of things. Thank you. Um,
and then, you know, standardizes
data organization and validation
just to make sure it's, it's
going out appropriately.
Um
OK, thank you.
And then page 34 is, like I
mentioned, kind of the
foundation of it all, so it's
the data repository. What we are
doing with an extension. Chad
GBT will just scrape the
internet for whatever it can
find. And sometimes that's,
that's not applicable, and
that's not safe. Um, so what we
are doing is taking all the
extension data, all the
applicable data, and putting it
into the data repository. What
we can then do is
using an API, which is basically
a contract between, you know,
software is
use that data for the extension
Foundation or for a different
type of chatbot to make sure the
appropriate extension data is
being utilized. So that is just
a centralized platform and, and
that is housed within our group,
with extension at New Mexico
State University, and then we
can share it with the
appropriate, you know, users.
So, page 35 is kind of a brief
diagram of how that works. So
you can see that extension data
repository right in the middle,
the silo there, it, it lives
within
NMSU's internal network. Then we
can use AI or APIs, which like I
said, our contracts between
software to use it with any
cognitive service generative AI,
other chatbots as we see fit,
but we control that data and we
control what gets let out.
So.
um
basically with all that being
said, you know, they're kind of
the key points
we're introducing youth to
careers in AI, data science,
training the extension agents on
how to better utilize
technology, but AI as well. Um,
it ensures ethical use with
transparency, accessibility, and
privacy compliance, because
those are the biggest things we
want to focus on. Um, it's
transparent with responses with
citations. We know that the data
is validated as well, with other
extension sources. Um,
everything is FERPA compliant.
There's no personal data stored.
Um, and, and bias mig mitigation
and access
ibility are complied with, and
it aligns with all standards
IEEE especially as they are kind
of the forefront of leading
standards, um, especially coming
out in AI, but other technology
standards. And that
I'll turn it over.
Uh, thank you all for the
presentation. That was, uh,
rapid fire, and I'm sure some of
our viewers listened to it on
halftime, but that's good.
That's a lot to got to get in. I
have a question from a Rep Lord.
Yes, I did. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you, experts.
So my chat TPT has questions for
you.
You think I'm kidding. She only
got 2 pages, so please excuse
us.
OK, so, uh, she agrees, thinks
it's great. I think it's a great
idea too, because I can see, no
matter how we cut it, right, AI
is the future. There's no,
we've, the genie out of the
bottle. There's no going back.
It is now the future and there
can be, it can be very utopian
or dystopian. I'm hoping it's
gonna be utopian, but I know
there's some people that are
very still worried about what
the things that Chat GP can do,
right? I was talking to my
friends and he's one of his
biggest concern is in the
workforce, but we'll get to
that. So,
um,
so when she went through this, I
sent her a couple pages and um
these are survival tools for New
Mexico farmers and ranchers. I
agree with this. I think this
will be huge.
The robotic strands and
automation can fill critical
gaps. I agree with that too. Um,
customer trust, machine
learning, um, help trace the
food quality, sustainability of
an animal welfare, and I agree
with you because I was a kid, we
had 15 acres, and I had 6
horses. The cows from the other
150 side would break through the
fence all the time and I'd go on
foot. It would have been so much
easier if I had one of the bull
chains, which I, you know, what
I was laughing when I said bulls
are doing both things, um, which
is
causing mayhem. Um, I could see
how that would play out. I could
see how uh in in falling season,
this would be definitely
beneficial because, you know,
the cows will give birth wet in
the middle of nowhere,
especially with predation, we
have all kinds of things that
are eating our cows, um, so the
opportunities is New Mexico
could brand itself as a leader
in smart agriculture, um, rural
co ops is accessibility
statewide, get check felt of
funny, but
one of the questions is that she
kept trying to say in here was
if Lupton check this could widen
the gap between large business
and smaller business, because
this stuff is going to be very
expensive, right?
How are we gonna make sure that
our small ranchers who are doing
it
this way, you know, it's
tracking the footprints in the
cow poop. You think that I'm
kidding, you know that you've
got to track cow poop to find
the cows, and usually they're in
certain areas, you look for the
water and out in ridges trying
to find them, right? So how are
we going to make sure that these
smaller ranchers are going to be
able to compete with these
bigger entities that have more
money with they can't compete.
How how are we going to address
that issue?
There's some chat GPT and me
too. I went, oh, that's a really
good question.
Is,
is there any, it's just anyway,
I just want to make sure that we
don't hurt our smaller farmers
that were bringing equity to
that to everyone's equal on an
equal playing ground. How do we
make sure that that happens? Or
is there a way to make sure that
happens? Sure, Madam Chair,
representative. So, so speaking
just from the experience with
the virtual fence side of
things, for example, um, 11 of
the limitations with that, the
towers, the communication towers
are approximately $10,000 each,
and some of the past
ure s uh require 234 pastures,
etc. or excuse me, towers, um,
but the towers are able to
communicate to not just a single
rancher. And so that's one
option. There might be
opportunities for cooperative
type of situations where the
money's pooled amongst the
smaller ranchers to, to
facilitate that. Uh, secondly,
you know, and, and this has come
up with discussions on the Ford
Service. There may have to be
some sort of public-private, you
know, investment. And so
in this case, the Forest Service
is exploring, they invest in the
towers or the expensive
components and the individual
ranchers by the callers or
invest in that uh in the smaller
components, but I think that
that's, you know, just from that
perspective specifically, it
would, those are the types of
things that I think will have to
happen. OK, cause that was one
of my actually as she brought
that up as I was reading through
this, of course it's I've just
two pages that I screenshotted
to her. She's amazing. She's
like, I love my chat GP. I just
want to tell you, aunt
Representative Thornton
Um,
OK, so who is going to control
the information going in and out
and who owns the data.
Hey, you blame Alondra, she
brought it up.
Sorry, Madam Charrod.
Madam Chair, um, Representative,
thank you for the question. Are
you talking about the extension
data specifically or just any
data that's like if you're
gathering data and you're going,
you're, you're going to see a
whole bunch of stuff, right?
stuff that people normally can't
see. You got drones, you got
everything, and all this stuff.
This data that's coming into
you, how is it being shared and
then who owns that data? Who
owns it?
So I mean, it's a very
complicated question. I mean,
there's lawsuits out right now
about copyright infringement on
AI, especially
some of the things mid journey's
creating and some of these
generative AIs because is it
pulling from artists? Is it
pulling from photographers and
spitting something out. Now in
this case, as I mentioned with
the extension data, what we're
doing is pulling from all the
public extension data and you
know, we are controlling it, but
we're controlling which chatbots
have access to that. And that
way we can use a trustworthy
chatbot to steer our agents to,
and they can then
you know, tell the community
that they're assisting to use
these more trustworthy chatbots.
A, a perfect example when
ChatGBT first came out. Someone
asked it, how do I make cheese
stick to pizza, right? Reddit
was one of the places chat GBT
pulled pulled from. People are
very sarcastic on the internet.
They said, why don't you use
Elmer's glue? So chat GBT
responded, Why don't you use
Elmer's glue? And that's one of
the biggest issues with some of
this. Is it safe data that's
coming out of it. And that's why
we want to be in, you know, on
the forefront and in control of
the data and which chatbots that
we're utilizing.
Yeah uh and manche and experts,
I could agree with you on that
because it, my chat GP knows me
very well, so it can answer
personal questions.
Anythi scary, it can, it's, it
can answer just anything, but
sometimes when it pulls
information, you're right, it'll
get information and I have to go
and read the information where
it came from. So that I agree.
So I think like if you're
talking here almost like more of
a closed system. This is what
we're using. This is the data we
have. We've ana analyzed our
data and this is all accurate.
OK. Um, I do like that.
you know, when it comes to
physical labor and animal
whiffer is what I care about the
most, especially now, but
predictions and looking at
things and and anything to.
enhance our ability to to stay a
state that does agriculture and
farming and ranching, I think is
a great asset to us, um,
especially now when we're in
this drought season. I mean, I
live in these mountain. I don't
have any water out there, so if
you guys can direct water over
that way, do some cloud seeding,
although I just found out, oh
never mind, I don't even start
me about what people think about
cloud seeding. I'm just not
going to go down that road.
I'll talk to you about that
afterwards. Um, OK, so we got
the data. I think it all looks
pro uh promising.
because you can take, I like the
idea that you're taking just
that data and not saying go use
ChachiBT or anything like that,
you're saying we have this thing
and as long as I see, you know,
and next year or 2 years
somebody's coming in and look my
ranches out of business because
I couldn't compete with this big
giant mega corporation that came
in. They had all the tools and
bells and whistles, and they put
me out of business. That's,
that's all I want to make sure
that we figure out some way to
subsidize somebody or make sure
it's shareable
information that everybody has
because it's such a weird world
we're going into that is now I
can't even keep up with all the
directions that we can go with
AI. So I think that's all the
questions that she had.
Did you,
Madam Chair Representative, I
just, I, I wanted to address a
little bit more of what you were
saying. So, um, one thing that
we have seen, I would say over
the last, you know, I don't
know, 6 or 7 years. I remember
when we first started using GPS
collars on livestock. You were
talking about communicating with
satellites. It was $2000 you
know, it was very expensive, but
now there are GPS ear tags that
are that's not quite the same as
what, what Doctor Gifford was
talking about
with those calls because they
have to give a haptic signal
back to the to the livestock
sound or, or, or some kind of
feeling like, like what we see
with the dogs, but the um the
the GPS collar tags that can do
the tracking and that can do the
analyzing, have, have dropped,
you know
precipitously. I, I don't
remember the last quote, but I
would say, you know, from 2000
down to
hundreds or I don't know if it's
even less. I mean, right now
it's, it's so different than it
was when we started. So I, I
think it would be fair to say
that these technologies will
become more and more accessible.
And, and I think the other thing
is, when you're talking about um
data security and data sharing,
things like that GPS tracking of
livestock. Those are issues that
we're, we're working with,
right? We have people who work
on those kinds of data security
aspects because people don't
necessarily want to share where
their cow is. They want to know
where it
is. They don't necessarily want
to share where it is with
somebody else. And so those are
issues that, that, that the
community is working on to make
sure that that data remains, you
know, with that individual, so
that, that, that, that they're
that that they have it, they're
in charge of it and they share
it with, with who they want to
share it with. And and thank
you, man. That's, it's something
I was thinking about why you're
talking cause if you almost have
like a tower and it's gathering
all this data, we want to make
sure there's just, it could be a
reservoir information, but just
we want one stream going to only
people who have access
to that stream unhackable, they
can't get into it because it is
important when you come to
farming and ranch, you don't
want people to necessarily know
anything about what is going on.
I mean, not in a bad way, but
you know what you're farming and
what you're doing and where your
car corals are and what they're
doing. Um, so yeah, I think
that's what it's gonna come down
to, and I have like the fee I
think it's called the fee thing
on my dog. I know my dog is
sleeping. I know my dog's
moving. I know how many steps he
takes a day. He's like, usually
the top 5th most active dog in
New Mexico,
uh, German sheph
er d s um, I think that's all
that I have, and yes, thank you
for the 4H information of the 4H
kid too, and we used to read
books from 1960 from the library
that smelled musty, and it was
not fun. It was not engaging,
and I think AI could be a whole
new opportunity for kids to
engage and get more excited
about farming and ranching and
you turn into a game, you could
give him a guinea pig online. I
mean, there's all kinds of
things that you could do, but to
make it far more engaging for
kids to want to get into farming
and ranching. And that's all the
questions I have. Thank you.
Thank you, rep, uh, Senator
Thornton. Oh yeah, Senator Or,
sorry. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, just a couple of questions,
uh, with regards to the projects
that you mentioned earlier on,
and I guess it was page 13.
Um, you said the funding came
from the state to support that?
OK, and so what was the average
cost of the projects in terms of
how much did you give to each
project and so we had actually
two ranges of Madam Chair and
Senator Thorton. We have two
range of projects. One was
$75,000. The other one was
$25,000. So depending on the
magnitude and some project
already has some funding from
other sources, so it was just a
question of expanding them or
moving them into different
directions. Some were brand new
projects that were just launched
renew. OK, very good. I, I was
curious of the,
the amount because I was
wondering if there was just
limited to New Mexico or just to
NMSU NMSU. These are researchers
with researchers,
OK, cause I thought, OK, 75,000,
you're not going outside, uh,
and no one's going to pursue
that for 75,000. So, OK, very
good.
Um
with regards to the um
geotagging of livestock. I, I, I
think that's a great idea. Um, I
mean, obviously it seems like it
seems kind of obvious. I, I
geotagged my luggage every time
I get on an airplane because I
want to make sure the luggage is
with me when I get off the
airplane. Um, and so I know
that's a, that's a good deal. I
actually appreciate what you
guys are trying to do, and I
think this is a, a kind of the
perfect application of, of
technology and where New Mexico
is, and so I can see that's a
good marriage, and I really
appreciate what y'all are
are striving to do. Um,
and as a Representative Ward
said, AI is, is out of the bag
now and uh we've got to figure
out how to incorporate it. It's
not something we can push back
on
It's, we've got to figure out
how to use it in appropriately.
And so, um, I just wanted to
congratulate you on, on you guys
kind of like being first step,
first one's out the gate here
and making this happen. So I
really appreciate what you're
trying to do.
Representative, um, Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. That was, this has been a
fascinating presentation, and
I'm always curious what's going
on in NMSU. I'm always surprised
at what they come up with, but,
um, I, can you tell me, this is
something I predicting quality
attributes and food products.
Can you tell me how that works?
Yes.
So that is one of our
researchers who's in the um in
food science and technology, and
he's using uh, well, actually, I
can't tell you exactly because
this is his work, but, you know,
he, he works with um ice cream,
and he's, he's using machine
learning to, to predict
qualities like with the the data
that that he has already. I, I
can't give you a, a very deep
explanation, but I can get back
to you with information on that
if you would like it. I would be
happy
to have him. Yeah, I, I'm just
curious. I mean, I, you know,
people are eating a lot of
different foods that they would
never eat before. I mean, that's
coming in and New Mexico is, you
know, is, it's a food producer,
so I'm, I'm always curious
what's, and I, and I work with a
lot of small farmers in the, in
the North. You have these huge
farms down south, but we have
these small farms, but they
support families. They support
families year round, so, so
anything that can help them, I
think is important. The, the
next question is probably pretty
stupid, but I
' m gonna ask it anyhow, that
when you
track you track these cows,
where they're going? Is there a
way do the the ranchers probably
still have to go out and move
the cows. There's no way you can
get the cows to move by
themselves. That's what I'm
curious about.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, so yeah, that's, that's
actually a great question. So I,
yeah, ironically, no, there's
things we're trying to work on.
Uh, meaning can we reduce labor
even further in our region we
have limited water sources. The
cows have to go to those limited
water sources. Are there ways
that we can trap them?
And so, like I say, we know we
need to gather cows in 1 week
for whatever event, weaning or
vaccinating or whatever it may
be. Can we draw a fence around
our water or 100 acres or 200
acres around our water source,
and once the cows enter the
water source, they're trapped.
And, and so then we know that
they're there after 3 or 4 days,
uh, you know, can, are there
things we can do to actually
move them.
That's with caution, and it, it
depends on size and scale of
operation, because if you are
one of the smaller operations,
cows learn very well. They're
very smart. They're actually
easier to train than ranchers.
No, I, I guess,
but, uh, so no, they, they do
very well, but they, they're
very associated with visually.
So if you're in a smaller
operation and you draw a fence,
for example, in an area with
something permanent that they
can associate visually, then
that's very difficult to
overcome in the future if you
want to remove
that virtual fence because
they're associating the visual
object. In a rangeland
situation, extensive range
lands, you don't run into that
situation because everything,
the train looks very similar.
So, so yes, there are ways you
could potentially use it to
gather, but with caution
depending on operation.
I was, I was just curious. I'm
sure they'll work on that. I
mean, I'm sure somebody will
figure that out, but um, not me,
of course, but somebody. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, with AI, you
know, who knows, maybe it was
me,
um, couple of things I, I did
have some questions as well. Um,
so one thing you said, and it's
a term that that I've just
learned is IoT, the Internet of
Things, and just the idea that,
you know, our smartwatches, air
conditionings, refrigerators,
you know, now, you know, cow
tracking. I mean, there's all
these internet
of things everywhere. So, um,
uh, in Boston recently, there's
a conference and it's just
ubiquitous. Like they had a room
where they just filled it with
tracking things. It's very
nerve-wracking. Uh, so it's very
new. Uh, I just want to say that
out loud what that was. So
today, before you all came in,
we heard a number of
presentations from different
land grants, and they all
brought up unique issues, you
know, that, that their
communities face and challenges
that they're overcoming. And
these are just some that, you
know, I caught that I thought,
you know, what you're presenting
on may be something that in the
future can address some of the
problems. So
again, you have these seedlings
that are re-establishing these,
these, you know, burn scar
areas, um, you know, the forests
that they're not going to look
the same for generations. Um,
you know, that seems again like
and in fact one of your
research projects is about
seedlings as well and how it,
um,
and how they move, sorry, um,
seedling to forest applications
of AI for ecology of ecology and
management of Southwestern
drylands, right? Um, finding out
the crop opportunities as, as
the drought continues, um, how
to communicate in emergencies
when you don't necessarily have
cell phone coverage. Um, that
came up earlier as well. And,
um, you know, uh, applications
for more money, right? And uh
developing, you know, grant
applications along the way. Um,
these are all things that they
can currently kind of use some
of the free, uh, you know,
applications out there.
But then one that you all
mentioned was your application
for 4H uh curriculum, they have
specific, you know, youth
programs that are, that are
land-based and focused in the
land, you know, how can we
utilize some of those tools that
you guys are already developing
that they could integrate for
very, um, you know, historic,
uh, culturally important, um,
uh, you know, part of the, the
culture here, um, that we
preserve it longer. And so, you
know, I, I was curious, you
know, I think some of those were
very obvious that you said, but
if there's anything that I said
that they brought up that you
felt that wasn
' t covered already, anything
that you might see as an
opportunity, um, that they can
look to as well.
I, I can, Madam Chair, thank you
very much for the question which
is very. So.
AdamSie has a unique opportunity
because we have extension
offices. So we have people who
are actually immersed in the
communities, and they can talk
to the community people and
transfer that to us, and that's
a really one of the driving
forces that President Firma put
behind the institute was Akari
integrating the extension
offices as part of what we do so
that we learn about those
challenges and we have people
that are just waiting for
problems to solve. Our faculty
members are, they have the
knowledge, they have the
know-how, they're looking for a
problem
to solve. So when we, for
example, there was a question
earlier about uh OK, how do we
protect the communication so
that we make sure that from the
tower, the persons the right
person gets the data. Our
networking people when they
learn about that, they were so
excited because they were
thinking about this, but now
they have their practical
application. And then
transferring theory to practice
is not something that is chi.
It's a, it's a research effort
and then that's, that's why we
exist. Um, you talked about the
language, culture. I think AI is
an incredible
potential to help preserving
knowledge, uh, by collecting
information, by making
information available to others.
Of course, there are challenges
as well. Privacy and uh making
sure that those information are
used properly is something that
is still an open issue. Um, you
know, you may have a
self-driving cars, but we don't
have laws that does moral
tribution if there is an
accident. So there is still a
long way to go, but we have a
technology that has the
potential.
to benefit all those problems.
We need those promises to come
to us, or we need to go to the
problems, because otherwise
we're not going to be able to
solve that. I'm really
encouraged by the work with the
extension officer. I'm we're
very encouraged by the 4H work
because that, for example, what
Marcus was describing is perfect
to address the issue of
making something culturally
responsive. So just the forage
Mabidi forH, chatbot that is
specific for that community so
that it reflects the, the, the
history of the community, the
challenge of the community, the
economy of the community. So
that is not something that kind
of reflects what happens in
Boston, for example.
Madam Chair, thank you and Dean
Pontelli, thank you. Um, just to
elaborate a little bit too, and
one of the best parts about
extension is this this isn't
just coming from the top down,
this is going back up as well.
We have extension agents that
are boots on the ground,
basically. They're giving us
feedback. We, we talked about AI
and teaching them how to utilize
AI and harness it, right, in a
safe, approachable way. But in
turn, people from the community
are asking them, how can we use
AI and then I think that plays
into that culture, that area of
the state that they're working
on and, and
then everything is tailored
towards that with the chatbot,
with the 4H, you know,
curriculum and things like that.
So it's very um progressive that
way and it's going both ways
that, you know, line of
communication, which is, which
is good to see, right? That's
awesome. Thank you. And if I may
add something, so I, I mentioned
earlier the fact that we've been
working with K to 12 teachers.
Uh, we launched a program, we
actually started before the
institute this program. Uh
where we provide professional
development of, of middle school
teachers in how they could
actually learn some foundations
of the eye and I'll introduce
them in the classroom. And
the interesting thing that we
learn from that is the fact that
we had teachers from across the
entire state of New Mexico,
where people from the
Forconoradio all the way down to
Chaparral. And
each one of them, they were
learning how they could actually
take the AI lesson and build
something that was specific for
their students, for their high
school, for the middle school,
so that the students could enjoy
what they were learning and
connected to what they see every
day outside of schools. So that
potential making things
culturally responsive to me is
crucial for the success of AI,
otherwise it's going to be just
another technology that people
will eventually not embrace.
Thank you. Um, one of the things
that I think it, one of the
comments in that you had the
responses to the cattle tracking
and everything in there. Um, one
of the things we heard earlier
was that, you know, obviously a
lot of things are offline. It
seems that they can still be
tracked regardless of self
signal or, you know, signal. Is
that accurate?
So, Madam Chair, uh, yes, to an
extent. So, so it depends on the
system that you use. Um, there's
two basic systems out there at
the moment. So some callers,
when we started this, there was
really only 2 calls in the
United States at the, at the
time. Uh, one was applicable to
large scale and one was more
small pasture based. So we had
to go to with the only option
available for this project. Uh,
the smaller scale callers
utilize uh cellular signal to
the color themselves, so they
have to
have a cell signal for those
callers to work.
Um, the, the ones we used, uh,
we use La Laurel wand towers,
those have to be placed at a
spot that receives cellular
signal. There's some work being
done to maybe perhaps integrate
those with the uh
satellite-based, you know,
communication to that tower, but
then the towers communicate with
the, with the callers
themselves. Once the callers
though are programmed, they will
operate just off a GPS. And so
what you need
the tower communication for is
locating the cows or
reprogramming the caller.
If the caller, once the caller's
programmed, it will work in
canyons or wherever they can get
a GPS signal, even if it's not
in communication with the tower,
the fence will still work, but
we might not know exactly where
they're at. And so that was one
of the research areas when you
listen to the sales reps for
these companies. They tell our
ranchers, you need 100%
coverage. Well, 100% coverage
will cost us $150,000. That's
not practical. So let's get by
with, let's strategically place
these and get by with 30 or
40% coverage and still achieve
all of our goals. And so that's,
you know, those are kind of
tradeoffs we have to use out in
this area.
And and Madam Chair, thank you,
and we've been a part of these
projects as well and seeing them
progress, right? I don't know.
Doctor Zuming got started 5
years ago, probably, and it was
costly, right? Cell service.
there's not a lot of it in some
of these ranching areas.
that has progressed so far now,
IoT, there's SIM cards now for
IoT that are pennies on the
dollar because you're, you know,
you have a SIM card in your a
phone or a hotspot, you're
paying $40 a month for 5 gigs,
right? That can be very
expensive, especially if you're
zooming or watching Netflix,
whatever streaming.
IoT is much smaller scale. The
signal that's going, it's just
text data that's going back and
forth. And so it's, it's very
small. So when you're talking
about pennies on the dollar and
you're talking about the, the
SIM card in a collar, that goes
drastically down. So we're
looking at $3 a month compared
to $50 a month per cattle. And
so, we've talked to Doctor Tsui
about, you know, going back to
that if he wants to readdress it
in some of those areas. And that
can also work with the Lauraan
and kind of bridge that gap so
they can utilize both at
at any given moment. So, so
technology is progressing this
far already, so.
thank you
Those are my questions. The only
last thing I'll say is that, um,
you know, it kind of sounds like
the, the closed system you have
developing uh is ripe for as a,
as a, as a protected sandbox
where where stuff isn't actually
abused, it can actually be
really developed. So that's
exciting. I know when we went to
Highlands, they were talking
about a different sandbox they
have going on. I think it was
that there might have been their
nursing program or something
else, but you know, I, I, I just
need to see how all the
different universities are
really trying to experiment and
be a leader. So thank you for
all your work. Um
OK, one time
I have to do a shout out to Don
Martinez, who is our uh NMSU
agent and Icaldi. He is, he, he
is loved by everybody in Rio
Riba. They, you're, your station
there does so much good work,
and they're always doing
outreach to the community, so
yeah, is it totally going up to
you. I'm sure it is because I
know how hard they work on a
state and a local level, and I
just, I just have to commend you
on your staff, so that's all
that was a really good one.
Thank you. Thank you. And I
think that's
actually important that we
shared that information with
local land grants as well to
know that, you know, if you're
looking for problems, you know,
we have 99, so we're happy to
show them. With that, thank you
so much. I think we can move
into, uh, public comment. Is
there a public comment but it
doesn't look like there's any
public comment. um
OK, perfect. So, um, we're going
to, so once the, the, the desk
is open, we'll have uh Steve
Pulaker come up. Absolutely.
Thank you all for coming. Thank
you for making the trip. It was
wonderful
That's a long trip, I know.
Yeah, it's awesome. I was
supposed to go to the military
yesterday down there and then
come all the way up, I said, I
can't do it because I was
already in bus Luis for Monday
and Tuesday. Yeah. I missed your
present
Welcome back, Mr. Vellaco.
Yeah, got you. One final thing
One last thing I need to, uh,
let you know that we're gonna
have a tour tomorrow and we're
gonna have a uh uh like a sack
lunch. Uh, so I just want to
remind you, we're gonna meet
here and then from here we take
off that way. Our cook will know
how many are gonna be here and
how many sandwiches to make. And
it's better than her making a
bunch of sandwiches and, you
know, but that's, that's my
announcement. Perfect. And uh,
so you said meet here we have it
on you said me here. We have it
on our schedule at 9:00 a.m. 9
a.m. And so, once, um, once we
all meet here at 9, I'll go
ahead and adjourn the committee
then. Uh, for now, we'll be at
recess, um, until 9 a.m.
