Into, I'm not sure where she's
got to.
and since you're Stephonics, you
introduced yourself.
Senator Pinto, come introduce
Senator B block, you did
introduce yourself, correct?
Uh, yes, ma'am. I, I can do it
again.
I have like a 37 minute
introduction. We'll skip it for
today. Well, maybe we'll do it
on Saturday, so save it for
Saturday, um.
OK, so, so Alice, thank you so
much for being here. You, I know
you didn't expect us to be ahead
of schedule, but we all went
quickly. So I will let you,
unless she uses an acronym or um
you can raise your hand and say,
wait, but otherwise we'll hold
questions till the end. So
whenever you're ready, thank
you, Alice.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
Um, apologies for being here on
time instead of early. Uh, there
is a children's cabinet
convening going on right now,
and so, uh, a lot of us were
there, uh, doing that work and
it's still going on, and you'll
hear a little bit more about our
special education OBed program,
but our state, we're still
there.
Um, I'm very happy to be here
this morning. Um, the chair
manager asked me to uh give a,
an overview of developmental
disabilities, uh, for the
members of the committee as some
of you may not be as familiar
with Didi and that is an acronym
I am going to be using today,
um, developmental thing in there
with me. Can you introduce
yourself? Oh yes, I'm so sorry,
Madam Chair. My name is Alice
Lou McCoy. I'm the executive
director of the Developmental
Disabilities Council here in
New.
Mexico, uh, the DD councils are
um federally mandated. There is
a DD council in every state and
territory in the United States,
um, I'll be going over the
developmental disabilities Act
very briefly.
Um, does everybody have?
So the DD councils were
established, um with two other
systems. So in the federal DD
Act, the DD councils, the
university centers of excellence
or essentially the development
of DD research.
And learning, um, and also the
protection and advocacy agencies
were developed, um, in the DD
Act and in New Mexico are
protection advocacy agency is um
disability rights New Mexico. I
believe they're represented um
early on.
So Jim actually founded a
Disability Rights New Mexico.
And um we also have the Native
American Disability Law Center,
which is, um, which serves the
four corners, um, including New
Mexico, there are also a PNA
agency here in the states. So
every state has all of these
pieces, it is a um 3 legs to a
stool, and they're very
essential for the protection of
Americans living with Didi. So
very quickly, what is the
developmental disability, yes,
the, the.
The Center for Development
Disability is the university
Center for Excellence. So here
in New Mexico, the UNM.
Center for Development
Disability will be our you
signify them. So ours is at UNM
and then uh in other states, um,
I'll talk a little bit about why
the 3
Legs of this chair are important
and um the potential for kicking
down two of the legs of the
stool, um, in the proposed
federal budgets that we're
seeing. So uh I want to start
with um what is a developmental
disability. This might seem
obvious, but it is important for
us to know what this means
because many of the services and
programs that uh people living
with DD may be eligible for, um,
are very closely tied to this
definition. So you must meet
this definition.
to meet eligibility. So for the
first um slide, uh, you know, we
go through the
Federal definition, and it's
also the New Mexico um state
definition as well. So we also
have a DD Act. It establishes
our council here in New Mexico,
and it does also develop um
defined developmental
disabilities as a severe chronic
disability of an individual, and
there are some elements that you
must meet. Um, it must be
attributable to a mental or
physical impairment or a
combination of these
impairments, and must be
manifested by the age of 2.
to
So, for example, if you've
received a brain injury in
childhood, that could, uh, that
meets these other elements of
the definition that could be
considered a developmental
disability, but if you received
your brain injury after the age
of 22, then you no longer meet
the definition of Didi. And this
can become important as we're
talking about services and
funding.
Um, it is a disability that is
likely to continue indefinitely.
So, uh, you know,
You
For people who are found to be
eligible under this definition.
This is something, and then
finally, this is the most
important part because this is
often where eligibility
questions come into play, um,
that disability must result in a
substantial functional
limitation in 3 or more of the
following areas of major life
activity.
So I've listed them for you
there. I'm not gonna read them
for you, um, but, you know,
there needs to be that kind of
checking off, you know, can you
do self-care? Can you, can you,
um,
Uh, do you have learning
disabilities, you know, do you
have, um,
barriers and self-direction, you
know, can you make your own
decisions? And so these are some
of the functional limitations
that are considered, um, and
finally,
We have to think about the
person's needs. They may have uh
certain functional limitations,
but do they need, you know,
either special interdisciplinary
or generic services. Do they
need some kind of supports,
other kinds of assistance
throughout the duration of their
lives. If so, they meet this
definition. Um, this is
different from the original
definition which had actually
specific diagnoses. So, um, in
the past, you know, you only had
a DD if you met, if you had
certain
diagnosis from your medical
provider. And now I think this
is a better, broader, uh, and
more functional definition,
because now we're looking at
what the individual really
needs, because the diagnosis
doesn't say much about you. It
just says, you know, kind of how
the doctors categorize you, but
it doesn't actually say anything
about who you are, what you're
capable of, you know, where you
need supports. And so where you
need support, that's where it
really matters when we're
talking about the definitions
and providing services.
So the reason we had ADD act was
because it became abundantly
clear that um we were not
adequately serving people living
with Didi here in the United
States, and it was a really big
um policy decision, uh, back
when a lot of the disabilities
acts were being put into place,
um, one of the last ones was in
the 90s, the 8DA, that's the one
everybody knows about the Didi
Act um preceded the ADA by quite
a few years. And so,
We had the Didi act is actually
developed over the years. I'm
not gonna go into the history,
but what we all need to know is
that as it is evolving, as our
understanding of what it means
to have DD or have a family
member with Didi, um, you know,
as we understand more about what
it means is we have leaders in
power who also have, you know,
family members with DD or
themselves might live with one.
We understand that um it is
really easy to think about what
everyone needs from your own
perspective, but what needs to
be the loudest voice in the, you
know, what services need to be
provided, you know, what people
actually need are the folks who
are living with Didi themselves
and their family members, and
they need to drive that uh
policy decision making. And so
the DD Act does say that, you
know, the New Mexico doesn't
because we don't like.
Um, preambles and we don't like
purpose statements in our laws,
but the federal DD Act makes it
very clear that the purpose of
it is to have individuals with
Didi and their families
participate in the design of and
have access to these needed
community services, individual
supports and other forms of
assistance. And then, of course,
the big priorities for people
living with TD promoting
self-determination,
independence, productivity,
integration and inclusion.
I want to stress that those are
two different things. I think we
think about them as the same
thing, but they're very, very
different. So you can be
Included, you can be in a room,
but not participate or and you
can be integrate or you can be
integrated, which means you're
actually participating in
community life in a meaningful
way. So I think for many years,
for decades, we talked a lot
about inclusion. That's great,
and now we're moving on to
integration. This is where it
really, really matters where
we're living with each other
with all different abilities,
um, everyone has different, um,
Uh, backgrounds and, you know,
uh, different experiences to
bring to the table and it's all
valuable recognizing the value
of each individual is essential
for understanding why we need to
have something like the DD Act.
So for all of you here, you're
probably most interested in, OK,
well, you know, we're here to
provide resources and services.
We're here to serve our
constituents in our communities
and how can we as state leaders
in New Mexico do that. And so,
um, this is not comprehensive,
but
any means because as you'll find
when you work in the space of
GD, almost every single state
agency, state department touches
you in some way if you're a
person living with Dei or a
family member.
Um, so I'm just gonna list a few
here and it looks like a big
list, but this is really just a
few because if you think about
it, um, almost every department
has some kind of disability lens
that needs to be taken into
consideration. And so I would
like to um invite all of you as
our state leaders and our chair
and vice chair do this very well
in their leadership roles is as
we're looking at each law, each
policy, think about it from the
lens of people.
living with disabilities. Think
about it from that lens because
it can have really disparate
impact if we don't do that. And
so,
Um, I invite you all as you
think about, you know, what we
have available in the states,
um, and how we're shaping our
state, what that means. One of
the big overarching ideas, um,
when I went into the 2025
session, um, to do our work at
the DD council was I wanted to
express that disabilities, um,
it's a label, right? diagnoses
are a label that we give people
and when we live in a
world that is set up to really
serve everybody in a very
equitable way, then you see
that.
Disabilities are not as big of a
barrier.
And so when we want to think
about, um,
Healing, right, disabilities we
want to think about that. What
we really need to think about is
how we shape our world in a way
that is accessible to people of
all abilities, so that having a
disability no longer becomes as
much of a barrier. So I came
into it thinking, OK,
disabilities are a label, but
the world we shape determines
how big of an impact that label
makes in your life. And so I
invite all of you state leaders
to think about it that way. And
many of you have, many of you
have been huge.
advocates and really grateful
for the work that you've done so
far, um, in that work. So some
of the state agencies that do um
DD work, um, so I'll start with
the healthcare authority, that's
the most obvious one because
they have the they now house the
developmental disabilities
support division.
So DDSD, the developmental
disability Support Division was
originally in the Department of
Health. I don't know,
originally, originally, cause I
think we've had a few
restructures that our health
departments, but before it was
at the HCA, the Healthcare
Authority, um, it was at, uh,
Department of Health, and now it
is at the healthcare authority
because we have, um, because the
executive had proposed putting
all of the Medicaid programs
under HCA. So if you're very new
to the legislature, you might be
new to the HCA, you might, you
know.
You know that it's a new thing,
but it was a, you know, it was
a, a lot of thought was put in
by the legislature about how the
HCA is formed and um so that's
that's really important. So now
we have all of the Medicaid
programs under one roof.
So the DDSD I'm also going to
use the acronym for that, the
Developmental support, uh,
Disability Support Division, um,
they run the waiver programs.
I'm gonna go through the waiver
programs in detail. This is
really important because your
constituents will ask you these
questions. They want to know
what's out there, what's
available for me. So they run
the waiver programs that provide
the services that support people
living with Didi who meet the
eligibility definitions. They
also run the intermediate care
facilities, and this is the
closest
thing we have to um
Institutional care in the state
of New Mexico now. So, uh, due
to the um Jackson lawsuit, which
was wrapped up in the last few
years, and there was a
settlement for that. Um, it was
30+ years of um oversight and
litigation, and uh because of
that, we don't have institutions
for people. We have them in
other states in the United
States, but we do not have them
here. Um, the largest group
settings will be in what we call
group homes.
Supported living, supported
housing, and, uh, you know,
those will be groups of 4 or 5
people, and um, no more than
that, we have, you know, that
they'll be fully staffed, um,
24/7 staff and uh so that's
gonna be the loudest, uh, I'm
sorry, the largest gathering
you're gonna see, um, in a
housing other than the ICF, so
intermediate care facilities. So
these are for folks who have
such high needs that they must
have that almost nursing home
level of care.
Um, but they're not meant to be,
uh necessarily long term
housing. They're supposed to be
there to take her. Some folks do
have to have them, you know, for
an extended period of time, but
they're meant to get folks to a
place where um they can then
transition to um the uh DDSD
also supports autism programs,
um, if you want to learn more
about autism, the place to go
is, as Madam Chair pointed out,
the UNM unenter for Development
Disability.
they do the most hands-on work
in autism across the state of
New Mexico, they have a lot of
different programs, whether it,
it has to do with employment,
whether it has to do with
education, um, you know, they,
they are in the schools doing
that work with educators with
students, and so if you have a
constituent who wants to learn
more about what autism services
are available, um, they are,
you're going to be your best.
resource. So again, that's uh
UNM um Center for Development
and Disability, um, and please,
uh, I have my information at the
end and feel free to contact us,
our staff, and we're happy to
connect with you, my own staff
at the DD council works very
closely with um UNMCDD there
they sit on our council. I'll
tell you a little bit more about
the council makeup. So, uh,
DDSD also does a behavior
support services. This is uh one
of the services that are, um,
provided under the waivers,
we'll get into that later. And
then, of course, there's state
general fund programs, and these
are um funded by uh not by
Medicaid, but by state general
funds.
Uh, so then we have my agency,
the DDC, uh, we have 3 major
programs under the DBC, um, the
first is the Center for
Self-advocacy. This is our
oldest and uh what I believe is
the most important program in
our agency, the Center for
Self-efficacy, uh, runs a
leadership academy twice a year.
And they are in the business of
promoting elevating the voices
of people.
of adults, particularly living
with Didi here in New Mexico. So
again, when you think about what
the purpose of the DD Act is to
really put front and center
people living with Didi and to
put friends and to the voices of
families. That's what um our
Center for Self-advocacy does
the leadership academies are for
adults and for their family
members. So if you have
constituents who want to get
more involved in state policy
and advocating, um, here.
Um, at the roundhouse, um, you
know, during the interim as well
is probably the best time for
them, have them get connected
with us. We are all about
forming this connections, making
sure that our legislators, uh,
understand what the
Community is going through and
uh what they mean.
Our state leaders to be doing
better.
So that's our Center for
self-advocacy. We also have our
uh largest program in our
council is the Office of
guardianship. It ended up in her
council as a, I guess a
historical artifact we're the
only DD council in the nation
that has guardianship put under
us, um, in fact, uh, during the
Biden administration, there was
a lot of um
There was a closer look at why
there was a guardianship office
in the DDC, uh, but after they
took a closer look, they decided
that it actually was really
great that the guardianship
offices at the DDC because in
other places, um, they had a
more
Traditional and I'll say
paternalistic way of looking at
guardianship and how
guardianship should be done, but
because our guardianship
programs at the DBC we have um a
more forward looking way and
more person-centered way of
looking at guardianship, all
about protecting people's um
legal rights and civil rights as
much as possible, and helping
them.
maintain as much autonomy as
possible. So it actually ended
up being OK at the federal
level, but um I, I will put it
out there for our state leaders.
I do think um we should think
about putting it somewhere else.
It's not, um, it doesn't exactly
fit together with the mission of
the DDC although we've done our
best with it, um, because that's
what it is. So the majority of
our funding uh DDC spending um
in almost
Yes, the majority of our state
general funds um are go toward
the office of guardianship, and
when you all see me at hearings,
particularly at LFC. Most of the
questions will be around
guardianship, what's going on
around there, and I'll give you
a little bit of overview of how
you can access your services as
well, um, you know, in a couple
slides. Uh, we also have the
Office of the Special Education
Aba. This is actually Madam
Chair's bill, um, in, uh, the
2021 legislative session, um.
Uh, established the office of
special education on bed at the
DDC with the view that this
ombud program will support
students and families and
focus, particularly on students
and families. So we have, of
course, our public education
department that um has an
overview of supporting, you
know, all students as well as
teachers and school systems,
superintendents, you know, they
have a bigger view of um who all
they need to support and
grateful to them for that
leadership, um, and we also
have, of course,
school boards and local school
boards to maintain the culture
and local um priorities and
ensure that, you know, our
school systems are meeting the
needs of the community members,
and they're very focused on
supporting their schools and
their um their teachers and
their school leadership. And so
we saw that there wasn't really
anything out there, um, and you
know Ma was in this uh
Conversation with the governor
that there wasn't really
anything out there that was
focused specifically on students
and families. And so we
established this office to
provide that support. But in
order for this office to be
successful, meaning in order for
this office to be able to make a
difference in the lives of
students and uh and their
families, um, they needed to
really thread the needle, and so
what the onput office does
really well, and we're still
continually improving, we want
to hear all
Feedback, particularly if it's,
you know, if there are
improvements that can be made,
we welcome that feedback from,
you know, As your constituents,
have you used O be? What do you
think about it? We're always
trying to improve because the
needle we're trying to thread is
we have to be strong advocates
for students and families. It is
in our law, we wrote it that
way, that they advocate for
students and families. So you
see on the programs over the
nation. This is the first.
Of its kind in the entire
country that does focus its
advocacy on students and
families. So most on that
programs are going to be
neutral.
And they, uh, you know are very
explicit about staying neutral.
We don't do that. We talk to the
families, we get to know them,
we get to know the students and
their needs, and we go to school
meetings with them, you know,
we, we talk them through all of
their options, you know, we
really hear what it is that they
want for themselves. And so this
is a brand new thing. You don't
see anything like this and we
had other DD counsels ask you
how did you get this kind of
thing going, and the answer I
said was you got to have state
leaders that vote for the bill
pass it.
And so, so we're really grateful
to our state leaders, but that's
the issues and so we established
it in the DDC because we wanted
it to be very uh student
focused.
And you know that she's uh that
the bed and all her on bed team
tries to thread is that they
also have to support teachers,
they have to teach school
systems, you know.
How, how to do things well, how
to do things that stay within
the law, you know, we have the
federal um IDEA.
Um, which is the, remember what
this is, um, so that's our big
education mom and um we
have
but that the school system wants
to work with. So now we have
school districts calling and
saying, hey, we have a family
member that just started the
Uh, visualized education, um,
program process, the IEP
process. They're just coming in
and they're just starting in a
special education system. They
have a lot of questions, um, and
I don't think they feel
supported. So could you come and
support them? And that's a huge
deal, that school systems that
come to us because when we
initially watched the program,
there was a lot of skepticism
from the schools, um, and from
school leaders that we could
stay neutral enough, right, that
the schools would be able to
work with.
And now we have family members
that are really utilize us, you
know, and we show them how
advocacy works in the school
meetings so that they feel
confidence, and they have the
information, and they feel the
expertise to be able to walk in
there and say, OK, I know what I
need. I know how to ask for it,
and I know how to have it
documented so that it is there
to ensure, because if you don't
document it, so a lawyer by
training, if you don't talk it,
then it doesn't exist, right
under the law. And so, um, you
know, being able
teach uh families how to do that
and be
Teach uh schools who have the
best intentions who want to
serve these uh students and
families as well, how to do that
is a really big deal. So that's
why we established it in the
DBC, um, because we could have a
Um, we've also been able to do
um all goodness education on but
so another state agency that um
provides a lot of really great
resources and support that
people often forget about, which
is why they put it in this
slide, is the governor's
commission on Disability and
they have some um really
important practical programs
that you might um.
To learn about for your
constituents. They have what we
call the residential access.
And uh RAM will do, you know, it
sounds like what it is they'll
put it in ramps, they'll also,
you know, they'll change
fastsets or bathrooms, so, you
know, anything that you need in
your house to make it more
accessible for you to live in,
once you have a disability, or
if you're work with a
disability, um, then
Of us, you know, not having a
disability is just a temporary
states at some point every
single one of us will have a
disability at some point. I've
been in a wheelchair myself. And
so, uh, you know,
Understanding how inaccessible
the world really is, doesn't
usually happen until it happens
to you. And so, um,
Knowing that the program is
there, it is state funded, the
governor's Commission on
Disability does that.
Um, it's a great resource. Uh,
it's been, uh, it is state
funded, and it's also been, you
know, supported by different
agencies as well, aging services
at one point was supporting, and
so we wanted this so important
we want to make sure that it
keeps going. I'm highly
encourage all of the members as
you to think about um looking at
all of these programs that I'm
talking about today and seeing
if they are being adequately
funded and then really listening
carefully to the directors or
cabinet secretaries who are
talking about these programs,
about, you know,
They're not there are needs
there. Um, we don't, um,
overstate our needs. I know
every time I come in with a
budget request, I'm asking for
exactly the amount I need. And
so when we don't have it, um,
you know, there are consequences
I usually tell them, tell you
what they are.
And there's also the brain
injury, uh, I'm sorry, the New
Mexico Technology Assistance
Program. This is so huge.
Technology is everything these
days, and this is the only state
agency that really focuses and
has a true so NMA is the acronym
for the technology assistance
program and is actually our next
door neighbor, and it'd be very
intentional about working with
um the director of Governor's
commission on Disability to try
to sell space so that we, we
often have overlapping
constituents, um, so NMs have.
Uh, has, you know, they have all
sorts of adaptive equipment, um,
everything from athletic
equipment if, you know, you are
a person with physical
disabilities, and you want to do
adaptive skiing, for example, or
you want to do adaptive kayaking
to learning devices. So if you
need specific kinds of learning
devices to be able to really get
the most out of your classroom
experience, they will not only
talk to students and families,
but they'll talk to teachers,
they'll talk to school systems,
they'll talk to all sorts of
People to educate them on what's
available, and they have a
library, they have a loaning
library, so folks can actually
take the technology with them to
try it out. And if it really
works for them, then it becomes
a justification to acquire this.
So if you're a teacher, then you
can say, hey, I've tried this
out in my classroom. It's
amazing. I've got a piece of
equipment, um.
Or if you are a person who is
trying to get your budget and
we're gonna talk about the
waivers approved, um, to have
this kind of device, um, you
know, you could say, hey, I went
to EOTA, I tried it out. It has
done all of these different
things for me, and it needs to
be part of my budget, so really
encourage folks to reach out to
MMA, um, if you want to talk
about head one client who was in
guardianship, and they all think
he uh is a veteran, and the only
reason why, and you know, he.
Um, one of his tours, he, uh,
became a quadriplegic. He lost
the use of all four limbs and
the ability to speak. His mind
was perfectly fine, but he ended
up in the guardianship because
he couldn't speak, and if he had
the right device, he wouldn't.
And a guardianship. He can
express himself very clearly,
um, very clearly, and it was,
you know, it was such a pleasure
and honor to serve him, but also
it made me realize, uh, during
that time, how many people we
put into guardianship just
because they don't have a
accommodations that they need.
To be able to live in the
community can communicate with
them and uh be able to
understand them and, you know,
give them what they need so that
they can do all the things that
we do in life. And so, um, I'll
talk a little bit about that
under the, the context of
guardianship as well. So really,
really encourage all of you if
you see any constituents who
seem to be struggling and just
need accommodations, reach out
to NMA they know all of the
most, you know,
Um, cutting edge technology out
there, and as you know, that
stuff is coming out like this.
And they also have the brain
injury advisory council. This is
such a really important group,
and I wanted to, uh, really, uh,
promote that here because brain
injury, as you know, can um
include people that we define as
living with DD if they got their
brain injured before 22, but
they can also include people who
got their brain injury after
they became adults and they
have, you know, a lot of the
same um barriers and eat a lot
of the same support.
But it's eligible for um
CD services. And so we really
want to pay attention to this
group of constituents because
they often fall between the
cracks, you know, we tried to
serve them through things like
our turquoise care managed care,
um.
Medicaid.
Programs, um, but it's, it's
been really difficult and I
would encourage you all to
either uh attend the brain
injury advisory council meeting
or um ask some of your
constituents who have brain
injuries, hey, do you want to be
part of this because they do
have really strong
recommendations about what we
need in the state for.
Um, then we have, uh, I'm just
gonna run very quickly through
public education department in
early childhood. We all know
what they do, um, for, so for,
uh, PED the two big programs you
have to pay attention to, of
course, is our Office of Special
Education, that's actually just
um it used to be just a division
within or bureau within the the
PED but now it is an elevated
office and uh the uh a deputy
secretary actually um runs the
office under the structure and
then
They report directly to the
secretary, so it has to be
really elevated special
education in New Mexico in the
last few years, um, and then
finally, of course, the division
of vocational rehabilitation,
and PED, um, this is going to be
your
The primary resource for
employment support for people
living with disabilities. Many
of you know DVR, many of you
probably have heard have heard
some complaints about DVR from
your constituents. That's OK.
We, we've all heard it. We want
to get better. And so DVR is
always working for improvement.
Let's hear how we can improve
the our services. This is the
one place that's federally
funded, they get employment
services, and we know that this
current administration is really
Um, interested in employment
support. And so let's make sure
that we make the most of this
moment to get as much support as
we can for DVR. I'm finally
early childhood, we have a
family infant toddler program.
Um, this is so important because
the family infant toddler or fit
program, um, works on
identification, and we all know
if you are a parent with a
person with a with a child of
MTD or a family member, you know
that the earlier we can
intervene, the earlier we can
identify DD.
The more difference we make
every
diagnosis that we make in an
early age exponentially
increases the chances of success
and the ability of course we're
also working very closely with
ECC on building up support
settings so that there's a more
seamless transition, and, you
know, it really works hand in
hand with early childhood
identifying them early, serving
them early, and ensuring that
they get that special education
support at the pre-K level, and
once they get into kindergarten,
we have um a lot of uh records.
We have a lot of
documentation and we have a lot
of experience on how to serve
this student with
So the DD council, uh, I'm not
gonna read this to you. It's our
vision and vision, but uh every
council, um,
I, well, OK, I'm just gonna say
New Mexico City Council are
members are appointed by the
governor, um and every DD
council must have over 60% of
its council made up of people
living with TB and their
families, so that all of our
work is driven by the need.
We also have a lot of state
agent requirements for makeup.
So I've talked a little bit and
um about our programs, this is
the next page about about the
DDC's programs. And I'm just
gonna focus uh a little bit on
the Office of guardianship
because that is where you're
gonna get a lot of questions
about um DBC usually in the
state because uh so much of our
funding, um, goes for state
general fund goes towards the
office of guardianship. Um, some
of you may have heard of really
long wait lists. That is true.
We do have very long way.
Lists, um, we walked into the
session with over 300 on the
wait lists we serve.
Overall, over 1000 people.
On guardianship, um, and
conservatorship here in New
Mexico, we have about 6000
people total who are under
guardianship and dissertorship,
so that's a really big chunk
over 1000 is state funded, so we
pay for um legal services to uh
the only way to get a guardian
is to have a court appointed by
the judge, and so we provide the
legal services the entire legal
team to put that guardianship
into place, so the taxpayers pay
for that for people who are
income eligible. We do have a
200% poverty.
Level uh income eligibility
requirements. There are some
exceptions that are made, um,
but very few.
And um
And we also provide the biggest
cost is going to be professional
guardians. So for people who do
not have natural support for
family members, friends,
community members who are
willing, and it's a really big
job and when you offer to do
that, it's a job that you're
taking on for free. It's not
paid, um, but if there's not
somebody like that in your life
who is willing or able to do
that, um, and, uh, a judge
determines that you need
guardianship, that
what the office guardianship
does is provide a
Workforce of professional
guardians. We have high
standards for our guardians, um,
higher than, um, the typical
standards. One of the things
that we did in our legislative
advocacy was we ensured in the
last, uh, I think this was
passed in 2018. Um, we ensured
that um
Guardians have to be certified
by the National Guardianship
Association, they must be uh
well versed in the National
Guardian. It's a very focused on
self-determination, on
protecting people's values,
cultures, and
Wishes as much as possible, so
we do hold to those standards
very closely. It's part of our
contract with our guardian
providers.
We do comprehensive service
reviews in 2021, we passed a law
that requires my office to
conduct annual comprehensive
service reviews for every single
one of our guardianship
providers, um, that was not
happening before. Um, so now,
you know, we, you have written
reports and all of these reviews
are done throughout the year. We
also do what we call protected
person welfare visits, um, we go
to
Um, so what, what's your under
guardianship, you're now
identified as a protected
person. And so we, uh, you know,
we have, like I said, over 1000
protected people that we serve
under guardianship in the state.
Across the state, and we
Select about uh 200 to 250 a
year at a minimum. We do have a
performed group of 200
requirement, but we always
exceed that. So we try to see um
as many PPs or protected people
as we can across the state every
year to ensure they're doing OK,
um, you know, we don't just see
them, we talk to their
caregivers, we talk to them, of
course, we always talk to their
guardians, but we want to get a
good sense of how they're doing.
So the guardians have to submit
an annual report to the judges
every year. That's one person's
perspective. In courts only can
make decisions that are as good
as the information they receive,
and they're only receiving
information from one source,
you're not receiving
comprehensive information. And
so one of the things that we
piloted a few years ago was what
I call the um
visitor pilot program, um, we
partnered with the
administrative Office of the
courts, we did do that for a
year, um, and now it's kind of
we're waiting for um
To see whether legislators have
appetite to really expand that
and where they want to do it,
and they want to do it at the
TDC? Do they want to do it at
the administrative office of the
courts, so you'll be hearing
from me hopefully about
expanding that program because
it's really important to ensure
that people living under
guardianship are safe or healthy
or being served well.
Um, we do also look at, uh,
we've done a lot of work in
alternatives to guardianship. So
under the law and also just, um,
you know, as a general
Value, we should not put people
in guardianship that shouldn't
be in there. People should have
all of the support and services
that they need at the level that
they needed. So some people are
going to need guardianship, and
when they need it, we need to
make sure that it's high quality
surface that they're receiving
and that they're being
protected, their rights are
being protected, um, and that
they're being safe. So we've
heard some pretty scary stories,
um, in the last, I would say 10
years we've heard about
professional guardians stealing
from people we've heard about.
Um
People who don't have guardians,
um, who end up in really
terrible situations. So these
are all ways to identify where
the system failures are here in
New Mexico, and I would love to
have a more in-depth
conversation with all of you,
um, about how we can really look
at the different systems to
ensure people are staying safe
and healthy. Um, but to access
our uh services, um, all you
have to do is, uh, go on our
website and um so it's uh
www.bc.org. Uh sorry, NMDBC.org,
um, and I'm happy to give you
all my card as well, and then we
have our um information I put
our uh obguardianship, legal
directors email on there, so you
have direct contact to actual
people that you can talk to and
not just the phone number or
general email address, but these
are actual folks that Daniel
Eckman um.
Program director Joe Churk is
our officership legal director
and Michelle Trigumbo is our
special education state on that
if you want to access any of
these services, please contact
us. Um, but when you contact us,
we will for, for guardianship
services. We will do two
different things. The first
thing we'll do is we'll, uh,
Get to know you and help you
file or help you fill out our
application. So we don't just
give you a bunch of paperwork
and say good luck. We will help
you gather all of the
information that you need.
For this application, and we'll
walk you through it. We'll
answer your questions, explain
it, um, and, you know, walk you
through it step by step and help
you if you need help gathering
information, we can help you
with that as well. So the intake
process is very um comprehensive
and we do try to provide that
kind of level of service. Um,
but we also look at whether or
not, you know, guardianship, uh,
is an emergency, is there an
emergency happening if it's an
emergency guardianship, he jumps
straight to the top. There's no
wait list. Oops, sorry, there's
no wait
for emergency guardianships. We
did uh recently.
Um
We did recently strengthen the
law so that emergency
guardianship is tightened. The
reason we did that, the reason
we tightened it up is because um
we saw that some of the
harmful things that were
happening in the guardianship
system were happening because
people were going in and
receiving or getting acquiring
uh emergency guardianships for
people that didn't need
emergency guardianships. And
what happens in an emergency
guardianship is you're not
there. You don't have to be
there. So they can get
guardianship on you without
anybody knowing. They can just
go into a courtroom and just get
guardianship, and I think.
have access to all of your
assets, the immediately have the
ability to move you, so it's
horror stories we hear is, you
know, uh, the
Hospital, my, you know, contact
an attorney that they know who
does guardianship and say, hey,
um, this person seems to be
lacking capacity, and we need
to, you know, figure out how to
serve them or move them on,
discharge them from our, um, you
know, facility, can you help us
get guardianship for this
person. They're like, sure. And
so they go and they get the
emergency greeting shipped, um,
and then the person then gets
driven from their hospital stay
to a nursing home, not back to
their house, and then their
house gets sold, and all their
things get sold and the family
member
What just happened? This can
happen in emergency or did
happen in emergency
guardianship. Now, you cannot
get emergency guardianship
unless um there is a life or
death situation that you're
looking at and you cannot uh
sell assets or move a person
without explicit court approval.
So before, as you know, as soon
as you were uh appointed as an
emergency guardian, you could do
whatever you wanted. Now you
have to have explicit court
approval, you have to get it
here and as
You know, judges do not like to
change the status quo unless you
can really
Show with and so this creates a
really strong barrier, but it's
also the barrier for, it's also
a barrier for getting emergency
guardianship if one is needed
unless you have um
We argue that in court and so we
do provide emergency
guardianship services. So we
look at whether or not when an
application comes in is it's an
emergency. So let's get moving
on it. We'll get this ship done.
Yes, no little bit I think you
said 200% of federal poverty to
qualify, um, and, and talk a
little qualify uh, OK, so thank
you, ma'am. Uh, so, um, it
depends, of course, I'm a legal
professionals, but I'll just go
through very quickly who you
need to hire. So you're, you're
gonna need to hire a physician
attorney.
Who is going to bring, who is
going to file all the paperwork,
right? And who is going to bring
the petition to the court and,
you know, ask the court for that
guardian. So that's one where
you have to hire, and you have
to hire a second lawyer to be
the guardian of light. So the
guardian litem, you know, uh
they have uh they have legal
responsibilities under New
Mexico law. Um, I'm not gonna go
through all of them, but it's
another lawyer that you have to
pay for. Now you're paying for
two lawyers, and then you also
have to pay for a court visitor.
These are all statutorily
required.
in order to get a guardianship.
If you do not have uh a guardian
enlightenment report in a court
visitor report, and often the
judges also want to see them at
the hearing, so they have to do
all the work to do the report,
write the report, file the
report, and then come to the
hearing. That's a lot of money
that you're paying for 3
different legal professionals to
show up to get this guardianship
done. So it can be thousands of
dollars. So just we, we get
guardianship for my son, I
believe.
So, so families who are
struggling with having a person
with a disability and
Unless you're under 200% and I
will say that and I don't know
that this is still happening,
but some school districts where
the child turns 18, if they do
not have a guardianship.
The school said, OK, you're your
own guardian individualized
education planning meeting.
And exit them from services, um,
with the, the person who needs a
guardian being it's been an
issue for, for decades.
So we are really pushing, if you
hear of this kind of thing
happening, um, please call our
AA program because we are
really, really advocating hard,
you know.
We are there in the trenches to
let schools know that they can't
do this. I student has the right
to have an advocate in the room,
whether or not it's their
guardian. If they want somebody
there, if they want a family
member there, if they want a
friend there, they have a right
to have that person there, and
some students can't tell you
that they want a person there,
right? And so you
You need to have our own but
come in and say, look, I'm their
advocate, you know parent called
me and they can talk to the
students and they can make sure
that the schools know, you know,
they can't, um,
We can also help, uh, you know,
The schools understand how to
operate in a way that um is
but the school has to want to do
it. So, you know, we have some
schools that will take
opportunities to, um, you know,
do what they've been told by
their legal counsel, they're
legally obligated to do and then
not do one thing more than that
because they, but in fact, um,
They are. And so, uh, please let
us know if that kind of thing is
happening to your constituents.
We want to help. We will help. I
think we've worked in um the
majority of the school districts
now, and, uh, you know, folks
know about this, and they're
also statutory statutorily
required to advertise our
services in their schools, um.
Don't I'll do that either. So
please let us know, take a look
at the school systems in your
district, find out if they are
hosting our information. This is
in the block.
A place in the school physically
in the school, and if they're
handing out um our information,
like our flyers and posting our
information on the website.
This is all
that um says that in the
webcast, the the
The language is garbled. It's
good on Zoom, so if you're
listening, um, oh, it's just
fixed. So sorry for the
technical difficulties, um.
And go ahead, Alice. Thank you.
Any other questions? I wanted to
make sure I hit the last slide
and give the um committee
members and OK, so so far I have
um.
Senator,
Senator Lopez, Anaya.
OK.
OK. So just, I'm just gonna take
up a point of personal
privilege, so I was the chair of
the back in the day, it was the
developmental disabilities
planning council shortly after
the Office of guardianship
landed there, and the reason it
landed there is because no one
else would take it. It had been
with the um AG's office and they
was the DDPC was kind of the
redheaded stepchild that got
problem, problem.
Program, so that's how it ended
up there and I'm glad to hear
that, that, um.
It, it, it's working out and
that the federal programs and
then just as uh Alice used the
term IDEA, that's individual
disabilities education Act.
So, um, we, let's see how we
have um
So we'll, we'll take about
4 minutes per questioner.
So we will start with um Senator
Stephanics.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, director, for being
here.
Um
I thought I heard you saying
should go elsewhere.
Is that correct? I did Ma chair,
uh.
Sir Stephanics.
I think it's a complicated
question, and it has a lot of
political overtones as well, so
I'm not prepared to give a
recommendation today, but I have
some ideas I'd like to. I think
that Yazi uh Martinez lawsuit is
not, could you talk about what
role?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, for the question. So we
We participate.
When the
Constituents, and many of them
are on the plaintiff's side who
have lived experience. We
participate when they bring us
in for policy related work. So
when we can come in and provide
some kind of perspective or
expertise or recommendations
based on our experiences with
state agencies based on, based
on our experiences on the field
in the Obed program, um, that's
how we participate. We are
invited in for policy.
recommendations. We don't, um,
Participate in the litigation
itself, um, I am a, I was, I
worked on it as disability
rights attorney. And so even
though it wasn't on the
litigation team, we still try to
be really careful about being
part of the actual, you know,
when we go to the hearings, you
know, we go to observe, take
notes, and
Be helpful of people.
On, you know, either side of the
lawsuit, one our help, um, and
we certainly make
recommendations within the space
of the state agencies and, you
know, with
My state agency colleagues, um,
all of us have a lot of strong
inner agency collaboration, so
we try to make recommendations
through our own, um, in a report
and the various ways that we
interact, and there's so many
ways we interact with uh PED
with public education
department. And so, um, that's,
so we, we
Do participate in Yazi Martinez
policymaking, but we don't
participate in the litigation
itself, if that makes sense.
Thank you for that I hear from
constituents.
And whose capabilities.
So, and the other issue I'd like
to, uh, there are many children
who are sur uh suffering and
their educational needs such as
disabled.
In high schools.
And while a GED might be
accomplished, then we have
higher education,
discriminating.
So I thank you very much.
Thank you. Um
So they're supposed to post this
on, I don't think I've seen it.
I
venture center Pen so, yes.
According to state law, they
have to uh post it in a
prominent place in the building,
so it should be like, uh, when
you first walk in the front
door, the bulletin board, um,
you know, what we didn't want
was for it to just be kind of in
the corner where they put the
special ed kids, you know, we
wanted it to be somewhere that
every single student and family
could see it, because that's how
we ensure that.
Everybody who isn't receiving
services, who might need it
knows, oh, here's a resource
that I can go to, so that they
are legally obligated to do
that, if you haven't seen that,
Madam Chair Senator Pinto, that
they are not comply.
Because we're, we're still
getting calls from parents. So
either the website or where
advocacy is coming from, you
know, them guiding family when
there's an issue then to make
sure that um
Needs to be looked at and the
this age requirement of 2.
attendants under, do you know
why it's 22? Senator Pinto, this
is um federal and state law.
unable to answer that.
Manager Senator Pinto, I
realized I skipped over a couple
of really important slides. And
so if you, uh, would be willing
to flip to page 6 and 7, these
are the waiver programs that we
have under um New Mexico, um,
DDSD and I'm, I'm not gonna go
through them in detail cause as
you can see, they're quite
extensive, but I did want to
point out that there's 4 of
them and um so the big buckets
are gonna be what we always hear
of as the DD waiver.
Developmental disabilities
waiver. This is gonna be
typically the most comprehensive
waiver, it's gonna require the
most services, um, for people
who are eligible for these
services, it's gonna have the
longest list of services. It's
also, um, the one, the.
Program that it has the most
oversight, but it's also the
most rigid program. It's also
the one that has the least
self-direction or, you know,
sort of family choice on how to
do things, so it is, um, it
gives you the most, but it's
also the most rigid, um, many
families opt for this because
they like having that guidance,
and they like having the option
of having.
maybe a waiver is self-directed
completely, you get an annual
budget, um, based on age, and
then you can decide how you want
to spend it, many uh families
end up spending it on um paying
for caregivers. And, you know,
so if your primary caregiver is
uh a family member, then you're
paying a family member for that
service. So, so the reason I
bring this up, um, Madam Chair
Senator Pinto is because um the
definitions, the DD definitions
will make you eligible for.
these kinds of programs, you'll
still be eligible for coverage
under private insurance, you can
still be eligible under um the
turquoise care managed care,
community benefits, but those
are not going to be nearly as
intensive or comprehensive of
these, and there's, there are
sometimes even more continual
hoops to jump through. Although
I feel like all of the jump
through, and then very quickly
we had um we created the
supports waiver when the DD
waiver whitelist was thousands
and over a decade.
Long, and we did create a
supports waiver at the beginning
of this, um, administration.
Um, it's not utilized very much
anymore because the wait list
isn't very long anymore. It's
only $10,000 a year, which isn't
very much, and it's, uh, you
know, it is more limited. And
then, of course, we have the
medically fragile waiver, um,
which, you know, to qualify you
have to have um a medically
complex.
diagnosis.
In addition to intellectual
developmental disabilities, and
there are some more intensive,
um, you know, medically, uh,
complex.
Services that are provided under
the medically fragile waiver.
And so these are the four DDSD
waivers and that's where the
definition comes in Maam Chair,
Senator Pinto.
That's that is, and I didn't see
workforce solutions. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Nick. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Alice, for the
brief, very informative. I, I
got a bunch of questions. I just
need like real short, um, two
things on the slides, uh, stuck
out on the state agencies here,
the developmental disabilities
council and the Governor's
Commission on Disability, how
many are in each of those?
On the commission, I'm not quite
sure who, how many are on the
commission, um, but on the
council, uh, right now, I think
we have um
26, but we don't have, it's not
fully staffed yet. OK, so, um,
I, I'll just, there are some
statutory like the PED has to be
represented the healthcare
council.
OK, if I could just reclaim my
time on a question, Madam Chair,
is, but uh there are some that
besides the statutory
requirement. I assume there are
some um nominated by the
governor to be on these councils
or commissions. OK.
So, um, you know, Sandoval
County, um, very.
Attached to that as a
commissioner there for 8 years,
and we have 14 tribes of pueblos
in Sandoval County, the 2nd most
in the country.
When I, when I look at these,
how do you do the outreach to
the to our tribal partners, real
briefly. Thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator Black, uh, so the
DDC participates in the um the
tribal convenings that we have
that the governor has, and we
also work because we don't have
our own um um Indian Affairs
department or any kind of um a
Native American constituent
services within our staff, um,
we do.
Partner with other state
agencies who have their tribal
liaisons and try to do
outreach's communication all the
time.
Is that opening in back and
forth communication all the
time. Yes. So that brings me up
to another point is, you know,
we, we talked about these
websites and stuff and we have
such a a big world state with
very limited, uh, internet
capability in some places. How
do you, how do you, um,
How do you overcome or mitigate
uh those challenges.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Buck. So we do try to visit uh
different uh areas of the state,
and we do try to have a council
that represent different parts
of the state, um, so that we
can, uh, you know, use them as a
OK, thanks. And um getting to uh
Senator Pinto's questions on the
schools, is that a requirement,
obviously for the public and
charter schools because charters
are public. Uh, is a private
schools or religious schools?
Are they also required to have
but they do not,
it's just a public school.
Charter schools do, yes, because
they are uh public schools under
New Mexico law, um, but private
schools do not.
OK.
And um you talked about this
brain injury advisory account,
you know, we, we have uh
veterans who had a lot of TBI
over 20 years of war, uh, and
seeing some of that stuff, um.
How do you integrate with the
Department of Veteran Services
on, because you did mention a
veteran, uh, who.
How do you, how do you
integrate,
we historically have not
because, uh, you know, to
qualify for DD you have to have
had it for most of your life.
And so we haven't had like a
regular communication, however,
the officer guardianship does
have um priority services for
veterans. And so on our
waitlist, we have 3 categories
emergency, priority, and the
general waitlist, um, and so the
emergencies get done first. The
priorities um get done now so
the veterans have a priority
status.
but we don't have regular
communication with um the
veterans, uh, um, organizations,
um many most um definitions. So
lastly, I'm trying.
Oh, Madam Chair, I'm sorry. Uh,
I've been out since March, a
little rusty.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Alice, on that point, I'm, I'm
not sure I quite underst, it
sounds like a complicated
process for for the veteran
there because you have, you
know, this organization we
talked about, I, I, I, I'm a
little
I don't, I don't know if
veterans understand that process
well to get those particular um
treatments or, or care.
I think there's a gap between
the organization um.
Fall through the cracks, which
is what I'm afraid of.
Um, and Madam Chair, Senator
Black, um, I think, I think I
want to revise my statement. The
Office of guardianship, so while
the DDC as a council doesn't
have, for example, uh, the
Office of guardianship does
interact, um,
Pretty regularly with, you know,
veterans services facilities
across the state. So while we
may not be connected, um, you
know, at a sort of policy level,
even though that's the informal
connections there there are the
on the ground grassroots
connections think about it thank
you. OK,
so, um, if you are on Zoom and
want to speak um in public
comment, please raise your hand.
We're trying to get that
organized and next we'll go to
Representative Kates.
Thank you. You're very in depth
um presentation, um, and, and I
know that you just covered in
our state. I just wanted to
clarify a couple of things. One,
understand we are number one be
able to brag about that. I also
want to, um, just because it
came up with the art conference,
um, your remission on
disabilities. This is for
individuals to access funding to
help modify their personal home,
but there is a similar program
in MFening now for land
Lords. I need a wide door you
know
um, and I want to, and I think
that you did a good job, but I
just want to clarify the MTA is,
although it is set up to um
provide kind of discover what
kind of tools understand as
employers that this is something
as we that needs an
accessibility device, but it's a
big investment. This is a real
Lords. I need a wide door you
know,
um, and I want to, and I think
that you did a good job, but I
just want to clarify the MTA is,
although it is set up to um
provide kind of discover what
kind of tools understand as
employers that this is something
as we that needs an
accessibility device, but it's a
big investment. This is a
reality, and I would just, I'm
a, I'm a big component. I just
diversify your workforce.
Uh, I have in my and um and they
have add. Thank you
representative. Next we have
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I have two questions. One,
regarding, everybody understands
Medicaid is gonna I guess that
my question about disability
rights and protections,
dismantling protection. My
question is, what can we do at
the state level to fill in. I
know those kinds of protections.
Um, because we can be more
government.
Thank you chair, Senator Lopez
for the question. And so, um, we
didn't get into the slide
because I wanted to make sure
you all had questions, but I do
want to say that um in the
proposed budget, some of the
proposed budgets that we're
seeing, they are wanting to cut
the you said so UNM Center for
Development Disability would no
longer be funded, um, and there,
you know,
It changes every week, but we
have seen proposals to uh to cut
the protection advocacy agencies
as well, and so for us at the
state level, um, you know, I
know that my colleagues over at
Disability Rights New Mexico are
really
Unsure how they're going to be
able to fund their services if
their federal funding gets cut.
The vast majority of their
federal funding, I'm sorry, of
their funding period comes from
federal funds, and there are
many different grants, and
they're seeing sort of each one
of those grants fall, um, and so
I think, I hate to say it, but I
think funding those programs is
going to be the key, the work
can happen as long as they have
the resources to continue that
work.
The DDC fortunately, we do have
a lot of state funding and so at
least temporarily we can make
ends meet until we figure it out
in the big picture, but
protection advocacy agencies
particularly do nothing and uh
may I, Madam Chair, just add
very quickly that for the
environmental modifications, if
you look at the waiver programs
in these slides, um, almost all
of them have in, so those are
the modifications to do in your
home to make them more
accessible. There are all in
these waiver programs they're
also available under Tur.
care community benefits, OK. Um,
but what about um the
protections.
Oh, so that, that's dismantling
protect. You answered the
question. And then the second
is um why on the brain, you
talked about the commission is a
commission of the debt for the
deaf and higher we are very
close partners, Madam Chair and
Senator Lopez with both the
commission for the blind and
visually impaired and the
commission for the Deaf and hard
of hearing, um, director Goman,
director Trapp and I work really
closely together on
accessibility issues, for
example, they just aren't
typically falling under the D.
definition. So I was giving an
overview of developmental
displays specifically, but they
very much were close partners we
work on, you know, um,
employment issues, we work on
supported employment, we work on
particularly accessibilities or
big play because I worked on
state funding, the commission on
deaf and hard and hearing
advisory council because of
questions about their funding.
Um, it, you know.
Senator Lopez, I don't know
enough about their funding
revenues and uh resources and to
give you a really good answer,
but I would encourage um that
you uh reach out to uh director
Stan Ross about that. He's very
familiar with it. I do know that
Stan Ross and his uh office
actually is across the street
from us, and so, um, you know,
you could visit at some point,
walk over there and say hi and
thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Senator.
Thank you,
Madam Chair, Alice.
curious about some statistics.
How many
Folks in New Mexico have been.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Scott for that question.
We know that there are about
7000 people being served on the
DD waiver, and that is pretty
much the extent of it, um, if
they are not being served on a
waiver. I don't know of any
central registry of, you know,
who else has been diagnosed with
what, and so, so far, and that's
been a problem for us, you know,
so far the information we
collect um is either based on
what services they've either
received or have applied to
receive or um not, but we don't
have any, you know, there's not
like an epidemiologist, as far
as I know at the Department of
Health who's collecting that
information.
Oh, thank you, Madam chair
Ellison and kinda as a
corollary, you know what the
five year of these folks that
have been
Diagnosed or weak.
Are we increasing the number of
folks.
Decreasing about the same.
Scott, um, I know about
trajectories, for example,
people who need guardianship
based on a lot of demographics,
um.
I don't have a good idea what a
5-year trajectory would be for
diagnosis and as far as how
they're doing, um, that would be
the work of an epidemiologist to
be able to do that, but I do
know that as we improve,
Um, interventions as we improve
identification. Um, we are going
to see a rise in people getting
this diagnosis, and that's a
good thing because that means we
can help serve them from an
early OK. Um, just, just kind of
as an aside, autism is now one
in 36, I believe, 31, OK, so,
um, that, that's, but whether
that's increased diagnosis or if
no one knows, and I will tell
you histor
Berkley, and when I started
working on autism for um we came
ask for funding, and they said,
well, how many people are there?
And we said,
Yes, yeah, I mean, we didn't
know and so they refused to give
us funding until we could tell
them how many people, and we
couldn't tell them how many
people without funding, so to
the, I mean, it's been 30 years
that at least I have been trying
to figure out a way to get
numbers of people who who are
diagnosed with a variety of
disabilities cause it's hard to
plan and pay for what you don't
know. So we will go to Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I'm seeing here on your
Madam chair Senator Pope.
Um, by and large, if they're
serving as adults above the age
of 22, uh, they could qualify
for guardianship services, which
is why we have interaction
there, but you're right, as far
as the um what the DD council is
in charge of, um, you know, they
would fall outside of our
curfew, right, thank you, and,
and not to say that these folks
Mature and Senator, that's a
really good question I'd like to
Is there anyone in the room who
would like to give public
comment.
I knew you'd come through for
me, Jim.
Thank you so much, Alice, for,
for your presentation and please
all of you know that Alice is
very accessible, very easy to
work with, and um.
A wealth that he is, so.
So Jim, go ahead and come up.
And is there anyone on Zoom?
No, OK, so go ahead, Jim.
Madam Chair, um, my name is Jim
Jackson. I'm the registered
lobby. Um, I also serve as the
chair of the Disability
coalition, which includes our
independent living centers,
that's a group of 5
organizations I want to begin
with just a few um uh Senator
Scott, but my understanding is
historically there have been
about 300, more or less, about
300 new people, um, piece of
this puzzle that uh gives you
some sense of the.
continue, I would note, I think,
as has come up that uh this is
the the 50th anniversary of the
and um and that really helped
lead to
The creation of the DD uh waiver
probe through your financial
support, uh, and with the
leadership of the governor, we
have ended the waiting list for
the DD waiver, which was uh
issued for um this does reflect
the change from 50 years ago,
um, in effective on encouraging
community, uh.
Uh serving
this this year is my 50th
participate in that federal
special aid law. Um, I'm just
gonna uh finish up by noting
that uh you've had a lot of
discussion around developmental
disabilities, and that's great,
but the scope of disability
issues that come within the is
extremely broad. It's broad in
terms of the kinds of
disabilities that people,
education, employment, uh
vocational training, all of
these kinds, and I just want to
close with one example.
Uh, which is, you've talked a
lot about uh service. If you're
not a person with a development,
uh, you, uh, if you can get onto
the Medicaid program, uh, you
have access to a community
benefit of really important. I
would just bring to your
attention that we still have a
very long waiting list.
To get into for some people to
get into this program. So if
you're on Medicaid and you meet
the nursing facility level of
care, but you want
community-based and home-based
services, you can get them under
our program, but you have to get
on to Medicaid. We have a waiver
program that allows people who
are whose income is just a
little too high to to typically
qualify for Medicaid. So, if
you're between like 100 level,
we have a waiver that allows you
to get into Medicaid, but
there's a
huge waiting list for this it
takes years and years, we, we've
solved the DD waiver rewrites in
New Mexico and the coalition
will be bringing lots of issues
to you and just as a caveat, we
have salt, we don't have a
waiting list, but we also don't
have services, so people who are
who get off the waiting list
into services, can't get the
services, so it's um
It looks better than it actually
is.
So I think um since we have a
quorum, I would uh let's look at
the minutes from our May 20th
meeting and I a vote senators,
um, Lopez and the second from.
Signature block.
Um, is there any opposition?
OK.
Um, accepted the minutes,
approved the minutes, and just,
um, we will be taking a lunch
break and for today, the
sponsors, oh.
OK, I will go ahead with this
and go ahead, Robert. Um, the
sponsors today are JD
Bullington, Drew Sutter, and
Mateika.
So Robert, I'll give you 4
minutes.
Uh, on the issue of the, uh,
provider rate increases.
I went into a deep
go through the chair and don't
forget to introduce yourself,
Madam Chair, my name is Robert
Cagle. I'm an advocate for
developmentally disabled folks.
Uh, there's been some issues of,
uh, provider rate increases and
how they were funded, so I did a
deep dive into what happened.
Uh,
basically the short is in
January, the governor released
her budget, asked for $331
million for the DD waiver
program.
Her specific request was 28
million for increased provider
rates by the PCG rate study.
The PC rate study had a 3.7%
increase in FY 25. That's the
recommendation.
Uh, legislative finance
Committee recommended to 26.3
million for provider rate
increases, they also recommended
moving 5 million out of the 40
million still left to Department
of Health over to be used in the
waiver.
Um, HB 2 passed.
The
26.3 million was put in for FY
26.
Federal law requires the
payments be consistent.
With the quality of care and
sufficient to lit providers so
that care and services are
available under the plan, at
least to the extent they are
available to services to the
general population and
geographic area. That's the
federal law.
Uh, the Clay states clearly not
in compliance, the end of this
physical year ends in a few
days, and there's no provider
rate increase as the law HB2
authorized.
And the documents and stuff.
Thank you, Robert.
Please, we will break for lunch
and
Don't go too far, we may, we may
get an earlier start depending,
I don't even, oh, Xander's next,
so we might have a chance of
getting maybe reconvene it um.
12:30.
OK, so we'll be back at 12:30.
