I guess let's get started since
i'm the late one today
and wasn't my fault I just don't
want to get my vehicle told like
the environment second will take
my code
mr galves I think you're gonna
kind of start software the
update where you're at
mary.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Got a big chair of the five
minute clocks are going to start
running.
The.
Press the button with a little
person to talk
there's a little perfect can
near me
all right good morning i'm very
much deanest wide i'm share of
community service core were a
five or one c three over the
last two plus years community
service court along with al gals
legislators and others have been
working to get funding for so
terrible loss crucials via the
lc three behavioral health
collaborative this project was
found to fill a gap in services
and it received gain change or
status via our strategic
planning process which includes
some forty three affiliated
members of the three
collaborative
last year I received a behavior
whole star award for this
another behavioral health work
was a beautiful plan from the
government certificate from the
governor but no funding support
were hoping that that will
change in twenty twenty three
regard to due pass for this
project in health and human
services committee it was tabled
in appropriations because it
wasn't in the behavior whole
services division budget so
again this year we will be
submitting bills for this
project
so so terry is great for the
word deliverance so terry it is
an evidence based residential
treatment for psychosis in
twenty twenty one there were
twelve hundred residents of
dornia and a county that
presented to emergency rooms
with a diagnosis of skits
operation the recovery rate with
conventional treatment that
includes medication of psychosis
is twenty percent patience
treated at soterior house do
better than patience treated in
the hospital in terms of social
functioning employment symptoms
and rehospitalizations this
evidence is from the national
institute of mental health
study.
Of twelve years of sortery
operation again that's twelve
years study by the national
institutional health
so terry a treatment is for
three to six months so it's
longer than hospitalization but
with lasting results treatments
carried out by a licensed
clinician psychiatrist and
staffed by recovery peers in
home like residents patients are
provided safety and support in a
controlled environment as they
discover the best course
so close this is most frequently
a response to trauma and
individual treated and so
terriers allowed to work through
causes of trauma and problems of
as opposed to first of doing
symptoms with medication
medication is provided as
necessary but is not the primary
modality of treatment
a study of the original
sorterial done by the national
institutional health found that
fewer anti psychotic drugs the
better the chance of recovery
that is fewer anticipated drugs
a mouse of nineteen seventy nine
world health organization study
of town countries supports our
thinking the whole found that
skits are french outcomes in
poor countries are much much
better than rich countries like
the us
while more than seventy five
percent of individuals from poor
countries diagnosed gets a
friend at cat either recovered
or were doing fairly well five
years after their diagnosis only
twenty five percent
of such patience in rich
countries enjoyed a similar
level of success
because the result of the whole
study was so unexpected as
second investigation was
conducted with the same results
the whole concluded that living
in a rich country like the us is
a strong predictor that a person
diagnosed with succ.
It's already will never fully
recover
so to us mental health as a
community problem in it deserves
a community response the stated
new mexico agrees or it would
not have created the behavioral
health collaboratives now we
need the state to honor the
strategic plan of their own
creation the lc three behavioral
health collaborations for me
this is personal my sister had a
middle break down at the age of
twenty two and she was
hospitalised with adult onset
schizophrenia she was
immediately started on electric
shark treatment then on heavy
psychotic medication to stop her
hearing voices but the voice has
never did start and the
medication got stronger and
stronger as the years went by
when she died and twenty sixteen
she had to have a pint of blood
drawn from her veins every
single week so that she could
accept that level of medication
against alteria provides
evidence based treatment in a
safe and supportive environment
that allows the patient along
with light licensed
professionals to address cars it
as well as symptoms
years after my sister's first
psychos as we discovered the
cars she was in a physically
abusive marriage
if we had had time to discover
and address the cause of her
cycles as instead of focusing on
the symptoms and starting her on
heavy doses of medication her
long term outcome may have been
very different we need a certain
area option
so what is it cost
for one year of operation well
first let me jump to ahead let
me say that if we treat twenty
individuals in a year the cost
for client per day is one
hundred and eighteen dollars
that competes with jail county
prison you know county jail
prison etc
for one year it is eight hundred
and fifty nine thousand dollars
for a three year pilot project.
It's two point seven million
again the word sotaria means
salvation deliverance in other
words recovery
recovery is what is inexpensive
and long lasting the cost of
society of a single individual
twenty five who does not recover
is three point eight million
dollars
so we want a chance at recovery
again we will be introducing
additional legislation in this
session because this
this was not in the behavior
whole services division budget
so we hope that this year we
will not be tabled at critical
junctures so I would like to
stand for any questions and
thank you so much very kindly
for the opportunity to present
you today.
Representative harlen
thank you mister chair and thank
you
yes sir
so so interest at last I mean
sinterior is not
something people can go to now
you're trying to build it or
it's already no it is not in
place we're trying to get one in
place yes and then the other
thing that I have
first
in california there was one in
alaska there is one now and
vermont there are several same
model in israel and the state
pays for everything
thank you mister chair and the
other question I had was you
mentioned and you might have
explained it but I didn't hear
it the skids are frenia in a
rich country versus the skits of
skids are friendly and a poor
country why is there such a
difference
well in the united states we
have turned to a model of
medication
not just say that that
medication does not work is
extremely helpful in some cases
it's going to be the only option
but at adult answer
especially in the case of my
sister and a lot of folks if the
psychosis is not explored if you
don't experience what you're
experiencing often it's adult
and sets gets afraid of folks
are leaving adolescence going
into adulthood and that they're
freaking out about it they've
got what they seem to think is
titanic pressures on them
so if they are not allowed to
walk through that and feel it
and experience it and possibly
come up with other alternatives
before stopping voices or
stopping what they're
experiencing with medication
then the outcome
would be different you would be
on a lifetime trajectory of
medication
yeah
that's what happens in the us
just briefly add in poor
countries.
Colombia nigeria india those
kind of kind of countries when
people fall into this kind of a
state
the community really rally
surround rallies around the
family and and they help the
person go through it go through
that experience in that way and
don't use medication as a
primary model in some cases they
see it as a spiritual emergency
and should
the main difference and if you
think about veteran who has been
shell shocked right it's a it's
similar similar adult onset
skits are freenessee off not
always often a logical response
to something a trauma that has
happened to the individual.
So in an import country doesn't
get us when they start going
through treatment as the
treatment last is in a lot
shorter than over here in rich
places a lot longer the
treatment so in the united
states again we frequently turn
to medication we medicate normal
in the united states in third
wall countries they may not have
access to medication and so the
family rallies around this
person and so that's part of the
sortarian model it's an a home
like setting
in america and as was the case
with my sister we didn't know
what was going on and after a
while we fatigued we didn't know
what to do so she was
hospitalised and again that
hospitalization is what really
set her on
shot therapy heavy does as a
medication had we understood if
we had had a sort of option to
rally around her
I really do believe that her
outcome would have been
different she hated the medicine
she always wanted to go off of
it because it does her down was
like a straight jacket
a pharmaceutical straight jacket
and who wants that on you if she
had had time to work through it
it could have been different
yeah thank you for the question
thank you mister chair represent
small
thank you mister chair thank you
bob very much mister chair and
presenters you've visited with
neck from vhs from behavioral
health services division
or have you not
al has had more opportunity than
I have we did have a we did have
a zoom called with the secretary
we were told that there was a
lot of information and they
would like to explore it further
with us we never got that
opportunity instead of meeting
with us they asked to speak with
them.
With the representative ferry
and I believe that it's you know
it's because they have a budget
that they have to support and I
coming from stake government
hundred percent understand that
and so what that ends up being
is our getting acknowledgment by
the governor getting it
knowledgement through the
behavior hill services
collaboratives getting
acknowledgment from the
community but when it comes to
getting funding we need to
submit bill street to the
legislature and not go through
behavioral health services
division that they thank you
very much thank you mr chair
miss why mister turn off the
mikes
yet no no you're fine which is
the echoes come back its
alternative once I finish uh
quick question
and I appreciate it's great to
see mr with neck with mister
book as for a hst obviously we
have a great deal to talk about
with health care today the
reason is the question mister
chair in twenty twenty three we
appropriated twenty million
dollars for
behavioral health interventions
to what was then hst now
healthcare authority it is
absolutely the case where
sort of the first big stap has
been taken by the legislature
signed in the live by the
executive which is setting aside
large amounts of new resources
including four pilot projects
which this is even though
there's there is good evidence
from the two
united states locations as you
point out colorado or excuse me
california and alaska mr chair
we have to acknowledge that it's
at this point not the normal
route in most states you sort of
shared with us perspective as to
why I bring that up only
because.
Yeah I think can help it can
help me understand why it's hard
for folks who are professionally
this is sort of their entire
career why it's difficult to
sort of choose a new
pilot approach right when
everything your entire career is
sort of people that touch you
the people that are practicing
this is not the normal route
even though there is important
evidence for it mister chair
presenters
and war as when when we have the
hca and we're talking about
things there will ask them
we do need to make investments
in pilot projects we do need to
have the courage to try and new
things that does take new money
in this case the main source of
new money is the state primarily
working through medicaid we know
that at this point it's not
medicaid matched as that right
and that's that's correct we do
think we could we could dumb get
twenty percent twenty five
percent
reimbursement for the cost from
medicaid
that thank you mister chair
thank you mister gals
so it's
so we have to we have to be
ready to be innovative and try
something new they previous
route I think that the
legislature has taken is to
appropriate large sons to the
executive and sort of
work with and rely on the
executive to
sort of a portion that funding
out and I think there was a
strong hope that
it hope I think is a fair word
there wasn't sort of a certainty
there was a whole that
innovative evidence based.
Pilot projects that have
community support would be
looked upon with favor and with
funding when there are new and
large parts of funding
to this point it's been
challenging and this is a
perfect example I appreciate
directorsly mister chair you out
for next the opportunity it's
been difficult in this case and
successful to this point to have
a big block of funding and for
the executive to say yes I want
to try for a three year pilot so
i'll wrap up what i'm sort of my
brief starts with perhaps this
is if there is not that ability
to allocate sort of segment from
a large part of money than
perhaps we need to approach this
from a more grow type of
perspective that says here's
three years of funding there's
not a certainty that it's going
to be recurring funded by its
innovative it's evidence base
there's clearly community
support and commitment so we
need to take that extra step and
say from the twenty plus million
or whatever it is here is a
small share over three years to
fund that so anyway they're
there are good options I
appreciate the executives of
work in that were flowing a
you know
rapidly growing amount of
funding to
desperately needed projects all
around the state
we're gonna have to probably
take more responsibility as the
legislature and be more clear
in in this case sort of very
definitive with the projects
that we want thank you very much
mister chair thank you just to
crap this up for a kind of quick
I appreciate your time in in the
taking this legacy on for your
sister I mean is is really
system about your character.
There's ten million dollars in
her the secretary sitting right
there there is ten million we
know there's ten million
we can track it for you
the sector is not shaken ahead
with it was for to start up
things like this and and so that
money is available was twenty
million they never spent they
never it was turn on the lights
open the doors everything else
and they never spent it split
ten million each in ten million
she way of de so there is
capital of money available and
maybe you and the secretary when
she's done need to have that
conversation about how you
access some of that money in
access it now in that week don't
run a bill
try to figure it out through
girl you have tons of
legislators from there that can
help you appropriate grow money
through there in income pilot
and get you operational in start
up
but there is money available we
have seven hundred million
health care
in mental health and pretty much
has quite been all spent so it's
just a matter of partnering in
making sure that the executive
in the agency gets you the money
you need and and so you can move
forward thank you so much mister
chair and thank you so much
nathan will work with the
secretary we have been told that
that funding is no longer
available if that is the case
again
that we would probably advise
you that we'll move forward with
a bill just because again twelve
hundred people showed up at the
hospital with diagnosis
schizophrenia these are the
folks that are convolving door
cycle of street to hospital to
jail to street to hospital to
jail and so we really want to
break into that reboving door
cycle just like drug courts were
a community response to a
community problem and now
there's thirty five hundred drug
courts across the nation.
That's what so terry is so thank
you all very kindly food time
yeah thank you I don't think you
have to wait the money is there
so thank you
eric you're gonna start us off.
Hello jeana.
All right miss chair members of
the committee my name is eric
sheniam the l c analysts health
care authority.
Sitting next to me is secretary
carry our meho of the health
care forty
what can
well just my sigh I just kind of
wanted to walk you all through
the our day that we're gonna
have today.
First we're gonna start off with
a legislative believe you guys
are all familiar with the
committees familiar with
legislate process.
With you start off with a short
five to ten minute introduction
presentation from each there
staff and then the
agency and then we want to open
it up to the committee for lots
of questions armed counted diven
deeply into the performance
challenges that we're talking
about for the day and so we're
gonna start off with that
after that we're going to talk
about
or manage care organizations
that starts at ten o'clock.
And I just wanted to mention you
know managed care organizations
they they get about three
quarters of the money that goes
to
medicaid and so they are a large
driver of expenditures with then
the medicaid program and the
medicaid program are is becoming
more and more of a
driver of the budget overall
because it's it's you know we're
a hca total is up at at around
two billion dollars with him two
billion of general fund dollars
within our budget and then
moving on later on we're going
to talk about best practices and
behavioral health that's this
afternoon we have to.
Two experts from the university
of new mexico to speak about
that and then after that we're
gonna tie it all together with
the health care authorities
budget they and their requesting
repreview that for you and so
we've got a full day of
medicaid
a lot of it is gonna be focused
on behavioral house and look
forward to spending the day with
you today.
All right so under cat table in
your books
you bring the aspirin what's
that did you bring the aspirin
should have
alright the state of new mexico
case significantly improved in
its behavioral health from
physical health outcomes with
nearly have the state and
rolled.
Medicaid is the greatest lever
available to the state to reduce
the prevalence of metal illness
and substance use disorders and
improve physical health measures
related to women and children
such as maternal mortality and
birth
access to space services and
physical health providers is key
to improving these and other
population based outcomes
following recommendations from a
fault twenty twenty two lsc
evaluation
the legislature invested heavily
in increasing provider rates for
behavioral health and physical
health
almost across the board
this will be the second and a
series of plan legislative
hearings focusing on improving
access to quality behavioral
health and physical health
services but this one is going
to be primarily focused on
behavioral.
I know what I wanted to start
with is if you if you all have
this in front of you that under
tap care just wanted to go
through a few kind of outcome
pieces that we have just wanted
to mention right now in mexico
ranks at it
you know not great we have
improved a little bit over the
years but we're not doing as far
as overall mental health
prevalence
used substance use disorder
we're not doing that great in
those areas.
When it comes to suicide if we
go to the next page here you can
see that new mexico doesn't.
Do so well when it comes to
suicide we've ranked about
fourth in the country for
several years now when it comes
to some of these outcomes
when it comes to overdose death
new mexico has
you know we had a lot of
substance used to sort out
during the pandemic we increased
quite a bit
and we haven't seen that drop
off as of I believe the status
from april twenty twenty four we
still haven't seen
and improve we've seen a little
bit of an improvement from the
pandemic bed we definitely
haven't gotten anywhere back to
wear we were prior to the
pandemic.
And then
the bottom table on page two I
just want to mention this and
it's percent of new episode of a
abuse or dependents follow up
and the the department or mco's
match characterizations that
we're gonna talk to later they
actually do a decent job of
following up fourteen days and
thirty
thirty four days after
somebody comes into a hospital
whatever presenting this
substance use disorder or
the numbers are very similar for
alcohol use disorder also
and so
we have to kind of question why
is that the we're doing okay
following up after roots when
compared to the nation as a
whole
there might be some answers to
that on on page three you'll see
the
in the top graph their
medication assisted treatment
we've basically kind of maintain
flat usage of medication
assisted treatment which is one
of the.
Most available
evidence based interventions and
dealing with both eight you know
any kind of substance use
disorder both opined or
alcohol use disorder and so if
you look at especially when it
comes to
alcohol use disorder
when it comes to a compreceipt
if you're looking at in that
table there very little usage of
of a conversation to sell from
which are both meant for
alcohol use disorder treatment
and we so we could probably do a
little bit better in terms of
providing better
medication assistant treatment
one thing I wanted to mention to
is without better access
measures utilize this is the
second draft down and peach
three without better access
measures utilization can be used
to approximate whether medicaid
members are accessing the
service as the state is paying
for.
However because the utilisation
metrics the health care
authority tracks or units of
service the state does not know
if more referrer clients are
receiving care
of file twenty twenty three
medicaid accountability report
found that utilization curious a
physical and behavioral health
have decreased sense of twenty
nineteen
moving on to page four and tab
so I just wanted to recap the
prior legislat that we had and
may of twenty twenty four.
At the last legislat on health
care access the health care
authority committee committed to
providing claims data and other
types of data so that elsie
staff could assess access more
thoroughly as the scust lfc
staff utilization data but
cannot access or i'm sorry
assess where services are used
who is using them and rake
recommendations on where the
state's money would best be
spent
progress ever since then since
the previous legislative thought
he has not provided the claims
data reference above and
consequently listen analysis on
access measures have been
limited to summary data the
status the same data staff have
had access to you for several
years the reported in previous
medicaid accountability reports
the states meddling ranking
nationally for access to
physical behavioral health
services
is disconnected from its poor
showing
on many of the outcomes
discussed above for example the
mexico and twenty twenty three
ranked eleventh among the states
for the number of behavioral
health providers per one hundred
thousand population
while new mexico's ranking on
some behavioral health issues
have improved the state is still
on the bottom of the states for
the prevalence of most
behavioral health concerns
the desconect may be related to
the lack of access of evidence
based health services however
having a lack of of data makes
it hard to determine the cause
the thirty made significant
progress with its rural health
delivery grant program however
without better data is unclear
whether the grants were targeted
at the rate types of services in
the highest neat communities of
the seventy three million and
planning grants from the
health care authorities real
health livery grants
about thirty one million was a
lot of to behave your whole
services with allocations
including six million for
substance use disorders.
Five point three million for
autism twelve million for
therapists and other behavioral
health services and small
amounts for behavioral health
and the incarcerated population.
And with that mister chairman
i'll pass it over to secretary
army hope for further comments
on the
legislation
won't think you think you mister
share good morning good morning
members of the committee and now
they want to thank you for the
opportunity to be here not just
this morning but most of the day
today I am sure you'll be quite
tired of me by adjournment but
thank you for paying such close
attention to health care and i'm
the services that were providing
through the healthcare authority
I genuinely appreciate it and
i'd also like to think that lfc
leadership and uh mr shinya for
continuing to evaluate
healthcare access in our state a
definitely you think that's
something that we share as a
goal it's a priority of us of
ours and as well as something
that we share and so you know I
don't I don't think there's a
lot of dispute on those areas
where we could improve
healthcare access in the mexico
and eighteen of see for flag in
those important issues
moving on to slide to you I do
want to just acknowledge a a
doubter authority we always like
to acknowledge that we are on
the unseeded and cestral lands
of the original peoples of the
pablo apache
preblo a patchy and denay past
present and future future this
is particularly true today at
the university of new mexico
which is located on the
traditional home lands of the
public send you
it's with gratitude that we pay
our respects to the land that
the people and the communities
that contribute to what is known
today as the beautiful state of
new mexico
moving on to flade three at the
health care authority we always
drive to anchor or mission
vision and goals and those are
our north star for the system of
health care and support programs
we are working to build and
improve for our fellow new
mexicans are mission is to
ensure that new mexicans will
attain their highest level of
health by providing a whole
person cost effective.
Accessible and high quality
health care and safety net
services our vision is into
ensure that every new mexican
will have access to affordable
health care coverage to record
needed and seamless health care
system and we have four key
goals and we've worked to make
sure that all of the work we do
is always connected to advancing
these four goals are for as the
agency
moving on to slide for I am just
submitted happens a minute touch
on today I mean it is hard a
little bit about what we are
doing to increase access to
health care services that
includes what we're doing to
insure evidence and meet a
medicate health care services
what we're doing to advance and
expand behavior with services
also estatus arm on the rural
health care delivery fund and
what's being funded through that
project I where I was there
going to talk about what we're
doing to oversee our managed
care organization organizations
and insure network adequacy
and then I will give a brief
update on the health care
delivery and access act big bill
implementation that we're
working on today to support our
hospitals and i'll be happy to
talk briefly about the data
initiatives and what we're doing
to provide data to the committee
and where we are with that data
request that's been asked for by
the legislative finance
committee
moving on to flight five so I
want to talk about what it means
when we talk about evidence
based services and how the
medicaid programs insurers a
program insurers access to a
right way to rave services that
are fully supported by medical
and clinical evidence first it's
important to know that medicaid
is always firmly grounded in
evidence based practices federal
regulations do not permit
medicare to cover experimental
or non evidence based treatments
promising treatments even those
we are not allowed to cover and
so that sort of a an issue that
we should talk about in the
context of the sure house
conversation each benefit in
service add that we cover by
medicaid under goes a rigorous
evaluation.
And evidence based review to
ensure that it supported by
scientific research and clinical
guidelines and coverage
decisions are based on a
combination of federal mandates
expert recommendations from
national health authorities and
data driven outcomes medicaid
mostly uses a standardized set
of service codes on every single
claim for reimbursement there
are small set of codes that are
considered
temporary codes at those are for
a newer merging technology
services and procedures and I
want to clarify that medicare
does not cover those codes so
the entire suite that we cover
is evidence based I think there
has been some discussion about
we're not covering evidence
based services I really want to
clarify that we are covering the
standard medical practice that
it is available just like all of
you in your health insurance
programs
we are very focused on making
sure that our providers are mcos
adapt I don't practice
guidelines that are based on
valid and reliable clinical
evidence or consensus that
consider the needs of the member
that are adopted and
consultation with providers and
are revised at least every two
years we are continuously
updating our coverage policies
to reflect the latest evidence
and clinical advancements
ensuring that tax period dollars
for medicaid or spent on
providers services that are
supported by medical evidence
moving on to slide six I know we
all agree that rebuilding
behavioral health in new mexico
has to be one of the health care
authorities that priorities that
will continue to be the case we
we are not putting our food on
that gas pedal we are really
trying to accelerate the
continue of care in new mexico
we continue to see a year over
your increase in memedicate
member access to behavioral
health treatment are you can see
in the graph on the right we've
provided two point two million
more behavioral health visits
for medicare in behavior a
health that's sixty eight
percent increase in favor of
utilization since twenty
nineteen.
So what are we doing to improve
that and build upon that as you
all know we are getting ready to
raise medicaid reimbursement
reimbursement rates up to a
hundred and fifty percent of
medicare that includes a for
behavioral health that also
includes primary care we
recognize that our primary care
doctors in new mexico are an
entry point for behavioral
health services they are
providing behavioral health care
to new mexicans especially in
rural communities we are getting
ready to launch sixth certified
community behavioral health
clinics those will launch in
january of twenty twenty five we
have five more clinics in
development over the next two
years so really trying to focus
on making sure that that are
very very good high quality our
primary care behavior a health
integration are is provided to
new mexico our car members are
receiving delegated care
coordination and we are
supporting them with substance
used to sort our risk recovery
we are providing in person care
coordination at the five largest
hospitals while women are still
in the hospital so we have care
queen on the ground I trying to
engage women and services before
they leave the hospital we are
also working on launching our
justice re entry program we just
received approval in july delay
twenty sixth to reach into jails
and prisons up to ninety days
prior to release with medicaid
covered services medication and
car coordination and media most
important a plan for a dressing
needs such as housing and
transportation as individuals
transition out of curse roll
settings we have also added five
new behavioral health practices
those went live in july those
that includes enhanced rates
that will encourage our
providers to expand their
services and we are providing
technical assistance for free to
open providers who want launch
those new services or get
training
and that includes several new
services for children and add a
lessons to address a growing
need.
In a behavior of health crisis
we're seeing in our children
and sway seven m wanted to
indicate or show you are that
the hca has demonstrated a
seventy three percent growth in
the medical behavior of a health
provider network
and f one hundred and four
percent increase in the medicaid
psychiatric provider network
since twenty nineteen this data
comes directly from the medicare
provider enrollment system and
reflects overall network growth
the exiting mco there is a
western sky that exited the
market for medicaid in july that
did not impact this growth and
did not result in a loss of
providers for the seat of new
mexico.
On the next flide i'm sorry my
number is I think it's like
seven
I wanted to just acknowledge as
mister shinya's legislat report
discusses that new mexico
suicide is forth highest in the
niche so so aside rate is forth
highest in the nation are
overdose rate is eight highest
that's not just a medicare
problem I want to make sure you
all know this is that bride
behavioral health issue about a
year ago one of my own employees
had an overdose at work in one
of my field officers and was
saved by one of my customers who
is carrying the locks there's a
broad issue it's a public health
problem really requires a robust
set of public health responses
we strongly agree with the lsc
that interventions such as
medicaid assisted treatment
medication assisted treatment
primary care at me for a health
integration screening and early
intervention are all very
important as well as access to
prevention and craces response
services
we've continued to see growth
and the use of our ninety crasis
line by new mexicans with thirty
three thousand total connections
in afly twenty four and a
growing rate of calls resolved
without requiring emergency
response services the highest
counties just so you know with
nine eight eight connections are
sierra mckinley bernalio taus
and sandwich and county and
forty one percent of those calls
indicate a suicidal itiation
we have we are working really
hard to bring up our crisis
trier centers and mobile crashes
teams we've got five mobile
crisis teams working toward
certification for a medicaid
payment and our seven
cbhs will launch web crashes
teams also in january we've got
her packs good behavior again
for elementaries will students
that's really a prevention
initiative we do see I really
good evidence that and that has
decreased a classroom disruptive
behaviours and youth.
We are very focused very much
agree with the lfc report to and
then a lock soon distribution
and other medications are very
important we are focused on that
in the locks own distribution
focusing on tribal communities
and because of the issue in my
own office making sure that all
state officers have no marks on
as well
we are we have trained over
three thousand certified pure
support workers and included an
additional focus on operators
disorder
sort of interventions for that
population we've got eighteen
oxford houses across new mexico
are providing recovery housing
for individuals the substance
used to disorder with an average
monthly absolute rate of ninety
four percent
and then we've got our fresh
start rental assistance program
in nine counties the serving
hundred and thirty individuals
i'm any mexico was recently
selected as one of a few states
to participate in a national
behavior health learning clarity
to receive additional technical
assistance on the execution of
many these efforts including
that cbh branch
on flight nine you can see where
will be rolling out cbh season
fy twenty five and we're
currently recruiting for a new
cohort of writers in the next
two fiscal years wanted to just
call your attention into you
before it crashes tree our
centers that are open and
receiving medicaid reimbursement
and the two crashes tribal
stabilization programs that are
in process for fall
certification I think I could
not agree any more with the lsc
that access to medication
assisted treatment really is
fundamental I think there is a
lot of evidence that shows that
a we could reduce the risk of
death by fifty percent just by
improving access to mat but we
do need to train providers we
need to be ready to provide
amount demand amount treatment
we worked closely with the
department of health to make
sure that now is provided now in
every single public health
profits across new mexico.
Um and i'd really focused on
training providers and address
addressing the barriers there
are some very critical billing
barriers for example and reasons
that providers don't necessarily
provide map today and so we're
really focused on trying to
address those I make sure that
our system supports that care
mr chair members of the
committee I wanted to give you
an update on the satisfactory
behavior a health collaborative
and have received questions
about this to just want to be
really transparent about what's
going on
the behavioral health clarity of
has lacked a ceo since march of
twenty twenty three and that has
presented us an opportunity to
really reexamine its strategic
direction we've been doing a lot
of thinking about how to engage
and more meaningful and
authentic stakeholder listening
and collaboration when it came
onto the scene felt like the
clarity was having meetings just
to have meetings they weren't
meaningful they were valuable
local entity is seemed really
mattered as that we weren't
really listening so we are going
to focus on making sure that we
do that in a more authentic and
meaningful way I do wanna point
out that the behavior of clarity
of statute is twenty years old
it is a pre dates a time when we
had all of our funds in medicaid
it predates the medicaid
expension I think it is a little
bit of a outdated structure and
that doesn't mean it's not very
important but I think we need to
reimagine what it really should
look like for the state of new
mexico recognizing that
medicators now the payer the
largest pair of behavior a
health financing and services
are with seventy four percent of
those funds in the medicaid
program today that is something
that was not true years ago
before the behavior before the
medicaid expansion many adults
are really received there
services for behavior through a
patchwork or array they weren't
corn needed under a single payer
and so you don't think it's
really worth thinking about
whether that statute really fits
for two days coverage landscape
I am eager to hear your feedback
about moving forward with the
clabbative we would.
Be interested in partnering with
all of you in terms of what
would be helpful for the state
of new mexico we are really
trying to advance the goals of
better and deeper local
engagement improved monitoring
system and performance and
better a transparency about
state fund expenditures and
outcomes for behavioral health
on flight eleven I just want to
talk about the twenty million
dollar appropriation think it's
really really important I feel
like there's unfortunately used
in the center standing around
this um and i'm happy to answer
any questions so i'll give you
an update on the status of those
expenditures the slide kind of
outlay is where that twenty
million dollars appropriation
for what was originally for
children's behavioral health
services is obligated and the
reason that the state our agency
feels like we don't have room to
expand those funds is because
those are those dollars are
under obligation they are by
funds if they are not under
obligation by the end of
december they will expire and
they will revert back to the
federal governments we will
spend all of those dollars and
buy it and yeah they will all be
I know what we are not going to
let read any dollars revert back
to the headrow government want
to assure you that I also want
to apologize I do agree that you
should expect more from our
agency in terms of the execution
and distribution of these funds
it has been very challenging
there's a wide reason why ray of
reasons why it's been
challenging but I apologize I
think you have the rate to
expect us to do about her job
my accountability to all of you
is incredibly important to me
and I want to you to know that I
am very close attention to this
to make sure that we do a better
job going forward when we do
have a plan to spend the funds
they they are tied to medicaid
compensable services and said
that is one of the issues with
the socially a model and funding
that with the black of money
that appropriation language and
house bill to ties those funds.
To medicaid competible services
or services that are a finance
through title four e which is a
faster care and so we have
really focused on trying to
build out those support for
children's behavioral.
On flight twelve just a brief
update on the rural health care
delivery find since that also
mentioned in the legislate
report are we funded fifty two
rural health organizations with
that fy twenty four eighty
million dollar appropriation the
service types include behavioral
health primary care maternal
child health hospital services
and specialty care the phones
have been used to hire a number
of new health workers including
physicians nurses social workers
therapists community health
workers medical director
leadership and administrative
staff and we are projected to
provide an additional two
hundred and nine thousand five
hundred and twelve patient
visits using services funded
through this effort by fy twenty
six said that represents
additional access to carer in
the state of new mexico
one I announced the slight as a
little bit outdated by we have
we conducted a weapon are
yesterday for providers about
the forty six million dollar
appropriation that's in our
budget for afly twenty five
to give them information about
how they can apply for that next
round of funding lights of
interest as a reminder with that
initial round of funding
received about five hundred
million dollars worth of
applications and we had eighty
million to give out
but we and disappear that we
will have that forty six million
dollars under contract in the
next two months
on flight thirteen just a
dashboard in terms of how we're
monitoring that does rural fund
awards recipients expenditures
and services including the
number of new services that will
be available in each county
across new mexico those rural
counties at what we're funding
we are attracting outcomes we
are also in the rolling out
process so you know we're we're
kind of in a early stage but we
are tracking services we are
seeing that those services are
being delivered it's been a
really really strong program for
the cd maximum and I think you
for that investment.
Moving on to slide fifteen just
a word about medicaid managed
care oversight we are working
toward a single credentialing
with our nco's were currently
the work of that I think I get a
lot of questions about what's
the status the four mcos are
working to reach consensus on
those credentialing standards
and our plan is to have that
single credential in process
rollout and twenty twenty five
as soon as they have a date I
will give it to you but there is
some consensus building and we
have got um with on board at a
national quality expert to sort
of make sure that we are
following at sort of a
accepted best practice around
credentialing across all four
entities
we had updated our toys care
contracts there are new mco
appointment standards for non
urgent behavioral health we are
expectation is that the request
to appointment time for an
initial assessment will be no
more than seven calendar days
from the request all non urgent
behavioral health follow up to
occur with him thirty days of
the request and for a behavior
of crisis service fees to face
appointments to be made
available within ninety minutes
of the request we do have
increased provider network
review with our mcos include for
the specialized services that
we've rolled out and that
includes provider network review
for especially here a health
with tracking on network growth
and timeliness of these
specialized services that we've
just added as well and then we
are performing a gap analysis to
make sure that we understand
what still needed in the network
of new mexico that should be
ready I mean early twenty twenty
five.
I slide sixteen this data do
show growth in total population
medical and pharmacy costs and
medicare over a twelve month
period we're seeing that fifteen
percent overall increase this to
me does demonstrate provider
network growth we've seen an
eighteen percent increase in
medical cast reflecting higher
utilisation and there are some
key areas I just want to call
your attention to we've seen
significant growth in outpatient
and clinic services so twenty
three percent growth in behavior
or health provider services and
eighteen percent increase and
then at forty nine percent
increase in core service agency
is this highlights increased
capacity in our behavioral
health services showing that
more providers are available and
that patience are getting access
to services not a perfect system
by by any means but I do see
that network access to care is
improving i'm a have experienced
it in my own life as well with
more rapid access to
appointments and it was just
recently driving by levels and
size and out that you can get
a seem weak appointment for
obyon care from that provider so
that's really good news
ok on flight eighteen I just
wanted to give an update on the
health care delivery and access
act
that was passed with a very very
a strong legislative support
during the twenty twenty four
session and design it is
designed to generate another one
in a half billion dollars a new
revenue for new mexico's
hospitals
we are closely working with the
taxation and revenue department
for all that program out it is a
very big very complex program
but it is designed so that
larger hospitals will pay more
and rural hospitals rural and
frantical hospitals will people
I said the assessment but with
those fines going more
disproportionately to those
rural and frontier facilities
and to support them and
hopefully provide term added out
for school.
Strength to them here in new
mexico the funds that they pay
that assessment that those
providers are paying as used as
the state general find match for
this program and then those
payments will be based there
will be a sort of an ad on
payment and then a quality
payment forty percent of that
revenue will be tied to quality
performance and he just want to
call your attention there are
two behavioral health metrics
and one is related to something
that has mentioned in that the
legislat report that screening
be of brief intervention and
referral to treatment really
incentivising a hospital
providers to provide that
service and then really also
kind of rewarding them for
behavior how follow up after
emergency department visits for
mental health
estimated payment deaths for
that program everything is under
a federal review I there's a lot
going on at the federal
government right now
so we are just really hoping we
tried to get everything in early
ear seller that we would kind of
get ahead of whatever happens in
any potential delays resulting
from the federal election but
our estimated payment deep for
that first payment to hospitals
will be march twenty eighth of
twenty twenty five and then are
quality payments will be issued
in may
I think with that I am going to
start talking and turn it back
over to
your
mister chair for questions
we'll get started center
rodriguez
thank you mister chairman good
morning
eric thank you both for your
work
course or staff thanks for never
enough to because they work some
hard also but thank you I carry
you've been working extremely
hard on these issues a specially
during the transition and then
ongoing so I want you to know we
do recognize that but there are
some things a questions that I
have with respect to especially
the behavioral health on the
linkages program.
You did mention carry and I just
want to get some clarification
mr chairman you mentioned that
you one of your goals is to work
on expanded housing in the
behavioral health arena category
of within that cause we know
that that people need housing to
be able to to recover and to and
to live a life like we all take
for granted rate so
are you looking at when you say
housing are you looking at
requesting more funding for
linkages because this is as we
know a comprehensive program
that provides holistic
comprehensive services for
people who are
on either substance abuse mental
health issues lack housing can't
get into housing because
landlords won't accept them
because they have some issues
they have some some problems and
so
many times they just don't have
a chance and we need to have
this comprehensive program to
work together to follow them
given case management and
support not only during the time
who were providing the services
but afterwards follow these
people with help until we know
that they have been able to
concur at least matigate the
problem to allow given the
chance to concrete in life and
so tell me a little bit about
what you're doing with linkages
because I noticed over the years
that there's the request from
HSD and now healthcare authority
hasn't been much at all I end up
sponsoring legislation often to
provide funding for it but it's
never enough in sometimes it
just sits there and it doesn't
get expanded so tell me a little
bit about that this briefly as
you can
thank you for the question
mister terror a senator
rodriguez we so are a director
of behavioral health services
division is here if I if I can't
answer the question to your
satisfaction oh he is here to
augment out with more expertise
than I have on the spate and we
are the linkages is one of our
support of housing providers.
We have moved a lot of that
funding into the medicaid
program and so that are waiver
actually does cover support of
housing through linkages we are
actually expanding the number of
support of housing sites through
that under our new waiver so
there should be some additional
capacity
with your permission mister
charle turned to my behavior
directory to see if he has
anything to add.
Good morning mister chair
senator rodriguez nick book is
directed for the big health
services
at this point one of the things
that we're focusing on as the
secretary said is how can we
also maximise our federal
dollars so we are working with
the the medicaid um division as
to what that looks like
we also just were a renewed and
we received notification today
from samsung that we are were
renewed for the path program
which also has transitional
housing so we tried to maximise
that across and we'd have not
had any reversions in that link
and just program
all the vouchers that have gone
out have been utilized and
thankful to say that and we do
notice that excuse me at times
where
there may be reports of not
enough vouchers or so forth we
try to make sure that we're
moving vouchers from provider to
provide her to make sure that if
there's a gap in need in any of
the counties that we can kind of
try to meet that need by moving
at a cross
we have not requested
an increase for linkages at this
time only because we do feel
that with the federal dollars
they were able to meet the need
that we're seeing
thank you and there could go to
see you but let me ask you this
at your requesting at this point
federal dollars for this or are
you just requesting as part of
the medicate requires total
it's it's
a two part to that so we did
request additional from the
federal partners which we did
receive and were also working
with medicaid to see how we can
best utilise the match dollars
in our programs and I think one
of the things that the secretary
have brought up before was with
the justice waiver that does
include the the.
Transitional housing as folks
are coming out so that we can
move them from one program to
another and maximize that I see
okay then let me ask you this mr
chairman for your budgeting now
for this next next year
how much are you looking at
it requesting for that including
what you expect from the federal
government and in the other part
that you're doing
mister terror senator rodriguez
i'm not sure do we do you know
that I hope of your head it
because we we will be back to
talk about our budget this
afternoon if you'd like I can
bring that into her back to
today's
discussion this afternoon that
work is okay that'll be fine
thank you we just want to make
sure that we're not basing the
amount that we're gonna have in
the dispand in the budget on
estimates that may never never
be fulfilled and if the federal
government doesn't fot doesn't
pick up this somehow then these
people are I mean just out there
without a home and needing more
and more service or so something
needs to change and I know this
is we talk about this every year
and the problem is just getting
worse and families are still
without help behavioral hails
substance abuse homelessness as
we see and preaching to acquire
here
just continues to grow and sell
we to take this take a fulfilled
by the hours like they say and
truly do something together the
mfa mortgage finance authority
is also standing by willing to
help they do work in cooperation
with you somewhat whenever the
linkages program has money but
they're willing to help on that
also so any way that we can work
together to expand services and
quickly before they grow anymore
it's like overwhelming the
problem already is so thank you
mister chairman before I hang up
lower stop here for a moment let
me just ask at least one
requestion in your plans that
you're doing carry overall which
you spoke about.
Are you looking at evidence
based information like on
behavioral health services in in
working in your plan so you can
use the information that's
accurate in there to proceed or
is your plan kind of like a goal
that you want to work on tell me
a little bit about it because if
it is evidence based then these
problems that i'm talking about
with behavioral health numbers
out there that are so high from
people living in in the
situation I talked about would
be in there so
a brief response if you can't
because then i'll differ to
others mr chair senator
regorgance as they kind of
mentioned earlier in the
presentation all all services
that we are covering through
medicate our evidence based like
one hundred percent of them are
evidence based services because
there are based on clinton goal
and substantiated by clinical
evidence we actually do not
cover experimental treatments
that's a kind of a whole other
issue
except for like kids are
clinical trials there are some
subsets are things that are
experimental that are not
evidenced that we're allowed to
cover but by and large you know
we are required to cover
evidence based on services so
there are there are some new
services that have been added to
the medicare benefit package
that are behavioral health that
are evidence based practices and
those we are really excited to
add those services those are
sort of the five new services
but it doesn't mean that the
other services are not evidence
based it just means that we've
kind of added this new service
array we are really focused on
that and a following through the
best practice with the clinical
evidence thank you very much in
just briefly on another matter
that changing a little bit to
the organizations we talked
about this in the past also
about accountability and
transparency and more data from
the behavior will not only be
happened but overall managed
care are going to sations.
Are you
what what is the authorities
plan to improve the oversight
and it also get us the data that
we need with respect to like the
percentage of clients and number
of clients you remember I spoke
about this and I think
remembering real decided
remembering where we were
somewhere around this day so it
could tell me if that's improved
at all and you've been able to
get some that data for us mr
chair senator road I guess it
was a galler remember that
having their conversation with
you and
we we are working with the lfc
either there are to provide the
data what we were asked to
provide is want to be really
clear it was not just claims
data we were actually asked to
provide our entire claims
database over multiple years so
hundreds of millions of records
as well as our entire
eligibility database that it
contains very sensitive arab
information it continues are
information about every
household their immigration
status their income are their
social security numbers their
medical diagnosis their claims
so as you can imagine I can't
just send that data on over I
really have to make sure that
the security protocols can be
made I that's just a basic
obligation of mine you we all
read in the news there the
hacking incidents the nefarious
actors out there that are using
data and so there are there is a
series of security protocols I
have a whole security team that
safeguards my data
I am we're going to get to yes
with the lfc but it's going to
require the day can meet those
security protocols and that we
have a robust agreement that
released spells out with those
obligations are a we are in the
process of working through that
my security team is going to
meet with the team on september
thirtieth we will
we're working it out I think it
is it was a pretty substantial
really the keys to the kingdom
kind of data request and so I
just really need to make sure.
That it seems that is even sure
something you would expect me to
do is the cabinet secretary of
the agency
that being said I think we can
work it out it's just gonna take
it's going to take a little bit
of time to get there the agency
is also in november believe it
or not will be rolling out one
of our miser modules our data
services module will start to go
live in november that includes
our data services weeks they
data marks and data leaks i'm
that includes d identified data
that stake holders will be able
to utilize an access that
includes hallset of three sixty
degree view of our customers
from the eligibility and the
claims side so we've offered
access to that I you know
receiving some fair amount of
criticism fairly I would say
that you know the miser project
has been delayed is that really
going to go live in november we
do believe it will but at the
same time so I think we've
agreed with of see that we will
concurrently work on this data
request while we also work on
rolling out that measure data
services module if that meets
the need when it's available
then great but we won't delay
also working on providing that
request or response to their
data request so we are in the
meantime I do want to say a week
we get a lot of data requests
from the policy and we do
respond to those so just want to
clarify that we are a response
tracking all of those but
there's just this one bigger
request that we're working on
thank you and carry if I may
call you carry and for all your
work I guess i'll make a final
statement here and
the sake of time but
you know every year we have to
as you know we have to budget
and approve a pretty large
amount of funding for the
managed care organizations or at
least when the contract is at
four for renewal and it's sent
and pretty hefty amount as we
know millions I don't have the
total amount with me.
It's probably in here in this
whole binder but it's pretty
huge and when we have to do that
but we don't have the data to
justify what we're doing
especially because the data is
actually people very needed
people and an ill people that
qualify for healthcare and
services and so on and when we
don't have that you know it's
it's just difficult for us to to
be able to to just vote and say
yes we're again I approve
maintenance of dollars but we
don't have the data of how many
people are served how long are
they followed up we I know we
can't get diagnoses because of
people lives in so on I
understand that for privacy but
a lot of times carry what
happens mister chairman is that
where we ask for information in
the past at least we've asked
for information from hsd and
regarding this contracts and one
of the responses has always been
we can't we can't release it
because it's proprietari
information well it shouldn't be
because it's taxpayer's money
and it's public money in the
nothing that is public money has
to be proprietary for a
contractor and and we're all in
the dark and we have legislators
have devoted so it's supposed
things that just keep me
thinking looking at to be great
to have all the data that we
need to have so that we know
that we're doing the right thing
and patience are being sir thank
you carry mr chairman i've taken
enough time.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you
get an open mike sorry
my question really is about the
articulation and clara's between
k twelve education and hired
since his committee
came together on tuesday and my
own district we've transported
or home visit four students my
district right now among others
the state is dealing with
multiple school threats
we understand that mental health
is eight is the symptom of that
not only during the time of the
thread
the actor math of your threat
and so I know you touched on it
briefly but and I again I do
want briefly can you please
explain
or talk again how you support
that because quite honesty I
think that in my district I i'm
not aware of the services thank
you
mister chair representative back
thank you for raising with a
really really important issue I
actually my background is
medicaid school health so years
ago that's how it started with
medicaid programs connecting a
medicare school east hall
centers with the medicaid
program so that they could get
reimbursement and reinstating uh
building in our schools
one of the things that are seat
has done is really focus on
school based health care there
are schoolies how centers almost
everywhere across a new mexico
but also in the past year we
expanded the ability of schools
to reimburse for an nine special
education meant a whole services
so previously we were just
limited to providing supporting
squares who were serving kids
with disabilities a we have now
expanded that so now schools are
able to build for you know that
wider array and most that is
mental health we'd be happy to
provide you with some follow up
data about what's actually
provided in the schools how that
program is supporting the school
services the other thing I want
to say is that I think there is
going to be a growing need.
For crisis services for youth
and crisis response in schools
absolutely i'm so that is
something that we are building
out
we want to be able to boots on
the ground in school communities
when something that happens
unfortunately and so that is
part of the area of services
that were trying to build out
thank you mister chairman and I
would discount with this brief
statement is that when we look
at the suicide rate which you
mention you look about the
suicide rate of our teams and we
look about the number of people
that are in crisis alic which I
was a yesterday is asking for
money lse's now been you know
approached for money and if
we're able to collaborate in the
streamline our services and as
far as the collaboration
cooperation we're going to make
sure that we have a transition
for her kids I would love to
touch base with the offline with
this
to help our kids thank you
german.
Represent chat film
thank you mister chair
you don't hear the term of all
ago they hadn't heard and while
it kind of spoke to me I think
the question the the person to
answer my question I wouldn't
ask the secretary to to have to
do it but obligated our
performance do is there still
such a thing robin and round I
mean do I have we not spend
those phones and in I know you
can answer for your agency and
if there's anybody else can tell
me for the state I would
appreciate a shot at the you
know somebody have given me the
best answer.
Well mister chair representative
chat field I guess they can
start by answering for our
agency in the direction that
we've received from the
governor's office which was
under no circumstances me those
dollars be a not under
obligation and so I think that's
the point he was trying to
articulate which is that those
dollars that twenty million is
under obligation and so that was
part of the condition so that
those are but funds don't expire
and so for our agency that those
dollars are under obligation I I
can't speak for the remainder of
agencies but are we were
instructed to make sure that
that happened and have
contingency plans in place to
ensure that no funds would river
to the federal government so mr
chair is area anyone that can
tell us if if there remains
unobligated our performance
not mister chair representative
chat field during the last
session you all worked too
basically look at at which of
those funds were still sitting
around and which had hadn't been
spent that were obligated and
then reobligated those funds to
my understanding you all
basically obligated all of those
funds last year from the
legislative perspective now
doesn't necessarily mean that
there an agency
will spend all of those funds
hopefully they will
thank you mr chair I met peace
just just to add one thing there
is a contingency plan that we're
making in the debate can come
back in and swap those phones
cause we don't want to be the
only state in the union the and
spent their open this time frame
we fought with the agencies last
year to replace with general
fund but they think they're
smart enough to get it done so
let's see.
Thank you.
Center gone dollars.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you good morning to our panel
or else gonna ask you as some
when you mentioned a suicide
what page what you referring to
the street here
members of the committee we
we spoke about only mexico's
suicide rates.
I'm slayed seven and I think
that
verd slide number is kind of
a slide eight apologies.
Well i'll go back to the mister
chair and uh senator there's
also the
we have a suicide chart that's
on page two it's the very first
house okay
in reference to.
The question that that I have is
some
with a real grand gord's bridge
that has become in how you know
a place that are individuals
attempt so side and do some
commit suicide.
So when that happens
does that number count against
thousand against new mexico.
Mr chair senator is yes
counts as a new mexico suicide
and goes into the data because
so the part there is so a lot of
this individual sr from outer
state.
You know and and in all fairness
to
our department of transportation
are they have worked very very
hard until taking there some
corrective action cell phone
emergency phones
safety twenty four seven cameras
so they the list goes on.
And i'll always see you know
that that happens that I was
rings up
in or another big go
flags to the community in what
are we doing and what can we do
and
the department of transportation
is taken on a lot of studies
into
the way the the way the bridge
was so constructed you know in
the sixties there was not made
to add additional weight to it
so by you are going with higher
rayline or anything netting or
anything you know it just wants
supported he just thought that's
that's what it is
but all oh
I look at that as so you know
what can be done and how can we
work with that because.
I feel it's unfair to our state
and it's unfair to a telstra.
You know showing a number like
that because some as I mentioned
I would say that if you look at
the numbers is probably higher
from the individuals from outer
state than then from within our
state
is retail senator gonzalez at
what I can do subsequent deserts
i'll speak with secretary allen
I think that's sort of public
health reporting
so won't will kind of touch
based on that and I I don't want
to provide bad information in
terms of what goes into that
data reporting but I can I make
sure that I flag that concern as
a public health issue sort of
what i'm hearing you say as
those are there may not be we
may not accurately be reflecting
a new mexico's population in
that data and so I can follow up
on that a I really don't know
enough about how the data is
reported are collected be able
to give you a greedy and through
that unfortunate mister chairman
with everyone is so I don't
think we have anything to hide
but maybe can just be stated as
the numbers are from out of
state you know and let it be
what it read is.
Yeah so it's not a true number
two tour state and it's not a
true number two to the county.
Yeah mr
senator you raise a good point
and an I don't know mister
because you have anything to
mister in center guns just so
that you're aware we have been
working with the department of
transportation as well as the
county manager to make sure that
those heart lines that are set
up there's a thirteen of them I
believe that are set up across
the bridge and at the respect of
parking lots if people are
feeling any sort of behavioral
health crisis that they can call
and we've been working with a
dot and tales county on how we
update those machines and make
sure that they remain
operational so that continues to
be a work in progress and it is
something that were considering
a priority as well.
Okay very well home mister
chairman and thank you for that
at all I guess just the less
part to it is said
any time that that happens you
know
within the county
you know they have to bear the
expense and it's an expensive
part you know when when they
have to do that rescue you know
into and that's also something
that of the noise being brought
to my attention time after time
of them if there is a way that
are the state could work
without.
Thank you mister chair center we
can we'll definitely take a look
at that can you figure out if
we'll we'll kind of talk about
the reporting issue and see if
there's any additional support
we can provide to the county
thank you think it was chairman
representing the hoffman we hill
thank you very much mister terra
thank you very much as well
secretary of me home as you
should figure very important and
informative
presentation this morning I
think it's hope to say we've
come a long way since twenty
thirteen and thank you very very
much for all the hard work that
you've done I really glad that
you brought up the status of the
behavioral health collaborative
cause that was going to be if
you weren't
and so I think the idea of re
doing the statute is a really
good one and modernize it I alot
of people have kinda tasked down
the idea of getting rid of the
clarity altogether
is it mood are we already doing
that work in a different way and
and I think myself my answers
know we just need to refocus it
so my question center around
that madam secretary so
when I first started learning
about the clabbative one of its
mean keep keep points was to
break down silos and so I want
to know what is the work that
your agency is doing right now
to continue to break down those
silence then the behavior health
community even if the
collaborative is not
mister chair representative pack
my vehicle I think that's a
great point sort of like what
are we trying to achieve we're
trying to achieve better
cooperations or work together
communicate better
we are trying to work on this
one of the things that I picked
up on immediately during my
first clarity of meeting was
that the local attitude is
seemed really mad at us
they don't seem happy at all
like they didn't seem like we
were listening we were into
paying attention in the trying
to get a point across and we
were not.
We were kind of just talking at
the table and they could kind of
speak in this really formal way
to us and it just to me it seems
like we needed to just read you
those meetings completely I I
just felt like we weren't doing
a good job at all um and so
one of the things that we have
done is I apart to support this
process we still working with
those clarify subgroups we are
staffing those and making sure
that we are participating and at
the table and my expectations
that we are actively
participating that we're not
just sitting there but there
were really kind of listening
were trying to provide some
constructive help and feedback
here with those local issues are
um we are working across agency
as I mean all over the health
and human services sacriterious
collaborate very regularly and I
think we are going to be
starting like our own behavior a
half huddle to make sure that
we're really talking about
issues across the agency is at a
leadership perspective
and then I think we've also
unboarded an expert from local
government rachel connery don't
know if you all know how to from
santa fe county we've unborted
her she's helping us to do a
very meaningful better strategic
plan and what I have asked her
to do is go talk to see holders
figure out what's important to
that really understand i'm in so
she is working on that and I
think that work product will be
done very soon so she's really
engaged in that and those are
the kinds of things that we're
trying to do to fill in the gap
while we try to everything quite
reimagine what the collaborative
should look like thank you
mister chairman thinking man
secretary and I was those my
next question is what is the
status of the master plan I mean
we've been talking about putting
together the clabbatist plan for
many years now so it sounds like
you know you're doing that just
in a different way so I fair I
think you for that I think
that's going in the right
direction along those same lines
so mister chair and random
secretary
this past special session we
went through a lot of hearings
with ccj talking about the
behavioral health issue.
In one of the uh mean takeaways
that I took from it was the lack
of standardized and usable data
and how we're going to but how
are going to go throughout the
state and understand where
services are available what
types of services are available
and are they working so is that
something that you guys are
continuing to work on what's
your plan for that and is that
maybe something else that we can
look into incorporating and in
the work that breaches doing
yes mister chair representative
I think that's really true I
think that there there's like a
lot of data but it's not
necessarily coordinated and
sometimes it comes with each
other so it's like what is the
real information I think one of
the things that I haven't
thinking a lot about is you know
we we've invested a lot of money
you all even best said a lot of
money into the healthcare system
so where are those gaps where
does each county still need what
you know sort of like how would
so population of children and
like how do we how do we support
that population and children
what specialise services like do
they have enough
and so we are working on that
gap analysis that will be done
by early twenty twenty five and
it will be specific to a
behavioral health services first
and then we are going to do that
for the entire network we really
want to know sort of what
remaining investments are needed
in new mexico do we have enough
yet which I think the answers
probably still know but if we
don't have enough can we be more
specific about what we need
we're working on that and then
as I mentioned and we are
rolling out our data services
module for meiser that's going
to start to go live in I uh
november it's going to be we're
going to be able to see a lot of
data and you know we are willing
to provide access to those data
marks is with their card to any
of you who you know really would
like to see that data we will
facilitate that and make sure
that that happens at these are
tools that were built for the
state of new mexico not just for
our agency and so we will be.
Be able to provide that.
Thank you mister chairman
thinking ma'am sector I think
we're all really excited to see
miser and a long time company
but um
you would spoke and earlier and
you included a slide on
credentialing and i'm really
glad to see that you're you're
working on that issue um
hopefully soon to be senator at
your health who's here with us
today and I worked on a bill to
essentially deep bottle knack
the licensing issue because we
had heard feedback about a lot
of practitioners who wanted to
come to new mexico could not
come to the mexico or waiting
and unacceptable amount of time
to come here to practice
what are you still working on
the i'm not issued do we still
have more work to do on that and
if so watch what is that work
and can we work on it this
legislative session.
I'm as your terror
representative hockened the hill
so our agency doesn't oversee
medical licensing of course but
uhm we are working closely with
the medical boards to try and
figure out what those bottle
next iron who would say that
there is active conversation and
work happening but room for
improvement I think I do here
for providers that the processes
frustrating and so I I think
that there is work that's being
done on that and that we we
should be having active
conversations about how he can
make that better because we
really want to make sure that
we're supporting provider
attention and recruitment and
not making these processes hard
another miser module that will
be launching it a in october is
our provider enrollment system
that we will have a new provider
enrollment system starting at
the end of october that is going
to be a much more user friendly
sister and any provider in the
room knows that our current
provider in roment is very
painful you kept see what you're
missing it takes forever you
can't see where you are in the
process and so that is going to
provide great visuals that is
going to be like help for
providers is kind of like the
dominos pizza app you know you
can see like when your pizzas
and other and you can see when
it's in the car when it's
arrived at your doorstep and
you'll be able to track your
process and see what you're
missing and so that's launching
in october so lots of actually
things happening with myself
it's really exciting i'm as
frustrated as you are that how
long it's ticket but we are
starting to cease the moment i'm
with that so that's another
thing that we're doing tell
daughter probators
thank you very much mister chair
amount of secretary that
includes the questions I have
but maybe in it in a next the
next time you come in front of
our if we could get a report on
the status of speed for twenty
five from twenty twenty three
that's the county detention a
matter program rollout I know
there's been a lot of questions
on final promulgation of rules
for that and I can also have an
offline conversation with you
about that as well thank you
very much.
Should be back up in a few hours
to should have that information
for
representative armstrong thank
you mister chairman and um.
Thank you for being the lead on
that bill with all the issues
that we had over across new
mexico trying to get more
behavioral health specialists
new mexico
one of the questions I have
mister chairman and madame
secretary is first of all thank
you for the credential
thank you for helping raise
those reimbursement rates that's
been I think pivotal I just want
to make sure it goes as far as
we need it to go and and I i'll
keep harping on that until we.
Get it done because some people
were left out in that one of the
questions I have is on the core
behavioral health provider
growth
I see it on page seven and and
it's phenomenal.
Um you know it's it this is in
the grand scheme of things this
is what we're rebuilding this is
what we need but do you think
along with the health care
delivery fund that we are
focusing I mean I know we can
never focus too much on
bitdashrebuilding behavioral
health but are we focusing so
much on it that were leaving out
other things other health care
providers.
Mr chair representative i'm
stronger you are you asking
whether it just to clarify are
you asking whether to sort of
like the focus on behavior a
whole in that with the first
round of funding with maybe in a
disproportionate and we want to
make sure that we're kind of
supporting a wide array mister
chairman madame secretary I just
want to make sure that we're not
forgetting about other people's
because we're focusing so much
on behavioral health of course I
want all of it I know I can't
have everything that I want but
I just want to make sure that
we're looking at that healthcare
delivery funds across the state
and making sure that we're not
just funding behavioral health
but we're funding some other
entities as well I just want to
I don't want over saturation the
penguin seems to do that in the
state of new mexico we swing so
far
one way that we forget about
others and so I just want to
make sure that i'm sure you're
taking that into consideration
yes so mr chair
representative i'm strong we're
actually for this next round of
funding we're actually trying to
do a little bit of an analysis
in terms of what is still really
needed in each county we are
limited in terms of how much
funding there is but we're
really trying to make sure that
we're wise about those
investments we really feel like
this is probably the last big
infusion of money that we have
and so we're we're trying to do
like a county by county use for
a view to see okay like we
really we think we've kind of
That are funded with that first
round of funding so you can see
we spent twenty four percent on
maternal child how
we supported some dental
services primary care
obtamatory um some specialty
care I think what I was
referring to is sort of making
sure that when we find the next
round we are factoring and got
funded before and that we're
kind of trying to create some
david city in that funding thank
you for that I I assumed you
were doing that but I just
wanted to make sure for the
reasons I stated earlier and
then
one of the
questions is on page fifteen
slide fifteen
when we are
talking about just behavioral
health and then these
appointments you know making
sure the mco's have this
information.
How are we
going to hold mco is accountable
for do mandating that they have
to make these kinds of
appointments when we do have.
An issue getting into behavioral
health
appointments and so i'm just
curious how you came to this
analogy of holding the mco's
accountable for this
mr chair representative i'm
strong I mean I think that we
have to know where we're aiming
right we have to know what's
it's better to have a a standard
that you're working from and
then you can compare yourself
against that sender and so there
is going to be reportedly in
requirements for the mco's and
transfer and I think even first
quarter reports are coming to
where are we performing related
to this they think this is a big
question we have right so how
close are we to the assundereds
today and we have other
appointments to enter it's for
things like primary care and
specialty in those contracts as
well but I think we're all wanna
know sort of like what what
happened I got contracts didn't
have appointment standards
before and so I think it's
really important to have a
standard that tells us what the
ideal is and then we'll see
where we're performing and then
what kind of figure out what we
need to do in terms of improving
performance and working with our
managed care partners to do that
um we are also going to be
making a mser performance much
more transparent so we will be
putting a lot of stuff up on our
website in terms of their
performance penalty is that we
are imposing for example there
are penalties going out soon
you'll be able to see
what they are performing well on
and what they are not performing
well on it we ultimately really
want to make our members be able
to choose their mco based on
that performance I mean that's
really what should drive their
customer base so we will be
providing that so we're really
focused on transparency for all
of you in terms of performance
better reporting metrics for the
agency and then having
kind of filling in those gaps
where the contract just wasn't
clear about what what we were
expecting thank you for that I I
just want to make sure that it's
reasonable and are you know is
in a meeting the other day and
sear at county officer.
County hospital.
And they were talking about
their
denials after they were approved
for you know a patient was
approved for a procedure and
then they turn in all the
information to the companies.
Insurance mostly and and then
the denial rate was pretty high
and then you know of just so
there's issues still out there
and
I I really don't like mandates
so but I also want
the consumer to get the best
quality for the best price i'm
not against people making a
reasonable amount of money but I
just wanted to make sure that
that it was reasonable and that
we are holding there's some kind
of accountability I tried to get
into a dermatologist the other
day and it was ninety days
before I could get in
and I did not make the
appointment so i'm like well
forget it so madam chair or
mister tere representative i'm
sure that is really quick for
damage holiday just see you know
I think I had a eighteen month
wait for a certain tall
appointment so that's the kind
of thing i'm talking about so
we're you know we're doing that
with behavioral health were
setting standards but for
specialty or whatever other
thing we need to do you know
it's
eighteen months and so.
Just want to make sure that
we're we're doing we're doing
things reasonable I also want to
mention and and representative
allison will back me up on this
one hundred and ten percent is
that health councils could
actually help you get that
information in the the
communities where they live work
and play
they know what they need in
their areas so they they would
be a good
resource for helping you
determine what is needed in the
communities thank you mr
chairman and thank you madame
secretary
representatives kerpensky.
Thank you mister chairman and
great to see your madam
secretary thank you so much for
your
responsiveness and I just want
to.
They're one thing I point out I
seem that I see in the your
presentation today is it's
really very patient centered you
know a lot of the expansion
plans and ideas are for programs
that you're implementing now are
really based on patient aid
which I think is really
commendable um i'd I wanted to
ask about two things one is
the health care delivery in
access act and.
You know I
that
bill mister chairman
and members was you know passed
out of a real desire to
stabilise finding for hospitals
due enhanced that funding in
some cases
and I am wondering
you know one how are you viewing
that in terms of their actual
service delivery so are you
expecting to see expansion of
services are you going to be
tracking for that I notice that
a lot of the indicators that
i've seen are related to quality
to making sure people aren't
getting secondary in factions
things like that
but how how will we know in two
years whether as a result of
this enhanced funding that
hospitals are still providing
the same baseline of services
that potentially they've
expanded those services what are
harry viewing that.
Mrperiod terror representatives
key I think
it's a really it's a really
important point so the way that
these payments have to go out
the door per federal rules is
that they have to be tied to
quality measures and so that's
kind of what you see on the
slide there those are official
quality metrics and those are
standardized things that are
required by those payment
mechanics and our federal
regulators require that it
doesn't mean that we won't be
tracking the investments on the
back and and so there are
requirements in the bill that
really require the agency to
ensure that those funds are
reinvested in new mexico and it
in expanding services it could
be paying work force more it
could be a you know adding new
service array to a hospital I
think we are probably because
some of the hospitals have been
I would say struggling a
specially some of our rural
facilities struggling there is
going to be a period of time
where they need her to use some
financial stability i'm i'm not
sure that they will be in a
position to just automatically
go out and re invest in services
I think they have some work for
us issues that they need to
investor and they need to uh to
make sure that they have got
some some investment in their
infrastructure i'm so you know
we will be monitoring that I
think the other thing I want to
mention is that now the division
of health improvement is in the
healthcare authority and they do
facility surveys i'm in so i'm
really looking forward to the
opportunity to incorporate
facility quality and overall
facility quality into how we
think about these payments to
make sure that
you know we're not rewarding
facilities for quality metrics
over here when they've got some
real serious shortcomings that
they need to perfect and so
that's going to tell us to where
they need te invest something
we're doing with the nursing
facility payment program as well
I but it's one of the really
good synergy is of having the
division of health improvement
now.
Within this agency is being able
to have more visibility into
that data and so
we're really an early days of
implementing that program as
they said it's pretty
complicated and dollars haven't
gone out yet so we're probably a
couple years out from having
really good data that program
has a sense that clies in the
statute are we did that
intentionally want to make sure
it's working and so I think it
will be income in and all of you
will be passed my time I think
as the secretary but it will be
incoming on all of you to really
continue to ask those questions
on whether that program is
working and uhm make sure that
the agencies providing you with
that data.
Thank you for that mister
chairman and secretary
one of the reasons I asked the
question as I was in a community
meeting last vegas yesterday
where they've really been I
don't through a roller coaster
with the
the hospital there the new
interim ceo seems to be traffic
and **** but she was really
giving an account of some of the
services that had been in a
labor and delivery unit closed
emergency room closed i'm sorry
I see you close not the
emergency room
and you know it seems to me that
it with this new set of fines
and the new model and new
accountability that uhm we
should be keeping an eye on what
kinds of services are being
provided in addition to the
quality do you have existing
data sources for that within
what you're currently measuring
mr cherry representatives of
housekeep you don't really track
that data yet but as part of the
program so um we will be
investing in hospital reporting
requirements as part of the hda
program that program includes
some administrative funds to the
agency out of the pool of
dollars so that we will be able
to like on board the resources
because that is a big part of
the program and it was something
that we worked really closely
with
you know legislators and the
hospitals I was I heard you also
be glad and clear we don't want
these funds to just exit the
state of new maxical and so that
was where we came up with that
requirement that ninety percent
of those dollars be spent in the
state of new mexico investing in
services and it's a statutory
requirement in our agency will
have to track it and so we
haven't done that
to d to I would say that we know
at a bradscale hospitals are
providing what but under this
new program we will be doing
that and that's our obligation.
Did think you secretary in
second secondly in my last topic
is just
you know it we are looking at
utilization data network
adequacy data as seeing the
number of providers increasing a
am struck by the fact that we're
eleventh in the nation for
behavioral health providers and
yet I think
certainly I
usually remain in and I think
many of the members experience
the the concern from
constituents that they are
experiencing weight lesser they
don't know where to go over the
account figure out how to access
those services and I think it's
not necessarily a certainly
behavior health is an issue but
it's not just behavioral health
it's healthcare broadly
how do we get to an in how do
you see the health care
authority being able to get to
the actual health outcomes
rather than just access just
utilization just network
adequacy had do you have
existing partnerships that that
help you look at how are your
services actually moving the
needle forward so that people in
mexico are help that are served
by hca are healthier overall.
Mr chair
representatives
say
will we do track we do have
outcome data we have a
performance were card on our
website that tracks in our
performance compared to
our neighbouring states in terms
of a number of quality mattress
it's the interesting thing is
you may not know exactly the
health status of the member rate
so you're kind of looking at
these population metrics and
making some inferences about
improved quality tie term
improved outcomes
for example you know you were in
ferrying that more women getting
memography is a good result in
resulting in a healthier
population but you know it's
sort of there there's like the
connection to did this person
actually get healthier and that
is a little bit more challenging
to know we not have the data to
necessarily tell us that
through our claims system so
it's a really interesting
question i'd be interested to
hear from you in terms of like
what kinds of outcomes you'd
like to see
you know is this really working
I would be interested in that
feedback we are really pretty
tied to these like standardized
quality metrics and then
investments in the health care
system over all i'm in tracking
those um but if like there's a
chart in terms of like outcomes
I think you'd have to look at
the you know does the investment
for example in
medication assisted treatment
resulted in fewer overdosed us
and that would be sort of a
public health kind of assumption
and so some of these are really
big population health metrics
that were tracking but I think
there are core relations that we
typically make from our quality
data to make assumptions about
whether it's the services work
mrs everyday I would love to
follow up with you about this
cause I do think it's it's even
something that are
schools of public health good
potentially helpless in terms of
driving that for word
you know I look at like
juvenile.
Behavior of health for example
where it looks like we have more
providers than we did four years
ago
we're seeing utilization up but
still that performance the the
outcome of suicide behind your
health concerns is not is not
moving and so it feels like
there's something there that we
need to puzzle through and I
think starting with a few of
those indicators and really
diving into what's going on in
my might help us move the need
off on some of those thinking mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Representative small your next
but we're gonna we're running
behind already in less we're
going to pay you and have more
money to keep the lights on that
midnight we're gonna have to
speak a little bit
I think the regions will be
happy to do that for us mister
chair mister chairman secretary
they have services director
missions and you know thank you
madame secretary I really
appreciate your direct fourth
right
and engaged way of of uh
answering questions sharing
information highlighting places
where there are
you know more for us to learn
and see and also accepting
responsibility I think it's
something that we have to do as
well so thank you for that mr
chair I want to first start on
the rate structure
you mentioned I think this is
sort of one of those that needs
to be noted
sort of a hundred and fifty
percent standard that the
department is setting that as I
recall from last year
in our conversations in this
committee and going into the
session our proposal had been
new funding to reach a hundred
and fifty percent in target
areas namely around behavioral
health maternal health primary
care
and to do it earlier not
necessarily do it across the
board you've chosen a different
route in can you explain sort of
why and i'm not saying I fully
disagree I just think it's a
good thing for us to discuss
openly
mister terra representatives
small I think they probably miss
spoke so I apologize the uhm the
rate structure will be in
january of twenty twenty five
and we are on track to get back
implemented by a january of
twenty twenty five there won't
be any retro reprices thing and
that was the whole proposal that
the agency had of executing
those on the calendar year basis
so that we could get them down.
And home
the the rate structure will
actually be a hundred and fifty
percent of medicare for me
channel told health primary care
and be rewhole services other
services will be rebenchmarked
to a hundred percent of medicare
i've said that would be your the
primary care of services touch
almost every claim about seventy
percent of encounters include a
primary care code on them so
that's a very it's a very big
investment in care across new
mexico because specialists will
be building those codes to and
so you but that is the
structural sorry I didn't talk
about the new ones there are
because I think it was the
behavioral hall slide it may
have left out the nuance that is
really the agency's approach
working really hard to get those
done so that they are just ready
to go on january first
mister chairman secretary thank
you and to my I think that
tracks ultimately even though.
In a I think that tracks
ultimately with what I was
where we were engaging in
conversation even last year a
hundred and fifty percent in the
target areas benchmark to a
hundred and I think that as we
all acknowledge that will lead
to and you will increased
budgetary needs that we'll have
to budget more money every
single year just to stay at
those levels because we've bench
marked to that federal standard
which is tough but also really
positive we can promise an
increase and sort of uh get out
of the backsliding that occurred
in the previous eight years so
that's positive uh mister chair
now it's actually ma'am
secretary but also in the
behavioral health services
uh i've had the privilege to get
to visit with lock clinical to
familiar
f federal qualified health
center they
shared their work and the
assertive community therapy
space this was new to me of
course it's not new to
practitioners in the area but
what I understood it to be as
sort of the highest level of
care it's a twenty four seven
one side wherever someone is
experiencing these crisis and
was able to cross reference that
they in sort of consultation
with local line forcement both
the primarily uh last crucial
police department somewhat the
fire department little the
sheriffs mostly it's in the city
that there are folks for whom
encounters with law enforcement
are in the dozens if not scores
this therapy which is.
Well maybe eight can I ask
mister book could you sort of
briefly some rise a sort of
community therapy for us.
Certainly chair and
representative small thank you
for that
act of community communicate at
basically what we're looking at
doing is to try to address some
of the issues and if someone is
facing
a lack in one of the social
determinance of health how are
we kind of hooking them into
those appropriate services but
to also have using a variety of
tools such as motivational
interviewing stuff worth
figuring out what are those
route causes how are we going to
address them and how do they
interact then with the rest of
the system and so it does take a
more comprehensive approach and
it is not just.
If patient x comes through the
door that we're gonna say you
know here's a medication here is
someone else to call here is
going to be an actual plan that
is going to be followed in a
very stringent manner
and it does put some of the
honest on the individual but it
also puts it on a provider to
kind of make sure that they're
meeting some of those needs and
this is going to be as part of
our ccbhs the certified
community behavioral wholesalers
one of the core
practices that they have to
provide to make sure that that
rap around service is going to
be
fully completed and not just met
a portion of the way through
okay thank you mister chair
thank you mister and the
it requires a higher level sort
of a bigger team of
professionals because and it's
sort of sets a ceiling for the
number of clients each team
conserve because of for the
level of service that needs to
be provided is that that's right
that is correct and this is a
additional training that those
providers go through and some of
the things that we look at is to
make sure that it is
comprehensively reimbursed it
but that also is and added to
technical assistance that we
provide to make sure that some
of the those benchmarks are met
got it ok things for charity
must book it in the what I
understand in this case they're
the only act provider down and
don't you they're the provider
of choice there is only provider
there are not I guess your right
now there are no other live
activities in the stay although
that may be changing worth the
launch of the additional
behavioral the ccbhs.
Or are there.
Additional acts operating
mr chair and representative of
small I can get you the actual
number I don't have it off the
top of my head but we are
actively engaging many providers
to complete the training that
that's great in
the which is super positive
because again this is sort of
hyper localized but with their
feedback from both from first
responders both law enforcement
fire for folks who are
uh
in those justice involved
situations this seemed to be a
pasident of uh tool to help keep
them out of those are to
mitigate the sort of the in the
escalate some of that
so the then this comes to the
next big question which is and I
know this is sort of shared with
department and health
as we can front challenge was
worth uh substance use
in and homelessness and others
it seems to me he drought down
there's like a couple options
there's sort of stay you know
that sort of status quo folks
are unhoused in very unsafe
situations a danger to
themselves and to others there
is sort of the jail option which
is
which is out there very
challenging then there's
treatment either in in different
sort of modes of treatment and
it seems like act as one of
those models
so it's not always sort of like
a residential treatment however
meet residential treatment needs
to be a very big part of it can
we get the executive
administrations best
understanding of sort of the gap
but need for treatment options
for new mexicans.
Facing sort of the core
challenges of substance use
disorder and homelessness.
Because it seems like this
upcoming session well first do
do you all have sort of that
dust estimate of need to serve
new mexicans facing homelessness
facing substance use
uh yeah that kind of thing
will mister terror
representatives small so I think
that that lee will be answered
through that gap analysis that
we're working on because it is
supposed to be looking at some
of those like indicators of need
be a signing each county and
what service are rare needed by
county because we've done gap
and also before but not at that
kind of level that tells you
where to word a really focus we
do have high level
data for you I what I what I
think may be really helpful
would be sort of a conversation
between you know that few weeks
really understand what would be
helpful where you are thinking
would be useful and then we can
and what we have are and then we
can try to figure out how to how
to build something out to hope
you are make a good decision
than for ourselves to but I
think we'd like to have a follow
up conversation on what exactly
would be useful as you're sort
of like thinking about this
issue and what you'd like to see
and so but now will help we or
maybe something that we could
talk about a directly with that
entity that's helping us with
that gap and assist as well to
help inform that process
secretary to love that idea I
think that makes a lot of sense
excited to engage in that.
Because coming into this sixty
days session and with our
budget.
This is a very important chance
for us to sort of make our
biggest commitments and
investments in and.
That that will likely take shape
in a lot of different ways
continuing to support much of
the work that we're hearing
about.
Clear dealing with the need for
new capital and bed investments
and options that are out there
because simply standing in final
places that are dangerous and
without offering the next steps
to wear those folks go is
unacceptable and we're in a
position to dedicate resources
in collaboration with you
and other partners to actually
solve that next step
again so there were being honest
because it's either jail status
quo or some other form of
treatment diversion housing etc
moving then quickly
onto the
the mcose secretary of brought
this up with you before I think
it's good to have a brief public
conversation sort of the mco and
how we are portion members how
you are abortion members that's
our best way to sort of as it is
faster competition in the market
place she said this now the
dominant payer uh well over ten
billion dollars flowing
what is the apportionment of
members between the four mcos
and
in sort of layout and I respect
the sort of europroach and
determining how reapportionment
bound rebalancing of that
membership to faster competition
to
enhance innovation fundamentally
to make new mexican support new
mexicans health care how do you
how do we approach that from
your perspective
mr hair representative small.
So I I can actually get you the
number at the enrollment numbers
by mco I don't have those in my
head unfortunately right now but
I can provide that by this
afternoon will be happy to do
that
as you know we've got to larger
mcos and two smaller mcos and so
this first period of time with
that launch of truck with care
does need to go and try to
support the viability of those
two health plans answer the day
actually they were taking on a
risk this isn't just like you
know like state employee
benefits we are paying the claim
but this is you know that and
see as a really taking on that
risk and so when you reportion
members that can be really
tricky because you've got a sh-
make sure you haven't sort of
put all the risk in one plan
you've got to really make sure
that you're kind of taking a
look at a and utilization
patterns so what we've done is
for I think it's the first six
months of turkey's car it might
be the first year I can clarify
that leader on this afternoon
but new members always have a
choice they can always perk
whichever mco they want to go to
you it is oh member choice is
always the number one priority
there's no
change in that we also have
enrollment algorithms that
basically you know typically
would prioritize family
enrollment so like an entire
family would be on present
material or try our family would
be unbelievable so that that
really hasn't changed but when a
new member doesn't pick we are
sort of giving those new members
to those junior health plans for
a few months that isn't going to
be the permanent structure that
is the way that the agency built
up western skies enrollment but
unfortunately you didn't really
shift over the course of multi
multiple years and so what i'd
like to do is really kind of
have.
Members make choices be a stein
the provider network a lot of
times and so you know it's
really have more transparency
about those provider networks
for members but also have that
enrollment ultimately be you
know so that members can see
which is the best performing mcl
i'm pregnant which from co is
going to be performing best on
prenatal care I want to see that
i'm and so providing that better
transparency to the member so
that they can make a decision
and the mcos are all really
intentivised to improve their
performance because they are
competing for those members and
so that's really the ultimate
plan it is going to take a
little while to get there
because we're kind of in initial
quality stage benchmark you're
and and we've got to get make
sure that those two health plans
are are able to release serve
members and make you know make
it worth their while to make
investments here in new mexico
understood that thank you for
going into that I
look forward to continuing to
work closely and following up
appreciate the time thank you
mister chair
thank you are about forty
minutes behind in so we're gonna
they have to change some stuff
around the next presentation I
got three more people on the
less so
bringing data cruise
thank you mister chairman i'll
try to be brief a secretary
earlier you said in you during
your presentation you said that
you track outcomes can you
expand on a.
What does that look like
yes mister chair representative
dealer cruze what we do we have
a performance for score card and
actually the oldest tracks the
same some of the same metrics
some of them are different but
we have metrics for example how
well over the mco is performing
how well are the n c o's
performing on well child visits
and immunizations so those are
the kinds of data that were
tracking we have a performance
scarce score card on our website
that can be tracks there's
metrics he has kind of a so
there's some overlap and then
they have some other metrics
that they look at and we have
those either some of them are
updated monthly summer updated
quarterly in summer updated.
Is mister or their
instances or as part of your
process that you actually talked
to clients
mr chair representative I think
that's such a great question we
do have a new requirement in
medicare to have a benefit at a
beneficiary advisory committees
that's going to be something
that we do launch it is really
hard to get
feedback from our customers but
it is very important and I think
it's something that we could do
better job
one thing that I would like to
point out is that we pay
consultants for their work and I
think that if you won't mean for
input that's really helpful from
your customers you should
compensate them for it and we
don't really have a mechanism to
do that but you know I think
it's it's crazy how we pay all
these consultants and then the
most important people to really
advise us we can have asked them
to volunteer to come advise and
so I think we could do a better
job in thinking about how to
have a change the dynamic and
have a better relationship with
our customers to get that
valuable in pope
was determined that some of the
concerns i've had to say came on
to the legislature is this
notion that we provide all of
these services and and yet I am
not seen real data that circles
back to the customer
along the lines of customers
mischairman
what do you do to engage the
community the public it you know
you straddle the entire state in
a very headief of ways and in
your capacity but what what then
you what is offered to the
commute to give you
information about wants a needs.
Mr chair representative dealer
cruz so some of those thing by
our agency and we just did a
whole we did hundreds of events
as part of the turkways care
rollout we talked about we went
to every community in new mexico
we talked about what was
happening in terms of services
i'm even before that we did a
bunch of public input sessions
to train and form our waiver
development what kinds of
services individuals need i'm as
they said it's challenging you
know people are working there
sometimes have two jars they've
got children that they you know
don't want to bring to a boring
public meeting so it's hard to
get that and input but I think
it's something that we can do
better rmc actually also have
been if it's advisory committees
they have a teams of people that
work in community is and so I I
think I would also suggest that
you ask that question of our
mcpartners in terms of like what
presence they are having in our
local communities when they're
up at this panel little later
thank you
represent have heard
thank you mister chair and made
of secretary you mention that as
of july twenty fourth that
justice reentry program would be
a had been approved when as they
become effective
mr chair representative turned
in we are working on the rollout
right now it is a you know I can
get you with some information
about the rollout dates and go
live there are some correctional
facilities where we already have
established relationships and so
it will be easier to roll that
out and then others were really
working on that engagement and
process so over the next several
months we will be in the process
of a rollout for that program
and i'd get you some additional
concrete detail on what that
looks like
thank you mister chier thank you
madame secretary at nalso just
want to make sure that as we
putting together your medicaid
budget that we are including the
number of individuals who are
likely to.
Increased the roles than
medicated and that mister chair
madame secretary also we have
been talking about behavioral
health particularly with
students during the last in the
twenty twenty two of calendar me
now legislative year we were
able to find a fourteen schools
with the behavioral health
mental health rooms there were
many more schools who wanted
them who didn't get them and I
should point out that
there were schools within the
state of new mexico that had a
high rate of teen suicide and it
was decreased based on evidence
and the fact that we had these
rooms uh to
to make sure that a students had
someone to talk to whenever they
were filling depressed our are
needed something else to have an
outlet for other than taking
their lives so I say that only
two s that if there are our both
phones that are not otherwise
allocated and it looks like they
may not be allocated that there
are schools that are waiting for
those rooms and so please
consider that and with that
respect I I just want you to
know that the new mexico academy
for the media arts is going to
debut a fiam that they've been
putting together as a
documentary on how students are
feeling in their depression and
their men will help uh and I
hope that maybe they might be
some funding additionally to
help them with that they view
and thank you mister chair and
thank you about him secretary
thank you center woods went to
he's not here then i'm sure you
still wanna
well as long as the center is
so thank you mr chair I don't
think we wouldn't do that
i'm
I just want to be the designated
contrarian cause we haven't had
much of that yet
a real question is why do we
have behavioral health issues
always there's there's a
baseline but why are we.
So far above that
mr chair senator share I think
the interest that is is a really
complicated
you know there are a lot of
issues we've got i'm substance
use disorder that we've you know
we're battling offenting all
epidemic
um
people experience severe
withdrawl the
without medication assisted
treatment is really not a
pleasant process for them it is
scary to go through recovery
folks struggle with that they
relapse and that's part of the
process so I think with behavior
or health and what we're trying
to do is move the move those
indicators reduce that overdose
death rate i'm get more people
into treatment but it it's a
challenge it and you know I
don't think that necessarily the
expectation is that things will
be cured instantly
and so but I do believe that you
are sort of that right why
treatment array will start to
move the need all I mean there
are people who also don't want
it help and they reserve
treatment that is not a really
uncommon thing and so we try to
work with family as we try to
work with a members but I I can
tell you about many hisses I I
receive emails from family
members who basically are at
their with and trying to help a
family member
who has skits of renewal for
example and who's living in
their car and
we do try to connect them with
services we will send pure
support out to connect them to
services but at the end of the
day it's the choice of that
member about whether they want
to get treatment or not and I
think that's one of the
challenges with mental health
you know it's it's true of about
other physical health as well
you know people make decisions
about where to do with their
bodies but we can't force people
into treatment most of the time
and so I think there's.
Um that does a fact those
outcomes and I think right now
we're struggling with you know a
substance used to sort of crisis
in our country so
mr chair and madam secretary
so why do we have a substance
abuse problem
in an in is there any state that
we think is doing it right that
has decreased their their
behavioral health issues
mister terror
senator share I mean there are
states that are doing really
innovative things I am I really
don't think that any state has
solved this problem it said it
really am probably more of a
global craziest than anything
for example orient tried to
decriminalize to criminalize
drugs and um has now kind of
gone back on that I didn't work
so think states are really
trying to figure out what's the
rate solution
I would say that we are a little
behind the curve as just sort of
in the national landscape that
there's suffering all the up
crisis then heroin crisis and
then now fentional.
Was a a soon army and I don't
think the existing tools that we
had to fight substance of use
were were kind of ready and
ready for what that tsunami
looked like and so I think we're
really sort of trying to figure
out there is some reduction in
overdoors statutes right now um
prevention is going to be key I
mean I I think that the big is
to try and get our youth i'm in
individuals to never have to be
in a situation where they feel
like they need to use the
substances because they are so
incredibly addictive and so that
is really the force that we're
fighting against and trying to
resolve for for new mexico but
it is is a national issue if not
a global problem
so miss chairman of secretary
this is also a recent
phenomenon to the world that
this level of behavioral health
yes there's always been there's
always been a issue soon emperor
nearer clearly had issues
without you know when go back
quite a ways with with a with
this as it
is an item to worry about but.
But I don't think we had
in the united states in the
world in new mexico this level
of problem until relatively
recently and so i'm trying to
figure out so what changed in
the last twenty years thirty
years maybe
something changed and so that's
what's causing this problem now
so
I don't think that we know
clearly what changed and
therefore we don't know how to
fix.
I believe that we are suffering
from an epidemic of dadlessness
though mean fatherlessness were
of father okay but we don't know
have a dad and in a dad is
different in my mind the dad is
is a male figure that teachers
and leads and and does things
like that just because you have
a man in the house doesn't
necessarily mean you have a debt
but
but that's that's what I think
happened
in and the reason I look at that
is
when I went to high school
there were very few families
that weren't intact in those
that didn't have a dad had died
in vietnam or died in the oil
well accident or died in an
automobile accident something
like that in a few of them just
ran away but those that just ran
away we're relatively small
number.
Where people using drugs when I
was in high school absolutely
but we
but there were two or three
hundred guns on campus and
nobody shot each other
and you could see the guns were
hanging in the back of the
window of your pickup truck they
weren't hidden they were there
they were loading nobody saw
anybody
most of the other
you know graduation rates I
don't know I wasn't keep in
stats when I was in high school
but my guess is most of us
graduated
but somewhere along the way
something happened and at least
as is I see it it's dadlessness
but I don't know because I don't
have any stats and that's why I
ask something happened
and I and until we figure out
what happened I don't think we
can solve the problem
and and of course it'll never be
a hundred percent I get that but
but I do think that's something
that we ought to look at what
happened
thank you
thank you like that work senator
woods is going to walk in and
we're going to play this little
bit longer a man sector we gave
you ten dollars analysts last
year while where those analysts
and why aren't we getting the
dead already.
I mister terror thank you for
supporting our data requires
they think we had what you're
referring to as a request to
support the analytics capacity
of the agency those we were able
to access that funding for those
positions in july there they're
all sort of in the invariant
process or in recruitment
because we weren't able to post
those positions in till july
first
I don't know where agencies do
that you know your funded for
the positions the budget sign
the rps are the request should
go out and enjoy one you should
have a power applicants to hire
on july second and one way
agencies play this game with and
we don't have the money until
july one you get actually have
the process to to put those in
place and get the ball rolling
every agency does this cross a
board whether it's capital
outlayer whatever in some of
that funding but I think the
data analytics that we're not
getting from all it to look in
that being allowed to get into
the system.
Is going to hinder a lot of new
funding as if we don't have the
data we're not going to look
till towards funding new
projects fixing the old ones we
talk about the twenty million
for health care that's been out
there
and I think that's very critical
that we either work together.
Or we don't fund it's a simple
process and who suffers it's
going to be somebody is going to
suffer because the agency is not
doing their job.
Refund them they don't get their
job done
it's sooner to one to see they
have this conversation all the
time if people just do their job
we'd all be a lot better off but
as funding stuff and then seen
oh we don't we don't get the
money to july second you know
the money is there.
Prepare for what's coming your
way
the analytics in on ericss uh
performance investments right.
On the state and how we're going
to work together to come for
some of this information as to
get done the end of the day it
has to get done we can't have
two sets of data like we did
during the special session the
governor claiming this status
over here in loc's looking at
this data and none of us are
looking at the same information.
Higher ed was here we asked for
their information to be lead
into the system because we are
getting get it through p d
system but we're not getting
that data either.
In so this performance base for
a view on legislat is going to
get tighter entitlers he move
forward and we have to have the
information
the mcosen and the providers and
how many each guy I think that's
an issue we need to deal with
that we're running so far behind
time.
But
as we move forward prepare for
we don't have the data we're not
going to look at stuff
mr chair we're providing data we
received arm ten requests for
data just alone in the period
from august fifteenth to
september thirteenth so our
agency is providing do that to
that c what are you spoken about
earlier was just the
complexity of sharing our entire
you know hundreds of millions of
claim records with the very
sensitive information
but that doesn't mean that we're
not providing data and I I would
dispute that notion our agency
works really hard and we track
every day to request that we
receive from the lsc very
closely and try to be as
responsive as we can
eric are they providing this
what we need to compare
mister chairman in she's correct
in terms of that you know we do
get sometimes summary data we do
get.
But a lot of there isn't that
helpful in terms of asking a lot
of the questions that we have
around how to
where to put or funding what are
the areas that we need to
improve in
you know and a lot of that comes
from that claims data that we've
asked for
I think you know
you know I think we talked about
this back in may um and we still
haven't gotten that data
and I do think we're working
with the department to
you know
to put an agreement into place
on how we get that data.
I will say that it's gone
incredibly slow though that
process and we would like to see
it uh
sped up a little bit I think I
mean we get other data in a
shared file that mean you guys
have access to but it can be
unlocked by anybody else right
and why don't we use waited that
system in place for some of this
in mr chair I I would I would
say that's correct and it I I
would say that we have access to
you know the public schools data
for example that's sensitive
data also
um we have the policies and
procedures in place for data
to be stored safely I would say
in a lot of ways or our system
of storing data is probably even
more safe than
the departments because our data
never touches the internet it's
it's kept off it is not
connected to the internet at any
time and so it's it's kept very
safe in that sense that it it's
not going to be hacked um
part of the problem we're not
telling them that we have that
system in place information
can't get out is it part of us
the con- I think the concern
that the department is saying is
that we don't have the safety
and data standards
set up to be able to handle
their data and I I would push
back on the and see I I think we
do and we've we've handled
plenty of
data in the past m and them I
mean i'm going to kind of wrap
this up why can't you just go
over to their offices and sit
there for whatever time frame a
week four days look at the
information on their system as
tell him what you want in.
Look at and shred
I mean there's alternatives to
get in data and going to blame
the agency for it all I mean
some of it's not us but
yeah mr chair we've put that
forward before and that's not
really gone anywhere.
Mr chair is no idea like we we
are trying so hard to get to yes
you know we have a meeting our
security team is going to meet
with all of see on september
thirtieth
I really don't like hearing that
we're with holding data I is
like the opposite of who aren't
as a person or what kind of
leader I want to be I definitely
I feel like transparency is
incredibly important so when I
hear things like word of
dragging our feet or we're not
doing that it really bothers me
um that is definitely not the
goal the goal is to insure that
this very sensitive data is
safeguarded that is really what
we need to do it's my obligation
to do that as soon as we work
through these security issues
we will put together the data
agreement and make sure that we
can insure it I mean I I think
it's just we want to make sure
there are rules about it and so
those rules need to be per down
in rating they need to be
reflected and I need to be
reassured that it can be
protected we have offered
alternatives I we are going to
have those data more it's up I
am running in november you know
it's my understanding you are
will have access to those data
marks like no no question about
it you all have invested in
these data per tools we will
provide that you are and so that
will be regardless of what
happens with these data requires
but I mean our team are team is
responding to as many data
requests as we can handle at
this point and we are really
trying to get to yes on this
larger request which actually is
unprecedented because it
includes our entire eligibility
do their files as well as every
claim from going back multiple
years and so it's pretty in
depth with patient identified
data that's what we've been
asked for I mean the executive I
have had this conversation in if
we're going to compare and be
equal then we want equal
information so we're not
fighting each other so I don't
know we figure it out but at
some point we got to figure it
out because you've come in for
that us requesting money and we
say we don't.
Have this is data and we put you
on legislative it's all about
fairness rate we all are looking
at the same color orange then we
can all agree on something there
for not and we don't have the
data and your data is different
than ardidata and we're not
getting the data we want to need
to compare it then we don't have
a fair comparison and this
happens in courts and
corrections this happens in in
other points that you're not the
only one so I haven't seen
the other agencies to tell them
but I mean this is gonna happen
at some point in time and genise
and back then i'm looking her
his her and I have had this
conversation you want to fair
hearing and we want to be far
too in your hearing in the only
way you can do that is if we
have the same data and we look
at the same stuff mrperiod terr
we will get to yes on this but I
do need those security protocols
honored I really really do and I
don't think just missing those
as me being over asking is this
i'm just saying that it's not a
quick data request it's not it's
something that we will have to
work on together and we are
going to get to yes we are
committed to that partnership
when you're going to become the
largest portion of the budget in
the largest increase over the
next five to ten years and the
numbers going to keep growing
we're going to want that skills
and that information I mean
where what is going to be a
hundred and fifty million this
year and medicaid that we're
going to have to back fill in
start growing that in so when we
look at those numbers we're
going to have to make sure that
we know what's going on only
fair to us as elected officials
on thank you for your time thank
you mister church and no
disagreement with from me on
that
some point some the principles
got a column in the room and
seeing you know everybody's
going to get mayor netherness.
The.
We're gonna move on who's next
eric and then I guess we're
going to have to go to if there
is questions on this
presentation I mean
we're going to have to move this
pretty quickly eric.
Yeah.
When he got a questions on this
we may have to do like courts
and corrections you get five
minutes and that's it.
The.
This go
mischair members of the
committee I just really wanted
it quickly um startus off just
kind of lay the ground work here
I just wanted to remind the
committee we talked about it a
little bit in the last section
on july first we started the
turkois care
the new managed care are program
within medicaid
prior to this we had centennial
care that had three mcos blue
cross blue shell presbyterian
health and western skies
with the new turkois care we
dropped trickle is i'm sorry we
talked dropped a western sky
community health and we added
molina health care and united
health care.
Essentially what managed care
organizations these are the the
organizations that the
department or the health care
authority contracts with and
flows money through these these
managed care organizations to
the two of about seven point
three seven point four billion
dollars in fy twenty five
projected so it's a huge part of
our medicaid program it's a huge
part of our budget
we flow that money through and
we have a lot of contractual
standards around
how they are supposed to pay
providers on the ground for the
services that are provided
to your constituents
for everything from behavioral
health physical health and other
services outside of that I and
with that mister chair pile pass
it off to i'm not sure who the
first one was and i'll let them
inter- uh introduce themselves
and then we'll go from there
thank you
yeah you can introduce
hello my name is address peter
san i'm the
ceo for united health care
community plan new mexico
this was nancy smith leslie and
the vice president medicaid for
a blue crossley shield of new
mexico
high end was locked term the
vice president of population
helping quality for presbyterian
help
muttering mr chair members of
the committee my name is
caroline ingram i'm the plan
president of million health care
of mexico.
Mr chair members of committee
again enter peter send united
health care can be planned in
mexico I have just a few slides
up present and then I think we
have questions they insert the
end thank you for taking the
time to talk to us today very
important issue about the health
care of new mexicans for a
passionate about it i'd like to
say
i'm resident of same again
county very close to the more
accounting line so come from a
uh agriculture ranching
community very small very rural
my neighbors and friends used
her course care so I do get a
chance to talk to them every
week and get feedback about that
so I think i'm very close to it
I would also like to think the
law makers in the room for their
support of the cafcanian and
hermit's peak recovery it
touched my life it touched my
family's life for touch the
waves of my neighbors I know if
there's a long way to go about a
lot of work has been done
i'm gonna walk through just some
goals and objectives the unit
health care community plan and
then emphasize to the state and
I want to break it down to a
county level so you can see how
plans move from cut up the state
wide to the county i'm also
going to call out many programs
are agnastic where they might be
a united health care program but
they're for all new mexicans my
colleagues on the table will
benefit from this and so it's
not just a you know you're
healthcare thing but it will
help everybody lastly I just
wanna say only disabled veteran
and I do have a passion for
helping veterans that are in the
medicaid
program and a really touched me
when we talk about veteran
homelessness from this morning
if you got this next slide or
page two uhm I would like to
read this a little bit and i'm
just going to call out a few key
words that I want you to take
away.
Um the first one is quality
we have approximately forty
thousand members were one of the
newest plans here new mexico we
were one of the first plans back
in two thousand eight we left
the market in twenty eighteen
that we're back but quality I
consider quality to be the
single most important thing we
do in our processes procedures
help outcomes etc I don't really
feel like i'm competing against
my colleagues up here and
complete against the standard
and I need to achieve that
standard
collaboration is the next word
i'd like to highlight where i'm
working with the community
working with my state government
partners hca
collaboration also means working
with the county health councils
when we built this plan are too
through the rfp period to come
into new mexico we spent hours
and hours hundreds of meetings
with county health councils will
seem to them getting their input
lastly and won a highway
community
I have a team of a hundred
twenty people they are spread
out in twenty two different
counties across new mexico and
that's on purpose they are in
the community we want to bring
the best ideas from the
community or the best ideas from
the thirty other markets that
were in across the country we
have thirty other medicate
health plans in different states
we want to bring those ideas to
new mexico is applicable to work
on it
i'm gonna go through
some key areas that were focused
on first time when I talk a
little bit about provider
services network expansion
currently were meeting sims
standards in
all thirty three countries as
far as network we have over
eleven thousand told providers
in the state are really in the
depending on what provider types
the in the ninety third ninety
third and ninety fifth percent
tile as far as all providers uhm
you know mexico is a provider.
Poor state and so really we need
all the other providers we can
get
i'd also like to highlight three
providers good side health
that's a school based hole
program that we're bringing in
for turkois care it's going to
starting this fall in
grants and in
bluefield within their school
systems so about nineteen
schools I will benefit from that
heartland health which is a uh
raw mobile health care a service
that were bringing in and then
gallow uh which is another both
in percent in and tell a health
service are focused on maternity
and primary care those are net
new providers that were bringing
in for her course care again
those providers will be
available for the other uh my
colleagues at the table to use
sort of drivers with health I
want to highly one thing uh a
company called tripaster that we
brought in for choice care
that's a net new transportation
provider that is all amount of
meeting all the small
transportation companies in new
mexico that came out of directly
out of health council feedback
about the non emergency
transportation system the state
and how challenging it is and so
we wanted to bring in a new
company to work on this kind of
state of the art looking at a
little differently with a lot
more technology
workforce development i'd like
to highlight we are giving out
thirty scholarships a year and
conjunction with eastern new
mexico we don't sell center in
the mexico college and never
attack these scholarships have
focused up really on internships
and the health professions and
so we want to do s try to grow
that entry level health care
worker and keep them involved in
the community than in the state
and i'm talking about
nutritional statistions i'm
talking about.
Community health workers on
talking about
nursing assistance rate and the
ideas to get more of those into
the system here
and then some of those are going
to say and love it i'm going to
become a nurse I love it i'm
going to become a doctor right
and so there are going to start
stuff up the latter and stand
the community
lastly and we'll talk a little
bit about a support for the new
mexico dual association as you
know seventeen counties are
turning dozens in new mexico i'd
live in one and we want to
support the new mexico do it was
so session monetarily to produce
more dealers over the last two
years through our help they've
had twenty five more do those
out in the community and then
just want a highway are
supported the criminal justice
initiatives that have been
talked about already in an all
i'll break that down a little
further
if you go on to the next page
where I I just spot like a real
real economy and just kind of
breaking it down to to a county
level because I think it's
important for the health plans
it's not only to look at the
state but then you break it down
to the county we are very much
in contact with the the reariba
detention center and
correctional facilities really
real county about the reactory
support initiatives there
secretary meal mentioned a
little while ago we're also have
some dollars that have been
certified in train better now in
really the county working with
pregnant mothers in maternity
cases work force development we
do have a number of workforce
funds for people to finish their
degrees
and also working with the
recovery leader to find
opportunities to
with sud and get more pierce
specialists in rearing about
county and again and doing
things across many counties all
the counties but i'm just
highlighting this.
So you know how it works on that
the software drivers health and
mentioned the non emergency
transportation and again some of
these things are above and
beyond the medicaid requirements
such as the nondashmercy
transportation where we've
expanded services to allow care
givers or children to go along
with the medical recipient to an
appointment rate cell the mother
will not have to try to get baby
setting for a child the the
grandson can go with the
grandmother to an appointment so
that is above above beyond the
neement requirements that we
want to do then lastly we've
worked with a
el central in real county.
Working with to try to keep the
elderly population in their home
through telehealth and remote
minor train over the last two
years and get that benefits
everybody that's not we did
their sub prior to the twenty
two the contract reward
with some branch and some work
with them to keep the elderly
residents in their home through
remote mind a train and i'm so
they will not have to leave
their home fit then I want to to
go to a nursing home in the
largest city that they might be
and familiar with
galileo is is our nurse line and
something that is unique and
kind of above and behind we can
transfer from the nurse line
right two a
new mexico license doctor
and on that nurse
to if the nurse contributes and
says he really needs speak to a
doctor would you like to go into
a waiting room at we can do that
why do these things again are
ignostic of finally I just want
to say a I recognize the
partnership with hca
there is a lot of things they
need to pull together in the
collaboration that they did with
the foreign close myself
included was no small feet I
know there's still work to be
done and very incur itself from
what I see
i'd also like to call out we
mentioned it this morning
but there are some things
concerning recaprocity expansion
of
interstate carpacks
and the expansion of medical
residencies that I think
sector immediate talk to in
different forums I think we're
on the right track but I would
i'd call those out it's probably
the easiest way to get more
health care providers in the
system
without mister chair members of
the committee I will relate wish
my time and turn it over to my
color.
That's thank you
good morning and mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for your time this
morning again i'm
the vice president
and a move just like two of the
blue cross machine presentation
I wanted to provide an overview
of blue cross blue shield's long
standing presence in new mexico
we've been serving new mexicans
for over eighty years and more
than six hundred thousand new
mexicans carrier blue cross blue
shield card we employ over
sixteen hundred new mexicans
across the state and our robust
provider network includes more
than eleven thousand providers
we recognize that health care is
local and for over eighty years
we've demonstrated our deep root
commitment to new mexico in
twenty twenty three we provided
over one point two million and
grounds and sponsorships to more
than a hundred local community
organizations
we have a mobile care round that
serves over thirteen thousand
new mexicans and has
provided services at more than
two hundred events across the
state
moving to side three
our person centered approach to
care allows us to address our
members physical behavioral and
long term care needs as well as
those health related social
needs that many of our members
experience our care coordination
team consists of nurses social
workers community health workers
peer support specialist and
recovery specialist who are
meeting our members where they
are in their healthcare journey
and supporting them to achieve
their personal health and well
discourse
with today's presentation I will
share more about our specialized
character nation teams and a
recent efforts to expand
behavioral health services
improve maternal and child
health
and supporter members with
behavioral health and substance
use needs
turning to slide for
this line illustrates the
progress we've made over the
last three years to really build
out over here health now.
We have significantly increased
the number of behavioral health
facility is behavioral health
practitioners aba providers and
bh first virtual commissions in
our network as you can see on
the slide from twenty twenty one
current twenty twenty four
in twenty twenty three we out of
two hundred and thirty new
behavioral health contracts and
thus far in twenty twenty four
we've added a hundred and
seventy eight new contracts
we continue to pursue
opportunities to develop the
network and make targeted
investments in our providers
moving to side five you'll see
some of these target investments
that we have been making that
were really excited about we've
been really trying to support
work force development
initiatives and working both
with our local providers and
also with our higher education
partners to insure a pipeline of
future new mexico providers we
partnered with new mexico state
university in twenty twenty one
and again in twenty twenty three
to provide two rounds of funding
of five hundred thousand to its
college of health and social
sciences both rounds of funding
included support for a new
professorship in the college and
scholarships for students in the
voucher level level social work
and nursing programs
we're excited that the first
cohort of graduate to receive
scholarships and twenty twenty
one agreed to work in new mexico
for at least a year
when nursing a degree graduate
works at a dialysis clinic in
grants where she started as a
patient care technician while
she was pursuing her degree and
now is a nurse at that clinic
and other graduates started as
an emergency room nurse at
memorial medical center and last
uh christmas the hospital are
worried happened to be born and
he was recently promoted to a
manager
we've also established a
partnership with the university
of new mexico's college of
nursing department we're
providing five hundred thousand
for renewal and down
professorship in the college and
a hundred thousand dollars in
scholarships for students in
there.
Accelerated batch libernarising
degree program that program
allows students to earn their
degree and enter the work force
within eighteen months
we've provided funding to nine
primary care clinics to support
their hiring and community
health workers or do us we're
providing funding funding to
lovely tell system for the
recruitment of new primary care
providers and we're also
providing support for the direct
care workforce we've partnered
with the new mexico association
of palm and hospitals care and
provided funding for them to
recruit and routine personal
care attendance as well as
working with the non profit in
quentro to support their
certification program for home
health needs
moving to slight six
we're also excited that in the
coming weeks blue cross will
publicly announce a significant
investment to improve maternal
health outcomes for all new
mexican mothers we will be
supporting a variety of local
organizations including support
for a statewide maternal data
program for all new mexico and
facilities so that we can help
them track
out comes for safety for our new
mexico others we're also
enhancing access to behavioral
health services with a perry
nato partner by providing access
to sakiatric mental health
nurses practitioners
in addition to these upcoming
investments we've made
significant investments are so
earlier this year to increase
access to maternity car with
local partners the new mexico
dollar association
the roams program in
north eastern new mexico and a
scholarship initiative for UNM o
b d residents who are conducting
clinical rotations in rural
locations throughout the state
movements like seven are this
line illustrates key behavioral
health outcomes that we've
improved through our person
centered approach to care with
her integrated approach combined
with some of the value based.
Agreements we've have with new
mexico behavioral health
providers we've been able to
make a number of improvements in
behalf outcomes for example from
twenty two to twenty three we
improved follow up after
hospitalization for mental
illness rates by two percent of
the points follow up after ed
visits for mental illness rates
by three percentage points and
follow up after high intensity
care for substance use disorder
by for a percentage points
turning to slide eight
this slight illustrates a few of
our specialized behavioral
health teams and programs that
we are implying to better engage
our members for example we have
a team of pure support
specialist who partner with
their members and support them
in their recovery journey in
twenty twenty three are pure
support specialists working with
the cohort of our members were
able to reduce behavioral health
in patients day is by thirty two
percent in all cars ed visits by
over twenty one percent
we also have a dedicated team of
car coordinators who work with
justice involved members prior
to the release they're ensuring
they have scheduled a point
prescriptions and needed
referrals prior to their
reintegration back into the
community
and lastly on slide nine
we are excited to
share that we've launched our
blue door neighborhood center
that opened in south bally in
august the center offers
community resources and
programming for any community
member who wishes to participate
regardless of their insurance
status we are offering wellness
events exercise and cooking
classes health education and we
have staff on site to assist
with members who may be in need
of a referral to provider or to
a community organization to
address a health related social
need
as a future enhancement we plan
to have telehealth services
available at the center so that
community members are able to
access teleheal services and
we're also working with the
loveless clinic that's located
very close to the center.
To develop a navigation program
for referrals to services at
their clinic
so thank you for the opportunity
to share some of the exciting
initiatives we've been working
on and I will turn it over to
liz like a tour.
Thank you members of the
committee it's nice to speak to
you today about what
presbyterians up to with regard
to expanding access do I need to
bring it closer is that better
okay thank you
as I have planner and first I
just want to talk a little bit
my minutes and very little time
on slide too that just talks
about who presbyterian help plan
is
we currently start three hundred
and sixty eight thousand
medicaid members we've been in
the new mexico medicaid managed
care program since it started in
an twenty seven years ago in
nineteen ninety seven and we
currently have more than thirty
thousand contracted providers in
our network
if you go to sight three I want
to talk a little bit more about
our network
we currently contract with
ninety eight percent of the
available providers in the state
we contract with about ninety
five percent of the behavior
providers that are available
and we have a less than ten day
turnaround for credentially new
providers as they come into the
state when the primary reasons
that we find it providers are
not and our network is that
they're not always willing to
contract for medicaid and a
condition of participating and
presbyterians network is that
providers who want to contract
for other lines of business like
commercial and medicare also
have to agree to a medicaid
contract insurers equity for our
members and adequate access for
for new max accounts.
One of the things that we've
done in it similar way to the
other mcales as we leverage the
caqh tool for credentialing all
of our providers streams
streamlines the application
process and makes it easier firm
for our providers to get
credentialed quickly
we regularly monitor provider
satisfaction with it within our
network it's really important to
us that we understand the
barriers and the challenges that
are provider space by for two of
working to address those
barriers and challenges that our
providers identify for us were
able to retain ninety nine
percent of the providers that
contract with us
we've contracted with ever
nearly every provider in the
state but we know that that's
not enough we know that that new
mexicans all of the state
continue to have access problems
and we have to continue to try
to expand our work force within
the state to continue to bring
you specialists and and other
providers into the state if you
got a slight four
i'd like to talk about
addressing specific access to
care priorities throughout the
state and we talked some about
some of the the states
priorities some of the larger
populations within our network
in order to.
Expand access to services we
have to work with our existing
providers to
to drive quality to attract work
force to their organizations and
we do much of this through value
based contracting
a good example of a provider in
the state that we supported a
large rural primary care
provider in the state
told us that the only reason
that they were able to keep all
of their clinics open in rural
and frontier communities during
the pandemic was because of the
value based contract that they
had with prospects.
We also support things like
after hours and weekend codes
that enabled providers to offer
enhanced rates for services
provided outside of normal
operating hours
we offered rural frontier
differential and enhanced rates
to providers in those
communities again so that they
that are able to computer
salaries and attract people to
their communities
and we also want to support
providers and deliver and care
and in different ways we know
that we don't have sufficient
specialists to every single
community and we're often
reliant time accessing providers
who are a farther distance from
the the communities where a
members live
one of the things that we've
offered to our entire network is
a free video platform for a
providers to offer virtual care
to patience and we know that
making that investment in
technology is not always filed
for some of our smaller
providers
so far we've had seventy six
providers in the state take
advantage of this and served
eleven hundred more than eleven
hundred members through this
through this technology platform
we also offer a free help equity
trainings to providers
throughout the state these
trainings include for example
any racism and paranetal
settings at could about access
to actation care adverse child
had experiences are not your
destiny youth mental health
first stage and harm reduction
when I want.
While we aimed at increase
access across all specialties in
programs we know that some areas
of our state and some
specialties have even hire needs
we engage in targeted
interventions based on data and
member feedback to sharp in our
focus to areas of greatest need
and I like to highlight a few of
those areas
within maternal health
we have had some very focused
attention on supporting our role
frontier communities the march
of dimes data shows that eleven
of our states thirty three
counties are maternity care
deserts training more people to
provide quality care in new
mexico's rural communities as
critical and for this reason in
twenty twenty three we invested
almost three million dollars for
internal work force development
the supported seven local
organizations across the state
to train doors or be dewinds
midwives and lactation
consultants
we have also launched a contract
with the virtual care provider
who offers a dedicated maternity
tell a health platform including
remote patient monitoring to
provide talent maternal feet on
medicine and paranetal behavior
health services through this
partnership we also work with
local local providers to support
prescribing of medication
assisted treatment and
management of higher risk
pregnancies allows members to
stay in their homes and be
monitored and not have to travel
as far as a specialist care
during their high rise
pregnancies
were also piloting a value base
some value based programs
focused on paranetal and
pediatric care to incentivise
improved health outcomes in
these areas in one pilot project
launched in twenty twenty three
with an fc and southern new
mexico we focused on prenatal
post pardon care and depression
screenings so far a results
found significant improvements
and screening and post pardon
care and the target population
moving into twenty twenty five
will continue to align our
priorities with these
populations
in behavioral health i've been
in behavior professional for my
entire career and.
So this it's particularly close
to my heart to see some of the
things that are happening in
behavior hole you heard
secretary of me how and director
book is talk about comprehensive
community behavior whole
services are behind clinics and
my opinion that's one of the
biggest things to happen in
behavioral health in in
certainly my career
not only do these do these
clinics offer opportunities to
provide a widery of service more
available throughout the state
but the reimbursement mechanism
for community comprehensive
community behavior of clinics is
really critical to these rural
frontier providers and
attracting talent to new mexico
it allows them to be competitive
on a national scale
and so we do believe that they
are going to be able to continue
to drive
progress
in expanding capacity and and
services for paper health we
also believe that our parent
professional work force is
really critical to supporting
our behavior health
organizations for many people
particularly people with
substance use disorders who
haven't actually engaged and
treatment the people that are
most likely to reach them or
peer support specialist
community health workers we
deploy teams through
presbyterian and we also work
with providers to expand their
work force in those areas too
promote better engagement of
members
representative arm strong you
talked about dermatology and the
spent a pain point for our
members for many many years we
only have thirty three
dermatologists center state not
nearly enough to meet the needs
at php we wanted to understand
why so we've top worked closely
with our one of our largest
multifight their metality
providers in the state and as a
result we have identified ways
that we can fast track
credentially for those providers
when they bring them in
and we also at through our
presbyterian medical group
we've also begun to offer
virtual dermatology and rural
areas with the board certified
dermatologist who collaborates
with our surgical.
Providers for metallic procedure
needs
I also like to speak briefly
about children and state custody
as you probably know
presbyterian is the sole carrier
supporting that population
and we've been doing a lot of
work to enhance access to
services for a children and
state custody where adding
enhanced rates for a pediatric
visits to improve access to care
for children and state custody
and our providers are were
motivating our providers provide
more timely appointments and
also seek training and trauma
informed care
moving on to the next slide
would I still like to talk about
expanding clinical clinical work
for us
we're determined to bring
innovative solutions forward
that can make a stain impact on
addressing provider shortages we
see provider shortages
increasing nationally which
means new mexico has to compete
more for providers than ever
before
as an mco and part of an
integrated health system we
address these provider shortages
sh- shortly challenges through
creating and supporting pathways
to up skill work force so for
example we're working with one
of our large personal care
service providers in the state
at us to create a training
pathway for their for their
staff to become certified nurses
eight for example
we also partner with
we also partner with providers
in our higher education
programs to create a long term
pipeline for work force and new
mexico
we've worked for a long time
with u and m to support primary
car residencies and we
provide training for those
residents and our primary care
clinics on these programs
continue to expand we're also
providing and sentence or some
providers like I mentioned
before to employ per
professional work for a slight
community health workers and
peer support specialist.
Using the way for providers is
really critical to their success
in the state
and this means ensuring that we
do everything possible to keep
excellent clinicians in new
mexico and carrying for a new
maxicans as an mco we do
everything we can to keep these
providers in their state and we
often work closely with
individual providers to
understand an address specific
concerns one example is we had a
pediatric surgeon who wanted to
seek advanced training that's
not available in the state of
new mexico i'm in order to keep
that provider practicing in the
state of new mexico we worked
with radio children's hospital
in california to facilitate
advance article training the
single case agreements and
assistance without a state
enrollment this extra help made
the difference in surgeon was
able to keep practicing here and
had that surgeon left new max
account more than a thousand
children would have had to have
gone out of state for for
surgical procedures
we support efforts out more
clinicians work at the top of
their licenses primary care
providers are handling a lot
more these days through e
consults or medical group i'll
still provide specialty access
to our rural friend here
primary care providers so that
they are able to meet the needs
through these consults which we
reimburse at the same rate we
would and in person specialist
visit allows those members not
only to get the car they need
more quickly but they're also
able to remain in their
communities and not have to
travel such far distances to
access that special to care
we've also supported the project
echo program and we paid for
almost three hundred in counters
from rural providers interacting
with specialist panels through
the project
and we continue to at support
primary care providers to
infrastructure payments for
those participating and quality
and value driven programs to
employ new care models.
Addressing provider shorter just
takes more than one path and as
an mcl php is committed to
taking every path necessary to
grow our provider pool today and
in the future and lastly the
last later like to talk a little
bit about quality
we properly obviously partner
with providers to expand
capacity and access but we also
try to drive quality through
value based arrangements with
these providers
the health care authority is
done an excellent job on a
lining the vision of turkey's
care to the new quality measures
that are in our contracts we
then carry that forward through
our provider arrangements and we
provide incentives for those
providers to drive improved
outcomes on those same measures
when we look at some examples of
we've been using this practice
for quite some time through
value based contracts so some
examples while child visits in
the first fifteen months of life
over four years providers in our
value base program performed on
average twelve point twelve
percentage points higher
timeliness of prenatal care of
these providers and value based
programs provide performed
fifteen point seven percent
higher than that than the rest
of the providers in the state
and then for well child deserts
for children over four years
that that number was eighteen
percent higher for a really
based contracts and we also
offer learning clarities for
providers these are training
programs that are designed to
educate them on bay based
contracting principles quality
metrics and technology
integration that supports
improved care coordination
we also promote care
coordination and care management
by providing resources and
supports to providers to better
deploy care coordination work
for us and better manage
their their patience care across
the continual most services that
they seek so thank you so much
for the time to speak to you
today and i'll pass it to carly
thank you.
Mister chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
having us today in the interest
of time i'm going to try to
speak things up so i'll go a
little bit quickly
first I want to talk a little
bit about malina but I have
three things I want to cover
what we've done in the short
amount of time that we've had
this contract to build behavior
or health capacity the
innovations that we've created
to increase access to care
and then lastly some community
reinvestment and finally we have
one ask
for you that to consider at the
end of my presentation so if you
turn in your presentation i'm
starting from slide to
million is very excited to be
launching the new mexico health
plan starting in july and for
folks who don't know this is
really personal to me i'm native
new mexican many of you will
remember me back from when I was
medicaid director for about
eight years I also serve
nationally on a mac pack it's a
medicaid commission that advises
congress the states and cms so
getting to launch the program
here and kind of bring to life
the things that we talk about
and that's part of our mission
at money is really important to
me
i'm really excited that we're
able to to bring for the
innovations that we have in the
short amount of time so if you
turn to slide three
about mind a few of the new
providers that we've brought
into the state to be available
to folks we have a program
called male to care connections
where we actually have providers
on the ground out in the
community serving members
especially high risk members
they come and meet those people
where they are at that place in
time so similar to the act teams
that represent their small was
talking about they go into the
home and do home visits to
deliver immunisations or other
things that need to be taken
care of they can also bring tell
a health with them to bring and
doctors if needed we've also
launched a program for
adolescence called b me health
it enables them through an app
to be able to have access
immediately to providers and
then connect them back on the
ground here if they need help
with something.
Um the same with another program
called brave health that we've
launched here but more focused
on adults with mental health
issues where they're able to
have a live visit with somebody
over a teleconnection
this is really important
especially after people come out
of hospital stays and are in
their communities and haven't
yet found a provider to be able
to help them
brave health as error to help
with care management plans in
middle health while we get them
connected on the ground to a
provider and finally the last
two programs that were bringing
up one is called life connect
health they will actually be a
physical provider here and the
bernaldio county area I leverage
to some of my friends nationally
that were come medicaid and went
out to look for providers who
would come into the state and
provide care found one intended
and so they are setting up here
their providers will be open and
to all of the medicare programs
as they get going and then
lastly a program called million
of my health where we focus on
maternal health and helping
people out in the community but
really making sure that that
delivery for the mom and those
types of things are very
positive
to compliment in person obgyn
visits this is really important
with our hybris pregnancies and
as some of my colleagues have
talked about in parts of the
state where we have been deserts
and we don't have services
available
if there is ever an issue where
we are up against an access to
care issue only this philosophy
is to work through that as
quickly as possible so will
create what we call single case
agreements with providers if
they don't want to intermedicate
for some reason the new mexico
or they don't want to contract
with us we'll enter into a
single case agreement to go and
pay that provider we will also
make sure that our network
beyond being complete but if we
need to increase rates to
enhance providers from out of
state to come in so with
outreached a providers in
arizona colorado and texas.
The department has been really
good about sharing information
with those providers so they
understand the great payment
rates that we have here for
medicaid and the financial
commitment that legislatures
made to the medicare program
if you turn to side for
you'll see a little bit of a
description of our care
coordination extender program we
have care coordinators
throughout the state on purpose
we want people from new mexico
working at our health plan who
understand those communities to
help people in the community
their job
is to really track down that
member and have a visit assist
them with what they need to get
services in the community
sometimes that's translation
services sometimes that's help
with housing
food security making sure that
they get their medications
refilled and they're actually
located out in the communities
across our state they'll do
either a telephone account face
to face visits
to get in touch with those
members as they come on to our
health plan to make sure they
get services
we've launched a lot of
partnerships across the state
and the short amount of time
and some of you may have seen
the recent news about
relaunching our help center out
in gallop were the only managed
care company with a help sitter
out in a rural community and our
goal is to go ahead and expand
those across the state i'm very
proud of this help center if
anybody gets to go visit it when
you're out in gallop I think
we've got some legislators from
that area here today all of our
workers there are from that
community so they all speak
naval they are able to help
people with getting connections
to appointments helping them get
medications refilled helping
them with eligibility to health
insurance and if they're not
eligible for medicaid maybe
they're eligible for medicare or
marketplace but helping them to
get covered and I also helping
them around social determinance
of health they've done a great
job with that we've also
partnered with an available
nation on funding a couple of
programs if you go to slide six
you'll see
looking at our focus on tow
tired to behavioral health.
Program that sponsored by or run
by a presbyterian medical
services pms
they provide talks programs out
in the community that combined
both western medicine as we
would see it and traditional
medicine
that is important to tribal
populations we've also supported
the school based telstra
alliance in getting project echo
up and trained training
providers out there in the
community especially our school
based providers around how to
serve people and then we have
two other investments coming up
that you'll hear about in the
press this week or next week one
is with an organization called
royal health that we also
brought into new mexico they'll
be opening clinic facilities
here again in the bernalio
county area with a focus on kids
where his life connect the one I
mention earlier focused on
adults and then also expanding
some services for home visiting
through many mothers provider
that's up in the northern part
of the state to really promote
healthy families and support for
families during delivery.
Um finally one of my colleagues
mentioned a lot of the work
going on in real rebuild we have
a focus there are four of us is
health plans so i've listed some
of the information there
milliness small right now we
just launched obviously in july
we have about forty one thousand
members so we have a small
population up in real reburn
what we've actually deployed our
care coordinators that I
mentioned earlier
out in the community there to
find our members length and back
to services that they may need
whether it's housing food
security or working back with
the government officials there
to try to
help improve the situation going
on there we also have free to
all that we can make sure to get
out to all of you call the help
finder it provides a list across
the entire state of services
available in the community we
use it a lot on the ground with
our care coordinators but it's
free to anybody and
it's a it's a great tool to
really go in and find if you've
got a constituent or somebody
who needs help trying to find
what the services are to access
our care coordinators use it
every day for transportation
providing meals getting housing
for people but we we make it a
free available to anybody in the
community
lastly I just want to finish
with my ask
a many of you probably no I grew
up in new mexico and grew up
pretty much doing medicaid I my
first job was entitlement worker
helping kids who had were in
faster care get eligibility for
medicaid so i've seen all the
reiterations that we've done of
you know carving car about
changes those kinds of things
under salute under a centennial
care one into under now turkey's
care
but we all know that the only
way we're going to really grow
capacity here and make things
better is through our providers
and supporting the providers in
the community right so I ask you
all to please consider passing
the compact in your packets
you'll see three different
compacts that are available for
us to use.
I want to focus on the last two
um the counseling compact for
counselors and then psych pack
for psychologist right now
thirty seven states have signed
the compact for counselors and
this enables a counselor whose
license somewhere else to be
able to practice in your state
without having to go through a
whole bunch of hoops same with a
psychologist program psychpack
forty two states have passed
that and I left you contents you
can see the states surrounding
our areas whether or not they've
passed it what kind of changes
they've put in place but I would
urge that we try to work with
licensing a regulation to get
those things passed through so
that we can have access to those
providers that are in other
especially our surrounding
states so that they can help
provide services here new mexico
thank you very much mister chair
and I think we stand for
questions thank you organised go
through the kind of wrap it
around in five minutes or less
and ask your question so we can
get caught up on time
strong that was a hint i'll take
it thank you for your
presentation I just wanted to
let you all know that we are
actively working on the compacts
and and it's a heavy left but
we'll see what we could do with
that myself and other
representatives in the room also
I just wanted to publicly think
presbyterian and molina for
giving back to community in my
district specifically with
bilingual pending book machines
and helping better ins and other
things and so I just want to
publicly thank you for that and
hope that we can
have a long fruit for
mission to help new mexicans
have access and look forward to
working on those compacts thank
you mister chairman
thank you
representing hotmain visa
thank you very much mister chair
i'll be very quick I think you'd
be much further your information
presentation.
For all the work that you do my
question is for mr smith lessly
blue price so i'm
I was very interested with this
information on the follow
possibilities
percentages for mental
behavioral health I just can't
wanted to hear it in your words
I mean is the failure to ensure
rap round services and follow up
and coordination of care part of
the
the problems we have in the
mexico with this mental
behavioral health
and they make that we seek we
find ourselves in.
Mr chair representative thank
you for the question I I think
it's a multi faster
issue that we have a lot of
these members in our population
in need of these services are
sometimes hard to engage and so
when you can move the needle
even a small percentage point I
think it makes a significant
impact on their long term
outcomes so we
as they mentioned we have
specialized teams that are you
know feet on the ground they are
showing up in the jails
correctional facilities there
they're going to shelters
they're looking for a members
and in really trying to engage
them and they have lived
experience
in
as a pure support specialist and
so I think that really does make
a difference in hell how to
engage them most effectively so
thank you mister chairman and
and and thank you and I agree
that and I think we just went
through a special session again
talking about some of the
reasons why we have mental
behavioral health issues in the
state and I think lack of follow
up coordination of care we have
people showing up an emergency
rooms with untreated substance
because disorder issues and
mental health and once they're
released we don't know where
they go and they don't know
where to go next so thank you
for your work on that mr chair
the other last question I had is
am relates to the slide on
transitional living
and so
I just want to know more about
this but he would help impatient
claim cost decreased by seven
hundred and fifteen million per
patient the average link of an
impatient state decrease by
seven days why is this why is
transitional living making such
a huge difference in this issue
on the state um mister chair
representative think again for
that question
this is a program that.
We have the value at its service
it's outside of medicaid funded
reimbursement so we are
contracting with with different
entity is who are able to bill
medicaid and providing funding
for them to have um some
additional housing supports for
our members
in so when they have
those basic needs mat I think
then they can focus on some of
the other physical and
behavioral house needs they may
have and so just helping them
with the social determination
health needs a housing and food
security and transportation
really enables
our staff to then work with them
on those important services for
getting another their behavioral
hole services
rendered and and working with
them on those those critical
things so then we're seeing
you the decrease in some of the
higher setting costs for those
members so instead of having to
go to in patient or to an er
because they don't know where
else to go there and gauged with
our character team because they
helped them get housing and so
they're helping them get into
more appropriate settings for
those needs and thank you very
much mister chairman I just want
to take this opportunity that
when we invest as a state and
wrap around and holistic
services we are actually
bringing down the total costs
and services and mental
behavioral health cell just
something to continue to pay
attention to thank you very much
representatives
thank you chair
first thank you all for being
here this is a great follow up
to some of the conversations
that we've been having and I
really appreciate the emphasis
and growing the work force
I am interested in understanding
a little bit more about the
compact and why.
You know why new mexico hasn't
agreed to them yet
if there's information you can
share
mister chairman representative
my understanding is it's been
considered by the legislature in
the past but wasn't able to pass
through
so I think some work needs to be
done to get consensus there
thank you mister charle thank
you do we know if the reason
that it wasn't able to get
through was political or
logistical
just not understanding
mister chairman representative I
think
might be a mix of both political
and then enough time to educate
and figure out ways to make them
work so
might be
some work though that can be
done before session in order to
get that consensus built to to
reach a way to get it passed.
Thank you thank you mister chair
am very interested in learning
more and and there may be some
members who have worked on the
efforts in the past because I
have heard that you know we have
tried that and they've
gotten bottlenecked
that would be wonderful and then
lastly I just wanted to think of
the cross blue shield for help
with some constituent issues you
guys have been wonderful and
very responsive when
constituents have had concerns
or so thank you very much
thank you have anybody else on
the list so I appreciate your
time in the compacts has come up
two times their time in the last
two days I
was working
the new senator back there is
working on it and I think
there's some house members are
working on itself I think that's
gonna be a key issues for so
keep pushing that
in the snow or at okay thank you
guys
we're gonna
we're gonna adopt the minutes in
our gender so why have a forum
second having and tell you what
happened is
that people
can be cracked on yes
that pay in there is a minute
of a motion for new past
secondly
my president small any other
thing we need to look at we're
gonna get over those later top
cash back get looked over later
but that way we got
stick
an extra genetic
we stopped one more agenda item
helen europe
you're calling this the state of
the state is what charles said
is that what
good morning i'm helling us fine
and lsc analyst I am the
coordinator for the report cards
and today i'll be talking about
the end of the year report cards
that is at tab m of although
we're gonna be going so quick.
You might just want to look at
that later
these are the annual report
cards it is the year over a year
so we look a lot at your over
year
and I urge you not only to look
at the report later but also to
consider looking online when we
post online on monday because we
are moving to some online
dashboards that will have some
data included and that will be
the first one we're doing on
that as the state personnel
office and that when it will be
up on monday so if you are at
tab m and you look at page five
you'll see are you over year
and what's notable is that we
are seeing a reduction in red
ratings from we have twelve and
if I twenty three and we have
seven that means we have more
agencies in the categories of
yellow and green green being
good and yellow being nuts are
good but not terrible
we are considered continuing to
see weaknesses and many of the
critical social care services
and the number of programs will
slower ratings than a year ago
is a concern and we had nine
programs that had a downreading
this year
the
the
in both the early childhood
education and current
appointment in the health care
authority is slightly better so
that's a good sign and the state
continues to see strong
performance in the courts and
judicial agencies and in the
transportation economic
development tourism and energy
minerals and natural resources
departments I want to highlight
two things one house to do with
our investment performance i'm
overall we're seeing a
substantial growth and i'm
pretty good performance across
the board but we are seeing
slightly weak for performance in
the severance tax permanent fund
and that is because of the
allocation of assets includes
investments in venture capitals
and we have not seen a great
return on our on those
investments the other thing I
want to highlight well I won't
be highlighting eric will be
highlighting is on health care
authority department b.
Because it's a discussion that
you have earlier today.
The chair members of the
committee so that
I don't always can do this
but the health health care
authority health change it
challenges experience by the
state's medicaid population will
likely not improve if medication
release continue having
trouble making appointments
one thing I just wanted to point
out
about the medical assistance
division and and which is our
medicaid program is where we are
improving a little bit
you know there has been some
definite improvement over last
year we've gone from red to
yellow as a program
we're doing a little bit better
not a lot better but a little
bit better at um
you know the measure for
informed some medicaid match
care who had six or more will
child visits with the primary
care physician during the first
fifteen months measures like
that we're doing a little bit
better on and so I just wanted
to kind of point that out and
aspect you
without we can take your
questions
any questions on red yellow and
green
representative vincent.
I'll make it quick mister chair
I know page five.
And yesterday we heard
maybe
on some children youth and
family and i'm looking here
there was a recommendation
something about you know eccd
helping out with
children youth and family and I
I see that they're all read
they also they all are in the
sell your side
and then is it something to get
worked up about on yellow cause
you still missed your target
right
yeah yeah
and mister chairman
representative of the the reds
are from fy twenty three we are
seen some improvements in eccd
yellow
generally means that they've
just fell a little short of the
target that they didn't hear
that so we can't give them a
green but they they can close.
I've had that happen a few time
I just fell a little bit short
but I still get the practice and
I i'm glad they're doing better
but
still looks like there's plenty
of word to be done thank you
mister chair close on counts and
horses shoes and hand grenade
any other questions
seeing none
we're gonna be adjourned
everybody can will be quick next
door cause if people have
lunches with somebody else will
just be real quick or next door
in the next room and thank you
so
back at my time we're supposed
to be better
will be back at one o'clock.
