on the New Mexico Correction
Department's reentry system.
This evaluation follows LFC's
full evaluations in 2007, 2012,
and 2018, as well as a memo in
2019 that looked at related
topics. This is the first
evaluation since funding for the
re-entry program began in FY 23.
The reentry program develops and
provides evidence-based programs
designed to reduce recidivism
and prepare offenders to
reintegrate into their
communities.
Before we dive into the
substance of our research and
findings, I want to take a
minute to thank our partners at
the corrections department who
are patient with data requests
and gracious in helping us
navigate the complexities of
this issue.
We would also like to take the
corrections officers, officials,
and especially wardens across
the state who are welcoming and
informative as we toured their
facilities and learned about the
challenges they confront every
day.
To begin with, I will discuss
the current New Mexico
recidivism rate and put it into
broader historical context, I
will also discuss, uh, the
programs and practices employed
by corrections to facilitate the
re-entry of offenders back into
New Mexico communities. I will
then discuss medication-assisted
treatment or map substance use
treatment and the 1115 Medicaid
waiver. Doctor Tolman will take
it from there discussing the
central role of data gathering
and analysis in tracking and
improving outcomes.
well as non-substance related
programming.
Recidivism, as used in this
evaluation refers to the
percentage of offenders released
from prison that returned to
prison within 3 years. This is
the most important measure of
the success of re-entry programs
and a focal point of this
evaluation.
This method of calculating
recidivism is also the most
common among states, though
notably there is variation and
no national consensus.
On page 4 of our evaluation,
which looks like this and is
under tab C in your binders.
You can see that in New Mexico,
the recidivism number was 35.9%
in FY 23, and ticked up to 39.2%
in FY 24.
If you turn with me to page 5.
Chart one, note that recidivism
had declined since FY 19 before
rising in FY 24.
This is alarming considering
that the most recent national
recidivism rate calculated by
the US Department of Justice,
using a methodology like New
Mexico's is 27%. This means the
New Mexico recidivism rate is
substantially higher than the
national rate and rising.
During this time frame, FY 19 to
FY 24, the incarcerated
population shrank, while the
corrections budget increased,
resulting in a 27.2% increase in
budget per prisoner.
If you turn to page 8, you will
see a flow chart of the pathways
through the correction system.
Uh, now, this is a little bit
busy, so, uh, bear with me. If
you start on the top left, uh,
you can see the original crime,
and we move clock clockwise
around. Moving clockwise, an
offender will be sentenced, go
through intake, risk and needs
assessment, programming during
incarceration and eventually
arrive at re-entry planning,
which starts 210 days or 7
months before a planned release
date.
The details of re-entry planning
are spelled out in the
correction department's policy.
From their offenders are either
released into community
supervision or discharged fully.
At that point, a person may
successfully reintegrate into
their communities.
Or they may recidivate by
committing a new crime or
violating the terms of their
release.
On page 9, table 3.
We show the various types of
community supervision that
individuals will be subject to
upon release. 68% of those
released will fall into one of
these categories on probation or
parole. The remainder will face
no probation or parole. Standard
parole conditions include
regular contact with the
probation parole officer, random
drug testing, abstaining from
alcohol or even entering a bar
and potentially special
conditions given the offender's
criminal history.
Further down on page 9, we
summarize previous LFC
evaluations, which found that
corrections needs more
programming, better monitoring
of programming impacts, greater
utilization of compass.
What and better substance use
treatment and capacity.
On page 10, we consider the
effect of the medical and
geriatric parole legislation
passed in 2023.
Under the new law, the
requirements for an offender to
be released, released were
loosened to release those who
because of age or health, pose
no danger to society or
themselves, thus saving the
state of the cost of
incarceration.
Chart 3, shows that in FY 24,
only 5 applicants out of 85 were
approved, just 5.9%.
The 80 rejections in FY 24 were
primarily because the
applicant's medical conditions
did not qualify them for
release.
Moving to page 11, our research
found that most recidivism is
the result of new charges or
absconding.
Well, only around 20% of
offenders returning to prison
after release do so because of
technical violations. This trend
is visualized in chart 4.
Well, House Bill 263 in 2020,
and Senate Bill 84 in 2023
attempted to define technical
violations to limit
reincarceration for violations
that fall well short of the
initial crime, neither became
law.
House Bill 263 died, and the
governor vetoed Senate Bill 84.
Nevertheless, New Mexico's FY 22
technical violation, recidivism
figure of 22% is lower than the
25% reported in 2022 as the
national average. This result is
partly due to the discretion
given to parole probation
officers when reporting minor
violations to the parole board.
Minor parole or probation
violations such as failure to
notify an officer of a change in
address or employment, or a
delinquency of less than 90 days
on court imposed.
are unlikely to become
violations that will send an
offender back to prison, unless
they are part of a wider
pattern.
Further down on page 11, we
discuss best practices in
re-entry.
The phrase often repeated.
In both in the literature and by
corrections officials is that
re-entry begins upon intake.
Intake or the admission process
into a prison includes
assessment of an offender's risk
to other offenders and prison
staff, as well as needs in terms
of medical and mental health.
Substance use treatment and
other programming. In New
Mexico, that is accomplished
partly with the compass, a
Riskin needs assessment tool.
In the best case, that
assessment helps corrections
place the offender in a facility
appropriate for their risk with
programming appropriate for
their needs.
Building toward release,
officers complete a re-entry
plan and connects the offender
with resources to help them
reintegrate into their
community.
On page 14, we begin our
discussion of the role of
substance use treatment as a
recidivism reducing tool for
corrections.
Data show that substance use is
the biggest cause of recidivism.
Corrections is proceeding with
medication-assisted treatment or
mat following 2023 legislation
and a 2024 lawsuit settlement.
Matt patients are less likely to
use illicit opioids, overdose or
have contact with the criminal
justice system. Matt is the
standard of care for opioid
disorders.
2023 Senate Bill 425 requires
corrections to provide map to
all inmates in need by the end
of FY 26.
Turning to page 16, we note that
as of FY 24, 100% of corrections
programming is evidence-based.
So while corrections programming
is built on practices supported
by rigorous national studies,
correction still needs to
collect and engage data on
outcomes, ensure programs are
implemented as intended.
And ensure adequate capacity and
participation.
Besides Matt, two substance use
programs available at many of
the state's correctional
facilities or the residential
drug abuse program or RDAPT.
And the intensive outpatient
program.
Well, these programs are
evidence-based, both showed
declines in enrollment from FY
23 to FY 24, though program
completion increased during the
same time, and you can see both
of those trends on page 17,
charts 5 and chart 6.
Given the central role of
treatment, both in prison and
for those released, we update
the implementation status of the
state's 1115 Medicaid waiver on
the bottom of page 17.
The state's new Medicaid waiver
will cover Matt and other health
services for substance abuse in
correction facilities starting
July 2025.
On page 18 in figure 3, you can
see that at present, the
healthcare authority is
developing rates, protocols,
policies, and contract language.
Uh, that, and we'll we'll submit
an implementation plan early in
2025.
Turning to page 18.
Outside of prison, corrections
provides 16 community-based
substance use treatment services
for those on supervision.
A few of those are summarized in
the blue box on the bottom of
the page.
Page 20, chart 7 shows that many
of these programs are at or near
capacity, indicating a greater
need for providers and services.
Given that a third of the
incarcerated population had a
drug or alcohol-related charge,
the current service capacity may
not meet the needs of the
individuals who are released.
Another program serving those in
in the community, geo reentry
services recovery academies
improved completion rates from
47% in FY 23 to 91% in FY 24.
Also on page 20 we note that
well-completion rates in the
recovery academies improved,
capacity declined slightly, and
the cost per participant
approximately doubled.
Table 4 shows other
community-based services with a
positive return on investment
for New Mexico, including drug
courts and inpatient or
intensive outpatient drug
treatment programs. And with
that, I will pass it on to
Doctor Tolman.
Thank you, Doctor Valdez. If you
will please turn with me to page
22.
I will discuss our next finding
that issues within the
corrections department hinder
their ability to assess inmate
needs, assigned programming, and
track outcomes.
It's important to have a
functional data management
operating system, not only for
the security needs of the
prisons, but simply to track the
needs and progress of
incarcerated individuals as they
participate in various
programming, like substance use
treatment and get ready for
re-entry.
Since 2016, the corrections
department has received $16
million to upgrade their data
systems.
However, what we found is that
the department has not fully
upgraded to their new data
system and does not track key
indicators of successful
reentry, such as employment or
access to healthcare.
So how does this affect their
operations?
Uh, the department is basically
still running two separate data
systems. The old CMIS system and
their newer Omnisystem.
So we met classification
officers whose job it is to
prepare an inmate for re-entry
who have to double enter
information into both systems.
Parole officers in the fugitive
Apprehension unit primarily work
in Omni, but often have to pull
data from the old CMIS system.
Over on page 23.
Back in 2016, the agency made
the case that replacing their
old system would help with
agency functions such as
improving the accuracy of timely
releases and reporting on the
impact of reentry programs
success at reducing recidivism.
However, 8 years later, the
corrections department is still
information poor, but working
with twice the data management
operating systems and still
calculating some functions like
good time and projected release
dates manually.
If you will please turn with me
to page 24. Next, I want to
highlight some of the trends
that we see with probation and
parole.
If you look at chart 8, you can
see that caseloads for probation
and parole officers has been
improving.
Uh, but still remain above
national benchmarks, of which
about 60 cases is ideal.
Low caseloads allow parole
officers to foster better
relationships with parolees,
provide better case management,
which can help facilitate their
reentry into the community.
A couple of things have helped
with lowering caseloads for
parole officers in recent years.
Uh, for one departmental
recruitment efforts has reduced
vacancy rates, as you can see in
chart 9.
And simply fewer individuals are
being released from prison each
year, as you can see over on
page 25 in chart 10.
The Department should aim to
continue these positive trends
of reducing caseloads for parole
officers in order to support
reentry efforts.
If you will please turn with me
to page 26.
I will discuss our next finding
that although the corrections
department provides many
evidence and research-based uh
recidivism reduction programs,
capacity participation and
impacts are still limited.
Ultimately, our goal is to
reduce recidivism.
So what can we do as a state to
help reduce recidivism rates.
My colleague, Doctor Valdez has
already spoken about substance
use treatment programs, which
are fundamental for successful
reentry.
And research also indicates that
education and vocational
training while in prison, and
connections to supportive
services upon release, such as
transitional housing and
community-based behavioral
health uh services can help
reduce recidivism.
Perchins has made concerted
efforts to administer programs
backed by evidence and research.
Uh, but our analysis indicates
mixed return on investments and
lack of information on their
program's impacts on reducing
recidivism.
First, I would like to highlight
programs administered within the
prison setting, which are
highlighted in the blue callout
box in the bottom of the page.
These can include educational
programs such as adult basic
education or post-secondary
education, reentry programming,
or behavioral health services.
On the bottom of the page, I
would like to point out that
completion rates for the
education programs and moral
recognition therapy or MRT have
steadily improved since the
corrections department began
recording in FY 21.
However, over on page 27, chart
11, highlights that there is
still likely room for
improvement on completion rates
for some programs, such as uh
with adult basic education has
62% completion rate.
However, the capacity and number
who participate in these
programs has declined, uh,
particularly for behavioral
health.
Mostly due to a lack of
qualified behavioral health
providers and teachers for these
programs.
On the bottom of the page,
education is the most popular
program for incarcerated
individuals to participate in,
but just over half of the
eligible incarcerated population
participating.
Another programs with fewer
participating, meaning that most
offenders are missing out on the
state's most effective in prison
tools for reducing recidivism.
Turning to page 28.
Unfortunately, we don't know
what we are getting for our
investments in these programs in
terms of reduced recidivism.
Since the corrections department
could provide us with program
completion or outcome data for a
representative sample of the
prison. So what type of value
are we getting from these
programs? Over on page 29, table
6 shows that while corrections
could not actually measure
impacts on recidivism, a cost
benefit analysis of these
programs indicates that we
should be getting a positive
return on investment for these
programs.
And the department should
continue to track program
expenses and report on their
impacts on recidivism.
Continually on page 29, I want
to highlight a new contract that
corrections is partnering with
Project Echo to provide pure
mentorship in hepatitis C
education.
Corrections entered a 10-year
contract with Project Echo at a
cost of 900,000 annually.
Despite not knowing the
program's impacts and outcomes
for reducing recidivism.
Given the length of the
contract, correction should
monitor these efforts and report
the program's impacts on
recidivism.
If you will turn with me to page
30.
So once someone is released from
prison, they need to find a
place to live. And this is a
significant predictor of
successful reentry.
We find that 90% of the
individuals released are
utilizing one of the
transitional housing programs
administered by the corrections
department.
LFC staff again analyzed the
program costs provided by the
corrections department,
utilizing the results first
clearinghouse and found that the
high cost of running these
programs produced a negative
return on investment, as you can
see over on page 31 and table 7.
I would like to note, however,
that even though these are
costly services, there's still
essential services for those
individuals just released from
prison. In the corrections
department should continue to
monitor and report on their
usage and impact on recidivism.
While many individuals are
utilizing transitional program,
housing programs. You were,
however, participating in
community behavioral health or
substance use treatment services
and run the risk of recidivism
if they are not taking advantage
of other services that they may
need.
On the bottom of page 31,
Corrections also works with
multiple providers to provide
community-based behavioral
health services, including anger
management, moral recognition
therapy, and cognitive
behavioral therapy.
Again, the impacts of these
services on recidivism are
unknown.
However, we did analyze program
cost information provided by
corrections, and you can see in
table 8 that all of the services
should have a positive return on
investment.
Some things to consider when
evaluating the administration of
these types of programs that are
backed by evidence and research
is, are they implemented to
fidelity and are they achieving
the intended outcomes.
If you will turn with me to page
32. What we find is that
corrections is only has only
policies that detail how to
implement 5 of the 13 programs
that they administered directly.
Without policies to specify how
to run a specific program, staff
may inadvertently not run the
programs intended.
All of these cost benefit
analyses are assuming the model
is run to fidelity.
Furthermore, we find that the
corrections department does not
collect data or track outcomes
for most of these programs. So
the corrections can monitor the
impact of these programs, they
could better determine if they
are working as expected.
Finally, I want to highlight
some issues faced by individuals
who are released from prison.
One being that someone who's
released from prison needs
proper identification and
documents so they can obtain
employment and housing, and also
discharge money to cover food,
transportation, and housing
right after release.
Uh, the corrections department
is required to assist
incarcerated individuals with
obtaining identification
documents such as driver's
license, Social Security card,
photo ID and birth certificate.
This is considered a recidivism
reducing best practice.
Certainly, corrections is
connecting more people with
identification than in the past.
However, the evidence from uh
service providers who worked
with these individuals shows
that many are still re-entering
without the documents that they
need.
For example, on the bottom of
page 32, records show that
Eagles unlimited, which provides
assistance with obtaining
housing assistance and job
placement for ex-offenders, uh,
routinely invoices to the
corrections department for
obtaining identification
documents.
Over on page 33.
Goodwill Next Steps program,
which provides reentry services
for recently released
individuals reported that 26% of
formerly incarcerated
individuals that they served did
not have the necessary
identification documents for
employment, and 44% were not
released with discharge money.
These findings underscore the
need for sustained attention to
substance use issues, healthcare
needs, and other service needs
for the recently released
population in order to
facilitate successful reentry of
formerly incarcerated
individuals into the society.
Thank you, and I will now turn
the presentation back over to
Doctor Valdez to discuss our key
recommendations.
Thank you, Doctor Tolman. Uh, so
if you'll turn with me to page
2, I will go over some of the
key recommendations.
The legislature should consider
funding the correction
department's request to set up
an opioid treatment program as a
phased-in pilot program through
the state government Results and
Opportunity or grow program fund
over a 3-year time frame.
The corrections department
should provide the legislative
Finance Committee with its
quarterly reports on mat
screening and programming as
required by the Disability
Rights New Mexico versus New
Mexico Corrections Department
legal settlement.
The corrections department
should establish appropriate
benchmarks for re-entry program
completion.
And report to the legislature a
date on which the transition
from the criminal management
information System or CMIS to
the offender management network
information or Omni will be
completed. And they should fully
complete that transition from
CMIS to Omni.
And, uh, the corrections
department should amend their
evidence-based programming
policy to require outcome
tracking at the program level.
Finally, the Department of
Finance and Administration or
DFA and the LFC staff should
lower the accountability and
Government Act target for
standard supervision probation
and parole officer caseloads
from 88 to 70.
Thank you for your attention,
uh, secretary Tafoya Lucero will
provide the agency response.
Thank you very much, John, uh,
Secretary Lucero, good to see
you. You can proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Great to be here with you, so I
first would like to thank these
gentlemen sitting next to me and
their team members, uh, they
came in to our agency around
August or sent the letter in
August and then we had our entry
meeting and we talked a lot
about the places they would go
and the types of things they
would see and uh since that
time, it's just been like a lot
of direct work with them and I
really appreciated their
patience, but their dedication
to the process and their
curiosity as.
they went through it because we
recognized that they were
looking into a lot of different
areas which can be very complex
and confusing, and as we worked
through the process together, I
felt like they were very much
engaged with our staff and uh
willing to hear the answers and
and work through trying to get
to the answers that they were
looking for. So, uh, first I
would just like to walk you
through a bit of what they did
as far as their site visits.
They visited the facility in
Hobbs, the Lee County
Correctional Facility, which is
Level 3 medium facility, the
Roswell Correctional Center in
Hagerman, uh, which is a level 2
and level 1, facility, that's
the place where we recently uh
started our, our, uh, CDL live
CDL classes, uh, then they went
to the western New Mexico
Correctional Facility and they
visited the North campus, which
is the campus that houses the
female offender population. It's
also our intake center for
females and it houses a higher
custody level of female
individuals.
Uh, then finally the last two
locations they went to were
central, uh, central, uh,
Central New Mexico Correctional
Facility, which is in Los Lunas,
and there is the location and
I'm sure you all know that has
our intake center. They have a
mental health treatment center,
uh, long term care unit, which
sort of asks asks as a hospital.
We have a geriatric unit there
and then we also house level 1
and 2,
custody males, and then finally
the penitentiary of New Mexico,
which is a multi-facility
campus, um, and the
Two of the three facilities
right now are operational. One
of them is the South facility
which currently houses the
predatory behavior management
program and uh has some of the
security threat unit groups
there, and then the level 2
facility which um is a facility
with kind of functions like a
work camp where a lot of the
inmates go out. I, I wanted to
bring this up because our
wardens were just really excited
to have people from the outside
come and visit and they and
their staff made themselves
directly available to engage.
with these folks and to answer
any questions that they have,
and we also made sure that there
were many opportunities for them
to speak with inmates, and so
they went into the living units,
they went to recreation yards.
They got to see really
everything that they wanted to
see and, and, and probably a
little bit more than what they
were intending to, uh, but they
visited classrooms. They visited
some treatment programs, and I
have the pleasure of being with
them at the Hobbs facility and
uh we all jumped on a couple of
the simulation.
machines, um, I don't remember
which of the members it was, but
uh I, I believe some of you all
had an opportunity to try out
the CDL machine, and I know that
our public information officer
tried out the welding simulator.
So it was really neat for the
inmate population and for our
staff to be able to see uh these
people from the outside coming
in, people that were responsible
not just for doing a program
evaluation of our system, but
also for uh recommending funding
for us, and they were very
pleased to host these people.
the inmate population also um
wanted to express their
gratitude for being listened to
and they really felt like they
engaged with the team and so I
felt that was an important thing
for you all to know.
They, they also had a the
opportunity to visit one of our
probation offices. They visited
Region One, District 13B, which
is located in Grants, and then
they did a ride along with our
fugitive apprehension unit. And
so in order to do that, they did
training with us and we put them
on the ballistics vests and
everything, and they actually
got to be with our staff when we
apprehended a couple of folks.
One of them was an absconder who
uh was in possession of a stolen
vehicle.
And the other person I believe
was a sex offender who had
purchased a vehicle using false
identification. And so they were
able to be right there firsthand
on this, you know, on the street
with our people doing the work
and seeing the types of things
that we do every day and they
were able to engage and see what
that engagement looks like
between our client base and our
officers. So I, um, I hope that
was a good experience for you
all. I know that our officers
expressed a lot of appreciation
for your willingness to
Be out there. It's not, it's a
thing we like to offer all the
time, but not everybody takes us
up on a ride along and so we do
appreciate that. Um,
So moving into the report. Um,
they did note in the report that
our reentry division was started
relatively recently, and you
all, of course, know that we, we
had started the recommendation
or uh process to ask for a
separate budget program code to
emphasize reentry. My intention
in doing that was to say, you
know, as you all know, I had
come from the agency. I had been
working in the agency for many
years and I had seen some
administrations.
where reentry was something that
mattered and other
administrations where it wasn't,
and we would start a bunch of
things and start doing things to
help people get out and then it
just wouldn't be important
anymore and so it was very
important to me to say let's
create a method where this will
be uh forever solidified and
that no matter what happens, no
matter who's sitting in these
seats and no matter what their
perspective is always reentry
and recidivism reduction will be
something that the agency has to
care about because that's where
they're going
to receive funding. And so what
that involved for us was taking
a lot of components of probation
and parole, which is community
offender management and
components of the adult prisons
division, which is the inmate
management and control section,
and merging those areas and
trying to figure out where they
Played a role that was directly
related to reentry, and that
definitely has had some growing
pains and we've had to figure
out a lot of logistics as we've
moved through the process, but
we finally did make that budget
program code official in FY 23
when it was approved during the,
I think it was the 2022 uh
session when it was added in
House Bill 2. And so since that
time, we've been making sure
that we're doing our performance
measures in that area and doing
everything that we can to make
sure that
The integration of adult prisons
division, probation and parole
duties have uh merged in such a
way that it truly helps the
person who's preparing to
release, um,
So
I, I believe that it's done an
excellent job and one thing I
really want to know is that
In the time since FY 2019 to
right now, FY 24, we have been
able to reduce recidivism by
10%. Um, as Doctor Valdez noted
reentry is defined differently
all over the country and just a
couple of examples of what other
states do. Um, I know that in
talking with my colleagues from
other locations, they're the
majority of states do use this
three-year benchmark, but some
states only count technical.
violators. They don't count
people who are returning with
new crimes. They don't count
absconders at all in their
re-entry numbers. I'm, I'm
sorry, the recidivism numbers.
Other states will create
institutions where a pro
violator will return to, but
they don't call it a prison. It
very much functions like a
prison, but because they don't
call it a prison, they don't
count those people as
recidivists. And so I think it's
important for you to know that
because I am part right now part
of a.
Um, a national movement to try
to identify a singular method of
how states should report
recidivism so that when we're
out there talking about these
numbers, it's apples to apples
because right now it is not.
There's a whole fruit basket
that's being reported across the
country and New Mexico does have
one of the most stringent
reporting mechanisms for
reporting recidivism in that we
count every single person who
returns to our institutions for
any length of time within a
3 year period, even if they only
come back for a few days, we
count them as recidivists, and I
think that is uh important
information for you all to know.
So we have seen a steady decline
in our recidivism rates from 19
to 23 in FY19, the recidivism
rate in New Mexico was 49.2, and
then we saw steady declines down
to 44.5, then 44.1 and 21 and
then in uh 22, 37.5.
And it was incredible in FY 23,
we saw a rate of 35.9, and it is
true that we did see an uptick
this year in FY 24 we're at
39.19, but that's still
represents an overall reduction
of 10%, even including this year
as part of those numbers.
So,
I also want to note that there
are better rates of recidivism,
as was mentioned, of course, uh,
by the gentlemen of the program
evaluators for people who
participate in programs.
Specifically, the RDAP, which is
the residential drug treatment
program, um, the IOP, which is
the intensive outpatient and
there was a lot of data that was
collected on the uh the
transitional living academies
that we have for both men and
women in the
qu er que Los Lunas area, those
rates are are are lower, we know
that. We also know that people
who choose to engage in
treatment and complete treatment
do better, not just with
recidivism, but just generally
in life they do better with
being able to hold down a job,
be able to support their
families, and we also recognize
that our capacity is not where
we would like for it to be. Um,
we, we know that nationwide
there are shortages of
behavioral health providers.
you know, health providers, and
it definitely isn't something
that doesn't affect us. It's
something that does, but we are
trying to be creative about how
we're administering these
programs. So what we've done now
and I believe that you can see
in the report they do talk about
how our rates of completion have
increased and have improved. I
do believe the quality of
services that we're providing in
RDAP and IOP are much better
than what they were in years
past, though it is true that the
capacity is less. Um,
I believe
What, what, one of the things
that we've done, and I think
it's been a big factor in
quality is that pure that peer
usage, right? So a person, and
I've said this at a lot of
different committees, a person
who's walked in the shoes and
has been through the process of
having been an addict, having
gone through treatment, having
done all of the steps and having
become a successful. Those are
the people that really
understand how to help other
people that are in that
situation, but it's also
important to note that people
have to be ready.
It's a voluntary program. It's
something that people have to
want to do. They have to be
ready to do it, and they have to
have enough time to serve to be
able to complete these programs.
So another uh factor that wasn't
considered, but I do believe it
is important for you, the
committee to know is that last
year, 20% of the people that
arrived in our facilities came
to us with less than 6 months to
their projected release date. So
that's definitely not enough
time to enroll in a program like
this and do all of the rigorous.
work that it takes, and there's
definitely a lot of people in
population who just simply
aren't ready, and they don't
want to go through the program.
They might enter the program,
stay in it for a couple of
weeks, and then say, yeah, this
isn't for me and I'm out and I'm
gonna do something different
that definitely happens and um
one of the things I know in my
response is that Samsa notes
that in general people who
arrive in rehab treatment
programs, about 50% of them
complete, and we do know that
among those 50% of completers.
We do see successful outcomes,
but there has to be more work
done in helping people recognize
that maybe they could be ready.
And I think that um there's ways
to do that. One of the ways that
we're exploring is through use
of our new tablets and I believe
everybody knows that we've
rolled out tablets in our prison
systems, which means that every
inmate has access to these, uh,
these tablets. They have various
different types of um
applications on
Applic applications on them
where they're able to
Do self-help work.
And right now we're exploring
some programs that do uh RDAP
and other treatment programs in
this uh interactive journaling
method on the tablet where you
wouldn't necessarily have to be
formally enrolled in an RA
program, but you would be able
to access the services and the
items and we're thinking about
ways that we could implement
that using more peer work and
also giving people an
opportunity to just do it on
their own. That would cover
people who come in without
enough time to serve.
And it would also cover people
who are curious, but not quite
ready. We're thinking that that
might help us get to a place
where we can encourage people to
reach that readiness place
sooner, that readiness time
sooner.
Um
So, also, another thing that was
mentioned in the report was our
educational achievements, um,
again, you might also know and
have seen the articles and the
news stories about our high
school or high school
equivalency, um.
Accomplishments, but we have for
the last 2 years been recognized
by the New Mexico Department of
Higher Education as the adult
institution with the most high
school equivalencies earned, we
beat our record the 2nd year,
and that's just our goal all the
time is to try to push forward
and make sure as many people as
possible have that high school
equiv equivalency and any other
credentials that we're able to
get them. We are also able to
integrate education services on
those tablets and we.
do believe that that will help
us provide additional study
tools for people who are in
those classes and hopefully
we're able to see higher levels
of success rates there.
Now,
Another area of major progress
is that we've moved towards and
it was mentioned 100% in the
report, uh, using evidence-based
and research-based curriculum
for all of the programs that
we're offering in our
facilities, so that would be
things like education, higher
education, technical vocational
training, and we've been able to
move fully to uh research-based
and evidence-based, which is
something that the legislative
Finance Committee has noted in
the past we were not doing
enough of.
I, I highlight that just to say
we hear you. We're listening to
you and we're taking your
suggestions and moving forward
with them to better our
populations.
Uh, I also think it's important
to let you all know that
internally collaborations
between our adult prisons
division, the corrections
industries division and our
re-entry division, they all get
together. They work on ways that
we can uh figure out how a
person can get this work, get
credentials, and be um involved
in like potential
entrepreneurship by learning
some of these technical
vocational skills and some of
the things that we've been able
to
to our facilities that
previously weren't there, uh,
were things like heavy
equipment, uh, CDL, auto
mechanics, HVAC, metal
fabrication, uh, culinary arts,
safe serve and then we've been
able to do some expansion work
as well in areas like carpentry,
woodworking, um, and welding.
And then, while these items are
not necessarily evidence-based
and they're definitely not
included in the report because
they're too small and the
funding level for these areas
doesn't rise to that 100,000
number, um, other items and
activities that we've been able
to bring in our two facility
into our facilities are things
like crochet, quilting, baking,
hobby crafts, painting, and uh
we'll be starting up actually
yesterday was the first class
that we had for fly tying and
teaching inmates uh how to do
fly.
tying in partnership with
healing America's heroes in our
Roswell Correctional Facility.
So, uh, these are all very
meaningful things and I'll bring
it up because you may have seen
the news story, but we did also
recently opened up a little
store in Santa Fe that is run by
the corrections industries
division, um, you may recall
years back when the department
used to have hobby craft fairs,
this little store sort of
functions like that. Um, so it's
called Old Gumby's Country
Store. It's
located out by the uh corrals on
Highway 14. We're opening it
once a month. We do a lot of
hype and things like that. Make
sure to get it on social media
to get the word out, but we did
have our first, our first day,
our grand opening, if you will,
on November 22nd, and we had
just so many people from the
community come in and they were
just thrilled to support, um,
all inmate-made products, some
hobby craft, some were made in
our corrections industries
shops, um, and we had a lot of
Of interest and I believe that
moving forward, it gives inmates
a really exciting thing to do
where they're doing something
inside that they get to share
with the public that they get to
tell their family members about
and then they get to put out
there and see how people react
to the work they do. It's, it
was a really beautiful um
experience that first day, and I
would hope that that you might
consider stopping by when we
have our next opening, you'll
make sure to share that
information with you.
Uh, just a couple of, a couple
of other things that are
significant and also mentioned
in the report is our reduction
in in-house parole, which is
huge and it has been very, very
significant and a lot of that
has to do with the support that
we've gotten from you, from the
legislature and from the
executive in covering the costs
of supportive housing services
and essential needs. A lot of
people who otherwise would be in
prison, uh, they have an
opportunity to get out to a
place that's safe and viable and
uh training or treatment or
whatever it is that that place
offers and without that
supportive housing services,
many of those people would
remain in prison past their um
parole eligibility date serving
their parole term while they're
incarcerated. And I do believe
that that has a lot to do with
why we've been able to cut our
IHP numbers so significantly.
Another factor that is very
significant is the technical
parole violators in that they
are no longer a significant
factor.
in who's returning to prison, as
you heard, um, the gentlemen
present before me, they talked
about how the majority of people
returning are absconders or
people that have committed new
offenses, and that's a big part
of why our fugitive apprehension
unit is so active because we're
always out there looking for
people that have warrants and
working with law enforcement
agencies and serving as part of
task forces to make sure we're
doing everything we can towards
public safety in the state.
And we are of course connecting
a whole lot more people with IDs
than we have in the past. We do
have an MVD presence in all of
our facilities now and uh I do
want to just note that we
intentionally contract with
companies or organizations
rather like Eagles Unlimited and
Goodwill, specifically for the
purpose of having them help us
with these uh IDs and things
like that, right? So they serve
a twofold purpose. One is that
they serve as a fail-safe for
people that are getting out.
who maybe didn't have enough
time to gather up all of the
documents that they needed, and
2, they held probationers, so
people who have not been to
prison but are on probation who
might need help gathering those
documents or people who've lost
those documents and so we are
part of the money that we're
spending on those organizations
involves them helping us obtain
those documents, um, for
probationers as well as for
parolees.
And then, uh, the last couple of
things I want to mention is just
Senate Bill 58 and that
inventory, uh, I believe that
this committee is familiar with
the work that we do there and
the very extensive inventory
that we put out. We are very,
very detailed, very, very
transparent in the way that we
report our programming
information and this past year
you all added a new uh
requirement to the way that we
report for SB 58 that would
include tracking of success
rates by program and it's very
much.
alignment with what the
recommendations were made by
this uh evaluation team and very
much will help us because it
will establish a standard
framework by which we can report
these things and track these
things by program level, so we
are starting to do that now. It
was a shortcoming that we
recognized throughout this
evaluation period that we didn't
have the ability to track in uh
at that that micro level, the
way that we would like to, but
we do believe moving forward, we
will be able to do that.
And then finally, I think it's
important that I address the
situation with the data systems,
and I do that in my um response.
I think it's the last couple of
paragraphs, but the, I, I wanna
just share with you what some of
the challenges have been.
So
From the very onset, from our
very first meeting, I was very,
very transparent with the
evaluation team about our
limitations and data collection,
we knew that that was a fact. We
know that we're operating in
both CMIS and in Omni in Omni,
we're operating with probation
and parole and CMIS is still
very much functional for the
adult prisons division. Now,
there's a reason that happened
is that when we first rolled out
Omni, we thought that the data
migration was going to go
through smoothly and
beautifully, and it did not. And
so what ended up
in our facilities was that they
were only to see able to see
like an incomplete picture of
what was going on with the
inmates, and it was affecting
things like how did you count
and some of these other basic
needs in a prison and so after
we had it live for a little
while, we learned that our staff
were doing so much more manual
entry and there was a lot of lag
in that a lot of the data didn't
migrate over, so at that point I
made the decision to say I need
to pull this thing back. We need
to go in and do some manual
data.
so that we can ensure the
integrity of the data systems,
uh, that was a tough decision
for sure, and I do know that it
created some double entry issues
for our staff, but since that
time we know that what we're
reporting in in the um
CMIS system is accurate and it
helps the staff that work in the
prisons do their job.
Correctly, and I believe how we
left on the active, we would
have just created so many
barriers for them that they were
spending a lot of time trying to
figure out this computer system
and not enough time with the
inmate population doing the work
that they should be doing, so
there was a patch that IT rolled
out in December. We thought that
was going to be able to bring us
live and it turns out that it
fixed some of the problems and
it didn't fix the big, big
problem, which is the
calculation of sentencing. And
so I said, well, then we can't
roll out in December.
And so our plan will be that we
roll out when that next patch
gets uh administered, which we
expect to happen in the early
part of next year, but like
maybe the 1st 3 months I'm not
100% sure on what that looks
like, but we will test it and in
if it turns out there are
continued issues, then we will
not um move forward with rolling
out until we're really 100%
ready. I want to make sure that
we're capturing everything, even
if it is annoying to do some
double entry in some areas,
because at least I know I'm
capturing everything, and when
the system is where it needs to
be, then we will roll out and we
will certainly be sure to share
that information with our
partners at the legislative
Finance Committee. And with
that, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, I'll stand for questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Secretary, thanks for being so
um thorough in explaining,
especially on the recidivism
part, that was very good that
you had all that additional
information.
to you and your staff for all
your work and um I do have a
couple of people here that would
or legislators that want to
speak, but our co-chair just
walked in, Chairman Small, and
I'm gonna pass it on to you.
Thank you, chair. Are you OK
with that? All right, so I will
continue with this now and then
take it on if you'd like after
this, OK, uh, I've got Senator
Steinborn that has some
questions or comments, and then
we've got Representative Luha.
Thank you, madam Chair
secretary.
Good afternoon and good
afternoon to all your team. And
uh thank you all for what you
do, first of all, I know it's
not easy work.
Oh, thank you.
Um, I have some questions, and I
know you, you, uh,
You know, you have a lot on your
mind, you're doing a lot, but I
just wanna ask you to kind of
give accinct answers to what I'm
saying, cause I know there's
others who want to speak and we
have other things on the agenda.
Um
First of all,
I was here during the previous
administration. We had much
higher recidivism rates. So I
want to acknowledge that they
have come down. And obviously,
some of what's going on,
something is contributing to
that.
Um, we're locking people up at a
higher rate too, so I don't know
if it's
You know, has to do with the
inmate mix or, you know, what
other variables, but has come
down. So,
Um, for whatever's contributing
to that, that's a good thing.
But I am a little concerned
about what was in this program
evaluation that you really
didn't kind of address. You, you
kind of talked about other
things and kind of spoke to some
of them.
But one of the big ones for me
was data collection, that when
they asked for data on the, on
the amount of on the specifics
of
Who had substance abuse issues.
What was the follow up when they
got out, that the data couldn't
be provided, and that, that was
reported multiple times
throughout this. The data
couldn't be provided, and I'm a
big believer.
I mean, if you're gonna get
results, you have to be
accountable. You have to be
specific. You got to get to the
root of issues and with 50% of
the people committing substance
abuse crimes with substance
abuse issues or substance abuse
may be related crimes. I don't.
No, but
So I was troubled by that we, we
don't have that level of
documentation, apparently within
your department.
And that there were not then
following that through when
they're released. So can you
Speak to that, is that the case?
And how are we correcting it?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborn. Yeah, so it's the
data collection is definitely an
issue, right? It was something
that we knew was going to be an
issue because we haven't been
tracking like on an individual
person level where we know that
a person did this thing and got
out at this time and then
whether that that thing,
whatever that was that program,
whatever whether it impacted
that individual person's, uh.
Return to the facility or not,
and that was true, uh, but when
it comes to the data requests,
and this is also something we
talked about at length with the
uh evaluation team was that we
would receive these large
requests for data, a lot of
different requests for data, and
it was sort of like their
interpretation of what they
thought they needed to answer
whatever question it was that
they were asking. And so what
happened with us, we would look
at the request and we're like, I
don't understand what they're
asking and
they want this, this and that.
Well, that's not something our,
our system can produce. I wonder
if there's a different way to do
that. Um, it was something that
we talked about at length at the
close out, in fact, because it
was something I think that was
frustrating on both of our
parts. It's frustrating for them
because they weren't getting
like this exact thing that they
were asking for, and it was
frustrating for us because we
didn't quite understand what
they were asking for. So do we
have data um about program
tracking we do, but we.
didn't have the ability to
compare it with the other items
that they were using. And one
example was that they took a
data set that we had given to
Doctor Garin when he was doing
the classification study for us
and
That was sort of used as like
the base of the, the bulk of
their data and our our items
weren't in connection with that,
so I think there was a lot of
miscommunication issues, and
while it is true that we do have
issues with tracking our
systems. We do have an awful lot
of manual tracking mechanisms in
place. Did any of the
evaluators uh wanna say speak to
to that little from your
perspective.
Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, the, there was uh
a difficulty in, in conveying
exactly what we were after, uh,
but the crux of it was that we
wanted to understand program
completion and uh uh
participation in prisons and be
able to put that against what
happens after people are
released. So those on probation
and parole or fully discharged
to be able to say something
about program participation and
recidivism. Essentially, we want
to understand which programs
were most likely to help people
be successful in integrating
into their communities. However,
as we've discussed at length,
uh, in prisons, they're using
CAMIS and outside of prisons,
they're using Omni and so there
were multiple data sets and as
the secretary said, we would
have to put together multiple
data sets in order to make that
happen and, and building the
connection between multiple data
sets, uh, was a hurdle that that
made it more difficult for us to
reach, uh,
Certain conclusions about which
programs were working the best.
And that is uh one of our, one
of our recommendations is to
collect those program outcomes
and to be able to connect them
across people's experience in
the correction system, both in
prison and on probation and
parole.
OK. You wanna speak to that?
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborg. I just wanna
reiterate like our
Procedures as evaluators when we
initially meet with and engage
with an agency. We'll send an
information request and
In our understanding of what
this is what we think will help
answer our questions, but we do
invite that open discussion and
engagement so that way we can
help understand like what data
is available. And we also make
ourselves available for any
types of questions. It's like we
want to be able to go and meet
with the data people and figure
out the data systems and then
this became a huge part of the
evaluation. So it's like,
alright, let's kind of dive
deeper into this and help
understand the issues, so
That's our formal procedures for
you, Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
I came, I, I took from your
evaluation that you had kind of
concluded that maybe they
weren't tracking them. I mean,
notwithstanding the fact that
they're maybe have multiple data
platforms.
And in fact, just as a
Organization, they were not
necessarily tracking these
individuals. I mean, can, would
you say that that's the
conclusion you came to, or that
it's inconclusive because there
were multiple data platforms.
With it being sport.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinborn. It's difficult to
tell. We weren't able to look at
what the data systems were and
so we had received a sample she
uh secretary had mentioned we
had received a sample that they
had provided to researchers at
UNM that we were
Trying to look at, well, we'll
take whatever data we can get.
Um, so there is some data there.
We don't know how a
representative, um, it is of the
greater population, our
determination is that it was a
representative of the
population, so we know that
there's some data, we don't
know.
What parts of which data system
it comes from though, but our
determination is it was a
representative.
OK.
I'm moving on, uh, medically
assisted.
Treatment. Is that, what, what
is the medicine that's provided
in medically assisted treatment.
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborn.
So right now in our pilot, we've
been using the medication, um,
the brand names Vivitrol,
naltrexone, I believe, is what
it is. It's the blocker, uh, and
that's the one that we've been
using now and I I've, I just, I,
I'm sure you know, but the
interest level uh participation
is not terribly high with that
medication for people that are
users and so when we go live
with um
With the other form of MAT, the
medication that will be
distributed is bupropion, um,
and that will happen, uh, we
believe at the very beginning of
this year when we will start to
intake people who are on the
medication from jails where
they're receiving it.
So, Mr. Cherry and Madam Chair,
if the uh if the kind of uptake
voluntary participation with
that is not high and.
How I mean.
How much of a solution, I mean,
it's important tool, obviously.
But
It's a limiting sounds like it's
got limits to its effectiveness
because people, if you're saying
people.
Mhm
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborn,
yes, certainly, I mean, it was a
a pilot we had a limited funds
and we were trying to target
people who were on their way out
the door, people who were
releasing, and we were also
concerned about the medications
and availability of services in
the community and at that time,
uh, but now I'm happy to say
that the health department has
significantly expanded their
ability to do MAT distribution
at public health offices across
the state. OK. Well,
know that
chair, Mr. Chairman, in your,
um, I read in this.
Report that, that you're
requesting a supplemental of $15
million to create a program if I
read that right.
Medically assisted treatment. So
as it grow program, so
Um, that seems interesting.
Uh, I just want to ask real
quick, two other little
questions. The, the issue of the
IDs was also kind of concerning.
This also speaks to tracking
people and just working with
people on an individual level,
what percentage of people are
getting the correct
identification when they get
out.
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborn,
some confident now that anybody
who's been in our custody long
enough for us to make sure that
they have all of the items they
need in order to have a state ID
issued if they have enough time
with us, then we are getting
them and we are being able to
issue a state real estate issue
IDs from our facilities. It did
take a little while for that to
get, uh, rolled out. And I do
believe that what the evaluation
saw and I mentioned is the
majority of the people that
we're spending those.
dollars on at Eagles and
Goodwill are probably going to
people who are on probation, who
are not people that are leaving
institutions, people leaving
institutions have a lot more uh
staff resources that are
involved with them, helping them
out with those things, and I, I
don't have a direct number, but
I do know and I'm confident that
the percentage of people
releasing with their state
issued ID is very high.
OK. And then finally, uh, the
issue of voting rights, which we
had read about and I had
personally had constituents
contact me, a year or more after
getting out of jail years more
and didn't.
Know how and the local clerk
didn't have data and there was
this issue of getting data from
corrections to the Secretary of
State. Um, so this was a
reality. And then I read about
it recently, uh, last year, it
was an issue before the election
and
So can you just briefly tell us
what the status is of your
Work with the Secretary of State
to
Of course, when someone is
released from jail, they're
eligible to vote, correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborn,
yeah, they definitely are. Any
person who is out and uh so and
we have resolved this with the
Secretary of State's office now,
but we did discover that when we
went live partially with Amy
that there was an interruption
in the computer system that used
to talk to the Secretary of
State system. And so there was
this lag, this gap of time where
we were not sending information,
but then we realized that the
information we were sending was
wasn't going to be helpful
anyway. What we would
send before was um our
population releases people who
were out, people who are on
probation and parole, and then
we realized it's more beneficial
for them to know who's inside
and so we are now transmitting
that information to them and
what we're doing is sending
them, uh, information on who's
incarcerated and it's an
automatic process now.
rated. So basically they start
from a place of taking someone
off the role who's incarcerated
or
I'm just, I know, I'm not sure
how that works with them and if
that is basically
Solve the problem. People, I
assume, do they still have to
register when they get out, or
are you registering them before
they get our given the
opportunity to register for the
get out. Um, Madam Chair and
Senator, it's my understanding
that when a person gets a
driver's license or state issued
ID that it's an automatic
registration and so because we
are issuing state IDs, whatever
that trigger mechanism is on the
MVD side. I do believe that it
does automatically register the
person.
But because they have to be out
of prison. I, I, I think that
the Secretary of State's office
wanted to make sure they were
able to provide that information
to their clerk's offices. Hm,
OK, well, I'll keep following up
on that and appreciate the
presentation there. Go ahead.
Thanks.
Thank you, Senator. Good
questions. We're gonna move on
to Representative Allison. You
had your name up and your hand
up early on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
question is on the recidivism.
Um, do you try which group of
offenders?
Have the highest percentage of
reynicism. The reason why I ask
is because I was approached by a
family to assist them if they
could get a an early release on
a family member.
And I'm just hoping that my
assistants will not be in vain.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
Matting chair and Representative
Allison. So we do track our
recidivism rates, of course, um,
but as far as an early release
application, the only
circumstance where that would be
considered would be if a person
was it met the criteria for
geriatric and terminally ill,
um, but if, if that is the
situation for your constituent,
I'd be happy to get their
information and look into it
personally.
Uh, thank you for that. My
question was,
Which group of offenders have
the highest recidivism rate.
Is it the, like let's say the
murderers, drug traffickers, sex
offenders, or do you track that?
Madam Chair and Representative,
we do track.
The recidivism rates based on
risk level. And so what we find
is that our highest risk clients
recidivate at a higher rate than
other people. It's not always
necessarily tied to the offense
because you could have someone
with a sex offense who is deemed
to be a minimum risk under
compass assessment levels. And
so we're judging people based on
their risk level and oftentimes
that has to do with the fact
that they have had multiple
convictions, multiple.
Times inside our correctional
facilities, multiple periods of
supervision on probation and
parole and had multiple
revocations or unsuccessful
discharges from previous periods
of supervision. So we are
finding that people who are in
our intensive supervision units
are higher risk units are
recidivating at a higher risk
than those, let's say on minimum
supervision, people with
one-time offenses or people who
we would deem as lower level
supervision clients.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
that. Thank you for clarifying
that. And uh thank you for the
presentation because uh
Oh, hearing some of the programs
that you have available, I can
make some recommendations to the
family that I'm helping. So
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Sure,
thank you, Representative
Garrett, and then I have
Representative Luann and
Representative Gallegos,
Representative Garcia, and then
our chair, Representative Small.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for the presentation. So, am I
correct in understanding you're
hoping during the 1st quarter,
by the end of March, you will
have completed the criminal
management Information System.
Uh, to the offender Management
Network Information. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, uh Representative
Garrett. We're hopeful, right?
So I, I was, we actually thought
we were going to be able to move
over fully this December, and
then when we tested the patch
and it didn't do all of the
things that we thought it was
going to do, we weren't able to
move forward, but that is, um,
I'm definitely hopeful that it
works this next time around.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, um,
ICOSA at New Mexico Tech started
a major project for data and it
came out of the need to share
criminal justice, sentencing.
Are you part of that at all?
That bills if you were
madam chair Representative
Garrett, I don't know that we
are. I know that we've had a lot
of conversations with uh the
administrative office of the
court and other entities like
that to make sure that our
systems can talk to each other
that we can access each other's
systems, but that one isn't
familiar.
Thank you. Um, and I'm sure, so
my next question is, there's
almost 6000 men and women in our
system based on the limitations
of systems talking to each
other.
And then, uh, the, I'm sorry, I
didn't get her name, but your
other um representative talked
about some data availability. If
I want to know things like the
numbers and percentages of
people who first committed a
crime when they were in middle
school, um.
Am I unable to get that data at
this point in any Broadway.
Madam Chair Representative
Garrett, so if they are
sentenced as adults in our
system and they're part of our
system, we can get that data.
Uh, I don't necessarily know if
I would be able to tell you that
they were first uh in trouble in
middle school and certainly not
if they were if they did
whatever it was that they did as
a juvenile because we wouldn't
have access to those, uh, those
records, right, thanks for
pointing that out. Um, and I
asked that though because they
say that up to 3
prisoners have dyslexia. So I'm
curious as you do the basic
education, are people being
tested because that's people
disengage with education often
in that 11 to 14 year old age.
But as we see reci,
can't even say it, recidicism.
You know, what are people
struggling with one of the
reasons they struggle is the
inability to, you know, read or
do math because of dyslexia. Is
there any screening that goes on
in those programs specifically
with that.
Madam Chair Representative
Garrett, absolutely, yes. So
when a when people first enter
our systems, they get a lot of
tests, uh, behavioral health
tests, medical tests, education
tests, and then if a person
already has those credentials,
we go and verify them and, and
so there's a lot of different
things that happen at the
screening time during their
reception of diagnostic period.
So we would have knowledge in
advance if a person had these
greater needs and if they did,
then it's something that we
would make sure that the
educators at the receiving
facility, no, and then when the
individual arrives at wherever
their location is, that we call
it the receiving facility, they
would get another assessment
evaluation and determine if they
needed additional tutorial
services or what whatever it was
that their need was for us to
address it in that adult basic
education class.
Thank you. My last question is,
what is the availability of
illegal drugs in prisons. How
much of a problem is that?
Do we know?
Madam Chair Representative
Garrett, we definitely know we
have inside a security threat
intelligence units and we're
doing uh.
I can't think of the word
interdiction of um people who
are trying to introduce illicit
substances and things like that,
but I will say significant
reduction in what we used to see
coming in because of the changes
that we've made in the mail
system. We do believe that the
tablets are going to further
modify that as individuals will
have the ability to do, uh, like
a form of texting and emailing
because a lot of the drugs that
were coming in were coming in
through the mail, and there's
just so many creative
And, and, and amazingly
inventive ways that people do
that, but you know they could be
taping things to the inside of
envelopes and uh just lots of
different methods, uh, legal
mail was one of the issues
people would go and get like
letterhead from a lawyer's
office and put it on a big
packet and then there's certain
specific rules involved when you
open legal mail, you have to do
it in front of the person and
they're often these very big
files and folders, but with the
tablets now, the attorney
be able to communicate with the
client with encrypted messaging
and there will be virtually no
need for that physical packet to
come in any longer, so it
certainly is present. There's
definitely ways that people can
get it in from throwing it over
the fence to turning staff, um,
lots of different creative
methods out there, but it
certainly is reducing.
Oh, thank you and just thank you
to the entire
employees that work for our
corrections department. Thank
you.
OK, thank you very much. Again,
Representative Lujan, you're
next.
Thank you, man. Uh,
Thank you, Secretary, and, and
all your stuff uh in our staff
doing all this work, this is a
lot of information.
Um
So as we're looking at and
tracking and updating.
Our technology in our systems,
is there, is there, uh, a date
that you have set internally
that you're gonna report and
maybe have some of these uh.
These modifications, uh, that
we're asking for, you know, uh.
Moving into the systems, new
systems, and then completing
that. Do you have uh some
internal dates that you can
share with us that we can expect
to hear back from you, you.
Madam Chair, and Representative
Lujan. So we've actually done a
lot of different internal things
as the process has moved along,
so like I mentioned the issue
with the initial data migration
where we pulled back and said,
OK, we can't go fully live. What
we did then was we went to our
OMS, which is our our offender
management services office and
our leader over there um is
Justlyn Eaton and her team got
together and figured out how to
do manual data entry into Omni
entering.
sentence information, sentence
length and details about
people's judgment and sentences,
so that took a big chunk of
time, but that was one of the
internal deadlines that we set
her team, they got it done early
and then we also, while that's
happening, we're working with
the IT people to figure out a
patch that would correct the
issues and, and we really
thought we were going to go live
December, so that would have
been my internal deadline. I
would have said we will be going
live on December 5th and then
the patch didn't do what we
thought it was going to.
And so, uh, the next internal
deadline, I don't have the exact
date with me, but I do believe
it's at the very end of March.
Thank you for that. I think we
wanted to hear that. We, we, we
do need to know that, um, that
piece of of this information and
I guess with um looking at the
residential drug abuse programs
and and and other programs. What
would you say, um.
How can they be improved and,
you know, basically, why aren't
they, these programs living up
to their potential or what can
we do to, to help you to get
them to that, that full
potential, I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative
Wuhan, um, so what I think is
that we're going to have to
pivot because as I mentioned
earlier, there's a big
nationwide shortage of
behavioral health, mental health
providers all across the
country, right? If I had a whole
bunch of those providers, it
would be awesome. I'd be able to
expand. I'd be able to offer
these services to more people
and so what our staff are doing
right now is researching with
the creators of RAP and the
people who initialized it and
we're looking to see what other
states did because I'm thinking
that the most.
ful pivot could be in the form
of pure, uh, peer led groups. I
don't know yet if that's
something that's possible with
this particular curriculum, but
even if it isn't possible with
this curriculum, then maybe that
means that we move towards
another um substance use
disorder, uh, platform, program,
whatever they're called, and uh
it can be something that's more
pure delivered, and I think
that's really what it comes down
to. I mean, I have an awful lot
of people who are incarcerated.
who want to help part of um
recovery is service and part of
that service could be to serve
as mentors and helping the next
group of people, uh, get off of,
of, of the substance use and I
do believe that whether it's
through our app or another
method, we will be able to find
something that will work.
Even, uh, you know, human
resource limitations aside.
Thank you for that information.
I, I think that's, there's a
problem solving that we're
really trying to to figure out,
but uh as I'm looking at table
52 on page, you know, 23.
Um, we're looking at these
different fiscal years.
And
so just for clarification, maybe
this is LC question that
reversion that $10 million
reversion, 10.8, is that
That's a cumulative.
Some or what, can you, can you
just clarify some of this
because we're looking at many
fiscal years, is this, you know,
when, you know, what is going on
with that chart?
Mr. Chair or Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
you're referring to table 5 on
page 23.
Uh, yeah, so the reversion is
only $10,000. It's not $10
million and it is, uh, it is
cumulative.
And so for this fiscal year,
Um
In relationship to this, what,
what is
The secretary, where are you um
asking for for our special.
May I interrupt for just a
second? I representative, uh,
let me just ask to have brief
responses and brief questions
only because I have 2 more on
the list, and then we also are
already.
What, 10 minutes or so over, so
we want to make sure everyone
gets. Thank you, Representative
Lujan, and go ahead and proceed.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, I'm sorry, was the
question, what are we asking for
with respect to
This the process,
so it's done in a separate
place, right, the C2 process is
where IT money is asked for and
I'd have to bring up my
information technology lead to
talk about that if you're
interested. I think we can talk
about that. What I'm trying to
assess you is like there's gonna
be a, there's been a lot of asks
for the IT and programming uh
moneys and I'm just looking over
the report and so when we're uh
when you have to go to manual,
you know, implementing of
information stuff, there's risk
in that, and so I just wanted to
know.
you know, further that
discussion and how we can better
do these things and what's
missing from, um, what uh, what
your needs are in your agency so
that you're not running into
having to manually implement
information, therefore reducing
any kind of risk that we were
reading about in the report, and
I'm sure that's that's what I'm
getting at, but if it's an IT,
and that's what I'm getting back
to the IT ask where we're going
to see that, but we can have
that offline and, and uh so we
can get to other uh folks asking
their questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Gallegos, and
then Representative Garcia and
then our chair Smo. Thank you.
The manager,
uh, secret, I, I just wanted to
Couple of things. First off, uh,
tell you, I had a friend that
did the choir at the P&M.
Of the other night, and they're
very pleased with the inmates.
I actually have been into the
lake counting facility,
voluntarily.
And just wanted to give some
credit to them. They, uh,
perhaps that for humanities, it,
it goes back to your different
projects you guys do the
trainings, they build the
building.
And then they take him out of
the facility, and they erect
them uh on areas and it's just
pinpoints. A goes into B, B and
C, C and D, and you have a
house. So, um, my question for
you is I actually hire, we do
construction, I've got probably
2 of
Inmates would have come out
through Opportunity House, only
2 have gone back or misdeeds,
uh, but I was gonna ask on your
specifics you talked about CDL
woodworking, welding, uh, I
actually have one of the one
gentleman that went back as CDL
I currently have a welder. I've
got quite a few, but my question
is, are those classes in
separate areas or are they in
all the facilities.
I thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator Gallegos,
we unfortunately do not have all
of the programs in all of the
locations, uh, but where I do
have CDL in Roswell's relatively
new. We also have it in Hobbs
and we have those sI machines in
Las Cruces as well. Um, I do
have welding in those 3
locations also, but not
necessarily live like in Hobbs,
it's a sim, um, but in Roswell
it's real, it's live welding,
and it is in Cres as well, but I
don't have it at every facility.
And Mountain chair and this will
be my last question is
It sounds like all your
opportunities for them. It's
odd. We, we, they come to us at
Ramirez and Sons through the
opportunity house facility in
Hobbs, but
It looks like your opportunities
for him is all voluntary, is
that right?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gallegos uh voluntary on the
part of the inmate. Yes, they,
uh, they will need to enroll and
they'd have to meet certain
criteria in order to enroll in
certain uh vo and you have to
have the basic uh 8 adult
credential high school
education.
Mer, I promise I'll finish with
this sort of goes back to the
discussion of, you have peer
led.
They really interest and get
some peers back into the system
to explain to him the value of
having this opportunity when you
get out.
We pay our employees well.
And even though they're in jail
or prison for whatever reasons,
we give them the opportunity to
get out on their own. They will
do what's right, but I, I like
what you guys are doing in that
realm, because it's giving us an
opportunity to have employees or
good at what they do.
of learning and pretty good
environment. So with that, I
promise I yield.
All right. Thank you for that.
we have, did you expecting a
response, Senator, at this
point? OK, thank you. Madam
Chair and Senator Gallegos,
actually, yeah, great idea and
something that we're we're doing
already, uh, in fact, that's
part of what I'm talking about
with the pure mentorship. It's
not just people that are inside
teaching and mentoring each
other. It's also people that
have left done well, come back
and then help us with certain
things, but if you would like to
talk offline about getting some
of the folks that were working
for you to go back and do like
motivational talks.
That would be awesome. We're
also highlighting on our
website, uh, success stories of,
of people who are doing well
outside, so please check that
out.
All right. Thank you very much,
Representative Garcia, thank you
for your patience. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Good to see you
again. The first question I'm
gonna ask you is the one I ask
all the time.
What, what is a vacancy rate in
Western that both the prisons.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Garcia, that's in
my uh budget folder for my next
presentation, but I do, I do
have that information. You just
give me
one, if you want, we could ask
question next time around.
That'd be fine, uh, next source
I got, uh, Madam Chair.
Secretary, you said that the two
gentlemen, the two doctors
visited Western, the women's
facility. Why not the men's
facility also if they were there
in the same area.
Or, or did you?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, we did tour it. It was
earlier in March, I think when
everyone toured it or I think
May maybe.
But we did
We
OK. Thank you. I, I have one
last question, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I know you're having
problems with drugs and all the
prisons, OK?
Uh, how are you going to address
you, you see they're mailing it
whatever.
Yeah, you have a problem with
people dropping drugs with
drones in your facilities.
And how do you address that
problem?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, we definitely monitor
the drones, right, like a lot of
our facilities have uh towers in
all of our facilities have
vehicle patrols, so we're
looking for that drones haven't
necessarily been a very big
problem, but the way that we're
working with that is via our
security threat intelligence
unit, you know, they'll get
information, they'll know
something's happening, and then
we do a lot of partnership with
local law enforcement entities.
And the reason Madam Crey asked
that because of the facility and
in Milan, the federal facility,
they're having problems with
that.
Would, uh, people dropping drugs
and drones, and you know, the,
the problem with that is you
can't see them.
If, you know, if they're up 2 to
300 ft, you can't see them. They
can drop it right in whatever
they want. That's just a
question, uh, just a thought you
might wanna look into in the
future because that is a
problem, you know, technology is
so advanced anymore that
Anyway, that's all I have and
I'll ask you that question next
time around. Thank you, madam
chair. Sure, thank you,
Representative Representative in
our chair is small. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam, uh, thank you
all. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Uh first, on the, um, compliance
with the inmate literacy Act.
Can you give us a quick snapshot
of that, please, and for our
analysts as well, if there's
anything to add on that.
Or for the evaluators, excuse
me.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Small. I don't know that that's
something that they looked at
separately, but people who
qualify for admit the inmate
literacy Act or people that have
uh less than 10 years and more
than 18 months to projected
release. Those are definitely
the people that we prioritize
for adult basic education, uh,
people who meet that criteria
and who do not already have some
sort of high school criteria are
the ones that are placed into
those classes first, um, and
that's the reason that we have
that other percentage of people.
that are not in ADE. It's
because they're not.
I mean, ILP individuals are
prioritized above those ones and
if these gentlemen want to
answer, I'll, move the mic over.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Small, the, uh,
we did look at the results of
adult basic basic education,
which would have included people
who get funneled into uh into uh
to address their literacy
issues. Um, but we were more
concerned with the way that
adult basic education affected
recidivism, and so we were less
interested in uh the the effects
on, on actual literacy among
among the population, but we
didn't know, uh, the kind of
popularity.
and completion rates of adult
basic education.
Got it. OK, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, and um
Evaluators, uh.
Is there, yeah, I, I guess we
can, if there are additional
questions to sort of sort
through and understand, um,
numbers wise, how many folks
that that's impacting, uh, can
we follow up with you about
that, Madam Secretary?
Madam Chair Representative
Small, of course, absolutely.
OK. Uh, last thing, madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, the medication
assisted treatment, um,
It's a challenging balance, I
can imagine, because so much of
what corrections officers do. We
just heard is a lot of it is
keeping drugs out of facilities.
Is that fair to say?
Madam Chair Representative
Small, yes. Yeah, and so I can
understand the, the challenge
and the balance there, but
madam, uh, Chair, Madam
Secretary, what we're told and
we're with this committee has
been told a number of times,
including recently at the
University of New Mexico.
Particularly for some of the um,
you know, uh opioid abuses, uh,
in folks who are opioid use
dependent, medication-assisted
treatment is sort of one of the
few paths out of that.
And certainly it's the evidence
base, one of the core
evidence-based has out of that
dependence.
How do, and you know, it does
not, I guess.
The 47 folks that you noted here
that were, um, did they all
receive medication-assisted
treatment?
Um, Madam Chair, representative
is small, I'd have to go back
and look at that, but I.
I'm not sure you're talking
about them in their report.
Yeah, I guess a number, a number
better question is just how many
folks are receiving
medication-assisted treatment.
How many folks are eligible for
that? My strong sense uh is
getting nowledging some of the
challenges is that there are few
to very, very few, perhaps a
handful of folks who are
receiving medication assisted
treatment.
I suppose that there are a lot
of folks who would be eligible
and would benefit from receiving
that treatment.
Madam Chair Representative
Small, I would agree with you
very much that there's a very,
very small amount, a handful, if
you will, of people who are
receiving it now. Um, I will say
that this is something we've
talked about a lot, right with
the county jails and uh the
University of New Mexico and all
of the various proponents as we
were moving through with uh
Senate Bill 425, and what it
really was looking like for us
was it made a lot of sense if a
person was being arrested, going
to a jail and being placed.
On medication assisted
treatment, it made less sense at
the time when we were discussing
it for a person who was going
into the prison system to be
placed on that medication only
because they the presumption
that they would have been
stabilized at the jail because
it takes a long time for a
person to actually reach the
state prison system, right? They
have to go through adjudication
in the jail and so when they're
coming off of their active
addiction, they're immediately
placed into a jail and so there
was a
a lot of um
Discussion around that, and at
the end of the day when SB 2425
went through the jails weren't
even included in it, and it was
just the state correction
system. And so what will first
be doing is only interacting
with and providing treatment to
the people who need the
continuing medication, so
somebody leaving a jail who's on
the service or coming directly
to us who's on it, they will be
able to receive it now in the
form of different medications
and uh I do believe that as that
starts
happen we'll be able to serve
more people and have a better
idea of what that looks like.
It's something I'll talk about
in the next presentation, uh,
because we are asking for girl
money for that.
OK. Um,
And anything from the analyst?
If not, that's OK. Uh the, it'll
be good to go into that as we
move forward, a snapshot of how
many folks we think would
benefit from that because if
there is a great deal of demand
for illegal opioids.
It seems like in the sense, at
least in part, a great deal of
that demand or some of that
demand perhaps a lot of that
demand is by folks who are uh
unable to receive treatment, who
would benefit from treatment
where it would be safer if they
do receive treatment, that's not
an easy situation for you, Madam
Secretary, but it's one of the
things that we're being told
again and again as a legislature
and as a committee that is the
few ways to sort of address this
Growing opioid use dependence.
So,
Um, OK. And, and nothing from
the analysts?
For the evaluators and sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative small,
uh, we would also note that very
few people actually received uh
medication out of that, that
first group, um, but we would
also be interested in like the
potential for how many would,
uh, eventually receive
treatment, but we have heard the
same thing that this is uh the
uh the best practice for
treating opioid disorder. Got
it. OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
thank you to staff and our
secretary for the sake of time,
I think I'm going to forego most
of my questions, but just one
quick one here and maybe a short
comment, um, is the first, I
just um wrote some or scribbled
some notes here as we were
listening about this pilot
project secretary that you spoke
about earlier, and I didn't
write the name of the project,
but it was a pilot project and I
didn't get the number of um how
many were actually in this pilot
project.
that you talked about, uh, and I
don't recall the name. Do you
remember which one it was, cause
there's been so much said here
and it was early on, uh, and I
had two question marks like I
really wanted to know, and I
couldn't, I didn't write the
name of the program or the
project.
And if not, it's OK. I'll go
through it. And Madam Chair, uh,
pilot project, I'm not sure a
lot of our technical vocational
programs are sort of small like
that, so maybe it was one of
those, but I will go back and
look and get back to you. No
worries, yeah, that's good. I
should have been more explicit
in my notes, but I wasn't. So
thank you for that and just a
final comment here for the sake
of time is, you know, the
presentation here today just um
truly highlights the need for
more.
Um, and more and adequate um
comprehensive treatment
programs, behavioral health,
substance abuse, um, management
programs that are comprehensive
and holistic in nature, you
know, where we can piece
together um in one place,
wouldn't it be great to have one
stop shop where we can have an
inmate or a person who it
doesn't have to be an inmate or
released person uh from prison,
but just anyone who can come and
and know that they have one.
place to go to get
rehabilitation, behavioral
health services, system support,
um, housing, transitional
housing case management support
for a job for later, um, have
family interventions, whatever
it may be that's necessary, it
would be so good to have it all
just all in one, but um in here
I'm happy that the staff
recommended um an opio more of
an opioid treatment program.
Thank you for that, amongst
other things to our staff, you
recommended and and that and
tracking the outcomes.
Of these programs at a program
level becomes more and more uh
imperative as we continue to
listen to to more information,
so thank you for that and um uh
I.
I, I'm a little bit, um, I, I
guess not too clear, but I'm
gonna follow up with you if I
can, secretary, on the issue of
the inmates that are returning
back, the recidivism rate that
we spoke about at because the
information we received here
says the 40 to 50% um return
back to prison after they have
been released. That's a huge
number. That's almost fit well
even at 40's huge, but when I
heard 40 to 50, that's half of
the of the inmates that
return back, but I think your
presentation made some different
um they gave us some different
information that um you know, we
can look at together, but I just
wanted to to highlight that and
then another thing is that I
noticed that there were
13.5,000.
Uh, people, um, former inmates,
I guess, do you call them
inmates once they have been
released or in parole, or are
they on parole and probation,
um, it says here that um in the
you supervise your, your
probation and and parole
division that you have
supervises an additional
13.5,000 offenders, so it's in
addition to the 5,864. I, I get
it. So it's bigger than that,
than the the population that you
serve. Madam Chair, yes.
Uh, but it's not parolees, it's
probationers and parolees,
right? So many of those people,
in fact, the vast majority of
those people have not been to
prison. I see. OK, I get it. So
thank you for explaining that.
Now these numbers make sense. So
thanks again and um I don't have
any other questions and no one
else on the list to appreciate
all your work. You have a very
serious and hard job. Thank you
for doing it and to our staff.
Thank you. We're gonna move on
because of time, so let's go.
and I don't think we'll let you
go, secretary, cuz I think
you're letting you're next on
the list, right? You've got, um,
we've got the corrections
department, uh agency number 770
for the audience and um and
members here and um secretary to
Foya Trujillo again on the hot
seat. So thank you and let's see
who our staff, um, is going to
be on this one.
OK. No one? OK, we're just
Let's see who's going to sit
with us here in the
In the uh presentation table.
That's fine. All right.
That's OK, that's fine.
So let's see, Scott, are you
gonna be here with us or no, OK,
OK, fine. So Secretary to Foya
will have you on first. Thank
you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
All right, I've been sitting
here for a long time, but I'm
gonna go ahead and say,
introduce myself. I'm Alicia Deo
Lucero. I am the secretary of
the corrections department, and
I'm here with uh Mr. Ed Smith,
who is our director of the
administrative Services division
and uh he is a um financial guru
of sorts. So, uh, we're here
today to just uh talk with you
about our, our, uh.
Request
For FY 2026. I have a very, very
short PowerPoint presentation
that I will go through and uh as
you all.
might have questions, I'll give
you a, a lot of time for that
and recognizing that we went way
over. I will be brief.
OK. So on slide number one and
all I'm really trying to show
here what you can see is that
What I'm showing is that the
state overall, the state overall
over the last 4 years has seen
these big uh increases and big
budget increases for some
agencies in our agency, we've
seen overall a 1.4% increase if
you include the legislative
compensation packages. If you do
not include those legislative
package increases then in a
total of 5 years, what you'll
see for our department is a
4.4%.
decrease. Um, I also want to
just note that population in our
prison had been dropping very,
very steadily over the past
several years and we've started
to see now a slow uptick in in
in an increase in the population
numbers today's population is
5,621. Um,
And I just think it's important
to note, I've said this a lot.
I might be a broken record on
this subject, but fewer inmates
does not necessarily equal fewer
costs. Sure, fewer costs in
terms of who I'm providing
medical services to or paying
for food wise, but it doesn't
mean fewer staff. It doesn't
mean that I'm not having to
maintain operational facilities
and so, uh, the savings is not
terribly significant and then
that, of course, uh, given the
inflation rates over the last
few years. On slide 2, what
we're looking, this is our ask
overall.
Uh, for all areas, what we're
looking for is a 6% increase,
and I want to just note that it
is a very modest request given
the numbers that I just talked
about on the slide prior, um, as
I mentioned before in our other
presentation, we're also seeking
grow money, uh grow fund in the
area of Medicaid assisted
treatment, that would be
received over a 3-year period,
um, what, what, what the issue
is, is that right?
Now we just don't know what that
participant base or number will
look like. We know that we will
be receiving people coming to us
from jails and so we can
certainly talk with MDC and some
of the other jails that provide
math right now, but there are
individuals in their population
that they have not placed on
that or that they've titrated
off of that in order to prepare
them to come to our facilities
and so we do expect that that
number will be higher, but.
We really just don't know what
we ultimately will need to
administer the program and in
the onset we'll be taking
intakes, but as we move forward,
we will need to require, I'm
sorry, not required but offer,
um, Medicaid assisted services
to individuals that are in
population, not just people that
are arriving to our facilities
from uh jails.
Uh, the next slide.
You see the uh reentry program
request and in that area we're
asking for a 12.7, 0 wait, did I
skip this slide? I think I did.
Yes, I did.
Um
Yeah, slide number 4, sorry
about that. That is our inmate
management and control, uh,
section program budget code and
in that area we're asking for
6.7%, uh, just very quick some
of the items that are in this
request is going to include uh
the shortfall that we project
for salaries and benefits in
iMac and just to be clear, and
I'm sure that this committee is
already aware, but we did ask
for a supplemental in that
amount for that.
as well to supplement our budget
this year.
Uh, we're also anticipating a
rate increase in GSD, uh, the
medical and behavioral health
contract we uh recently
completed and entered into a new
medical uh behavioral health
services contract, and that will
be the amount of the increase,
uh, in that next line per diem
increases in facility rent, uh,
what that is is a per diem
increases for the Otero County
prison facility and for the Lee.
Correctional Facility, and then,
uh, the leases that we currently
hold with the Guadalupe County
and Cibola County.
Um, the final item in this area
of the request is for utilities
and things like meals, so we
know there's a built-in increase
that happens with our contract
provider for inmate meal
services, so there's a built in
there utilities. This is an
estimate because we don't
exactly know how much those
utility rates will go up, but we
definitely know that they will,
um, as they have for us in our
homes and in our lives, and we
continue to see those increases
taking
place. So, uh, the next slide,
slide uh 5 is going to show you
the request and the reentry
program, and that is that 12.7%
that I mentioned briefly and
with that covers is the
transitional living contracting
increases so that we can provide
some of those uh basic necessity
services for uh populations that
we just talked about in our
presentation prior to this one,
and uh we're asking for
um additional million dollars to
support Project Echo's peer
mentorship, um, program in the
community referred to as CPE,
the community, uh, peer
education project.
And then on the final slide,
we're covering the rest of the
program codes, um, you'll see
that in P 5:30, which is our
program support area. We're
asking for an additional
$200,000 to fund instructor
training, uh, recruitment, and
what this will also do is enable
us to provide more
scenario-based training
simulation trainings and things
of that nature so that we can
focus on things like
de-escalation, communication for
our.
ion al officers and our
probation and parole officers as
they're getting that training at
the onset, and then what you see
is that in P533 and P534, we are
not asking for any increase, uh,
just of a flap across from what
we had the year prior and Madam
Chair, with that myself and
Director Smith will stand for
questions.
Thank you very much, Secretary,
uh, and we've got Sed Campos and
then Representative Garcia on
the list, Senator, thank you
very much, Madam Chair. Just,
uh, a few questions and I would
like to go and start with the uh
Guadalupe County Correctional
Facility in terms of, has there
been any consideration to
purchase that facility.
And I'll start with that and
then from there I'm gonna go
ahead and elaborate a little bit
more into some of the programs
that I hope we can continue to
uh to uh in, you might say
increase if you will within that
facility.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Campos at this time we have not
had purchased conversations with
the Geo group about that
location.
So in terms of that, Madam
Chair, and of course, Madam
Secretary, I know that we have
started those years back, but
you're indicating right now, uh,
there hasn't been the interest
to continue with those type of
conversations.
A Madame Chair, Senator Campos,
and not necessarily, I wouldn't
say that there's not any
interest. I'm just saying that
at this time we haven't engaged
GeO on that conversation. OK,
Madam Chair, and of course,
Madam Secretary in terms of one
of the uh the programs and I've
had this discussion with uh not
only the warden, but others
within the department, and, and
that evolves around possibly uh
what I call a new day facility
where within the facility
itself that we can have the full
spectrum of programs from
education, health care, and
preparing, if you will, uh, the
inmate to, uh, if you will, come
back out into, uh, not
necessarily the community from
where they came from, but a
community where they and their
family can have a new start.
And uh in, and within that, I
know that as I've listened to
some of the other information
you've provided, that definitely
is there, and I really
appreciate the work that you're
doing throughout the, the entire
system.
Uh, but specific to this
facility because I believe we're
maybe at the 50 percentile in
terms of occupancy, and I could
be mistaken in terms of that,
but I really want to ensure that
within all of our facilities
that
People understand that we're
helping people get back out into
society with a 39%, if you will,
uh, recidivism rate, it, it, it,
it, it still doesn't sit well
with me as we continue to see
people ending up back in these
facilities. We want them to be
out. We want them to be, uh,
constructive members of society.
We want to see their families
continue to grow and to be very
proud, if you will, as a family,
uh, so that they're able to
Continue, so if you can help me
a little bit with what some of
the future plans for that
particular facility would be,
and if there hasn't been uh much
thought put in beyond what it's
currently serving, um, I'd like
to meet with you offline so we
can talk a little bit more about
that, but if you could please
help me with maybe a response.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator Campos,
certainly, so, uh, you're
correct in that, uh, have the
facility is being utilized, the
other half is not, uh, that has
largely to do with uh the
vacancy rate there and for me
what it really comes down to is,
well, two options. One, we're
able to increase the staffing at
a greater level, because if
we're able to do that, then that
means that we're able to use
more of the building, right? I
have to keep the numbers low
now.
In order to keep the institution
safe for the staff and the
inmates that live there. We do
focus that location right now
though on um PVs, so, uh, it's a
really concentrated, very
specific type of population and
they all get similar services
there, but I would be really
excited to talk with you offline
about the possibility of using
perhaps the other side of the
building in a different way. I
mean, it sounds like maybe what
you're talking about might be
some kind of a transitional
living environment.
Which of course wouldn't require
the same type of staff levels as
it would to operate a
correctional institution and so
um I'll, I'll schedule with you
after this hearing and make sure
we get a chance to talk in more
depth. Yeah, thank you very
much, Madam Chair, and of
course, Madam Secretary, so it
leads to the overall issue in
terms of our uh uh inmate
population throughout the state,
and it seems like with that
uptick, even though it's slow
now, it could be
increasing over the next several
years, so maybe you can help to
speak to that a little bit more
in terms of how you're meeting
number one, the um compensation
salary increases for uh those
that are working at the
facilities. Secondly, what you
see as the current vision for
the possibility of more inmates
being housed within our
facilities and then thirdly, as
we move forward with the
resources that you're talking
about and
If you will, the programmatic
pieces, do you see a definite
need for increasing uh those
resources to um to serve, if you
will, our inmates.
Madam Chair, Senator Campos.
I
So, um, I mean, you, you see,
right, I'm looking for
additional funding to do uh more
recruitment efforts, and I,
we've made a lot of progress in
that area and I'm sure you've
seen it, right? I mean, our
warden is out there, he's on the
radio, he's at community events
and we're doing everything we
can, not just in that community,
um, but everywhere to bring up
our rates and we really are
doing so much better in our, in
our rates of uh
Um, the staff, staffing in the
majority of our facilities.
Santa Rosa remains a a location
that's, that's difficult to
staff and has been. And as you
know, we, uh, went ahead and put
that housing there, uh, to see
if we could bring people in and
we're always looking to do that
whenever we're recruiting in one
location, we're seeing if we can
get people to be in our more
difficult locations, um, before,
first, right?
And as far as the next item, do
I see the uptick increasing or
continuing to go, I would
imagine so because I've
definitely seen more arrests and
things of that nature, and we
know that we need to be prepared
for a growing population, which
is why we're continuing to uh
try to staff and be uh able to
fill up our facilities better
and as far as the uh
programming, do we need more of
it? We, we definitely do. We
always need more of it, and that
comes in the forms of resources.
Uh, for bringing more staff on
board and being able to expand
the size of the program. So
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary, I
would just leave with this,
that, uh, that definitely is
gonna be something that we all
need to take a look at. I don't
know if it's gonna be programs
through higher ed, through our
universities or community
colleges, or as you go forward
if it's going to be something
that you would deal with
directly for certifications and
uh things that are going to be
very specific to our
correctional program, but again,
I thank you. I thank your staff
and the work that you all
continue to do, it definitely
has been an ebb and flow, ups
and downs over the last several
decades, but again, I believe
that we're gonna have to prepare
for that up. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you for your
questions and your comments.
Um, and of course, our
secretary, you know, I've got
Representative Garcia next
links and, of course, tear small
now and anyone else, I think
we're, that's it, 2 more,
Senator Representative, you're
first.
Uh, thank you, madam chair, uh,
secretary, the question was why
or what is a vacancy rate and uh
Western.
Madam Chair Representative
Garcia at Western right now it's
16.1.
OK, yeah, thank you for that.
You know, cause a couple of
years ago, there was a lot of
issues of uh quality of life,
not for the inmates.
Not only for the inmates but for
the staff.
In that you have to improve, I,
I'm not hearing too much about
it right now, so that's good,
uh, Madam Chair, the next
question I have is uh on your
vacancy rate, it says it's gonna
be 34.8% in 2024.
Are those splendid vacancies.
But I'm looking at this chart
right here.
Right at the bottom it says
34.8%.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, I don't know what that
document is, but I don't. Those
are not my numbers I show a
vacancy rate and facilities at
25.9 right now.
This is around the
the binder, uh.
So 7 770.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia. That's from an LLC
document they create for you,
but right now we're at a 25.7%
vacancy rate. Uh, we have 622
vacancies and in the budget we
have about funding to fill about
130 of those, so we do have
several 100 unfunded, but we do,
we're constantly recruiting and
hiring. We typically have 30,
40, 50 positions at a time
posted. OK, madam chair on um
the secretary, but on the, on
the vacancy you do.
that you do have, are they
funded vacancies and if they
are, where's the money going to
that you're not using for these
vacancies.
So right now, uh,
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Garcia. So it's sitting in the
budget there we have them
budgeted to fund so that as we
hire them, they are covered.
For a portion. I'm like I said
we have 632 vacancies and budget
for approximately 130.
No, thank you, Madam Chair. We
we need to speak offline you can
explain it to me a little bit
better cause I'm having a hard
time understanding you have all
that money sitting there for
vacancies, and these vacancies
have not been here from this
year, they've been there for
quite a while now, and they're
funded vacancies, and my
question is, where's that money
going to a sits there and sits
there that you're not hiring
people yet. That's the question.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia. So I want to be clear
that we do hire people as
anybody wants to work with us,
we hire them. Uh, we hire them
even when we don't have enough
positions at a given facility
because we know that we'll see
that ebb and flow with
attrition, right? Um, as far as
any like what you're referring
to is extra money, I wouldn't
call it that because as you
know, in a prison we don't just
leave positions unfilled. And so
that means that any of those
positions that are unfilled that
are important, mandatory.
to the operation that those
positions are filled with
overtime. And so we do still
fill the positions, which means
there's not just money sitting
there, uh, but we always are,
um, out there doing everything
that we can to recruit. Uh, we
do a lot of aggressive
recruitment across the state.
Madam Chair secretary, maybe I,
maybe I addressed it a little
bit on the wrong side. I'm not
saying that you're not trying to
hire. It's just hard to hire
people, period, because people
don't want to work anymore. And
uh that's, that's why I should
rephrase it that way and my
concern was
The money that's sitting there
using it for overtime, right?
Like, is that right?
But what you're using it for
overtime, that's really putting
a damper on the guards cause
they're always there. That's
the, that's the problem here.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Garcia. So we fill the positions
that we have to fill, right,
like the mandatory positions
that are necessary for the
safety of the operation of the
facility. There's a lot of other
facility positions that are
non-mandatory so they don't get
filled or they don't get filled
for the same length of time as a
mandatory position. Um, and I
would say that.
Uh, rate of 16% just looking at
grants specifically doesn't
necessarily lead to painful
levels of overtime. And in fact,
a lot of cases and I would see
in the majority of facilities
there are people volunteering to
do overtime and so there's in
all situations we're not just
mandating or making it mandatory
for people to stay, but rather
people are choosing to volunteer
on their days off.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and
you mentioned this right now,
you feel the most important
positions. What are most
important in the prison system.
I thought all positions were
important in the in the system.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Garcia, they are absolutely, of
course, every position in a
prison system is important, but
there's a difference between uh
mandatory for basic operations
and these are on our rosters and
those are things that we work
out with our uh partners in the
union to identify specific
positions as mandatory, and we
identify other positions as
non-mandatory.
I thank you for that, madam,
sure, thank you for that. The
secretary, if you don't mind,
we'll have a sit down one day
and, and
We can talk a little bit more
offline, OK? Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I think he representative. All
righty, we've got chair and
representative small. Thank you.
always being so quiet, kind and
patient and calm. You said a
high bar madam chair, but I will
work to, to reach it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, the couple of
things. First, uh, thanks for
including the grow, uh,
medication-assisted treatment
proposal, uh, Madam Chair, the,
um, this seems like it's a, it's
a very high price, $36 million
is part of that based upon the
type of medication being
proposed to be used.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
small, no, in fact, uh, the, the
medication that we'll be using
is bupropion, and, uh, I mean,
ideally in a perfect world if
money wasn't an issue, we would
be using the injectable lasts
for a month form, but that stuff
is really, really expensive,
like between 13 and $1800 a
month, and so we know that
that's not an option for us if
we start talking about per
person, right, like the numbers
are astronomical. We've, we've
calculated it.
out. And so what we're looking
at instead is, uh, bupropion and
other forms, and those are
significantly more affordable,
we'd be able to serve uh uh
people and much, much higher
rate. I do not believe that that
is necessarily the driver, but
the reason he ask is high is
because we just don't know what
the numbers are going to be like
we don't know what the use
numbers are going to be, and
because I know that the metro
detention center is a main
driver of our population.
and they have a very robust uh
MAT program in their facility.
I'm um working with my medical,
uh, administrator, Mr. Wenasan
Ganyi, and we're guesstimating
that a good percentage of the
people we get from there will be
on that medication once we
officially start and and open
and as I said earlier, right now
those individuals being
sentenced who are on the
a situation for the jail
anymore, so it's just we just
don't know what the numbers will
look like and then when we
expand to the wider facility, it
will have a lot to do with the
provider and the inmate decision
as to what that person's needs
are.
Got it. OK, Madam Chair and
secretary, uh, um, I think the
There seemed to be a few,
there's opportunity cost with
sort of money that could be used
in other places.
Thank you for including Matt as
sort of a specific focus. I'm
excited for us to work and try
to work to, uh.
Narrow the estimate of folks who
will be served have a clear
understanding of that. Um, and
try to get to something that's
workable. I think this doesn't
seem to me sort of that full
amount does not seem workable,
particularly sort of going from
like 0 to
You know
60, which would sort of be what
the numbers were if it would be
fully served under your like we
would use all the money. So
there, there is, there's gotta
be a middle ground, but I do
want to publicly thank you for
including Matt as one of the
specific areas of focus and know
that that's an area where
they'll need to be a lot of work
between our staffs, uh, to, to
find the right, right, right
balance. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, so I just
want to let you know, like we
didn't just pull the numbers out
of thin air. What we've done is
we've talked with other states
who've implemented and we've
looked at what their numbers are
and they're telling us that they
they're looking at in the
neighborhood of like 45% of
their entire population is on
the medication and so that's
where our estimate is coming
from. And so we think with the
grow money that it would be
broken down in a manner like
maybe 39 and 24.
Over the 3 year period as, as it
ramps up. I see, got it. OK, uh,
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary,
thank you for going more into
detail. I think it shows that
there's good work to do, um,
I think there there will be
there is needed work to narrow
or at least bridge
understanding, but I do again
want to publicly say again, this
was a, a deep area of challenge
and appreciate being able to
work proactively. Uh, secondly,
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary,
can you give us a rundown of
where your reentry housing is,
sort of the halfway housing when
folks leave.
Uh, incarceration.
I
Madam Chair and
Representative Spa, I wish that
Haven was here now, but she had
to hop a plane and leave, um, so
I do have lists of these halfway
houses and there all over the
state we have several of them
are in the Albuquerque area, but
they're located everywhere, but
the, the big ones that we talked
about today, the big expensive
ones, uh, the in the Los Lunas
area is where they are, the La
Passava area, which is the only
place that takes sex offenders
in the entire.
state that's in Albuquerque in
the downtown area, um, but our
goal with these
Services that we try to reach
out to really small places and
so one of the things that wasn't
talked about in the report
earlier, but it's a factor for
us because we're able to enter
into contracts via RFP with
really small providers, uh, so
we might come across like a
nonprofit organization and they
have like one house in Almogordo
that can serve 4 people, so
we'll enter into a contract with
those people and and that way
we're able to expand services to
as many locations as possible.
Um, I will be happy to send.
you email you a list of every
place and every location, um,
because the awesome paper that I
have here doesn't tell me the
where, but I will send that to
you. That's great, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, and I think if
I understand sort of the drive
behind the question that I was
asked to answer uh to ask. I
think it's an appreciation for
having a diversity of scale and
to be geographically diverse and
not be all focused in one area,
so it sounds.
the, the situation you described
with Almogordo sounds positive
and, and, and, and excited to
hear more about the additional
areas. Last thing, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary, I know it's a
challenging conversation, um,
but it, in terms of sort of um
right sizing and
You know, like acknowledging
some of the staffing challenges,
acknowledging some of the other
pieces.
How does the department
approach, is it, should we just
sort of take as gospel that the
department, everywhere the
department is now at whatever
capacity that's gonna stay that
way, that this under this
administration,
For whatever sort of assortment
of reasons, every facility with
corrections is gonna stay that
facility regardless of
headcount, regardless of
challenges and staffing
regardless of any other factor.
Madam Chair Representative
Small. You know, I, I think
sometimes circumstances arise
where I can't certainly say that
because there's always the
possibility that uh a contract
is lost or that we start to see
uh additional declines in
population and then at that
point we would have to start
talking with you all about
whether it was important or
necessary to close an
institution, you know, but at
that point I would say I would
really love for that discussion.
to involve this committee in
particular because there are
facility or or folks on this
committee that have facilities
in their jurisdictions and it's
definitely not the type of
decision I would wanna make
without that input or in any
kind of hasty way, but one thing
that's important to know, and
it's something you all asked of
me, um, I believe it was last
session, but it was uh to talk
about master planning and so we
are in that process right now.
Uh, we are working with
The contractor who's helping us
figure out all of the details
involved there and not sure what
that will shake out to look
like, but we're definitely eager
to see the recommendations
because I will not say that I'm
that we are rigid in that we
have to stay with the footprint
that we have right now, um, as
I've mentioned many times in the
past, we do have units and
locations closed at various
campuses across the state right
now, uh, so that we can shift
the funding and make sure we
stay safe.
Uh, it's definitely something
that can be flexible, and I'm
hoping that will be guided by
that master planning. Uh, Madam
Chair, Madam Secretary, that
sounds fair. I think, and the
master plan to any sense of sort
of where we are within that
process and not holding you all
to it but sort of what we can
look forward to is for getting
information back.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative.
I haven't heard an update in the
last few weeks, but our capital
outlay goes to the General
Services department and then
they do things on behalf of us,
so I think
they invent
Oh, so they've started it, but I
haven't heard when it's gonna be
done, but it's gonna be quite
extensive because our capital
last year was 10 million and a
million of that's for the master
plan. Got it. OK, uh, Madam
Chair, Madam secretary and team.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and staff
and secretary again. Um, I don't
have anyone else on the list, so
I think we're gonna move on for
the sake of time here. Thank you
so much for your work, to you
and all your staff here in the
audience and back at work.
Thanks again, yeah. Happy
holidays.
OK, we're gonna move on to the,
we have the review of the
capital outlay framework in
Cali. Thank you, Kelly, for
always being here and so
efficient, and then we've got
the anti-donation clause and
Jeremy Ferris from the State
Ethics Commission who's going to
be joining us on Zoom. We're
gonna have Jeremy present first
on Zoom and then Kelly after he
finishes, then we'll bring you,
I'll have you come up here. Is
that all right? Awesome. Thank
you. All right.
Jeremy, are you there?
There we go. Yeah, nice to see
you.
Nice to see you. I see myself up
on the big screen there. Um, I,
um, I regret not being able to
join you, Madam Chair and
members today. I'm, I'm out of
state with my team at the, at
the annual national conference
of Government Ethics Agencies
and we're, we're learning how um
how what we do compares with
other jurisdictions and uh
learning a lot. So, um, I would
like, Madam Chair, to actually
share my screen cause I prepared
a little PDF that um I'd like to
walk through if that's OK.
Yes, thank you. You can proceed,
Jeremy. Thanks for joining us.
OK.
Um
Well, Madam Chair, uh, Charles
and John asked me to to join
y'all today to, to give um a
brief presentation, um,
Purely for educational purposes
on the anti-donation clause, and
this is going to be quite
simple. Um,
Uh, I'm gonna review what the
anti-donation clause does, um,
what it does not do, and the
risks of, of an outright repeal
of the anti-Donation clause.
What, what we could, what we
could expect the um the state to
experience if if we did not have
the anti-donation clause.
So I'm gonna begin just by by
reading it. Um, I think that's a
fair place to begin with the
with the constitutional clause.
So,
The anti-donation clause, it's
in Article 9, Section 14 of our
state's constitution, and it
provides that neither the state
nor any county school district,
or municipality, except as
otherwise provided in this
constitution shall directly or
indirectly lend or pledge its
credit or make any donation to
or in aid of any person,
association, or public or
private corporation or in aid of
any private enterprise for the
construction of any railroad,
except as provided in
subsections.
through age of this section.
So that's, that's a mouthful.
That's, that's what we
colloquially refer to in New
Mexico as the anti-donation
clause.
OK, the anti-donation clause,
it's really too constraints on
the use of future um funds and
current funds. Our anti-donation
clause is, it's very similar,
um, both
And how it's presented
texturally and also by how it
operates with other anti-Aid or
anti-subsidy provisions across
state constitutions.
And, um, like many state
constitutions, New Mexico's
anti-Aid clause has both a
credit clause and a gift clause.
The credit clause prohibits the
state and local governments from
pledging their credit in favor
of a private enterprise. So that
means that um the state and
local governments are restricted
from acting as a surety on on
another's loan guaranteeing the
repayment of a private company's
loans, um, it also is a
restriction on on issuing bonds,
um, to, to raise funds for a
private company, just so, so
issuing, for example, general
obligation bonds.
turning around and giving a
private company this bond
proceeds.
That's, that's what the first
part of the anti-donation clause
does. It's um that's the credit
clause, it, it, it constrains
pledges of credit by the state
and certain local governments.
And then there's a gift clause.
And the gift clause prevents
both the state government and
local governments from giving
subsidies to private companies
or to nonprofit corporations or
or to individuals. Um,
For example, by paying for a
capital expenditure, buildings
or equipment, assuming the
discharge of a company's debt or
liability directly transferring
money or assets outside of a
contract without consideration.
Anything that that traditionally
could be described as a gift or
a donation, that's what the gift
clause is doing in in its
prohibition.
These are actually quite common
uh among state constitutions.
so credit clauses are, are
almost um
You know, they're, they're
present in in about 90% of state
constitutions, um,
And gift clauses in about 60% of
state constitutions, and, and
here's a kind of graphical.
Picture of, of
The states that have both credit
clauses and and gift clauses
either at the state or local
level or at both the state and
local level.
Um, so it's, yeah, this is a, a
very familiar part of of state
constitutional law in the United
States.
OK, um,
Now let's turn to what the
anti-donation clause does not
do. And I'm gonna start with uh
the judicially recognized
exceptions.
Um
So Madam Chair members, this is,
this is pulling from every case
decided by a New Mexico uh
appellate court, either the
court of appeals or the Supreme
Court. Um, I've read them all,
and the, the, the doctrine kind
of falls into, it can be
organized or organized around
into 4 buckets, where the courts
are, are looking at the case and
saying, yeah, that's not a
donation, that's not a
prohibited donation.
Um, so the first, uh, the, the
first thing that the
anti-donation clause does not
do. It, it doesn't prevent the
government from entering
contracts with companies or
nonprofit organizations that
provide goods or services in
exchange for for public funds.
Um
So that's, that's important and,
you know, the state and local
governments issue issued tons of
contracts, um, from its
appropriated funds to and
provide that funding to to
private companies, to nonprofit
organizations, and it's so long
as the state or local government
receives some value in exchange.
It's not a donation, it's not
prohibited by the anti-donation
clause.
Um, the, the next
The next, um,
I guess, area that the courts
Recognized in in the 1956 case
called Village of Dimming, um.
The courts have re recognized
that revenue bond financing, uh,
arrangements aren't donations,
don't violate the anti-donation
clause. And so that's, for
example, where a local
government would issue revenue
bonds, and then construct a, for
example, a building or um some
capital expense, using the bond
proceeds, and then leased the
building to a private company,
um, and use the company's lease
payments to pay the bond
obligations. That's, that's a
kind of a traditional.
revenue bond financing
arrangement and the courts have
long held, um, both, both in New
Mexico and in other states, um.
That revenue bond financing
schemes don't, don't violate
state anti-Aid constitutional
provisions, and that's, that's
a, that's, that's also a very um
well established part of of
state constitutional law across
the states. The first such case
kind of began in um in
Mississippi in in 1938.
So the next, the next, um,
The next place where the
anti-donation clause doesn't
prevent uh a transfer or
prohibited transfer. It's where
the government is a donee. And
so when, if one government
agency, state or local, it's
giving something to another
government agency, state or
local, there's, there's no
anti-donation clause problem. So
for example,
The state of New Mexico, we, we
lease our, uh, I'm sorry, the
state ethics commission, we
lease our, our offices from the
University of New Mexico, and if
we paid for some kind of
improvement using funds that the
legislature appropriated and
eventually left that that office
space and and gave that
improvement to the University of
New Mexico. There's no
anti-donation clause problem.
OK, and last, um, the
anti-donation clause does not
prevent the government from
paying compensation for some
injury that that the that the
government caused, and there's
several cases that um
That that stand for for that
proposition. So those are the,
those are the common law
exceptions to the anti-Donation
clause, uh, that means that uh a
court created those exceptions.
It's not in the text of the
Constitution. It's just what has
emerged, um, over 100 and
12 years of of case law.
OK, next, uh, Madam Chair, this
is, um, the textual exceptions.
What's what the legislature and
the people of New Mexico have
put into the anti-donation
clause, uh, to specifically say
what what it doesn't reach.
So, the first, um, the
anti-donation clause, uh,
doesn't prohibit the state from
making provision for the aid of
sick or indigent persons. Um,
that's the first exception to
the anti-donation clause, and
it's, it's been there since
1912.
Um, the anti-donation clause
also does not prevent subsidies
that the state makes um through
LIDA.
That's um, that's, that's also a
textual exception. Uh,
similarly, the, the
The, the anti- donation clause
doesn't prevent the state from
providing for affordable housing
under enabling legislation that
the legislature passes, the
anti-donation clause also
doesn't prevent the state from
providing certain scholarships
for veterans or or medical or
nursing students, and there are,
there are 3 textual exceptions
that that spell that out.
And last, the the most recent
addition to the anti-Donation
clause is that it doesn't
prevent the state from providing
essential services, um, defined
as infrastructure for
residential purposes, including
internet, energy, water, um,
under enabling legislation.
And that's, that's the newest
addition to the anti-donation
clause. I'm under the
understanding that that enabling
legislation hasn't passed yet,
um, but when it does, any
appropriation um through its
framework would would not
violate the anti-donation
clause.
OK, why do we have this? Um,
The,
there's kind of um
I guess a historical answer to
that question and and a
theoretical answer to that
question. The, the historical
answer is that um,
Madam Chair, this
The anti-donation clause or some
version of it was present in
every draft of the state
constitution, um,
Not only the one that that
passed in 2012 and um
was approved by the voters, but
also in the versions of the
Constitution of the 19th century
that uh that did not pass um a
popular vote, the 1889
constitution, 1872 constitution,
the 1850 constitution. And Madam
Chair, I've gone into UNM
Special Collections, and I've
read those constitutional
drafts, and there's some version
of the anti donation clause in
in all of them. Um, and really
it's, it's just uh an idea that
was very present.
And in constitutional law and
constitutional thought in the
19th century, and it really
harkens back, I think, to
America's response to an
economic crisis and in the early
19th century, the panic of 1837,
and the, the depression that
followed the recession that
followed, um, where the, the
states were, were overexposed in
terms of, of debts that they had
issued um to to fund.
Public infrastructure projects.
Um, so it, there's a kind of
deep state constitutional
history to these anti-aid
provisions and, and explains
Our constitutional text and and
the text of of many other
states.
The, the theoretical answer to
the question of why do we have
this? It relates to why we have
any um any constitutional uh
protection. So, backing up
constitutions protect the
interests that the
The public doesn't trust the
operation of, of ordinary
politics to guarantee. So that's
why, you know, we, we think of
many of of our constitutional
protections of rights in that
way, um, the guarantees of
speech, of of arms of equal
protection. We constitutionalize
those because there's a distrust
that the operation of ordinary
democratic politics is always
going to to guarantee those
interests, and that's why we
constitutionalize them.
And, and the idea of the
anti-donation clause is that
Uh, perhaps the same thing um
ought to be done by with the
public fist that um that there's
a distrust, for example, that
municipal councilors should,
should be able to issue
municipal bonds and used the
bond proceeds to subsidize a
business venture.
Um, NTA provisions, uh,
reflected distrust that the
operation of ordinary would
ensure the
That that those funds are are
spent for a wise and prudent and
public purpose.
And so, um, that's the, that's
the historical reason and the
and the theoretical reason that
explains the presence of these
anti-subsidy, anti-aid
provisions and state
constitutions, and Madam shared
the
You know, that, that kind of
means that these, these kinds of
constitutional provisions have a
very general domain. Um, they're
not, they're not just about
railroads. Um, they're about
They're about public funding of
Of private projects at at a very
high level of generality.
Perhaps a too high.
OK, let's imagine the world, um,
if, if the anti-donation clause
were repealed.
Um
So, what, what would that mean?
Um,
It, it would mean the government
trying to pick winners, um,
state and local governments
could provide an array of
subsidies, um, bond proceeds,
appropriated funds, refundable
tax credits, refundable and
transferable tax credits, uh, to
business ventures that that
might not provide a, a
commensurate public benefit.
So that's the first and most
obvious, um, I think.
Consequence of, of repealing the
anti-donation clause.
The second, Madam Chair, is, is
absent and anti-donation cause I
think that there's a lot of
pressure on on ethics and
disclosure laws. Um,
The competition for for
unconstrained subsidies could
really put pressure on our state
laws limiting gifts and and quid
pro quo offers, and, and Madam
Chair, it's, it's important to
remember that the anti-donation
clause, it applies to to
municipal governments and to
county governments.
Um, but our, our state's
lobbyist laws are state's gift
Act.
Um, lobbyist registration laws,
gift Act laws, financial
disclosure laws, those don't
apply to local governments. They
don't apply to municipal
governments or to county
governments, and to allow the
Um
Those governments to to issue
bond proceeds, for example, and,
and, and fund business ventures
without that framework of of
financial disclosure and
lobbyist regulation and and gift
prohibition, um,
It would just put a lot of
pressure on the system, um, and
so that's, that's another kind
of
Risk or, or, or consequence to
think through when we're
thinking through changes to the
anti-Donation clause.
And then last met him here,
there's the, there's risks that
I think are associated with um
public subsidies to to
nonprofits at scale.
So, you, you could imagine a
world in which the, the
government
Um
Directed funds to nonprofits in
a way that's um that sidestepped
or or replaced uh government
agencies, and that, that leads
to kind of capacity building
problems in the government. Um,
so, and, you know, there's,
there's a way in which uh the
funding of, of nonprofits at
scale could um could pose
opportunity costs, um,
Uh, to, to government capacity.
And so that's, that's just,
yeah, some, some initial
thoughts about
Uh, the world without the
anti-donation clause or the the
risks of repealing it.
And then, um, some, some closing
thoughts, Madam Chair, about,
about amendments, the
To the extent, and, and, and
often the anti-donation clause
sees joint resolutions to um to
amend its text in in sessions.
And one thing to remember is
that the anti-donation clause,
it's, it's both a gift clause
and a credit clause.
And a repeal of the credit
clause isn't isn't necessary,
uh, to, to be able to direct
more funding to to
non-governmental entities with
kind of current current money.
Um
Met him here, there's, there's
another, I think misconception
that's uh
That we have in New Mexico about
the repeal of the anti-donation
clause, it's repeal would not
allow the legislature just to
directly appropriate um funds to
private entities or nonprofits.
That's actually, that constraint
is, is present in the
Constitution, but it's present
in in another provision of the
state constitution of Article 4
Section 31, that requires the
legislature to appropriate only
to entities under the absolute
control of the state.
And that's, that's, that's
important to remember. The
anti-donation clause is not the
constitutional constraint on
On appropriations directly to
non-governmental entities.
And then last Madam Chair, the
Um
I think it's just also important
to remember when thinking about
amendments that
Um, even with the anti-donation
clause, state agencies, local
government agencies,
Still, still may expend
appropriated funds on on
contracts with with
non-governmental entities and
nonprofits, and they can still
expend.
Capital, um, appropriations for
for buildings.
And, and lease those structures
to to nonprofits unfavorable
terms, so long as the government
keeps the the title to the
The the building or the land and
so on.
The contract or the
The deed, um, I'm sorry, the
contract, the lease agreement
isn't uh
is in a disguised donation.
So those are just um
Uh, a collection of thoughts
about potential amendments to
the anti-Donation clause, Madam
Chair, and um in this this
slide, I have all, all the
references to all those cases
that uh kind of comprised the
The common law exceptions to the
anti-donation clause, and Madam
Chair, I'll, I'll sit here with
you and, and, and answer any
questions as, as long as I'm
able.
And as long as you're
interested.
Thank you very much, Jeremy, as
always very explicit and
hardworking. We appreciate you
very much. Uh, do we have any
questions or comments from
committee members.
Yes, we've got Representative
Joe Garrett.
Madam Chair, thank you, Jeremy.
Quick question, I know that
several people are considering
running bills, amending uh this.
Are people running their bills
by you by any chance.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Garrett, um,
I haven't seen the, the text of
any bills I have received an
email communication from a, from
a member that's um that's
thinking through a bill to amend
the Anti-Donation clause and,
and, um, I've, I've certainly
offered to, to look at at
anything that that any member
sends me.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you again. Uh,
anyone else, please?
No, it seems pretty quiet here
now, Jeremy, thank you so much
for joining us from far away.
Appreciate your work and we
don't have any comments or
questions. We're gonna take
these handouts with us. Thanks,
um, so we can review, appreciate
you have a good evening. Thank
you. Sure, thank you. All
righty, Kelly, you are next on
Antonia. We've got the capital
outlay, uh.
Whoops, let's look at the full
title. OK, it's just the
framework that you're going to
present today. So thank you.
You, you're already there. I
can't believe how quick this is.
So thanks again, let's proceed
so we can get going long day and
we wanna be here we are again,
madam we are again. Thank you,
um, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Kelly Carswell, I'm joined by my
colleague Antonio Ortega, and
we're Ca Olay analyst for LFC,
um, as the chair said, we're
here today to present capital
outlay requests from state
agencies.
um, judicial entities and higher
education institutions, as well
as a draft of LFC's uh statewide
framework for 2025.
Um, the framework includes
preliminary recommendations that
staff bring to the committee,
um, and that you all will have
the opportunity to vote to adopt
um at the end of this week.
Um, the LFC framework includes
funding, um, for state agencies,
judicial entities and higher
education projects and becomes
the foundation for the
introduced version of the
capital bill, um, it usually
makes up roughly, roughly half
or a little less, um, of the
overall spending in the capital
appropriations bill every year.
So, um, I'm gonna be taking you
through this handout you have
with the pink sheet on top. Um,
so the pink sheet on top is kind
of a summary.
And then, um, you'll see right
behind that, um, a high level
and then I'll take you through
some detail as well. So at the
top of the brief, um, just a
reminder of kind of the state of
the capital landscape, um, based
on our quarterly report that you
heard last month. Um, so at the
first quarter of FY 25
outstanding capital funds
totaled an estimated $5.8
billion across more than 5000
active projects underway all
across the state, um, as we
Discussed a lot of times over
the past few years, these
balances are historically high
and there's a number of reasons
for that, um, strong state
revenue and influx of federal
funds, um, and a variety of
issues that, uh, have made
construction difficult despite
all the funding available for
it, um, including rising costs,
supply chain issues, and
capacity issues in both the
public and private sector. Um,
as was true last year, you know,
this is important to just keep
in mind going into a
new funding cycle, um, because
of that limited capacity we have
to take on a large number of new
projects. Uh, this makes it
extra important to prioritize
funding to complete existing
projects or to thoughtfully
phase.
Um, or provide complete funding
for large high priority
projects, and these principles,
um, we try, we try to apply to
statewide, uh,
Statewide capital projects as
well as encourage legislators um
to apply them to your, to the
projects you all fund from your
own pots.
Um, I will also say as kind of a
backdrop, um, to developing a
capital budget this year that
the increase in construction
costs that we've seen over just
the last, last couple of years.
Um,
You know, really meat making
many the many demands out there,
um, meeting those demands
challenging, um, as we try to
also maintain uh relatively
consistent levels of capital
spending, um, were of course at,
we've been at um historic highs
in terms of our capital spending
over the last couple years and
essentially following our budget
guidelines, you know, we're
trying to, um, and as we go into
a new year sort of stay
relatively.
consistent with where we've
been. Um, given that, uh, and
the construction costs, um, the
levels they've reached just a
couple of large projects can eat
up quite a lot of our capacity,
um, and you'll see some of the
challenges of that related to a
few requests for major new
construction, um, both from
state agencies and higher
education institutions.
Um, if you'll turn to attachment
A, which is the high level, um,
summary of requests, um, as well
as capacity. You'll see that
executive agencies and judicial
entities made requests totaling
$1.3 billion in higher education
institutions requested about 430
million. So altogether for the
statewide framework, uh, we're
looking at about $1.7 billion in
overall requests. Um, you can
also see on this high level, the
newest revenue.
estimates for severance tax bond
capacity included the estimated
distributions from the board of
Finance to the earmarked funds,
which include the water project
fund, the colonious
infrastructure Fund, the tribal
infrastructure fund, and the
housing Trust Fund. Um, so now
I'd like you to turn to
attachment B, which is the
first um big spreadsheet in this
packet.
Um, and I will just kind of
orient you to the information
that is here first. Um, so this
spreadsheet lists all state
agency requests, as well as the
draft staff, staff scenario for
the capital budget, um, the
spreadsheet is organized by
agency and you can see the
request title is in column A.
Request amounts are in column B,
um, proposed funding amounts and
sources are in columns C, D, and
E, and then language proposed
language for the proposed
projects and also some.
staff notes about these
requests, um, are in columns G
and H.
Um, as usual, just kind of to
remind you of some of the
general principles we follow and
analyze and requests. Um, we
have been trying to strike a
balance between need and
capacity to efficiently expend
funds and complete projects, um,
additionally, framework
development is really a
year-long process. It includes
um site visits in the interim,
uh, review of infrastructure
capital improvement plans,
monthly meetings with major
agencies and the higher
education department and higher
education institutions.
Um, participation in executive
capital hearings, um, and
additional requests for
information and analysis that we
do at the staff level following
those hearings.
Um, additionally, we consider
projects that would address
major risks to the state or
people within the state's care.
Um, we also consider legislative
direction on programmatic
priorities for state agencies,
project readiness, other revenue
sources that may be available to
contribute to some of the
project costs opportunities to
leverage federal funds and
outstanding balances from
existing appropriations. Um, as
always, we also try to ensure
that our recommendations are
sufficient to again, fully fund
projects.
Or to support a reasonable
phased approach, um, to getting
a project done in a reasonable
time frame. Um, so, Madam Chair,
I'm not gonna touch on every
single request or touch on the
specifics of proposed funding,
but I do want to highlight some
major requests and sort of give
you an opportunity to look at
the spreadsheet. Um, so, Madam
Chair, would you like me to run
through all of the highlights,
or do you want me to stop along
the way. Thank you, Kelly, you
can stop along the way and then
we'll.
ask questions in that way it
leaves more time and I do have
um people here on the list, but
oh, you want to continue for
thank you. So maybe I'll do like
2 pages of highlights and then
stop.
Yes, that would be good. Thank
you.
All right, Madam Chair, um, so
starting on page 1 lines 2
through 9, you can see requests
for um judicial court
construction and um smaller
improvement projects totaling
more than $92.9 million. Um, the
largest of these requests are um
on, as far as construction goes,
our online 3 and the magistrate
court roll roll up and this
overall request includes 17.5
million in supplemental funding
requests, um, for a new
magistrate.
Court in Santa Fe, um, I wanted
to point out that design is
still not complete for this
project and appropriations for
it date back to 2021, um, and
have totaled 3 $33 million to
date.
Um, also on page one in lines 12
through 15, you can see requests
from the aging and long-term
Services department, um, the
largest of these is a statewide
senior center request of about
$33.5 million. Um, the request
for statewide senior projects
the last several years in the
non-general obligation bond
years have been on par with GOB,
um, your funding levels. Um,
but, you know, we just wanna
caution um that
For these projects we've not
seen them demonstration of
capacity to spend that level of
funding, um, and you can see
some specifics on that in the
notes column.
So turning to page 2.
Uh, and bleeding on to page 3 a
bit, um, in lines 54 to 59. You
can see requests from the
Department of Finance and, and,
and administration. Uh, these
include $5 million for
completion of the Mora County
Courthouse and $20 million for
emergency local capital
projects. Um, so this latter
request was a new initiative
that you all funded last year,
um, and the department has
already awarded roughly half of
that first appropriation, which
just became available.
in July.
Um, and I will pause there,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Kelly, as always. OK,
we're gonna go on to questions
and we get representative
Armstrong and Senator Gonzalez,
you're next. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Mine's um on a different
page, so I'll just raise my hand
when it's uh when it's in the
page that I wanted to ask
questions about. It's not on
this 1st 2 or 3 pages.
All right. Thank you. Uh, did
you want to continue, though, if
you have a question, even if
it's another page
representative. I don't want you
to leave without getting your
question answered. Sure, I'll
just ask it right now. Why would
we give $7 million to um.
Um,
The Fairgrounds.
Mexico State Fairgrounds when,
uh, after the governor's
announcement the other day.
That's my only question. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Armstrong, um,
that's a great question, and I
think, uh, this one in
particular, uh, definitely needs
further discussion and might
require amendment during
session. Um, so, you know, as
with as with the rest of your
budget recommendations, um, the
framework is the starting point,
um, for the capital bill's
consideration by the full
legislature and, um, you know,
our analysis of these requests
was well underway when that
announcement came out.
out, um, but it is a question we
will revisit for sure. Thank
you, Madam Chair. That's all.
Thank you, Kelly. Thank you,
Representative Senator Gonzalez.
Oh, Cherry may make a
suggestion, I think all the
members have gone through and
maybe we could just go to
questions from
The different pages, if that's
OK with Kelly.
Um, at your pleasure, madam
Chair, I, I think it's a good
idea.
Thank you
and um.
H2 on them, item 48 and 49.
Uh, does the state of Colorado,
uh, contribute to that or is it?
Or New Mexico.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, uh, yes, so the New
Mexico State funds, um, are only
put towards improvements on our
side of the border.
OK, and then the next question
that I have is on um
On page 4 on 107.
And uh several times we have had
a
The Department of
Transportation.
And to me that number is very
low.
When you consider their 6th
districts.
That's only like about 1.5
million per district.
And uh just a greater will cost
that, you know.
And is there a way or a
possibility that we can do.
Working with the DOT to see how
we could.
Because they're they in very big
need placement part.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
yes, I can follow up for you on
that, um, my understanding from
Joey is, um, these vehicle
requests are not usually
something we deal with in the
capital budget.
OK.
Oh, that's all I have.
OK, thank you, Senator, and
thank you, Kelly. Uh, anyone
else here may have questions or
comments.
Um, OK, I think that we're done.
This is great, Kelly. Oh, I
representative Allison, did you
have a question before we go on?
Representative Allison, do you
have a question? Do you raise
no, OK. Well, thank you very
much. I think we're gonna move
on, Kelly and Antonio,
appreciate your work. I remember
last year when we were working
on this and for a moment I
looked at him I thought already
it's that time, it flies, so
thanks for your wonderful work
always. You're welcome. We'll
miss you in this process this
year, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you so much, but I'm gonna
miss you more. Thank you.
OK. I think we're going to
adjourn motion for adjournment.
In the second and no opposition,
right? OK, thank you. We will go
on and we'll see you tomorrow. I
think that was the last item.
Yep, we'll see you tomorrow
again. Let's see, we're gonna
continue at 8:30 in the morning,
