Mhm
Let me, let me stop you right
there real quick. So we're being
broadcast and so if they can't
watch it online, they need to
click on the Zoom side of the
link to watch and listen.
Counsel
Counsel, you're, you're fine,
you're fine. Um, but counsel
cannot figure out how to make it
work. So if you're trying to
watch on the Zoom link and
listen, then I'm on the link you
need to click on the zoom side
of the link.
And and probably mute yourself.
Mm
Thank you. Is he we're gonna
extend the questions are we
gonna go 3 years? I think uh
we'll go to my presentation
next, Mr. Chair.
This will be behind tab A.
And it's titled Fiscal Impacts
of Oil and Gas Setbacks, and it
looks like this.
It'd be behind your tab.
Switched over on the projector
up here.
Good morning again, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Ismael Torres. I'm the
chief economist for you all at
the Legislative Finance
Committee. And I just want to
start off by um highlighting the
difficulty of this topic.
It's a very complicated topic.
I'm sure you all know how
difficult it is. It's difficult
for us to untangle and analyze,
but I do want to shout out, um,
the team that put this together.
I'm very proud of the work that
we've been able to accomplish,
as I'm sure Mr. Golding can
attest the kind of analysis that
we were able to reproduce with a
very limited amount of time,
staff time, staff resources, um,
is, is truly incredible to me.
This is some of the most uh
proudest work that I've been
able to accomplish at the LFC.
Uh, because I know that this
kind of analysis that we've
recreated here and been able to
develop is the kind of analysis
that uh
Global energy analytics firms
are paid a lot of money to put
together, so, uh, with that
being said, there are certainly
a lot of caveats to this
analysis that I'll be going
through in the presentation, um,
especially at the end of, of,
uh, these slides.
So starting off on slide one
here.
As we were tasked with putting
together the fiscal impacts of
oil and gas setbacks. Of course,
there are sort of two sides to
this equation.
They are the associated costs
with
um stepping back allowed oil
production from certain zones,
but there are also theoretical
health benefits or health costs
that can be avoided from those
setbacks. And unfortunately,
there aren't a lot of studies
specific to New Mexico's health
impacts related to proximity to
oil and gas production. There
are some, there's a lot more
research in say California, not
as much in Colorado, but we were
able to find one national study
that broke out New Mexico's
health impacts were estimated.
New Mexico's health impacts due
to oil and gas production.
That being said, this study is
estimating the impacts from 2016
production, so this would not
include the recent climb in in
production in the Permian Basin
as Mr. Golding just described.
But it also includes health
impacts estimated from distant
populations. So this would
include health impacts in places
like Albuquerque, which would
not benefit, um, or would not
see health benefits from an oil
and gas setback. It also, um, it
is including sort of what I
would consider economic value.
These include things like the
statistical value of a life,
which estimates foregone wages
over, over a lifetime due to
increased mortality. So these do
not reflect the.
impact to the state. These are
impacts and costs borne by New
Mexicans and a share of that, a
fraction of that would be cost
to the state. And then again,
because this is all oil and gas
production, and not necessarily
just the oil and gas production
that would fall within a setback
zone, the entirety of this cost
would not be ameliorated with a
setback zone. So, a portion of
this would be reduced with a
setback and then a portion of
that would be the state's fiscal
cost. Unfortunately, we don't
have the data to do this kind of
analysis.
If we are able to get access to
some health department of health
data, we might be able to do
some statistical analysis to
find maybe health disparities
within setback zones. But again,
I want to highlight some of the
work that we heard from and that
we've worked with, with Doctor
Shade earlier from July, I
believe, or maybe it was May,
um, on, on how proximity can
translate into health impacts.
And so, a couple of things to
keep in mind are maybe wind
direction could be an important
determinant of health impact,
maybe even more so than
proximity if you're.
Downwind, even outside of a
setback zone that may be a more
important determinant of health
than maybe if you're upwind and
closer in the setback zone, some
of this pollution also could be
coming from up to hundreds of
miles away as these volatile
compounds can travel, say from
the Texas side of the border,
traffic pollution, which also
may not be ameliorated by oil
and gas setbacks and other
variables. So important to keep
in mind, uh, 600 to $1.5 billion
in health impacts for New
Mexicans, a portion of that
could be affected by an oil and
gas setback.
And then, uh, I think it's
helpful to set some context on
what setbacks currently exist in
New Mexico. And it's a very
complicated patchwork that
complicates our analysis of this
topic, but we, as of now have
federal rules which can apply
nationwide and statewide, and
then there are certain field
office rules which can only
apply within their own
particular borders, and then we
have local rules as well that
depend on county and municipal
ordinance. So we have sort of a
patchwork and an overlay of
different
setbacks that already exist.
From the uh Roswell field
office. I was given these
federal um um uh exceptions,
exceptions on on leasing for
onshore oil and gas production
on federal land within
incorporated cities, towns and
villages. Carlsbad and Roswell
field offices, surface
disturbance within 200 m of a
100 year flood plain statewide,
uh, you must comply with the
endangered Species Act to ensure
that you're not um
disturbing any or creating any
activity that could disturb
those protected habitats.
I'm not gonna go through all of
these, but you can see how many
that we've identified here and
how complicated it could be
based on the production
facility, the municipality, the
certain structure or water
source, um, and, and you can
feel free to peruseuse those at
your leisure.
So, here's how we produced our
estimate.
We first were able to analyze
135,000 data points of oil wells
from New Mexico oil conservation
division. Also another 135,000
wells from New Mexico Tech. We
did that from two separate
databases. So all told, well
over 300,000 getting close to
400,000 data points that we had
to match individually to each
well. Once we did that, we were
also able to geolocate those
wells and use some geolocating
data that I'll go through here
shortly to identify structures.
that could be uh a setback zone.
Those wells must be uh set back
from certain um structures
that's using some AI technology
to identify structures using
satellite imagery. We've also
used some national data on
waterways to identify those. And
then we've also combed through
those 135,000 data points from
OCD to recreate what we call
decline curve analysis to
simulate how Wells behave in the
most recent data and also
show how we expect future
production from existing wells
to continue into the future.
We've then matched that up with
the consensus revenue stimating
group's estimates for oil
production in New Mexico to
isolate specifically the
production that we think is not
yet permitted and could be
impacted by a setback rule. And
then we were able to apply a
proportion of this earlier
analysis from the well data to
that Craig share of unpermitted
to be produced data and then we
were able to get the production
impact. And that's how we
calculate the fiscal impact. So,
don't worry if you didn't catch
that, I'll be going through
that, um, as we get into the, to
the figures here.
So, as I mentioned, OCD data on
wells. Um, I should clarify that
this is specifically Wells, not
other production facilities. So
in some of the setbacks
proposed, there are setbacks for
tank batteries, compressor
stations, gas plants, and more,
that is not included in the
estimate here. So we are
specifically looking at the
impact from wells, because we
didn't have data for those other
production facilities.
As I mentioned, Water data US
Geological Survey and an RGIS
data source to try to capture
flow lines data and major water
bodies, and then we were able to
use that AI building identified
or structure identified um
footprint data from UNM's
database.
Uh, I, I want to highlight here
that there is a more
straightforward way of doing
this analysis, uh, that is,
well, it would be
straightforward, but is of
course complicated by
Very sensitive industry data. If
we were able to get the specific
industry data on where even
anonymized, maybe take away, who
plans to do it? And even if
they're able to anonymize where
they plan to do it, we were able
to get from the industry.
Future production sites, we
could directly estimate the
impact of this. Instead, we have
to go through that sort of long
snake procedure to estimate
this. And furthermore, I want to
highlight that there is no
current rules in place by the
Environment department or other
permitters on how waterways will
be interpreted. So that's why
we're using this US geological
survey data, if the Environment
department were able to decide,
which of course, you know,
without uh a statue in place
wouldn't make sense for them to
do, but that's also a high, uh,
a highly
sort of determinant variable
that's still left out here. What
is the interpretation of what
constitutes a waterway here for
this setback.
So, here's some of the data that
our economist, Jennifer did on
uh well locations within the
state. These are those 135,000
wells in green, you can see
those that are permitted and
active plugged, completed,
abandoned, so not, so all of
those that have already been
producing in green, and then
what our focus here is in those
pink zones. So these are the new
permits that have gone forward
and have been, have received a
permit, but are not yet
producing. And so the reason
we're
Look at this map is we're not
trying to identify all of the
production in New Mexico that
could fall within a setback.
I'll get into that shortly, but
we are trying to identify the
direction that production might
be moving towards to give us an
insight into the future and what
production could be impacted in
the future.
And so you can certainly see
there the hotspots in the
Delaware Basin and then in the
San Juan, which
Is really the focus of this
presentation.
Here is a map of those
structures, those AI structures,
and their setback at 22 2250 ft
in blue, shaded in blue, and
then the currently permitted but
not yet producing wells in pink.
So you can see how this plays
out in Southeast New Mexico
here, there's certainly a lot of
wells, not even close to those
blue borders, but we do have
places like Carlsbad and then
the southern part of Artesia
here, that would see some, some,
uh,
Um
Affected wells. A zoom in here
over by loving, and I want to
draw your attention to some of
these lines. This is pretty
common within the industry if
you have a, a good resource, you
may see lines of wells, um, in a
row, tapping into that resource.
And so, if you can see here,
there's a a line south of Loving
that we might expect could be
the source of future production
that gets cut off by these
setback zones. So that's kind of
what this analysis is able to
accomplish, identify where those
future sites might be.
Here's the waterway data, the
chart on the left or the map on
the left is the whole state of
New Mexico. And if you maybe
could zoom in on your slide
individually. You can see that
the San Juan has a significantly
larger share of these waterways,
which could affect production
then say Southeast New Mexico,
which tends to be in a little
bit more of that white area.
Izzy, hold on one second. So the
slides aren't showing up on
Zoom. OK. So those people on
Zoom can download them from the
LFC.
Website and this presentation to
see them. Absolutely, Mr. Chan,
and on the agenda as well,
they'll be able to download this
and crashed all the computers
while you're doing
we did we have someone to blame.
You know, Mr. Chair Jennifer, I
did think go through 22
different computers trying to
run this analysis. I had to use
my personal computer at home or
or LFC laptops weren't strong
enough, so I don't blame them.
Um, if, if you look on the right
here, the maps, uh, we have
Artesia here. You can see how
the waterways affect you see
maybe in the north, uh, uh, east
quadrant here, well is less
affected by waterways, but the
San Juan at the bottom, it's
really hard to find a a
production spot not within some
of this waterway setback zones.
And then we have to combine
those two. So of course, it's
not just if you're within a
waterway setback or a, or a
structural setback, you, you
can't be within either of those
setbacks. And this is those
setbacks combined. Farmington on
the top left, and then um some
portion we've zoomed in here
again on loving in the bottom
right. It's too hard to zoom in
on, of course, the entire state,
but you can see, especially down
on the bottom right, those lines
again that I was talking about,
those sort of rich production
veins and uh um
Whether or not they're affected
by a setback zone. So, that
being said, here's a map of the
entire state, setbacks in blue,
unaffected wells, those are,
those falling outside of the
setback zones in pink, the green
are those within a setback zone.
And so what we're really looking
at here now is we're zooming in
again, we're, we're narrowing
down again. What are the
Wells that are not yet
producing, that are permitted
and not yet producing to give us
an insight into future
production zones. And then
within those zoom down either
further or reduce even further,
only the wells that are going to
be affected. And then we start
looking at proportions. What
proportion of those permitted
not yet producing wells are
affected by a setback. And
here's some math for you all.
Here's a table on all of the
wells that we were analyzing
here.
These are currently producing
current or already plugged,
already abandoned, or permitted
and not yet producing. You can
see all 125,000 and then those
within any setback zone 42,000.
Of the active wells, so these
are not, are permanent exclude
permitted but not yet producing,
but only those that are
producing, so not abandoned, um,
or plugged. We have 51,000 wells
analyzed, about 20,000 of those
are in a setback zone.
Specifically, we keep drilling
down, keep drilling down. How
many are permitted not yet
producing which give us an
insight into future production,
13,000 wells of those, only
2.3,000 wells are within a
setback zone. And then we get to
our proportions here. This is
how we are applying it to future
production estimations.
Of oil wells specifically, we
expect 15% are in a setback
zone. And you can see those
broken out by uh two of our
largest oil and gas counties
here and by land type.
As you can see, the share of
gas-affected wells total here on
the right 27%. That's what I was
highlighting earlier in the San
Juan, largely due to waterways.
Setbacks around waterways, I
should clarify. And then you can
see how that's affected by
county. You can see the San Juan
share is much higher at 61%.
Now, that being said, so we've,
we've keep narrowing down future
wells, the only those that are
impacted. But even then, we
don't estimate that 100% of the
resources within a setback zone
are totally lost because of this
new horizontal drilling
techniques. We know that some of
this resource can still be
accessed by long laterals. So,
what portion of those affected
wells
are locked off, or are lost
resources that cannot be tapped
and produced. And we do have
some data from Inverri which
tried to estimate acreage
affected by the largest
producers, so we only have it
for the top 10 producers and
their estimate was about 36% of
the acreage could be locked off.
And so,
Um, our top 10 producers make up
a large share of our total
production, maybe over 80%. So
we think this is a pretty good
estimate of what total resource
acreage might be lost. So of
total future production, say
about 15% of oil production
represented by 15% of oil wells
might be affected, and only
about a third of that, that 36%,
we expect to be totally lost. So
you can see how the math
translates to about 5% future
oil production lost is what
we're estimating here. I do want
to highlight though that even if
we aren't estimating
2/3 resource loss here. Those
2/3 that would be impacted,
would have less economical, uh,
less, less advantageous
economics. So the cost to
produce the breakeven price for
those wells with a longer, less,
uh, optimal lateral.
is also uh uh something that
we're not estimating here. So
maybe there would be some
production lost from the uh
They worsened economics of those
wells that we aren't estimating
here. Only, only the locked off
resources is what we're
estimating here.
And then we, we, uh, conducted,
as I mentioned, our decline
curve analysis here on slide 16,
if you're following along
online, and we were able to um
extrapolate sort of the maximum
production. So if you look at
the chart on the right here,
this is the typical production
curve for an oil well in New
Mexico. In the first quarter,
you might start off slow.
Eventually, you hit your peak,
your maximum production in that
typically 2nd quarter and then a
pretty rapid decline into the
out years, and you see we've
analyzed the data to go out to.
5 years and beyond, um, and
that's for our analysis that
I'll get into here shortly. But
you've also seen the maximum
production.
Or on average for these wells in
New Mexico on the left here. So
you can see how those efficiency
gains have really contributed to
our production, uh, growth here
in New Mexico. Although we have
seen lately in the last couple
of years, that production.
Efficiency per well start to
decline. So the amount of oil
produced per well is coming down
slightly over the last several
years, and we are using the most
recent maximum production per
well, not the sort of peak that
we saw in the early 2020s. So,
that's another important caveat
if, if production efficiency or
maximum production per well
increases again the cost
estimated here would increase,
but if it continues to decline,
the cost will decline.
OK.
So here we are doing combining
some of that rapid decline curve
analysis with our wells
analysis. We're able to produce
what we are calling sort of our
estimate buy well vintage, and
we can see in green here those
that are already permitted,
already producing with their
decline curve, and how that
might produce into the future
with pretty high confidence
because we've seen that decline
curve analysis, we can just sum
all of the existing wells, some,
how much we expect they will
decline over the years.
See how much we might produce in
the future. Then we have in
blue, the amount of permitted
wells that are not yet producing
again, we know what their well
curve analysis looks like. We
can estimate how those will come
online and with pretty high
confidence how that production
might look into the future. And
then we are looking primarily at
that yellow chunk, how much we
are estimating oil will be
produced that has not yet been
permitted yet. And that's the
share that we're applying this
sort of setback analysis too.
But of course, this is yielding
some incredible insights for us
and our team. We are able to
sort of break apart what were to
happen if there was no new
drilling, we can see the
production impact that would
have on New Mexico, the red is
would be the last oil produced,
and then the green would be our
current production scenario. So
you can see how quickly our
production would decline in that
scenario. We can see if no new
permits are, are given, um, a
share of this, if only federal,
as Mr. Golding mentioned, uh, as
that was discussed earlier in
the decade, how that would
impact.
New Mexico's production outlook
and we have that graph for you
here. And then, of course, the
focus of this analysis, how a
setback scenario would impact
production into the future. You
can see that about, I, I think
on whole, it's like 7% when you
include the gas wells of
production into the future that
would be lost in red here. And
so what that translates to in,
in Los uh production value is it
would we expect that it would
climb to about $4.5 billion in
lost production value per year
by the end of the decade.
over 10 years, about $35 billion
of lost production value here in
New Mexico.
And what that translates to in
into a fiscal impact if you
remember this presentation from
Miss Fabian earlier this year,
very complicated network of how
oil and gas taxes feeds into
states revenues. Here's a
reminder of that, um, in this
sanky chart that you can follow
if you um are able to keep your
eyes crossed long enough. But
we've done that for you already.
We estimate that the fiscal
impact could climb to about $800
million per year by the
beginning of the next decade. It
starts off slow with some of
that currently.
permitted wells come online and
then builds um as that uh share
of the future production grows.
We expect in the next 3 years
almost half a billion dollars in
fiscal um losses compared to the
alternative, uh, for the state.
Here's the big table on slide 24
of how those estimates estimates
play out in dollars and where
the impact would be. Some of the
largest losses are in capital
outlay funds, because that's, of
course, supported by the
severance tax, but the general
fund also has large losses of
around $100 million here, uh,
really some of the largest
losses are to the permanent
funds, which then would result
in lower distributions to the
general fund in future years,
um, but all of that's here for
you to peruse at your leisure.
As I mentioned at the beginning
of the presentation, lots of
caveats here with this kind of
analysis on slide 25, some of
the things were not estimating
our knock-on effects, as you all
know in our fiscal impacts, we
do not do sort of that dynamic
analysis. So, in addition to the
lost production of oil and gas,
we know that that results in
lost contracts for servicing
companies to those wells for
trucking services of those of
those wells. Also, the secondary
employment impacts we do
estimate losses to GRT and
personal income tax, but there's
also a multiplier and a
spinoff of those dollars within
the economy that we are not
estimating here. We are also not
estimating the loss of economic
activity from those dollars that
could have been spent had the
state government spent those,
say, on capital programs or on
other social programs. Those
also have an economic stimulus
effect, and even a small return
to the state that we're not
estimating here.
All that being said, if you, I'm
sure it was easy to, to hear me
caveat as I went throughout the
presentation. I have some of
these listed here for you on why
these estimates could be higher
and why they could be lower. Um,
something that I did not mention
earlier, oil wells have an
associated gas, especially in
the Permian Basin, a large
associated gas that comes out
with that oil. And if that gas
is larger than what we're
estimating here, uh, then
certainly the cost would be
greater if production shifts to
more restricted areas than we.
Meet with our permit analysis
that could increase the cost.
Again, didn't estimate the
impact of tank batteries,
compressor station gas plants
and habit and habitat
restrictions, importantly, only
waterways and structures, so
habitat restrictions could be an
important um cost raiser in
this, in this scenario that we
did not estimate. Uh, waterways
that the environment department
interprets them to be more
restricted, um,
Let's see what else here our
municipal GRT losses were not
estimated that would be
difficult for us to produce, so
only county GRT losses were
estimated here. And then, of
course, we are using the
consensus revenue estimating
groups prices and volumes, if
those were to be higher, that
would be a really large increase
in the cost of this analysis.
And costs could be lower because
waterways are interpreted to be
less restrictive, production and
prices are lower than we
expected and the proportion of
production is less than that 3
acreage that I mentioned. So on
whole, I do feel that this
analysis is a low estimate
because we have much higher
costs, more, much, much more um
variables out there that could
lead to a higher cost than a
lower cost.
And with that, Mr. Chair, uh, I
think Mr. Golding and I are
ready for questions.
That concludes how many weeks of
work?
All interim, Mr. Chair, all
interim.
Thank you. So, let me first say,
we've tried to figure out where
the balance is, right? Not
pushed to the one side in mass
production or pushed to the
To the other side of mass cuts,
and figure out where a baseline
really is, so if something does
happen that we'll know.
We'll have a basis point to
start. That's what this report's
reflecting.
But one thing I did ask you, ask
me, it was the GRT impacts in in
throughout the state, you didn't
come up with any
Number that you could
I mean, that's an important
number for me and everybody
else.
Mr. Chair on slide.
24, this huge table here, we do
have a few gross receipts tacks.
Uh, uh, estimates for you,
although this would be
specifically on GRT from wells.
So the GRT lost on those
associated wells, and we're
estimating about $50 million
lost to the general fund about
3.7 million lost to counties
annually by the end of the
estimate period, but we do not
have an estimate for
municipalities.
Looks like you're getting a
computer for Christmas.
Representative David Cruz will
be our first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
One of the things that I noted
was that on the LFC.
Newsletter
Right at the top, 3rd paragraph
in relation to setbacks, it says
that staff scheduled to present
the findings to the committee at
8:30 October 22nd, estimate the
impact on production value could
be about 408 million in 2026,
but would grow each year and
could reach 4.1 billion.
Yeah, uh, in the next 5 years.
So here's my question.
We the that only takes into
account production itself and
revenue coming to the state in
Mexico. Is that correct, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Cha, yes.
Mr. Chairman, was there any
analysis done of uh of how that
would affect the local Mr. Chan
and Representative, no, that
would be sort of that dynamic
analysis that we we're missing
here. Um, we, uh, as you point
out, there would be, of course,
an economic loss to the area due
to less drilling, less
employment for that drilling,
less dollars invested in the
sort of local economy that also
would then trigger maybe say
leisure spending or or dining,
um, that is not estimated here.
Mr. Chairman, I think that's a,
a very, very important question.
You know, a few years ago when
we had the economic downturn
back in 2008 and 2009, uh,
In my community, which is a
working community, it was, it
was a stark reminder of how the
economy is affected when you
have a significant impact as we
had in the economic downturn. It
appears to me that
We need this information to see
what it means to individual
families.
The other question that I would
have is German, and last
question.
Um, has the population of the
affected areas grown
specifically because of the
production, the work that's
available.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, certainly since 2016,
we haven't seen the sort of same
population growth rates that we
saw at the end of the last
decade. But um certainly still
higher levels than pre.
Boom, pre latest boom.
So, Mr. Chairman, it seems that
there's a correlation between
the fact that there are more
people that are more you know
closer proximity to the wells
because specifically they're
working there.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Izzy, um, a very
thorough job as usual, um,
Uh, always proud of the work
that you do, uh.
One of the questions I have is
on the production value.
How is that calculated and is,
are you pulling out just the
wells that would be uh
Affected if setbacks were put in
place.
Thank you, Mr. Chen. Thank you,
Representative for that
question.
The there's there's a long
story, but the short story here
is that the share of the wells.
And the share only of the
acreage or the resource lost of
the wells. So not just the wells
that are impacted, but
specifically those are all
locked away from their own from
those resources.
Their production value, which is
how much we estimate that well
could have produced an oil and
gas times the estimated prices
of that oil and gas. So that
would be the total value of that
production that is lost, but,
uh, to, to your point, I think
to your point, um, there's also
sort of lost value in that, um,
opportunity costs that I was
mentioning earlier, if it is
more expensive for you to drill
a well outside of the setback
zone and go further to reach the
resource. There's some amount of
economic value loss.
the increased cost, which is not
reflected by, say, this
production value lost here.
That makes sense. That does make
sense. Um, I, I was just curious
because I, you know, I'm seeing
different estimates from
different entities. And so I
was, I was curious, you know,
your, uh, the 6% you would
assume would be a loss of 4
billion where the oil and gas
industry is thinking 6% is more
of a $10 billion revenue loss,
and so, um, that's, that's quite
a ways off and so, uh, what I
don't want to happen, Mr.
Chairman, is for us to estimate
and then it
to be a real kick in the pants
for all of New Mexico. Uh, my
next question is, um,
With the on page 21.
Where you're saying the
estimated uh cumulative
production value lost.
One year, 3-year, 5-year, 10
year, and then uh and then also
in, in uh in the same time with
24, page 24 where you're talking
about.
The, um, the estimated direct
costs.
So with that amount of loss in
our budget.
Um
What do you think the, do you
think that, according to this,
the 5 year would be around 1213
billion, and the 10 year would
be 35 billion.
Loss to our
Budget, is that correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative, this,
uh, the figures that you
referenced are production value.
So the taxes are applied onto
that production value. So, uh,
it would only be maybe a 5th, a
50% of that. Um, my quick math,
I should be careful with that. I
would refer to flight 24 if you
would like to see the, the, the
budget sort of impacts, um,
slide 21 is the production value
loss, so that's maybe a better
sort of economic value, not
necessarily.
Losses to the state budget.
OK, thank you for that. And what
would the, so the loss to the
state budget is more on 24?
That's right, Mr. Chair. And,
and I think the general fund is,
is over $100 million sort of by
the end of the forecast period.
Um, but there are other losses
that reach that uh uh charted
losses on slide 23, um,
Not quite a billion dollars by
the end of the forecast here.
OK, thank you for that. Um,
Why are we only
When we talk about, um, you
know, the quality and the
health.
Um, portion of this.
Um, from the, your very first uh
on the the fiscal costs of
health.
Um, why are we only talking
about oil and gas and not like
air quality across the whole
state.
Um, and, and just focusing on
oil and gas is this specifically
what you were trying to do or?
Yes, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, um,
The, the task here is really
the, the fiscal impacts,
analyzing the fiscal impacts of
setbacks, which would only apply
to oil and gas, and so that's
why we're trying maybe
unsuccessfully here to estimate
some of the health impacts or
the health costs that would be
ameliorated by those setbacks or
could be ameliorated by those
setbacks.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I,
uh, I just want to remind the
committee that, you know,
there's other entities in the
state of New Mexico that
That, uh
You know,
Cause
Health
Uh, risks or whatever direct
costs.
For health and to, I'm just, I
understand what you're trying to
do and what you, what you were
asked to do by the task. Um,
And I think I, a lot of my
questions got answered with the,
the rest of the, the um.
Your, your presentation. Um, my
My final just reference would be
that, um, Mr. Chairman and
committee that
We need to look at across the
state.
Or what happens to our
communities, uh, and the
negative impact that setbacks
would have.
Uh, there's already setbacks, as
you stated and as you showed
very well in your, in your, uh,
presentation.
Where
You can look at a high rate of
inflation, first of all.
If we do these setbacks, a high
rate of unemployment.
And a high rate of uh companies
just moving across the line to
Texas.
That, uh, really hurts our
economy even more.
And um
And
The health impacts.
won't change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Gao.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Torres. A lot of good
detail here. I appreciate it. I
just wanted to clarify one
thing. I live in Eunice, 4 miles
from the Texas state line, about
95% of our air volume.
is going into Texas, not the
other way around, unless there's
a huge er hurricane in the Gulf.
I don't know that uh Texas.
Sends any pollutants towards us,
so, uh, they may wanna look into
your details, see what we're
doing to them, but I did have a
question on uh the current
setbacks and have we done any
kind of historical view at
Where we are with any issues
with current setbacks. I, I
guess I'm trying to figure out
what our benefit is. We can
already see the loss in revenues
that this isn't gonna be OPEC
cars, there's gonna be
legislative cause our state
budget, but I'm wondering if the
uh
In the current numbers that you
had here, uh, are there issues
with setbacks, uh, I, I guess
just another caveat there is I
live, I've been in Eunice for 35
years. I lived about 70 ft from
an oil well.
I never had an issue.
I did have mother die of cancer,
but I brought it from Clayton,
New Mexico, so probably the gas
from the cattle.
Could have been uh part of that.
But, uh, currently I don't know
or that well has ever caused me,
my wife, my daughters, or my
granddaughter an issue, and I'm
just trying to figure out what
the setback is that.
Uh, it's probably 200 ft from
our football field.
Uh, you know, schools, which I'm
also on the school board.
Uh, so it's never been a
concern. I'm just trying to get
a graph.
for the issue is on the setbacks
and why we're going so detailed
into trying to find out.
Um, the, the need for sip.
Mr.
Uh, Mr. Chen and Senator, we
have not done an analysis on, on
historical setbacks, impact on
production.
Um
I, I, I do appreciate the
opportunity though to clarify
that
The setbacks proposed.
Um, would only apply to new
permits. So those existing
wells, say close to you or close
to to the football field would
not be impacted by setbacks. So
that's, I think, um why the
detailed focus on sort of the
future impact. Um,
Uh, I'm not sure if that
answered your question. Well, it
gives me an indicator and Miss
Torres, I appreciate it, uh.
The community already do that.
So, uh, I'm, I'm trying to
figure out why we're
duplicating, for instance, gal.
Ja, New Mexico, huge Permian
Basin.
Or gas
mean
They pushed back on some uh
whales.
Because it's too close to their
infrastructure.
And they personally as a
community, look upon themselves
to
Uh, do a setback rule for that
entity. So I guess I'm trying to
wonder why we as a legislator
trying to impose it.
All entities and give back the
the setbacks, and I'll, I'll end
with this Miss Chair and Mr.
Torres, uh, January of 2023, I
was able to go to speak the
Congress on the value of
permits.
Because we know there's
shortcoming on permits taking
along longer time on the federal
side.
And when I did that
presentation, being that I've
been on school board for at that
time, 21 years, I'm 22 years
now, uh, the value of the permit
and the value of the old gas
towards our students.
And our teachers.
And we need to remember what Oas
does for our communities.
And who had definitely affects,
but I appreciate all the detail
and I like that you're trying to
be uh just find this wine and
sand of what the values are.
But I think there's a lot more
to the discussion.
And just the value to.
Of the state of New Mexico, so
with that old deal. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Torres.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair, my first question
is,
Why are we even proposing
setbacks.
What end? What's the goal? What
are we trying to do?
Mr. Chair and Senator, I, I
think I also appreciate the
opportunity to clarify that um
I'm not here in, in, in favor or
opposition of this proposal as
staff, we're tasked with
impartial analysis. So, um, I
don't think that would be an
appropriate question for me to,
uh, impose my own perceptions
of, of the goal here. So, Mr.
Chair, why?
Are we doing this? Why are we
even considering it?
Are you asking me the question?
Yes, sir. I, I mean, bills were
introduced last year, right? And
we didn't know if something
passes in the legislature, what
the actual cost is to the
legislature, right?
So, you have to look at
everything.
The budget committee and say, if
this happens or this bill
passes, we want to know what our
Our costs are to the state. And
so I think you look at setbacks
cause it's been a topic for how
many years now? 34.
Maybe more.
Maybe less, maybe less.
That, that from an economist,
just a guess.
Um.
But I think you have to look at
everything and say, OK, if this
happens in in in the economy or
this happens, and a bill passes,
what is our cost? We do that all
the time. We do that with health
care bills, we do that with
educational bills, we do that
with every single bill that we
in an FIR on. And so this is a
big topic for the legislature
and say, OK.
We know that
We know this, this is gonna be a
very interesting people should
listen and New Mexico is really
set itself up.
Be independent of oil and gas
with a few more years.
And so
You're gonna hear some good news
in January and news that's gonna
shock a lot of people that that
were in New Mexico's really at,
and so how do we really get
that?
Going in, and how do we take a a
view across every piece of
legislation that that happens. I
mean, we, we looked at these,
uh, I can't remember what
Charles are some bills that we
looked at in LFC that in the
past that we wanted to see what
the actual cost of would happen
if they, they were to the state.
I mean we at oil and gas, look
at
Fuel taxes.
Gas taxes, right? And see what
the revenue is to the state. We
look at what the whole harmless
cost was to the state. That was
232 million back then. I don't
know what it is today, right?
And so we look at all those
across the board.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I, I'm not
disputing why we're having this.
This discussion on, on what
happens to the revenue.
Why do we have setback?
Why are we even discussing
setbacks?
To what end?
Now, if, if the end is simply
the destruction of oil and gas
industry in New Mexico or the
world.
Well
OK.
If it's really about health
issues, that's different.
Um
So, so that's the question, why?
Why are we even having a setback
discussion.
And, and, and I bring that up
because we have oil wells.
There are a few yards from a
football stadium.
Or
Even shorter distances, the city
parks in the city of Farmington.
And nobody's dying from them.
So why are we having the
discussion? Do we want to get
away from oil and gas. I think
that's foolish. Do we need
something beyond oil and gas?
Absolutely.
But I don't think we can get
away from oil and gas. If y'all
really want to get away from
that, take off every piece of
clothing that is not synthetic.
It would be very disgusting.
Don't you,
you, you, you can't sit on those
chairs because they, they were
made from some petrochemical
company.
You can't use your computer, you
can't use the microphone. You
can't drink out of the cup.
Because all of that is
synthetic. Almost everything in
our world today is synthetic.
Yes, we have cotton.
And my shirt is, oh, I think it
says 80% cotton, so that means I
still get to wear 20% of my
shirt, right?
But it's, it's, it's, it, it
makes no sense to try to make
oil and gas go away. It makes no
sense to our economy. It makes
no sense to health.
Because
It's cold out there, and if
everybody wants to go back to
their car, which, oh, by the
way, uses oil and gas.
Uh, including the tires,
including the roads you drive
on.
Then walking back home,
Which
Has paint on the wall and carpet
on the floor and the insulation
in the walls and the ceiling,
which is all oil and gas.
It doesn't take long for
everybody in this room to freeze
to death tonight.
If we did that.
And that's not healthy.
So I don't know why we're trying
to do this unless we just hate
humanity so much.
Um, the health.
As Senator
Gallegos pointed out the wind
generally blows from California
to Texas.
And, and we're just, we're just
flyover country.
So most of the garbage that's in
New Mexico here came from
California. Fortunately, we're
still shipping it to Texas and
who's sending it to Louisiana
and off wherever they go from
there.
But
When we're looking at the health
benefits,
One of the things I'd really
like to know, Mr. Chair, is
asthma and cancer rates.
For children in hobbs.
Versus children in Clovis.
Asthma rates are higher in
Clovis.
Answer rates are higher in
clothes than in Hobbs.
A lot higher than they are in
farmington.
But I would also like to know
what are those rates in Omaha?
Compared to Hans
What are those rates in San
Francisco compared to Hobbs or
send uh uh um Manhattan compared
to Hobbes.
That makes a difference compared
to what we can say 1000 kids
have asthma.
OK. Compared to what?
We don't have a comparison.
We just say kids have asthma.
Kids have asthma all over the
world. It's have asthma in
China, they have asthma in
Australia, they have asthma
here.
Though compared to what
I think that's important to
know.
The other thing that I think
that we've, we're, we're missing
here, and I would really like
to, to have some better data. I
heard, I was looking this up
here, I was trying to find it.
The cleanest barrel of oil in
the world.
Comes from the Permian Basin.
Now, what that means is not only
is the oil itself.
clean
But how you get it out of the
ground, the production is clean.
How you transport it is clean.
So the cleanest barrel of oil in
the world. Now, I heard that.
I couldn't find it here.
Well I, I admit that I don't
have the, the reference other
than whoever told me this, OK?
But it makes sense.
Because we already know that the
oil there is good oil.
And we know that we've got a lot
of rules today that make it
clean in the production.
So why would we want to shut
down the cleanest oil.
And encourage Russia or
Venezuela or Saudi Arabia or
Iran to produce more oil that we
would then buy from them and arm
them so that they could kill
more people.
Why would we want to push that
production to those countries.
Their their oil and their
production is not as clean as
America.
And we're using it to build
hospitals in New Mexico.
They're using it to buy weapons
in Ukraine.
Be a difference compared to
what?
That's the question. So on all
of these things.
All of these things.
Before we do something stupid,
we need to say compared to what?
On everything, and at what cost?
You hit the at what cost?
We didn't hit compared to what.
And I think that that's
important.
Important.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the time.
Um
This is a lot of work. This is,
I want to thank you for, for
taking a, a stab at this and
really with all the other
factors and variables that you
couldn't include in, in this
work that you did, because it's
gonna take a little bit longer
for you to do that. With that
said, from the first
presentation we had from um
It was mentioned that the, the
OPEC in the market actually
Affects our production and
supply by withholding supplies
so that there's a market
control, I assume, or as I
heard.
Was that used in your factoring
in any of, of your data or
information. And if so, which
would have a bigger effect on
production.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Wuhan.
Yes, that, uh, that type of
analysis that Mr. Golding
presented is incorporated in
here through our estimates of
prices.
So, the expectations that Mr.
Golding laid out.
are certainly this same
expectations we build into our
oil and gas price forecasts. We
have very similar outlooks as,
as Mr. Golding presented, um,
for that reason.
Um, I think that if the question
is, would say a price war or, or
to Mr. Golding's mention of, um,
you know, market control, uh,
increasing production to drop
prices to increase market
control.
That can have a very large
impact to the extent of the of
the price war to the extent
prices decline, has different
impacts on production in New
Mexico and different impacts on,
on
Production value or tax revenue.
Um
But it could certainly be
greater than the impact of
setbacks if prices were to go
low enough, say $30 in the $30
or even the low 40s, we could
see um break even prices being
hit, which would slow down
significantly more drilling in
New Mexico. But that being said,
we do not currently estimate
that to happen.
Thank you for, thank you for
that last statement. We don't,
we don't presume that that's
going to happen. In fact, we
know that.
There's a, there's a stable line
of production and for the future
for the
The longer future, I think we've
said that in this committee
before too, Mr. Chair. I guess
what I'm trying to get out is
during the report here, it says
it set backs are anywhere from
10 or 5 to 10%.
Um
Did your, a, a decrease, are we
looking at
Profits and production, when
we're looking at record amounts
of production. We're looking at
record amounts of profits for
the industries.
What price are we putting on
health. And also, Mr. Chart, I'd
also like to note that
You know, I don't, were you a
second question, Mr. Chair, did
you estimate any of the natural
disasters due to
Um, the effects of this industry
in our state, uh, just our state
alone. I mean, there's a global
effect as well. Now, those are,
those
Or variables as well. So this,
what I'm getting at, Mr. Chair,
we don't have a full picture of
all the
The variables are are in the
effects of this industry, but
what we are trying to do is find
solutions. And I will say that
that is really important too, as
we're working across the board
with industry and with
everybody. We're trying to look
at solutions. This is another
way of us coming together to not
just look at the, the 5%
economy, uh,
That could be could be lost.
From the, you know, for
setbacks. It's to say.
Where are our values here? Um,
is it more valuable to protect?
Or health
And um
In our, and our taxpayers here
in New Mexico by figuring out a
type of solution because it's
not just based on what we are
going to get in the revenues.
It's based on a bigger overview
of what is, is happening due to
um
The uses of of this product.
Quite frankly, Mr. Chair, so I
think this is a bigger
conversation. I really
appreciate the work. This gives
us a lot of insight, but I don't
think it's to the full and clear
picture that we're, that we need
to make some very big decisions,
but decisions, big decisions are
already being made.
Economically,
From our federal government on
down. We do have timelines of
how we are trying to move away
from uh depend dependency on oil
and gas, and I don't see this as
part of the equation. What we
have done in New Mexico is
we've, we've had a, a, a very
good bill from Senator Bobby
Gonzalez SB 26 in 2023. The
strategized and new strategy to
help us um cheer up.
What some of these downfalls
could be the downturns in the
economy due to these uh what we
need to do through our ETA and
through other policies received
from the federal government and
global, um,
issues we have due to this
industry. I'm just trying to be
realistic here. I'm not saying
we're gonna move completely away
from oil and gas. We, we know
the dependency and
And the benefits we, we have
from the industry, what I'm
saying is, how are we going to
strategize to say we need to
look in a better way to
Through all scopes,
all these variables of how we
can get to a better place to
protect the health of our New
Mexicans.
And if, if the concern is how
the air is blowing, then it not
only affects this population in
this state, it affects
populations in other states, in
other areas. So that can't even
be measured, uh, Mr. Chair, what
I'm saying this is a bigger,
bigger, bigger issue. Um, and we
as the policymakers.
Here in New Mexico, and on this
committee understand that we
have a job to do in
understanding where our revenues
come from, and working with that
industry to see how we can, um,
Better prepare for our future,
but we also, the first priority
are our taxpayers and their
health.
And what
We need to get some better data
or more data or just a fuller
scope of information because I
don't think we're seeing the
entire scope of that here,
though you did incredible work
and I commend you for that. I
just think there is more to do.
We need more data, we need more
information. And if5% to 10%
decrease in those reed revenues
if it can be proven that we will
improve the health.
Of our taxpayers and maybe
others in other states as we're
talking as the wind blows, Mr.
Chair, I think it's really well
worth the investment if that's
the way we want to look at this.
Um, but I do not believe we have
enough information. Um,
It's just focused on, on the
revenue part of this. We need
more information from these
other variables that I've
mentioned.
And I think we owe it to our
To our taxpayers and to our
state to do that type of work,
and I commended the chair and
making and the committee for
doing this part, this portion of
it. It's really important, but
it just gives us uh a short view
into this and, and we don't need
to start this, this division of
Of um
You know, just uh focus on oil
and gas and industry and
protecting that at all costs
versus, you know, we have to,
you know,
have this other discussion and,
and create this polarization
that
I don't think it needs to be um
part of the discussion right
now. I think the more
information that we get, the
better, um, policies we can come
up with just like what we did
with Senator Gonzalez's policy
because that's the direction
we're truly moving in. That's
really what's moving, uh, we're
missing from this conversation
today. I think being proactive,
having a holistic approach to
this is really where we want to
be, Mr. Chair, but I don't.
We're just getting um
The tip of the iceberg as far as
I'm concerned with this
information piece and we need to
sit down and really have some
better strategy and looking at
our policies moving forward.
It's gonna, it's gonna take a
lot more than this and that's
I mean at a polarized uh way or
approach what I'm hearing today.
We need to stop that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I appreciate the
time.
Thank you, Representative
Sariana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First,
thank you so much, you and your
team for all your hard work on
this um presentation. I really
appreciate you. Um, I love LFC.
Um, comparing human health to
the value of gas and oil
involves weighing the economic
benefits of fossil fuels against
their negative impacts on
health.
Of New Mexicans.
Um
I was invited to the rollout of
the new healthcare database
synchronous, which tells and
shows, um, the effects, the gas
and oil, um,
has on the community surrounding
the extraction areas. It shows
it and it shows the cost to the
state, but yet we cannot get
that information from Department
of Health or whatever they're
called now. When we can get
that, we will show the effects
and the cost to these
communities because we can, we
can say, oh, nobody's really
getting hurt. Butal is brave
enough to say, yes, we are,
let's move those setbacks back.
Um.
The health costs.
They lead to
Help, help, um,
Respiratory disease, all these
different things, heart
conditions, illnesses that
result in significant public
health expenditures. We saw that
yesterday in the meeting when we
were talking about the effects
of wildfires, the extreme
effects of wildfires and are
flooding that is directly caused
by gas and oil, and we know
that.
So
So this industry and what we're
trying to say is great because
it gives us so much money, is
hurting New Mexico in so many
ways. We are paying for the cost
of cleanup. We are paying for
people with people's lives
because of wild flowers, fires
and floods. These have to be
important to us. We can't just
say money is the most important
thing. It's not. It really
isn't.
Um,
I don't know how to make it
clear, I guess, cause yesterday
when we were talking about the
effects of the wildfires and the
floods.
And the costume New Mexico. This
isn't going to change. We're
gonna, it's gonna continue as
long as we have um this industry
causing the heat effects it is,
the global warming, the gas, we
learned in our last meeting
about ozone, thanks to Senator
Woods asking what is ozone? We,
we, we learned what it is and
how it affects and how directly
gas oil directly impacts it, and
it's, it's hurting our state,
it's hurting our world, but we
don't seem to care because money
is so important.
Um, I think the quality of life
of the, of the community, we
have to really look at. These
kids, 34,000 kids would live
within a mile or go to school
within 1 mile of an extraction
site.
We know what's coming out of the
extraction sites, benzene.
Carbon dioxide.
All these methane, these things
hurt our kids. So their future
is just expendable, I guess.
I guess that's what we're
saying because if money is more
important than anything else,
that's what we're saying, and I
don't believe that. I don't
believe as a state, we don't
find our kids and our educate,
educating our kids is important.
We give a lot of money to it.
But yet
They're expendable here, and
that's not right. And that's
what we have to think about as a
legislature. Our job is to look
at New Mexicans and how do we
help them?
Not Manhattan, New Mexico.
Um
I guess, while gas and oil has
significant economic value.
There's impacts on human health
can be profound and
far-reaching.
Prioritizing health and energy
policies and investments can
lead to more sustainable and
equitable outcomes. We need to
focus on how we move away from
this industry because it is
hurting us so much.
Um
And and and thank you for
everything you said and did and
everything you, you came up
with, but I still believe, um,
money can't be the most
important thing to the states.
Our kids, our communities,
That live within this area have
to be important too.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Sariana. You know, we started
this journey in Carlsbad, right,
to educate ourselves, and this
is, this is educational, right?
We're not
Drawing the basis analysis. This
is an educational process
because nobody knew what
setbacks really were, what they
really did, and how they
affected anybody, so.
And Mr. Chairman, thank you for
that. I do appreciate that and I
do appreciate this presentation
and all the time we bringing to
this because everyone needs to
know what's happening. And, and
that the gas and oil industry,
yes, it's great for our state
and the money, but if there are
other effects and, and like I
said, um, with climate change
and greenhouse gasses, wildfires
aren't gonna stop. They're gonna
continue. Floods aren't gonna
stop. They're gonna continue. So
we're gonna be paying out for a
long time because of this
industry, so anyway.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I don't.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Woods.
And so let me go down the list
to get Senator Woods,
Representative Baca,
Representative Chatfield,
Representative Garcia and
Senator Padilla.
And represents small.
Tender woods.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I, I wanna
thank you for the opportunity
for
To be on this committee and, and
uh
Hear this discussion.
My question are gonna be about
Something you may not be able to
answer, but maybe
I could ask you to think about
it when you're further analysis.
In, in the United States, we, we
created a
Uh, a system of government, and
then we created a a rule of law.
Because when we
Came
When our forefathers came.
They decided that
The king didn't know everything.
That, uh, there was value in
private property ownership.
That an economy could happen.
Because people actually want to
take initiative to work for
themselves, better their
families.
And
It created a a capitalistic
system that, that many people
are still fighting against
today.
And uh there there's certainly
countries in the world.
That, uh
Uh
Government has taken over
industry.
Rush is a perfect example.
Uh, they have taken over
industry, uh,
To create uh wealth for
Themselves or or government.
And
So, but in the United States
right now, I'm pretty sure.
Uh
Private ownership of property.
It's still a big thing.
And I think, uh, you know,
Probably everybody in the room
owns a car.
Every probably everybody in the
room, a lot of you own a house.
And I know I'm gonna make these
statements being a non-lawyer,
everybody knows that I'm
The furthest from a lawyer,
there was, but
I had a couple of uh mentors.
During my legislative time.
Uh, and I hope I don't ruin
these guys' reputation.
By mentioning names.
One of them was Kenny Martinez.
And one of them was Michael
Sanchez.
And they both believed
That there were fundamental
laws.
That we had to deal with.
So, my question to you,
is on page 15.
And it shows the share of New
Mexico wells affected.
And when we talk about
You know,
The, the private ownership.
Of these wells.
And the total
Um
Sheriff of New Mexico oil wells
affected, and it shows private
ownership, the total.
is 52%.
And
When it goes to the counties of
80 and San Juan.
Private ownership is 71%.
Of the wells affected.
So just a quick question.
You know, and our constitution,
there's this little deal about
compensation,
compensation for a taking.
Is there, has there been any
thought?
About
There will be a taking.
this regulation.
I mean, if, if a law passes.
And whatever setback is there.
Is there any thought to that
being a taking, taking.
Of a private individual's
property.
And even at that, when, when we
go, you know, uh, there, there's
much.
Thought in the state in Mexico
that uh state owns the water.
For example, it's a natural
resource, the state owns it.
But
The person that put that to
beneficial use has, has a water
right.
So he has a right.
That if we take that right away
from him.
Then we're probably gonna have
to compensate.
Someone does.
All right, how about oil and
gas. Now all is a completely
separate type of of uh law
pertaining to oil and water,
does the state own all the oil
in the state of New Mexico.
You know, evidently not when we
start talking about the Federal
Reserve over here, it's got on
page 9.
It shows production.
By uh
By the federal, private, and
state.
So that gives me an indication.
Those are the owners of that
oil.
Not the state of Mexico, the
state of Mexico has the red
there on that chart.
So again, the setback rule in
the Mexico.
Will that govern
The Federal leases.
I know,
I saw him in here a while ago.
I'm sure he's.
He may have left already.
But my question to you, uh, have
we
Have we included in our
Financial impact.
Any thought about takings and
what those will cost.
Mr. Chair and is, yes, Mr. Chair
and Senator Woods, we have
thought about that, um,
are, are finding is that if
setbacks were to somehow be
created that impacted already
permitted, already producing
wells, that would certainly
trigger compensation.
For this analysis, um, we were
assuming setbacks only applied
to not yet permitted wells. So
there wouldn't be a taking and,
and your example, and so there
wouldn't be compensation needing
needing to be provided. But yes,
absolutely, if, if
Any legislation, or if, or if
such legislation were to remove
the ability of existing permits
to produce and and to your point
as well, even leases, leases uh
to produce even on New Mexico
resources could
Trigger uh uh a need to
compensate for the taking of
that uh ability to produce. But
for this analysis and for the uh
uh proposed setbacks, that would
not be the case because they're
not yet permitted.
It only would apply to not yet
permitted production.
So in other words, if, if I had
private property.
And it didn't have a permit to
drill on it.
That would tell me that I would
never be able to drill on that
private property.
And yet that wouldn't be a take.
No, Mr. Chair, in our analysis,
it wouldn't be.
Well, I can see that that could
be a little challenge somewhere.
We have, we have a
Very emotional issue here.
I know.
But I worry as much about the
rule of law as anything.
Because it without
The ability to hold private
property in our nation.
Unless we just want to
Turn our laws upside down, and
have the state own everything.
And then all of a sudden,
We are all employees of the
state.
And as you know, right now,
The state employs about 1/3 of
the people in the state.
About 30%, not 3.
30%, including if you can
include the school teachers as
being state employees.
Not to say they don't do a good
job, they don't do a service,
they provide services.
But their net wages.
paid by a
a a
Taxpayer
They pay taxes too, but their
total wages and their benefits.
paid
taxpayer.
And
You know, uh
Until, you know, this is all
great stuff, there's all.
The motion in this thing.
But physically responsible
people.
After to realize.
That what was it that we saw
that that
On page 21.
On page 21, you know.
The estimated production loss of
$4.5 billion.
In 2035.
What are we gonna lay out?
Which one of these free
programs, or we're gonna
eliminate?
Is it free college?
Rehousing
food to our kids.
Which one of the three are we
gonna give up?
It's, it's a, it's a long term
deal.
So we're talking about is, but
as you see these oil wells.
Declined very quickly after
their driven.
So if we cut,
We cut permitting and no new, no
new oil wells.
We're gonna run out of money big
time hurry.
Others thought that we can our
our permanent funds are gonna.
Then we're going to make a lot
of money out of, out of those
and now, investments are going
to carry the day.
But the only way investments
carry the day, if some other
thing that we're investing is
making money.
So
That's a challenge also.
I appreciate your report. I
think you did a very thorough
job in looking at it, uh, I, I
am amazed that you could take
this many data points.
And overlay them, and, and come
up with a lot of good
information.
Uh,
it, this, this
Production setbacks scenario.
Uh, on, on, well, on page 20 on
page.
On page 19, on page 18.
You know,
Look at what will happen if we
just stop drilling for oil
today.
And how many people will live in
the state of New Mexico.
In 2035.
If we just eliminate oil and gas
production.
Under the same scenario we live
in today.
Where we support so much of our
population.
And you don't have much, how
much population we have under
our, our Medicaid right now, and
we're talking about expanding
even that to cover more people.
And what that will cost.
The state of New Mexico.
So
Until
I am shown.
Another source of revenue.
This being pragmatic I can't
see.
What we can do here.
That, that makes sense.
If we're gonna keep the same
standard.
Of giving
That we are doing today.
you know,
I, I'm out of here. Thank you,
Mr. Chair
Representative Chatville, we're
45 minutes behind time frame
now, so we're gonna have to
speed it up a little bit.
Uh, I don't remember who I sit
next, so I got Roer Chatfield
and Representative Garcia
Padilla on the list.
Representative uh Garcia, why
don't you go first and then
we'll just swing back around. So
be as quick as we can to make
sure we're asking questions.
Represented Garcia, fire away.
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I have more of a comment.
And one question and permitted.
You mentioned earlier in your uh
uh presentation that Mexico
takes a long time to.
Put out firm, is that correct?
Mr. Chair, I'm not sure if Mr.
Golding is still online um with
his analysis to answer if if
he's not, that's fine, you know,
that's fine, uh, I do wanna just
to comment, OK?
This committee and to all the
people hearing, you know, in
2016 when I came into the
office.
He was broke.
No, we were sweeping money from
everybody and everybody's crying
our kids don't have this free,
they don't have that free, you
know, and we're targeting oil
and gas. That's what we're doing
here.
And you know, and everybody
wants clean air.
fresh water, we all do.
But we're biting the hand that
feeds us, and at the end of the
day, we're gonna be saying what
happened in 2016, how quickly do
we forgot.
You know, I came into office in
2016.
I was appointed to by the
Governor Martinez into office
and the state was broke and we
were sweeping money from
everybody, from education, from
health, from everybody, but we
just need to keep that thought
in mind, you know, take away oil
and gas and what are we gonna
do?
You know, cause uh clean energy
is fine, you know, these
turbines that we have out here.
They all have oil in them every
single one of them run off of
oil.
So we take oil and gas off,
we're not gonna have no turbines
either. That's just the problem,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Representative Chapville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, you know, mankind is, I, I,
first of all, I appreciate the
hard work you did and I'm
impressed that you're able to
come out and, and I appreciate
you sitting there and being the
recipient of all these comments
of wisdom that we're bringing uh
forth.
Mankind over the years they uh
have survived a lot, you know,
the earth was it had dinosaurs
on it and then we had the ice
age and so it was hot and
tropical and then it went into a
cooling deal and man came out of
that ice age, uh, doing fine
and, and through many, many
different types.
Of whether
Uh, we have survived.
Things that other species
couldn't because of our ability
to adapt. That's what we're
doing right now, we're adapting,
right? Uh.
Going into a little, little
different time of, of climate
and, and that's happened before.
It's big.
Uh, big, uh, circular thing that
comes around here on this earth.
Uh
I'm unconvinced.
That setbacks.
will cure all the, all of our
health pro issues.
I, I don't think there's
anything more important to
anybody setting up here than
health and safety. We all
Uh
That's our top concern for all
of us, health and safety.
Uh, the discussion is how do we
get there discussion is how do
we adapt?
So I'm unconvinced that
increasing setbacks.
It is going to cure.
Much, if any of our health
problems.
I am unconvinced that reducing
Uh
Climate change without dealing
with density of forests.
is going to stop forest fires.
Uh, it, they, they, they work in
tandem. Senator Woods had a good
point. You need to, to have a, a
catastrophic fire, you need a
wet year followed by a dry year,
so wet year grows a lot of
undergrowth and the dry year,
uh, helps it to ignite, so
Uh, hopefully we can uh get
through this. I think we need to
take a real deep hard look
before we sacrifice a large.
percentage of the income of this
state is something that has not
been proven.
To solve the problem we're
trying to support to solve.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. Torres for this.
Um, I'm gonna be directing my
questions. So,
I've been in office since 2022.
Can you tell me how much our
budget, the state budget,
overall state budgets has
increased between then and
today.
If you don't have, I mean, just
ballpark. I, I don't know.
I, I believe when I first came
in it was, we were somewhere
around $7 billion.
I believe now we're looking at
$10 billion. I mean, if that is
that at least in the ballpark,
Mr. Chair, I believe we did
around 12% um in, in the
previous year and then about 6%
after that. So maybe around 18.
%
Growth over that period.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mrs. Doors. And I, I
guess
And I sit here and, and I cannot
be an advocate and a champion
for education.
Without at least having concern
for our students in our schools.
And, and my big dilemma is where
did they intersect?
Whereas
Um
Uh, the intersection because
The impact on funding for
education and some of the
programs that outlined by
Senator Woods are important to
me.
Can you tell me as far as with
the
Very briefly.
How the oil and gas industry has
helped both the school, uh,
Capitol Oli Fund and the uh SCG
or the funding for our students.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Baca, 100% of
School capital outlay comes from
severance taxes.
Um, and I believe right now
we're maybe around 35% of the
state budget coming from direct
sources, so about 35% of the SCG
could be attributable to that.
Although,
It's a little tricky if you
include permanent funds, but
I'll leave it at that.
And, and thank you, Mr. Sherman,
and thank you, and, and that's
why I'm saying I sit out here
and I, I think of the STEM
centers that I have been
supported by this industry. I
stood out there and I, I look at
The challenges that we have as
far as our low performing
schools and it's not
Because of the hard work of our
teachers or students.
We've got to be able, this, this
has been a bipartisan.
Uh, effort to support our
schools.
And quite honestly, I fear.
That
If we are not careful and
diligent about this.
It will be, it will affect our
ability to fund our schools for
future generations cause I don't
see in the near future, any
foreseeable replacement of this
industry.
So I, as I said before, I'm, I'm
I, I really do think that we
have to consider very closely is
where they intersect. I do
believe in higher standards and
I do believe that we should hold
people responsible for this, but
I also believe that many of
these folks working there, they
move their families within these
sites as well. So, I, I think
it's, it's where they intersect
as far as this, we cannot say
it's not about just the money.
We cannot say that we don't care
about people, but we also cannot
make decisions that will have
the unintended consequences and
effect our capital.
outlay our infrastructure, our
healthcare, so I think that
that's why we need a lot more
information around this very
sensitive topic. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Represented Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, uh, Izzy and Mr.
Golding for the presentations.
Um, I would like to focus a
little bit on the, uh, fiscal
impacts directly, um, and I
wanna
Preface all of this with, I
think this is a fantastic piece
of work, um, and what it really
demonstrates is the complexity
of this issue and that the
number of factors that go in and
the um still the remaining
uncertainties.
Um
Hopefully my questions are
easier.
Um, so, on page 23, the direct
estimated direct cost for
setbacks.
Um, it, it appears to me that uh
by 2027, we are looking at um an
estimated impact of slightly
over $100 million.
Is that correct? 150 million
about 150? OK. And then 2028 is
450 million.
Close to 500 million, yeah OK,
close to 500 million. So, um,
Can you remind me what the
fiscal, the positive revenue
impact to the state, the film
industry brings to New Mexico.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon.
Um, uh, we've seen studies
anywhere from say a 19 cents on
the dollar returned to the state
to maybe 50 cents on the dollar.
So if we're spending 100 $100
million for round numbers, it's
probably closer to 120, but $100
million maybe, maybe 19.
19 to $50 million back from
that.
Spending.
OK, so, um, that industry
sector.
Um
It is about 50 million, we could
say optimistically.
Positive
Or is that too high?
Mr. Chair, uh, so we, we provide
credits that are, you know,
already north of $100 million.
So,
Uh, it, it would be.
I, I guess I shouldn't venture
off the top of my head. What it,
it, it's certainly a multiplier
above that amount of this total
spend, economic, but the fiscal
benefit is what I'm mentioning
about maybe, maybe around $19
million. OK, thank you. And, and
sorry for the.
Asking that question cause it's
not really on topic, but um what
I'm trying to get at is we as a
state have been investing in the
film industry for 20 years,
approximately.
And the
You know, the money going into
the state budget from that
industry is still relatively
small.
Um, compared to what we would be
looking at, uh, as a direct, uh,
state fiscal cost of, of a
potential.
Policy change. Um, regardless of
whether or not the policy change
is something that we move
forward with. Um, what I would
like to highlight is that
Our state currently is very
dependent on just a few
industries, Oil and gas, film,
outdoor recreation, for
instance, and then a lot of
benefit from our national labs,
um, and, and military
installations. Um, and so if
We are looking at something like
this. I just think it's
important for this committee to
really um prioritize and act
with some sense of urgency to
diversify our economy, because
We are gonna have a hard time,
um, compensating or making up
for a loss of 150 million,
nearly 500 million in just a few
short years, um, and looking
toward a billion dollars in 10
years. And so, no matter what
the decision is regarding
setbacks, um, we really need to,
uh,
Invest substantially and
urgently in other forms of
revenue.
So
Thank you. That was it.
Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, you know, I couldn't have,
I, I represented Dixon almost
gave my exact comments and
speech I was gonna make. I mean,
all my points that I was gonna
talk about here we're
were made by folks here and
thank you so much for this
excellent, you know, analysis,
like everyone has said, I think
it's fantastic. I think we need
to see this, you know, more
often and more regularly. So,
especially with the potentially
40% new state Senate next year
and I'm not sure what the
newness in the house is gonna
be, but it's got to be up there
somewhere. Um
You know, it's not lost on me.
I've stood up in the Senate
floor multiple times and said
it's not lost on me and how I've
remodeled my public schools and
built new public schools in my
district, Rhodes, um, you know,
a parks, swimming pools, all
these things that money has to
come from somewhere, and it does
come in large part from an
industry like this and, and I'm
grateful for that. I'm, I'm very
appreciative of that. I mean, my
area's been overlooked for, I
don't know how long, but, uh,
but I've been able to to
commandeer some of these dollars
and get that done. So I, I think
this industry. I think they're
doing a a phenomenal job for
that standpoint.
On the other side of the coin on
the health issues, I don't know
why we can't do both. I mean,
when, when, when I see slide 23,
and I'm sure that you have a
whole other couple of slides
here to talk about the other
costs of setbacks and all of
that. I think all that needs to
be taken into account, and I
don't know why we can't do both.
I really feel like we're an
innovative, smart people, and
we've done a lot of wonderful
remarkable things. I don't know
why we can't find out how to do
this industry in New Mexico in a
way that doesn't affect health
and children and all the things
that you heard about today, Mr.
Chairman, and, and, um.
I yeah, I mean, it, it's just
remarkable that, you know, we're
just getting so hung up on this
thing when we can truly just
wrap our heads around how to
make this better for all of us.
We can do both of these. I'm a
firm believer in that.
The one thing that I would like
to see in your analysis, and
this isn't a question, it's just
more of a, a maybe add on to
this or something, and it's
probably in one of the other
myriads of things you do for us,
Izzy, so let me just, let me
just say that I probably just
haven't been able to keep up
with all of it. And that is, um,
you know, I, I'd really like to
see a, a real sliding scale on
Effects to this industry, and
not just this industry. I mean,
you, as a matter of fact, you
could talk about health concerns
with windmills, mills. I mean,
the, when they fall down to the
ground, or all whatever they're
killing in the air or whatever,
and there's so many other
things. I don't think people
realize how many gallons or
barrels of oil are needed to
operate one of those things.
You, you could put this in any
industry. We just happen to be
looking at this one today
because it's one of our cash
cows, if you will.
So, but what I'd like to see is
actual regular Mr. Chairman
reporting on the drop off of,
you know, when this revenue
stream is going to drop off. And
what, what are we truly, what is
our backstop here?
We're trying to do fund reform,
and we, we talk every couple of
years about, you know, I don't
know how many funds, 350 or
whatever, we probably need 30
funds to do everything that we
want to do. But we probably need
to see regular, more um analysis
on when, when this revenue
starts source starts dropping
off. So it answers what a lot of
the members up here said, Well,
what is the other funding
source? And, and I don't know
that we're doing that. Do you
want to make a quick comment on
that at all or I'm just pointing
out a few things, you know, that
you know we're doing that we,
that we could be doing more of
or less.
love to shore up what's going to
happen here.
Uh, Mr. Senator, just to be
brief, we do have some work that
we produce annually for you all,
the long-term estimate, which
attempts to get at that cliff
effect and uh potential
transitions of, of sort of
revenue proportions of revenue
within the budget, um, for those
interested, I would, I would
encourage to, to look at that.
Um,
And, and I'll leave it, leave it
at that. Yeah, so, so Mr.
Chairman, I think when we do
something like what we just did
with this phenomenal analysis
here. I'd like to see that be a
part of the conversation. Like,
how does this link up with what
you just described. So that we
see our deficit at the moment,
what are we trying to backfill?
We're trying to backfill in 3
years X, 5 years, 7 years, and
here's what you've done
legislature, and maybe you want
to do, like in my business,
every year we have an exercise,
Mr. Chairman, where we lined up
all of our revenue sources and
we see which ones are making 2%.
You know, margin and which ones
are making 52%. Guess what? The
2% gets shut down and that
dollar, those dollars get put
into the 50, 40 or whatever
area.
Plain and simple. I think we
really need to do that kind of
analysis here. So that we know
what we're sort of shooting at
or aiming toward.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Representative Small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you to all the
presenters. I'm gonna first ask
Mr. Golding a few questions, uh,
and very much appreciate you,
uh, your presentation, uh, the
insight in your time. First, Mr.
Gold, uh, ah, you, um, the red
count, uh, the rig sort of um
breakdown. Uh, it's been
something that I've anecdotally
tried to follow, and I'll lay
out sort of my understanding
briefly and would love.
your feedback, uh, the, the, the
Delaware, of course, is the main
part of the Permian in New
Mexico, as you noted, um, we,
there's the central and Midland
in Texas.
And I've sort of, it seems to me
that we're maybe, although we
have some of the best producing,
uh, area where of quarter or so
of the actual
per.
Land area and then obviously
there are a number of other
areas in Texas that produce from
the eagle fur to others. Is
that, does that sound roughly
fair?
OK, so, uh, my, what I've
noticed is that the rig count in
New Mexico and this is based on
the public Baker Hughes red
count data we're um we're
consistently, I mean, when I
first started looking at this,
maybe 3 years ago, as I recall,
we were sort of in the mid to
low, while we're in the low 30s.
Uh, share of New Mexico rigs
compared to Texas rigs.
Uh, that we had a, you know, 30,
30 odd%, maybe 32, 33. What I've
noticed is that's crept up and
we're now consistently above 35
and approaching 36, 37. I don't
know what we are now. Um,
And so it just, it sort of seems
to reinforce to me that actually
it's better to drill in New
Mexico. Um, there are different
reasons and we've had very
detailed uh from our LFC and
others, there are trade-offs,
the timelines, as you noted, are
certainly real. There are many
other
Additional costs associated with
drilling in Texas, related to
the private land ownership, um,
and, and but in a longer time
frame to drill on straight on
state and federal land in New
Mexico, in particularly federal
land. So,
It just seems like our rig count
is actually
Out competing are land share, if
you will.
Yeah.
Got it, got it. Thank you very
much. Um, one thing I'd be
interested in the future and
it's something we've, we've done
a lot of work on as a
legislature. I think we're
poised to do more on both from
an analysis uh understanding,
but the role of produced water,
uh, we know that there's, that
it's um
Uh, a very significant factor
challenges and opportunities
sort of abound.
And that particularly in Texas,
the seismicity issues related to
produce water disposal are
significant challenges, sort of
across the board for production,
but if there are things that we
can share or that you want to
share on that now, that's great.
If not, maybe that's area, those
are areas of further
collaboration because very much
a shared basin from the water
perspective also.
Got it. Thank you very much. Um,
Secondly, uh, on the outlook,
uh, I want to spend just a brief
amount of time on the Outlook
piece uh one, this is sort of a,
you're feeling, but the growth
in production in the Permian. Do
you think that that has slowed
upstream exploration in other
parts of the world, that is,
they're sort of
And the, and keeping the prices
lower, that it's actually slowed
development of new oil reserves.
Globally.
Well
Got it. Thank you very much, uh,
super appreciate the short cycle
long cycle. That's the first
time I've heard that in sort of
this context and think very
helpful. Uh, finally, the sort
of
Flattened growth curve or
flattened oil demand growth
globally.
That seems
there seems like there's
scenarios there where there's
continued economic growth, but
that, as you noted, the shift to
EVs, LNG displacing diesel and
other things that, do you think
that there's
Um, more of a decoupling from
oil demand and economic growth
that we're starting to see
Got it. Uh, thank you very much.
This is, it's really, yeah,
thank you, really remarkable
insights and I think that you
see the caliber of sort of our
team here and to be able uh to
be sort of the heart of this for
our nation, really appreciate
your work and time and the
opportunity to collaborate and
send questions, uh,
Uh, down the, down the road. Uh,
briefly want to go now to um
our, the chief economist one,
just want to really say a big
thank you, uh, Ms Fabian, Mr.
Torres, really, and your teams,
obviously, because it's a team
effort, really impressive for,
for Mr. Torres, you know, Las
Cruces is very proud, and I
think shows the caliber of the
work that uh yeah, and um the
question one on the health
impacts
Are there any, is you've noted
some, some areas where there's
clear need for future study and
questions. Do we know if any of
that is happening and are there
any sort of, here's what would
be needed to better understand
these questions in more detail.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair. We've uh
reached out, hopefully working
with the department to get
access to that data soon. Um,
we, we believe it exists. I
think, uh, uh, rates of, you
know, some of the diseases that
have been mentioned premature
birth weight, um, premature
mortality, um, lung conditions,
all those things, we, we think
that they should be available
and uh once we get access to
them, either we can conduct the
analysis or hopefully we could
also work with the department to
conduct that analysis. Awesome.
Thank you very much.
much for that. Um,
Secondly, um, on page 26 of your
presentation, there's obviously,
you know some of the limitation
of estimates. Are there any
there that you would highlight
for us that have
Potentially outsized importance
or is that sort of the nature of
some of these unknowns that it's
very difficult to quantify even
their impact should they change.
Mr. Chair, Representative small
as long as this list is, these
are the ones that we identified
that could have the largest
impact on these estimates. Uh,
the ones that come to mind,
price, price is huge. If prices
go higher, the impacts could,
could be tremendously higher if
they're lower, it could be
lower. Um, but, but I, I really
do want to highlight that we're
not modeling the impact to
setbacks on other production
facilities like tank batteries,
compressor stations, gas plants,
pipelines, I mean, all of those
things could have large impacts.
Um,
And I guess for me, what
actually stands out is the lost
acreage is, is, for me, I, you
know, we're taking analysis from
someone else and um that, that's
a huge variable for me, uh,
because in addition to just lost
acreage, uh, I, I'm not sure
what the lost production is from
uh uh uh well outside of the
setback zone becoming
uneconomical because of the
setback. So,
I, I would highlight those. OK.
Thank, thank you very much.
That's super helpful. And I
think that so it, it does sort
of the production constraint
through area sort of sur the
sort of surface denial that
um
Appreciate sort of really
highlighting that one. Mr.
Chair, I think my, one of the
things and I really appreciate
bringing in the Fed continues
LFCs, um,
Sort of just really leadership
in this.
The, uh, I'll be continually
super interested in
What seems to be the
World-class strength, which
we've heard again and again for
production in New Mexico.
And as we see a flattening and
ultimately or sort of a
Uh, declining ascent.
A flattening, and then
ultimately a decline in sort of
world demand based mostly around
transportation. There are very
valid points about inclusion of
um
All of the components of fossil
fuels in a wide application in
daily and future life, including
in a decarbonizing.
Uh
Sort of world
And so it'll be very interesting
and it seems to show
That New Mexico's production is
globally competitive as the
world burns less fossil fuel.
Uh, burns it at a sort of a
slower rate of incline, a steady
rate of sort of uh mid or yeah,
that steady point and then even
as there is less burn for
transportation, the necessary
components for a world economy,
uh, that could be supplied by
production in New Mexico, which
uh portends a very, I think,
Could be a very uh strong
outlook for our state and our
world.
Yeah, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Golding, let
me ask you some questions. On
page 5 of your slide
presentation here.
Hope you're, they're still
there, yep, you're still there.
Uh, I'm looking at it in as a
business guy, I'm looking the
2030 is a race to production.
Would, would I be correct in
that assumption on that slide. I
mean, there's a lot of, I don't
know what a lot of these BP net
zero is the 2030 is the breaking
point across oil production.
Is that world demand or is this?
Yes, long-term demand forecasts.
OK. But, I mean, it's really a
demand to 2030 and then it's
anybody's guess after 2030 of
word demand and that zero play
into those scenarios.
Right. And then on
I want you to go over for me.
get back to it here.
On the OPEC scenario on page 10.
And, and you're telling us in
2025.
This next year that OPEC could
change.
The modeling and it could drive
the market up or down. Could you
go over that for me one more
time so I can get a clear copy.
OK. I mean, that, that's
something that's really, really
gonna have to watch, especially
in New Mexico because we're
forecasting is basing off 76 or
$74 and if OPEC increase the
production and the market
doesn't hold, then we're gonna
be looking at a completely
different scenario rather
quickly, and this is not the
first time it's happened.
This may be the 3rd or 4th that
I'm
Been through in, in, in watching
that scenario so for our
economists, I mean, OPEC is
gonna be the demand leader,
right? And how much it costs. I
mean, cause their cost to put
that barrel of oil on the shores
of the United States is so
cheap, roughly $30 I think, last
time I heard that, that there's
no way that US
Oil companies can keep up with
that cost for production, cause
their costs are a lot higher to
get them out of the ground just
to get him.
To there. And so,
So you, once, for once I'm
hearing that we have OPEC over a
barrel with production in the US
is pretty much that, that,
that's a nice scenario to be in
because when we can control OPEC
and they need $90 a barrel
pricing in order to service
their debt and, and we're only
needing to look at
60 to 65 to, to anywhere above
that, right? To service the US
costs, right? I mean, that's,
that's interesting to me that
the, the roles have really
changed.
That OPEC is not gonna be the
leader driver in in oil price
that the US can play in that in
the premium can play in that
pretty heavily. Am I correct in
saying that?
OK. Thank you. Busy and, and you
got to, Izzy and Jennifer, I
mean.
That's a lot of hard work over
the whole internet, and I
appreciate that.
It's a little rough on, on, on
either side that sometimes cause
I know you're trying to get data
from
Both sides and be equal to both
sides and, and whenever you're
getting shot at from both sides,
it tells you you're probably
headed in the right direction to
get a basis point, so.
Uh, anybody that
That
degrees or disagrees is, is on
one side or the other, and we're
trying to figure out what the
baseline is and how we're
headed. I mean, you know, we
look at um slide 22 of your
presentation.
Those are all benefits of
Oil and gas, and they may be
hard to follow like stringy
spaghetti through there. But
those are the total benefits to
the state. Do we know what the
total benefits are on an annual
basis and I probably add them.
Charleston's 15.4 billion.
That's his guess.
I think, well, there's, there's
also the federal benefit on
here. So Jennifer is remembering
$15 billion over 15 billion
revenue from the industry, but
that's also going 2.7 to the
Feds. So, if you back that out
of the 15 billion, you'll be at
12.3 maybe to the state. And
that's an annual benefit, that's
a 202312.3 billion. So I mean
there's our number, right?
If you really want to look
across the board and not just a
general fund costs, right? To
capital, to schools, to
Would it ever we have in here, I
mean.
The compensating tax, the
corporate income tax, right?
That's the, that's to me is
chewing up a true number of what
the really impact is.
And it may be a slow decline in
it hit if we do setbacks, but I,
I, I just. Um, is there any way
to really calculate what the,
what the health costs are
across. I mean, you can go into
Albuquerque and say they have a
emissions control, right? So,
OK, what, how much emissions
does that flowing into other
areas, right? How much are the
wild flowers from California
flowing into New Mexico cause
that's why we have red sunsets
because the ash and that, and
how much is effect from other
states or or municipalities, I
mean, how much is affected in
Gallop, I mean, if you have a
dairy, they're higher methane
producers there.
Then
Uh, an oil field, right? And so
what are those? How, how, how,
is there any
I don't know any possible way in
my.
You know, maybe AI can create
it.
Or what the health costs and
what the effects are in every
certain area, right?
There's probably 0 in Komodo
unless there's an accident. Um,
But what are the, what are the
real costs and how do we
calculate those individually.
Mr. Chair, I think it is
possible. It, it wouldn't.
There's a lot of good research
out there, um, that can point to
how those health impacts can can
occur. Um, it would be a matter
of maybe a statistical exercise
to find increased rates of um
certain
You know, conditions and, and
see if we can statistically um
determine or or or evaluate
whether or not there is a
likelihood that it's caused by,
say, proximity to production.
That's a very intensive analysis
that um we're not ready to do
quite yet, but um I, I, I do
think it would be possible, and
maybe, maybe some of our uh
higher ed higher education
institutions also could play a
role in in evaluating that kind
of work or or the department
because it would be a a
heavy lift.
Where would they find that data?
I mean, I mean healthcare
reporting is probably not a 20
year stream, right?
Because 20 years ago we're
probably still laying out paper
forms and, and reporting
incidents, right? And New Mexico
with a stagnant population
growth, right?
It's hard to calculate what are
the genetic
Of a person in New Mexico and
what they're susceptible to, and
I mean, I mean, how do you
calculate that number?
Mr. Chur to your point, it would
certainly be a short window. It
would not be
You know, to, to try to evaluate
the really long term impacts.
I think we'd likely be
underestimating it, given the
strategy that I suggested.
I know we're behind. I have a
lot more questions, so.
Get you in there, but I really,
I really do appreciate the work
and, and trying to get us to
comprehend what the costs and
what the healthcare costs are
really, and, and it just tells
us, to me it tells us number
one, better watch what OPEC
does.
Number 2 is, um,
There's a lot more work to do
this and, and so.
Make sure you get with Charles.
I don't know where the state
supercomputer is Charles,
remember Governor Richardson
bought that thing and.
Is it Albuquerque salvage or
somewhere right now.
And, and, and so I, I, I'm, I'm
really, as we head into this,
this new scenario of estimating
and forecasting, right? If, if
LFC doesn't have the tools and
equipment to do that.
You should really look and how
we get them.
The tools, the equipment, the
computers, whatever it is,
because as we get more
Um
Advance, we're going to ask you
for more advanced technical
studies and, and so we'll need
that. I mean, some of this is,
you're not gonna get the oil and
gas companies where they're
gonna drill in the future, I
mean.
They're not gonna give you even
an inkling to where they're
gonna go because somebody could
reverse design that, and then
they know where who's going
where and, and all that. So I
mean, we're gonna have to go
blind on some of this stuff,
but, but thanks for all your
hard work, but as we had looked
forward, just remember to make
sure that we
We have that.
In our budget scenario, I don't
what.
New supercomputer costs.
Uh, but make sure that we give
you the tools to understand and
to help the leg.
Uh, tourism next.
Lansing, are you the secretary
acting secretary.
Still acting.
So
He's gonna
Mr. Secretary, you're gonna
start us off, so we're already
behind the, we're already behind
and
You're gonna have to play catch
up, so is your slide
presentation is, uh, it's pretty
thick for negative 30 minutes.
So as quickly as you can run
through this because we're gonna
have to play catch up. That was
an important topic, not saying
that tourism department is not
an important topic, but it's
your bold points and, and your
highlights.
Absolutely
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. It's always a
pleasure, uh, to be here with
you all. Um, first, I wanna
definitely thank um LFC thank
the committee. Thank Mr. Sali.
Thank Julisa, um, who's really
just been incredibly
professional and diligent,
working with us. Um, it's
really, I think, appropriate
actually for us to kind of
Go in after this conversation,
um, to talk about how, you know,
we are diversifying the economy.
And some of the success that
we've seen, uh, specifically in
the tourism industry. So just to
kind of give you, um, sort of
the run a show here. So you'll
have a presentation in front of
you, but you'll also have, uh,
there's some supplemental
documents that I'll be
referencing, uh, with specific
award amounts so you can see,
uh, within your community, um,
you know, where those dollars
are so to start, uh agency at a
glance. So at the New Mexico
tourism department, our vision
is
to be the primary destination
for venturesome travelers, uh,
where the stewards of the New
Mexico Tru uh brand. It's close
to 13 years, uh, now, which
we're very proud of. Our mission
is to grow New Mexico's economy
through tourism.
We have 4 divisions. We have New
Mexico magazine, we have our
program supports our ASD, HR,
legal, um, we have tourism
developments, which manages a
lot of the uh community
development and, and sort of
product development programs
that I'll speak to, then
obviously marketing and
promotions, which is the lion
share um of, of what we have
traditionally done and what we
continue to do.
Authorized FTE is 59 and I'm
really excited about this. Our,
our current vacancy rate is 6.7%
right now with uh 4 vacant
positions, which I'm uh I'm just
incredibly proud of. We've got,
uh, just for the sake of time, I
won't, you know, go through, but
we have some staff in, in the
audience and I could not do this
without them. They're
incredible. Uh, they, you know,
I lead them some days, but they
probably lead me, uh, most days.
Uh, so very much appreciative to
them. Our budget recurring 2.
5,612,700 other state funds,
4.8%, that's primarily uh the
New Mexico magazine revenues
which that's an enterprise fund.
And then also uh clean and
Beautiful, which is uh a
distribution that comes from
motor vehicle license plate
registrations.
Um, are non-recurring is uh
currently 23 million of 560,000,
um, which we are incredibly
appreciative for after the sort
of American rescue plan money,
uh, dried up. Um, it was, uh,
you know, this body and governor
uh that saw fit to, uh to sort
of replenish some of those
dollars with general fund. And
we take that very serious and
we, we make sure every day to be
um good stewards of those funds.
Our reversion, um, in FY 24 was
240,569 or less than 1% of our
uh
Our budget essentially.
So, um, moving on to economic
impacts.
Uh, we had, um, another really
solid uh year in 2023 which um
was a record year, 8.6 billion
in direct visitor spending,
$11.6 billion in total economic
impact, uh 93,200 jobs sustained
in 810.7 million in state and
local taxes generated again, um,
you know, coming off the heels
of the, the prior conversation.
I think this is an industry
that, that you all should look
at as, as having a lot of
opportunity as we
Diversify our economy. So again,
um,
It was a record-breaking year.
We continue to have these
record-breaking years as you can
see in that, that bar graph on
the side. I think what's
important is the 3.8% increase
um in spending versus a 1.2%
increase in visitor volume
because as we'll discuss, we're
really looking in our expansion
markets at targeting some higher
value travelers, obviously,
still looking at visitor volume
as a, as a huge indicator of, of
our success, but then also
looking at spending as a
proportion of that, which we're
seeing that
moving in the right direction.
Also exciting as we're seeing a
recovery of international
travel, um, within a year we saw
over a 30% increase. It's a tiny
part of the market share that we
have. But within that tiny part
of the market share, there's so
much opportunity, uh, with
spending, um, within that
market, which I'll speak to some
opportunities there. I did want
to be, um, you know, eyes wide
open. I know that there are
challenges. I know that looking
at the data, we were looking at,
you know, full service
restaurants and, and
You know, it's, it's been a
struggle for them to uh to
recover. Um, we, we, we really
do look at this and try to see
how all these segments sort of
of the tourism economy, uh, work
together. Obviously, I, I, you
know,
My, my thoughts with, with
Roswell right now, um, with,
with Riodoso and, and, and the
challenges in Riodo. So we face
these headwinds and, and, you
know, we can't just look at this
as, as a rosy picture. We're
always having to be responsive
to the community and, and to
what's going on and just how uh
we have have worked with Lincoln
County and Rioidoso, and we will
be supporting them in promoting
the area with Roswell, we're,
we're a partner as well. So, um,
but we understand
There's always challenges.
So these are two, the two next
slides I think are just really
foundational to what we do
because they're going to drive a
lot of this. So really, when we
talk about the, the two sort of
core functions that, that, um,
that kind of overlay the tourism
and apartments. So our
marketing, our marketing makes a
promise about New Mexico, that
it is place of adventure steeped
in culture. It's a place with um
authenticity and a real uh
someone for, it's a, it's a
destination for someone who has
a real thirst for authenticity.
So we, we drive
That um that promise through
really, really quality
advertising and brand
impressions on New Mexico.
Additionally, tourism
development is there to deliver
on that promise through
developing quality attractions,
amenities and access to our
amenities and attractions in New
Mexico.
So, where that all ties in is,
this is an infographic that's,
that we've used as sort of a
North Star for our, our
department over the past couple
of years. Um, borrowed from my
predecessor, uh, Jen Schreier,
and, and just sort of, um,
You know, updated, but really
that drive demand piece and that
marketing and that delivering on
that experience with a constant
feedback loop of research.
Victoria Gregg is our research
director. We have Eric Heringer
who's our economist. They do
great work in making sure that
we're always on the right track.
So looking at driving that
demand through marketing,
through the four season
marketing, through the
cooperative and regional
marketing through earned media,
through travel trade, which is
an exciting program we'll be
talking about soon.
That also delivering on that
experiences, investing in
infrastructure, investing in our
businesses and in our product.
Really understanding the
regulatory environment and the
challenges that we're seeing and
being responsive to those. Both
of those are critical and they
work, uh, very, you know, they
work hand in hand together.
So first,
Just to take a, a deeper dive.
Into, um, how we are uh driving
that demand. And first of all,
uh, as far as the, the numbers
go, there's an article in your,
in your packet, um,
That, that speaks to our record
breaking numbers.
But as far as driving demand,
these are the main functions I
think that are just important to
this committee, uh, with respect
to, um, to, you know, how we're
doing that. So national
marketing.
That's, you know, obviously been
a, been a core priority of the
department international
marketing. That's something new
which I want to discuss what our
on ramp is to that cooperative
marketing, we have a program
that's had years of success
working with communities on
regional, uh, marketing, so that
his folks um are understanding
New Mexico is a destination.
They're also understanding where
in New Mexico that they want to
travel. And those communities
are having that ability to
control their destiny.
Earned media so that um coverage
that we get in, in National
Geographic or and uh food and
wine or any of those
publications, we have a, a
strong comms team, uh, that
works with, with that New Mexico
magazine.
It's the oldest state-run
publication. And it's very
specialist, great advertising
tool in New Mexico Tru
certified, which um is close to
500 partners now, um, which is
Really, uh, encouraging.
I'm trying to get through this
quick.
National marketing, this is an
infographic that I think is just
helpful. Apologize for the.
Hypo on differentiating. Um, so,
really, when we look at growth
markets and retention markets,
traditionally, we've looked at
our retention markets as being
those primary drive like that
West Texas market, those places
where we know we're going to get
strong visitor volume, so we
need to make sure we're keeping
that advertising going.
Sometimes really looking at the
co op program since there's
already high awareness, looking
at ways that certain
destinations can sort of uh sort
of take that uh that
drive travel. But then also,
since we've received these
investments over the past few
years. Some of these expansion
markets, uh, specifically in
California, where we're seeing a
lot of opportunity. Uh, we went
into Los Angeles uh a few years
ago and then uh San Francisco
most recently, and we've seen um
just uh really good indicators
of success that Californians
are, are staying longer and
they're spending, they're
spending more money here. Um, so
that's encouraging.
What's new this year,
From all that is
We are going to make, uh, what I
would call it incremental and
strategic play into
international leveraging the
fact that we have the Route 66
centennial coming up in 2026.
We have some strong interest in
some of our international
markets in that centennial, and
how do we make sure New Mexico
is a destination for those
markets.
So we're gonna be partnering
with Brand USA who's essentially
the tourism department for the
United States.
Um, and we're going to be doing
a dedicated, um, sort of
strategic play in, in Munich and
in London, um, working on some
really high traffic billboards
and digital placements, really
following the lead of Brand USA
so that we can try to, you know,
get as much of that interest
into New Mexico. And what we've
seen is that the Southwest part
of Route 66 is where the
interest is. And so we have to
be competitive there. But I'm
really excited about, about
this.
activation, um, and we're gonna
also be working on, uh, some of
this international activation
with our travel trade program.
Also in your packet, you'll see
this is just some examples of
some of the placements and what
they look like, um, and I'm sure
you've seen them in in airports,
and obviously the advertising
spots that we have just, just so
you um cooperative marketing.
So this is, again, as I
mentioned, um,
Sort of a legacy program that we
had, uh, after COVID, we, we
bumped it up to a 2 to 1 match.
And since then, that program has
really been picked up by so many
communities. Um, this is again,
a way to go from awareness so
they know about New Mexico, to
sort of consideration and
conversion. So they know about
New Mexico, but hey, what about
hot springs and iC?
You know, and this is, this is
the program to really sort of
come in under that awareness,
get into that consideration and
then drive conversion. So this
year, uh 3.8 million funding 48
communities you'll see, um, in
your packet as well. I do have a
list of all the cooperative
marketing, a grant recipients
for this year. I'm so excited,
um, Aaron Ladd, Taylor Lawrence
in the back, um, do a great job,
uh, managing this program.
Wanted to mention earned media,
uh,
Obviously, you know, this is not
a direct paid media. This is
earned media. This is what I
kind of call the sweat equity
media. It's the, it's the really
talking to travel writers and,
and influencers and storytellers
and getting uh New Mexico
editorial coverage, um, in, in
large publications which uh we
our team has been very
successful doing. Cody Johnson,
our comms director, Nicole
Barker on our media relations
manager, finding all the
opportunities, whether it's
balloon fiesta or, you know,
any, any opportunity to get
Eyes on New Mexico and get those
stories out there. Recently, we
had an article that uh we worked
on uh about Sizobra's 100 that
was placed in Forbes magazine,
we had um the BBC did a, an
article on, on, um interesting
article on the crossover between
the green chili culture and uh
and uh the Manhattan Project in
New Mexico. Um, and then we had
some coverage in food and wine
on indigenous foods in New
Mexico. So that earned media
program, definitely, um
Helps us tell that story.
Very proud in Mexico magazine,
New Mexico Magazine this year
won the 2024 magazine of the
Year by the International
Regional Publishers Association.
This is a, this is huge. I mean,
as we have, uh, you know, as, as
many people can imagine, um,
running a, a magazine is, is
becomes more and more difficult
as we go more digital and as,
you know, the audience changes
and preferences change, but
that's a big deal for us. Um,
and I just really appreciative
of the magazine. We're also, uh,
we work
with them on some targeted uh
public some targeted outreach
and some targeted campaigns with
our New Mexico True certified
Partners.
And we also do our adventure
guide, which has a run of
300,000 copies, which is a great
advertising tool that we use.
So New Mexico Tru certified.
Uh, as I mentioned, almost 500
partners now. Uh, this is
anything from potters to uh
clothing and apparel to food and
wine, to anything that's made,
sourced in New Mexico that can,
that can sort of have the, have
those um those criteria marked,
they can be part of this
program, sure people have seen
at grocery stores like at
Albertson's, they do have, uh,
you know, special sections. I
have some other ideas about how
we're gonna, you know, keep
pushing that out there.
so that we're not just getting
the, the money from travelers
when they're here, but when
they're leaving, and when
they're, they're out of state,
they're still buying New Mexico
products.
So excited to see that, that
grow.
So moving on to delivering on
experiences. So going from
marketing,
To development.
I wanted to highlight 3
3 of the primary programs that
we have driving this division.
So there are tourism event,
growth and sustainability
program, or TES program.
Our destination forward program,
which is a dedicated tourism
infrastructure program and New
Mexico Clean and Beautiful.
So to start with our tourism
event growth and sustainability
program, um, we see events as a
huge driver of tourism, um, in
the state, and this can be, uh,
again, larger events like
Balloon Fiesta or Zozobra, but
we also support, you know,
events like the Dumming duck
races, like Fiesta Latina and
Silver City, like the little Las
Cruces International Film
Festival, just events that we
feel are going to translate into
um overnight stays into um
Uh, you know,
Extended trips into uh people
coming back because, uh, because
they want to come to an event.
We see this as, as a huge part
of our portfolio. This year,
we've grown this to 38 events
that we're supporting, uh,
statewide with a budget of, of
over $533,000 Holly Kelly, um,
our tourism development director
runs this program statewide
impact, huge reception from
people, and again, uh,
supporting our events supports
tourism. If we're supporting.
Right events, and we have been.
You have a list, um, also of
those, uh, tourism-related
events, uh, the, the tags
awardees from this year. So you
can, you can take a look at that
and see what's taking place
within your communities.
But strong program.
When we talk about, um,
Quality amenities, attractions
and access to those amenities
and attractions. This
destination forward program is
something I think that's
innovative, uh, that's something
that's complemented other
programs like Trails Plus
program, and, and, and some of
the other grant programs to
really support recreation in the
state. Um, we, for example, uh,
just to give some examples of
projects, this year we're
awarding dollars for theater
renovations at the Balloon
Fiesta Museum, renovations to
the Raton.
Convention center, um,
additional RV hookups and
Socorro. um, we're looking at
how do we make these targeted
investments again to, to really
ensure that we have that quality
product, and we're delivering on
that promise. So this year, 12
tourism-related infrastructure
projects through Destination
Forward, total budget of 2.35
million. And again, if you want
to see your, if there are any
particular projects in your
area, you have that printout.
So the Mexico Clean and
Beautiful program.
Um, we continue to grow this
program.
Uh
Things are, uh, you know,
We we're capped in terms of our
funding because this is funded
primarily off of the, the
license plate registrations, but
we've continued to purpose money
towards grants. Uh, I believe
when I, when I started in the
role as tourism and development
director years ago, we had about
45 partners, so we're up to 67
communities, uh, that were,
we're working with, and I know
many people have probably seen
uh a, a big campaign that we
launched uh last week, this
Breaking Bad Habits campaign.
Uh, so that campaign um is
the result of uh funding from
the legislature, um, from our
clean and beautiful budget, um,
what I'm really excited about
with this program, and I would
encourage you all just to check
out the Breaking Bad habits, um,
website, because it's a place,
one stop shop where you can
volunteer. You can find a
cleanup event. You can set up a
cleanup event. You can report
litter and then get follow up as
to whether or not uh you, you
actually got service. I think
it's going to shine a light on
the
On some of the fail, like maybe
the capacity issues and the
constraints that we have, but
I'm really excited to just see
how this program rolls out.
Um, so, more to come on that.
And I'll also talk about it in
just a sec. I know we've got to
go quick with the tie into the
marketing center of excellence.
So, moving into, and then if you
want to see Clean and Beautiful,
again, here's the total list of
awards uh within your
communities.
So some new initiatives.
Um, marketing center of
excellence. So a couple of years
ago, it was signed into law bill
that established marketing
center of excellence within the
tourism department. So this is
essentially tasked with
supporting executive agencies as
they develop their, their
campaigns and their public
facing um efforts.
By providing like high quality
technical assistance,
consulting, and then some um
You know, efficiencies in terms
of how procurements happen and
things like that. We are only
obviously a few months, um.
Basically, that started in July
1st. That's when it was active.
We've recently hired someone, so
Francine Hopper, who I believe
Right there. So she's hiding,
but she is the um special
projects director within the
tourism department who's tasked
with managing this marketing
center of excellence. Um, we're
excited to be working on a sort
of an enterprise system that's
going to allow all state
agencies to work on their
campaigns together so that if
there are linkages between, for
example, the Environment
department, the Economic
Development department, um, MEd,
other agencies that all have a
place in some big
project that's going on in the
state, they can all better
communicate and they can make
sure that they're telling the
right story to the public.
We want to have a, a robust
asset library that people can
draw from, so that they're not
stuck trying to get their own
photos and their own production.
We already have some of these
things uh ready and appropriate
and ready to go.
Um, and I'll mention this
Breaking Bad habits um campaign
is an example of where I see
this marketing center of
excellence going. Um, Francine's
been instrumental in working
with DOT working with the
Environment Department, working
with other agencies in building
this website, and building out
these resources so that the
agencies are communicating and
we're breaking through some of
these silos. So, we're gonna
continue um to build this
enterprise system called the
mother ship that we're trying to
build here. Um, it's, it's a
heavy lift. Um, but I think, um,
I think we, we've got some um
We got strong uh staff that's
working on it, and I think we
have a great vision.
So just a few more slides.
The um Route 66 Centennial um
grant program.
This was something that was
funded through a $2.5 million
allocation from one of our
special appropriations last
year, uh, what we are doing with
those dollars is we are
splitting up between our brand
USA activations in Munich and
London, um, and these, uh, grant
efforts. So in addition to what
we're going to be doing
internationally. We're also
going to be supporting at the
community level with targeted
investments and marketing and
promotion so that people can do
the production and get their
assets ready.
so that we can actually have
those in market.
That we can do some, some minor
infrastructure that's doable,
signage, lighting, public art,
things like that that makes
sense to drive this, you know,
to put us in a good place going
into 2026 and special events,
how do we use our special events
and leverage those as
advertising opportunities to get
people excited about the
centennial. Um, we just
announced those awards, but I
can um make sure to get a
similar list like I have for
these other programs, uh, to
this group.
Um
Very shortly.
OK, so travel trade.
This is an example of, you know,
I think the innovative, uh, the
innovative people at this
department. So,
What is travel trade? Travel
trade are those B2B
relationships. They're those
relationships between the state
of New Mexico and large travel
buyers that actually sell
itineraries and, and actually
have these large, for example,
the bus tours and some of these,
these larger group travel events
that come in. Right now, we
really don't have a great
infrastructure that I've seen to
communicate on that level with
some of these large travel
buyers and operators. We are, we
have a dedicated staff now, um,
that's
going to be going and making
these appointments and having
these appointments with these
travel buyers and getting to
Mexico on the map for these
itineraries, so that they're not
going, um, right to the Grand
Canyon and then just missing us,
uh, which happens. Uh, we really
got to get that, that awareness
out there and we need to get
ourselves actively and
proactively onto these
itineraries. So excited for that
travel trade program. We're
gonna be strategic about it, but
we have a lot of, um, I think
things that the world
They're they're interested in
ballooning, um, native and
indigenous culture, cuisine,
it's just really, I think
there's things that New Mexico
has a right to win on. This is
a, a way to do that.
So, to finish off with our
budget request.
Oh, sorry about, thank you.
So to finish off with our budget
request, um,
Essentially, what we are
requesting is about a 3.3%
increase in recurring. So that's
790,000
about 7914 positions. So it's
for 2 positions, it's for a
tourism development coordinator
and additional tourism
development coordinator and an
HR position. Right now, as you
saw, our vacancy rates
incredibly low. We are doing
everything that we can from a
capacity standpoint to just
maximize, maximize what we do
every day.
To just make sure that we're
spending the right attention,
that we're out in the community,
um, with 59 staff, um, and all
of, all of the uh programs that
we're involved in. I think it's
important that we look at
investing in that, which we
really hadn't so much in the
past. There's also, um, some of
that budget is just to keep us
fully funded or to keep us
funded enough, um, based on our
vacancy rate right now.
So additionally, um, this was a
decision that we kind of made
each and every year, we support
the sports, uh, or I'm sorry,
the New Mexico Bowl, um, through
special appropriations, and a
couple of years ago, one never
made it through, something
happened. It was a problem. And
so we kind of had to come in on
the back end and, and, and
remedy it, rectify it. What I'm
trying to do is this is
something we do every year,
something that's had success.
Let's at least put the 200,000,
which is essentially the like
the average
amount, the amount we're
supporting this year, like, how
do we, how do we just put that
as foundational money.
And that way we can, you know,
avoid, I think some of the, some
of those issues that we've seen
in the past. Um, so that's why
we're requesting to put that in
recurring.
As far as the special specials
go.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you, Jennifer.
Um
We are essentially requesting
the same specials, uh, that we
uh had requested last year. So
that's 16 million in, in the
national advertising is what
puts us in the four season
campaign and allows us to be in
those expansion markets, allows
us to have co op at the 2 to 1
match, allows us to have
destination forward program
allows us to have this events
program. So the 1.9 million
supporting uh destination
Forward.
The marketing center of
excellence again requesting 2
million. That's what we have
this year in the books. Um,
we're gonna, when you look at
this from a procurement
standpoint, there's got to be
somebody who's holding sort of
the prime contract that they can
turnkey that other agencies can
turn key into. And that's what
we want to build this enterprise
system into. And that's what
we're going to need budget for.
And then in order to sustain the
momentum of, of the
anti-literate messaging that
we're having, uh, in market
through uh July of next year. We
are going to be requesting an
additional 2 million, which is
what we had this year, uh, that
was appropriated, um, as a
special. And then, uh, 300,000
for the Special Olympics, which
is an organization that we have
supported, um, and we would like
to continue to support.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I
stand for any questions. Thank
you. Let, let me ask one
question in the beginning is, is
any marijuana companies about
New Mexico true? No.
Are they applicable or they can
they apply or you know, there's
uh Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, and I could let my uh
general counsel or but
essentially there are, there are
rules um that
Uh, make that challenging and
just from a matter of, of public
safety standpoint and and the
audience that, that the consumer
facing audience that could be
looking at New Mexico Tru
certified products. It's just
something we haven't had the
comfort with, but I don't know
if there's any.
And we're good. Questions from
committee members.
Uh, Senator Gonzalez is first
and then.
Representing
The nindos next.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
in lieu of time or
Um, I'll just make it very
quick, but um.
Uh, first of all, um,
Tourism like for my region is
beyond important, you know, it's
we live and die by.
by that sword, you know, and uh
uh any anyway that we can work
or promote it, uh, but just some
of the things that we um recur.
And on the beautification.
On that 2 million.
Well, so does the Department of
Transportation have additional
money to that?
Mr. Chairman, Senator correct,
there's $500,000 of Department
of Transportation money that
augmented that got us to 3
million.
So it was 2 million and then it
was uh 2, it was 500,000 from
the base of the Clean and
Beautiful grant, and then it was
500,000 augmented by DOT that
got us to 3.
OK. And uh,
I know how important every part
that you mentioned.
But
What is our, our biggest
challenge and what is what are
our biggest competitors, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, are you
talking about from a tourism
perspective or from a litter
perspective? I'm sorry, I'm
sorry, just as a tourism, oh,
from a tourism perspective. Um,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I think,
you know, regionally, uh, the,
the southwestern states,
obviously competing with
Arizona, Colorado on adventure,
uh, some of these things, uh,
you know, they, they are
competitors. They're we're
getting into ski season and, you
know, that's gonna be, you know,
they already have a lot of snow
up there. Um, so we, we see a
lot of that competition, I
think, just regionally in the
Southwest. Um, now, I do also
think that, uh, you know, in the
Southwest, we actually have a
a lot of competitive advantages.
I think we went on culture. Um,
I think we went on cuisine. And
I think we are starting through
our outdoor recreation efforts
to, to build some of that, um,
that infrastructure in that
system to really be competitive
there, because I'm hearing
reports in Colorado, you know,
you're on a waiting list to go
on a walking trail there.
Right now. And so I do think
that we have uh some
opportunities if we do this the
right way, um, to pull some of,
uh, you know,
What would be a Colorado
traveler into New Mexico. So I
think to answer your question,
our Southwestern states are
always our biggest competitors.
But I think we have some real
competitive advantages that we
leverage through New Mexico,
true.
Um, 2 more parts and um be very
quick, um.
I, I still feel
But uh
You know, in growing our own and
keeping our own and educating
our own, you know, it's, it's a
huge plus.
And uh
What are the possibilities of
working with
Public education department.
And K-12 or K through high ed.
And coming up with a curriculum.
Scope and sequence addressing.
The beautification, addressing
the tourism, addressing
hospitality, how the potential
of
Again, just growing our own,
keeping our own, but at the same
time building capacity.
To our state
And we can just hit things right
away with a strong component.
Uh, I think that would be
excellent, you know, I have had
a few discussions with the
governor on this, very
supportive, but yet, you know,
just putting it into a
curriculum, I think would be a
big, big plus. Now, um, the last
question that I have and then
you can come back to that is um
on this handout.
The report state once again, uh,
said visitors, this one.
On the last page where you have
the grants that have been
awarded, uh, our schools
eligible for that?
So, uh, Mr. Chairman Senator,
uh, definitely with respect to
the beautification piece. Uh,
we've looked at this because
traditionally, like, the school
districts hadn't been partners,
but looking at how the clean and
beautiful statute works as a,
believe it's a special district
or I'm trying to remember how it
was defined. There may be an
opportunity for them to be
eligible applicants. And if we
do that, I think there's
opportunities for outdoor
classrooms, uh, and, and some,
some activities that we can.
just target and we can, we can,
we can figure out exactly what
that scope would be. Um, you
know, uh,
I actually would love to just
discuss this more with you, um,
what's your vision for that
could be? Because I do think the
Clean and Beautiful program is
something that's, it's very much
youth focused, youth empowerment
is one of the 5 goals of the
program and I think we could be
doing more specifically with the
school districts. Well, Mr.
Chairman, you mentioned uh the
outdoor recreation outdoor
education and recreation goes
hand in hand, and uh there again
it's a wide, wide open that I
think.
We could be the first state with
a a very powerful component.
And that we could work on that,
and I, I think that would be
excellent too.
To have, uh, you know, within
our state, you know, growing our
own, but at the same time,
bringing that uh content, you
know, to a higher level and.
And the readiness that that
comes with it.
Now, uh, one thing that I have
learned.
Yes, if you want change,
And if you want value.
It has to come through
education.
You know, and it's from the
bottom all the way as you grow,
and then we can start seeing
some of those results, you know,
that we can work. So again, Mr.
Chairman, and yes, I'll I'll
visit with.
With the department, you know,
say I do have some really good
ideas into this. And as I
mentioned, I have had this
discussion with the governor
too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much, Senator
Gonzalez. Next we're gonna
represent Baca, then Senator
Sendo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, first off with the
compliment, I will think, I will
say that I think that our
efforts are working.
Uh, it used to be when we travel
around, there was an article,
one of the 50 is missing.
Many people didn't know much
about New Mexico based upon
recent years and my recent
experiences.
That word is getting out. Um,
one of the biggest things that
you guys have is I'm actually
carrying it right here, these
pins.
I've been amazing, but let me,
if I can give you any
suggestion.
On the back, we do a QR code
that it gets us to our websites
and it highlights these things.
I was actually wearing a pen
earlier and the people that they
want to pin, of course he asked
for this one, but I'm like,
that's a real one, so we, but
You know, I think for all
ambassadors that are here, used
to be a great way, but once we
give them this pen on the back,
we need a list because we, we
need to diversify, Mr. Chairman.
We need to just say that, hey,
we're not, we're more than just
balloon fiesta, green chili, and
Breaking Bad, right? That's
usually what we're known for.
And I think that we have to do a
good job.
Of diversifying so that we truly
have these events throughout our
four seasons.
With 330 plus days of sunshine,
we need to take advantage of
that. Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, I'm
gonna ask you just, and again, I
want brevity.
You talked about our national
marketing, OK? Now, I know that
we can't target every state in
the same way, and I've been here
long enough to know what states
have been targeted.
In the past. Can you tell me
what are the states that we are
now focusing some of our efforts
on.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, are you asking
the new markets? Yes,
so in terms of the new markets,
again, it's been California.
California has been the, I mean,
we were, we were marketing in
Phoenix and, and in Arizona. We
were in Texas, uh, we were in
Colorado, California, we saw as
um based on a lot of research,
so we are in multiple airports
in California. We have a very,
very strong presence with our
connected TV, and again, um,
this
International play is going to
allow us to go into Munich and
London with a targeted
uh campaign with Brand USA. So
those are our newest, uh,
campaigns you will see some
spill over in other markets,
but, uh, traditionally that, you
know, or this year that is where
we're going to be in market. We
had been in markets uh like
Chicago in the past, became
really cost prohibitive first
based on the value of travel
that we were getting. I can let
our marketing director speak
more to that if she wants to,
but
We, we have made changes, uh,
you know, as we've done this
every year and, and, and taking
markets away and added markets,
but luckily because of the
investments we've had recently.
We've been in the adding phase.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. Thank
you. I, I do recommend that we
look at some of those,
especially that don't have the
nice weather like we have now. I
was in Seattle.
Um, just let me just say I'll
just say Seattle is pretty
drizzling the whole time. So I,
I think that we have to be very
intentional about these monies.
I also think that we have to
look about the reoccurring
spending here as far as for
advertising, we just need to
monitor that. And I'm finally
gonna, Mr. Chairman, I'll end
with this.
I like the fact about having
These events and I would
encourage more events, but it's
also gonna be the responsibility
of this committee to make sure
that we have
Uh, as far as we address some of
the issues with the
infrastructure, our roads and
our big cities with some of the
challenges that we have is crime
and otherwise. We want people to
come to the state. We want them
to have a great opportunity. We
also have to make sure that we
provide every necessary means
that they enjoy.
What we, the land enchantment
have to offer, so I, I will
respectfully request more of
these, please, but um I wanna
thank you and uh I appreciate
your work.
Thank you, uh, Senator Shindo,
then Chatfield.
All right. Thank you for the
presentation.
enjoyed the presentation and so
forth, but I have several
questions with regards to the
economic impact report.
That, does or does not include
um
The tribes, you know, like.
The tribal governments because
they certainly have.
Their own facilities and so
forth that's it, is that Mr.
Chairman, uh, senator, it does
because it um as long as uh the
transactions are happening, we,
we've done it, we do it by a
county level data and then we do
it by um credit card data, and
then we do it by survey. Um, so
there's, I can let our research
director speak to it more
specifically, but yes, I mean,
that, that tourism is captured.
I think we are starting to
realize that there are some
issues with data that we're
gonna have to, to figure.
out, for example, international,
since we don't have a direct um
international inbound, uh, the
surveying isn't what it should
be, I think, and so I think
we're losing some of that
information, whereas people may
be doing things and they're not
telling us what they're doing.
Um, but yeah, generally, the
economic activity in tribal
communities is reflected um in
those these larger numbers. OK,
I appreciate that. I was just
curious, you know, because it,
it, I was thinking maybe the
impact will be a lot more
because
If it's not captured, then
that's another.
Are you because you have what 11
tribes that have casinos,
hotels, golf courses, and all of
that gas stations and so I was
just curious Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I actually, um,
I'd have to defer to our
research director on how
casinos.
Or captured at all in any of
that information because I
don't, there may be a separation
there.
Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Mhm.
OK, I appreciate that.
And then, uh, of course,
You know, the, the slogan, you
know, adventure.
Steeped in culture, and I think
a lot of it has to do with, you
know, the native communities in
this state.
How were they involved in the
your cooperative uh program in
terms of advertising, because I
know, you know, you have some of
the tribes that have very
sophisticated marketing
themselves.
But then you have many other
tribes that don't have the
capacity. How are they evolved?
If at all.
Mr. Chairman Senator, thank you
for that question. I'm, I'm
excited cause we, we, we
recently hired a tribal tourism
uh coordinator name is Jay
Bernal. I think she's in the
crowd. So, um, really we have uh
been working to increase our
participation, uh, from native
communities in our programs. Um,
but I think we're not, we
haven't seen that translate as
much as we, we would like to.
We're seeing it in the events
program, um, you know,
supporting things like the
Bernal Leo Indian Arts Festival.
Some, uh, some events uh working
with IPCC, um, and, you know,
gathering nations, we we're
supporting through that, that
program, um, so I think there
are that events program we're
starting to see, I mean, tour de
Akima, we're starting to see
some increased participation,
but I have, you know, tasked uh
Jay and I want to see increased
participation from tribal
communities in all of our
programs. Um, and I, I want to
see it in Destination For. I
want to see it in cooperative
marketing.
As far as our national and
international marketing, we
always have, uh, within sort of
the three commercial cycle, uh,
within our, uh, spring, summer
and the winter campaigns we
always have a native indigenous
sort of themed, um,
Um, Videopo, commercial. So
that's always
Front and center because we see
it is so important, um, to, uh,
to what makes people interested
in New Mexico. So that's
something that we'll continue to
do. It's always going to be a
very like prominent part of our
uh national and international
campaigns. So that's what people
are going to see. I think from
the community level, we have to
do a better job at making sure
uh that we're getting that
participation. Appreciate that.
I think it's also important for
you to understand the, the, the
entities you mentioned are all
within Albuquerque area.
We have tried scattered, you
know, across the state, and I
hope that you guys can do a lot
more better job of reaching out
to those tribes that are in
rural areas, because they also
depend on tourism, Zuni out
there, they don't have a casino,
they don't have a hotel. They
have a lot of artists, you know,
you know, and others and so
forth. So, you know, it, it's
fine to mention.
The entities around Albuquerque
area, but to me, I'm not
interested in that because
that's where the people are
already. That's, that's the low
hanging fruit.
You know, the challenge is how
do we get folks out there and,
and understand there's other
tribes out there, you know, like
Zuni or Pierre, that's, you
know, kind of hidden gem, you
know, and they also rely on
tourism and stuff like that. So
I would be more interested in
that.
You know, it's a lot more
challenging, but I think they
also are deserving.
And Mr. Chairman, so, if I may
just, um, we have uh in the past
couple of years, I know we, we,
we did work with uh Governor
Queanella and Pierre for, uh, it
was at that time, it was before
Destination Forward. It was
called the rural Pathway program
and we supported, um, they were
essentially uh curating an
interpretive center, so they
were going to do um some art
exhibitions and then a walking
trail. So we have worked, and
that was a couple of years ago.
Um, but to your point,
I think we need to be out there.
We need to be in rural
communities and I think that's
something that we're going to
take very serious uh moving
forward. Yeah, I appreciate that
even in having workshops because
I'm looking at your rent also as
well, and not very many.
tribal communities. I know
there's activities going on all
over the state, but
They don't appear on here
whether they are aware of it or
whether they even know how to.
Or have the capacity to do that
at the tribal level. Uh, it's
one thing, so I think maybe even
a, a training of how you apply
for these grants or those that
have that capacity might be
good.
Uh, just one more question, um.
On the
The, the Route 66, uh,
Centennial grant program, is
that an RFP program where they
Communities also, OK, yeah, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, so again,
it's kind of split between two
charges. So there's the brand
USA um efforts that we're doing
in Munich and London, but then
that, uh, the dollar amount that
you see on that slide, those are
direct grants, and those grants
went through a competitive
process. So we did have, um, I
mean, they had to meet certain
eligibility requirements like
where they, where they were and
being close enough to the route
that it made sense for the
traveler. Um, but all of those
were um awarded through.
Uh, competitive process with the
application committee and
Um, as I mentioned, we just
recently finished that last
week, uh, and are getting awards
out as we speak. Yeah, so, so,
yeah, I was just looking at
that, the reason I'm asking is
because, you know, you have, you
have Acoma Laguna and drives
right along Route 66.
And, and, and I didn't know that
was a competitive process or
they just didn't apply or were
they
just didn't apply or
so anyway, so that's it. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, I, I, uh,
Yeah, I'm happy to see that. I
know what you're doing is
working.
I, I have a little restaurant
and, and uh there's.
We get people, a lot of them
from Texas, come through there
and, and some of them come
repeatedly, you know, they, they
go skiing up in Red River and
stuff and that, and that's
increasing. I live close to
Route 66.
Uh, which is to carry and I live
a little bit north of there, and
uh
Uh, there's a lot of, you're
talking about your, uh,
National and international
advertising. I can tell you
there's a lot, a lot of people
that fly in from your rib, a BMW
motorcycle with
Saddle pouches on the side and
ride Route 66.
Just across the Texas line,
there's a thing called the
Midway Cafe.
And one of the things you have
to do if you ride Route 66 on a
motorcycle is stopped.
At the Midway Cafe and have
lunch. That's a big deal. Yeah,
there are restaurant for a while
was, was, uh, some of these
motorcycle clubs had us, like if
you went on a certain, certain
ride, you had to get your ticket
bust at the restaurant there,
you know, and that's kind of the
way the
The Midway Cafe is, you know,
that we, we.
We made it to this spot at this
time and
And uh it's a little
Kind of a thing that they do.
So I'm, I'm very tickled to see
the, the effect that these
Advertisements are happening. I,
I wondered, uh,
16 million in national
advertising.
Uh, what is, and that was just a
special appropriation. What is
the total budget for national
and international advertising
and uh split out separately.
Yeah, I had that information if
you want to give me one second.
So, for national marketing, uh,
right now, about 14 million is
going towards the national
marketing campaign, the
international marketing, uh, we,
we do have some production.
Um, basically, it's 240,000 is
our, our co op with Brand USA
and it's a small activation.
It's only in in targeted
placements in Munich and in
London. We are trying to be
strategic, incremental in going
into a new market and not, uh,
you know,
Not changing what's, what's
totally working. Um, cooperative
marketing is 3.8 million, um,
so,
And then the Route 66, so yeah,
so basically all in um
You know, close to
20 million or 23, I think it was
2. So without the 16 million,
it's pretty short, no, um, Mr.
Chairman Representative, that's
correct, and that's why.
Mentioned um how appreciative we
were for the support when that
American rescue plan money, um,
you know, was not available.
The, the confidence and faith in
our department that that's where
the investment was, was yielding
a, a return. Um, we don't take
that for granted. Um, it's a,
it's a, it's a big chunk.
I think, you know,
I don't know what that return
is, you, I know you sent us some
numbers, but I think we need to
take a good hard look at at
giving you some permanent money
to
You'll be able to advertise our
state, you can sit and do
nothing and let the world pass
you by, or you can get out there
and get in the mix, you know,
and, and I think that uh
We need to get in the mix, and
I, I appreciate some of the
programs that I see, uh, that
you all have and, and, uh, the
good job you're doing. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
you represented.
I think that's it on the list.
Let me ask you some questions on
the budget, right? They looking
to me like you're, you're, you
have 59 full-time employees,
right? 54 fields, so you have 5
vacancies, but you don't have
the.
Or vacancies. This is a
snapshot. I don't know what it
was taken, but September 1st we
have 4.
Or vacancies. Yes, it's the
cabinet cabinet secretary, the,
uh, no, no, no, I'm not talking
about I'm talking about 5
vacancies that are sitting in a
little bucket over here.
That are on field, but they're
not funded.
You may want to call it, Mr.
Sher, but, I mean, we, they're
not, this is the issue I think
and why we're requesting the
additional funds. We're getting
to this point now where we
really have such a low vacancy
rate that we are getting into
this position where we are
running out of funding for, for
employees just because
Our vacancy rate is so low. So
there may we, we're gonna have
to have those discussions about
positions that if we don't
I mean, they're just gonna have
to lay vacant if we don't have
the dollars for.
I don't know if you want to come
up whoever does.
You have 5 vacancies that are
unfunded vacancies, correct? I'm
sure that uh we actually filled
one of those vacancies, so we
have 4. OK, so you have 4, but
then you, you're running a
negative in your
Funded vacancy dollars to the
tune of
38, I think it's 38 or 39,000.
In the program support dollars,
right?
And, and so we're showing you
running a negative that you've
over hired in that number.
And overpaid and so you're
outside of your budget.
Spending.
So you're correct in that we've
had to borrow money, um, for our
400s to cover our 200s, that is
correct.
You are correct.
And so, I mean,
In that vacancies, and then
you're asking if what your
request is, you're asking for
how many more FTEs, 3 additional
FTEs, when you currently have 4
vacancies. What are those 4
vacancies that you're requesting
in?
Or one of the 4 vacancies that
exist and what are the four.
The 3, is it 3 or 4 that you're
requesting?
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, so our, uh, 4
vacancies are cabinet secretary
position.
Our ASD director, um, which I'm
doing kind of both at the
moment, um, marketing
coordinator, which is in our
magazine and then our video
service, um.
Video services coordinator. So
those are currently our 4
vacancies, the 2 positions that
we're asking for, um, and the
how we came to this number is a
HR generalist too. Currently we
only have one HR and HR manager,
that's it for the department,
uh, who is getting close to
retirement. It's not lost on me.
Um, and then a program
coordinator, uh, 2, which would
be in our tourism development
P548, uh, PC code uh to assist
in running some of the programs
that we talk.
talked about.
Do we really need a cabinet
secretary? We have Lansing.
Again.
I mean, there's vacancy savings
that we can expand.
Gotta have a little fun. If you
don't laugh,
and, and so, uh, I mean, we're
gonna look at those, those FTEs
cause you, you're, you've
overspent and you've barred out
already. We hadn't seen the bar,
Charles.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee were getting ready to
prepare that bar, um, and we
should, uh, be committing it
soon. Uh, it will be about, uh,
I think the total will be in the
neighborhood of 389,000.
But how can uh Charles and I
guess is a question.
If they have a vacancy, and
they're paying them.
They hire it and they're filling
it in.
And they don't have the
authority to spend that money.
How are they spending money in
the agency without the authority
or the bar of transfer to to
spend that money.
This is um a good question, Mr.
Chairman, for every other
category of spending.
And an agency's budget.
Cher won't allow him to book uh
purchase order unless there's
sufficient budget.
But for whatever reason, we're
seeing agency after agency are
hiring people or giving raises
in excess of what their 200
category can support. Normally,
we would expect
That's only occur if they've got
enough budget, but we're seeing
the opposite and then bars
coming in after the fact or some
agencies have already notified
me, they just intend to ask for
a supplemental.
Um, for you, which I
Never really seen in my
experience.
At night purposefully
overspending its budget with an
expectation that you backfill.
How, how
This doesn't go to you guys, but
how many of those are we gonna
see? I mean, we hear the stories
of every agency doing this.
As, as we headed the budget
season, right?
How many agencies are going to
be overspent.
And not within their budget
guidelines, and not able to to
balance their budget without a
supplemental.
Or moving money from one
category into personnel to cover
it.
Um, that's what, that's what
you'll see a lot of, uh, it's
not every agency, but it's a
fair amount, uh, more than
normal.
Um, I'd guesstimate 1/3 to 1/2.
You, but if you look at in your
packets at that PSA form. That's
where you'll be able to, to see
if an agency as of September 1st
is uh over hired and or as
payroll that's too high, that's
not supported by the.
OK.
I, I, I just think you guys need
to make sure we have a good
explanation. The cost of
insurance, I think we're
calculating as a whole, not
individual on agencies, right?
Cause it's too hard to calculate
in that base budget.
10%, depending on the number of
employees you have. So I think
we're looking at that numbers
overall, if you, if you take
that insurance 10% cost on 59
employees. Do you know what that
number is?
The 10% increase on the
employees.
We'll get that. Yes, cause we've
we we obviously had to do it um.
And we're looking at a whole
number throughout everybody not
in that. So just a word of
caution as we head forward.
You're not alone in overspending
your budget, but be careful as
you do that, cause things are
tightening. I, I don't, you guys
were here during the
presentation, if OPEC plays that
game in the beginning of the
year, we're gonna be looking at,
it really tightening.
Numbers and maybe even making
cuts and you guys have not seen
that and they could happen
rather quickly.
Uh, if OPEC plays that that game
with us, so.
Anything you want to ask me?
Mm
Mr. Cha, thank you. I just, I
think that's also the part of
our request is really to fully
fund our positions. We know
that. We understand that. We
hear you, and take it very
seriously. We're gonna be so
cautious with fully funding
positions. If you look at what
the judicial branch did with
their fully funded vacancies and
took and paid PTO with it at a
level that we had not expected
and, and so we're gonna be very
cautious as we look at funded
FTEs and how we do that because
that is where you transfer money
Out and there's so many stories
about
Headshots and buying.
it.
physical equipment or capital
with FTE money and, and we need
to get a hold and get a true
balance as we go forward, so.
Not, not saying that we won't
fill your request. You make
requests, let's, we're gonna ask
tough questions. That's our job,
especially as we go into
agencies of, of how many funding
do you need and how many can you
handle and, and what it's gonna
look like. You're moving it out
of the 400 level, so that's
interesting to me, what, who's
gonna get hit in the 400 level
or what excess you had. Any
other questions?
None.
Thank you, Mr. Actor secretary.
Do you think we should fund the
uh cabinet secretary position.
Or would you rather just remain
active.
Yeah.
Or they spend on other stuff.
So you, we already spent that,
so there's no funding for a
cabinet secretary for 2024, 25
because you spend it on other
stuff, so.
Thank you.
A.
As this, you're gonna go over
the environment department
budget.
Mr. Secretary, you're gonna
answer all the questions we're
gonna shoot at you today.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
think, uh, sports staff is
passing. What time are we
we got a handout this
presentation right here, uh, my
name is Austin Davidson. I'm
your natural resource analyst,
and I'll be going over the New
Mexico Environment Department's
purpose, performance, and
budget.
So turning to the first page of
his presentation, you're going
to see a breakdown of the
function of the agency and the
purpose.
Specifically, the agency
administers the water and
wastewater infrastructure loans.
It monitors the federal
facilities in New Mexico has
within it over 20 funds ranging
from 80,000 to $80 million and
has 10 boards and commissions
within the agency, but are
independent of the agency. A
good example of that division is
going to be NMED's recent
requests to change the New
Mexico produced Water Act, which
are in front of the water
quality control commission.
Which is technically within NED
but is independent of NMED.
Turning to the 3rd page of the
presentation, you'll see an
organizational breakdown of the
department.
You're going to see at the
center of it.
We don't want to change this
slide screen up above, so in
case somebody starts yelling at
us and text messages zoom is not
matching the the presentation.
Unless you want to be the
secretary of tourism, Mr.
Secretary, because they're
apparently there's one, but
there's no funding for that.
Or you wanna be a legislator and
work for free
Mr. Chair, on that 3rd page, uh,
you're gonna see an
organizational breakdown of the
agency and you're going to see
at the center of that, it's
going to be the secretary, and
then from there, the different
divisions and bureaus that exist
within the agency.
Turning to the 4th page of your
presentation, you're gonna see a
breakdown of those core
divisions. The first one I
wanted to highlight is the water
protection division, that's
gonna have the drinking ground
and surface water bureaus within
it, and those all focus on the
water quality in our state.
Turning to the next, uh,
Vision I wanted to highlight is
going to be the environmental
protection division, that
predominantly focuses on the air
quality in our state, in the
industries that impacted, and
then the division also regulates
the radioactive materials in
their use in our state.
The next is going to be the
resource protection division
that regulates the disposal and
management of the solid waste
and hazardous waste. It also
monitors our DOE facilities like
Sandia National Labs, Los
Alamos.
And then the last division I
wanted to highlight is going to
be the environmental health
division. And that's going to be
regulating the industries such
as restaurants, public pools,
and spas, while also monitoring
the safety of workplaces, our
cannabis industry, and the
septic tanks in our state, kind
of think of that broadly as the
OSHA of New Mexico.
Turning to the next page in your
presentation is a more granular
breakdown of one of the
divisions in the agency. That's
going to be the resource
management division, and that's
going to have the office of the
secretary in it, the Office of
General Counsel, the Office of
Information Technology, and the
administrative services
division. They have a total FTE
of 98.4, and then a total budget
of 25.
The Next page is gonna be a more
granular breakdown of the water
protection bureau that I
highlighted, it's gonna have
that office of the director, the
different water quality bureaus
that monitor the quality of
water in our state, and then our
construction programs bureau,
and that helps with the water
infrastructure projects in our
state that has a total FTE of
212, and then a budget of 76.
The next page is going to be our
resource protection division,
and this can have a total FTE of
112.
The total budget of 39.3
million, and then you're gonna
see there's going to be the DOE
oversight bureau, hazardous
waste Bureau, petroleum storage,
tank bureau, and then the solid
waste bureau.
The next page is a breakdown of
the environmental protection
vision that's gonna have the
office of the director and the
predominant function of this
division is the Air Quality
Bureau, and then the radiation
Control Bureau, and that's gonna
have a total budget of 120.5 FTE
and then a total budget of 31.2
million.
In the next page is going to be
the environmental Health Bureau,
that's gonna have a total budget
of 12.6 million and a total FTE
of 110, and then the predominant
function is that environmental
health bureau, which is gonna be
monitoring all those different
industries.
And then the last of these new
divisions is going to be the new
proposed division of the agency,
the new compliance and
enforcement division. What this
agents, what this division is
hoping to do is to remove the
permitting and the compliance
and enforcement sides in NMED
and separating them.
And a good example of that is
going to be the air quality
Bureau, which currently does the
permitting and enforcement of
its air quality permits, and
this division would be taking
the compliance and enforcement
of those while the Air Quality
Bureau mainly focuses on the
complex permitting side.
Of air quality permits. And so
the total FTE is gonna be 130,
the proposed, and then the
proposed budget.
Uh, 14
The next page is going to be
going over the different ways
that the LFC and NMED monitor
their performance of the agency.
A good way to highlight that
would be in that water
protection area, there's going
to be the percent of the
population served safe and
healthy drinking water. You'll
see an FY 22. It was at 97%, and
then you'll see a decline, and
that decline is because there's
new regulations that the EPA is
passing that then NMED has to
enforce, which then affects the
percentage.
Of how much New Mexico's
drinking.
Safe water. And that's a good
example of how the how the New
Mexico Environment Department
and the LFC monitor the changing
performance metrics of the
turning to the budget side.
Of this presentation, the first
graph on the left is going to be
a breakdown of how enemyD spends
its personnel contracts and
other, and you're gonna see in
the different colors, those are
the different types of funds
that go into personnel contracts
and other a good example of that
would be the red column, that's
gonna show that for personnel
enemyD spends 26 million, most
of its general fund on
personnel, then you'll see in
the orange, the federal funds.
You'll see in the green other
transfers, and then you'll see
in the blue other funds.
If you turn to the right side of
this, you're going to see a
graph that kind of highlights
how those different trends have
fluctuated over the last 7
years.
You'll see in FY 25, a pretty
sharp increase in the federal
funds and then a slight decrease
of that in FY 26, and you'll
also see specifically in that
green column, that's gonna be
the other transfers, and that's
gonna be reflecting that the
agency is moving away from
budgeting what it's called it's
special revenues in a single P
code and then moving those to
different agencies, those
special revenues will now be in
each of those divisions. So
that's why that green column
decreased.
So much.
Turning to slide 13, you're
going to see a budget investment
over the last 10 years for the
agencies's general fund.
You'll see in FY 15 through
FY20, a flat to sustainable
growth, and then you'll see from
FY21 on a really sharp increase
in the amount of funding that
NMED has received for the
general fund, and at the very
top of FY 25, you'll see that
from FY 14,
FY 25, the legislature has
increased the enemy's general
fund budget by 188%.
turning to slide 14.
You're gonna see a headcount
breakdown of the agency. You'll
see in that red highlighted
area, you're gonna see that in
FY 14, the agency had 555 filled
FTE.
And then you'll see an FY 25 at
this snapshot in September, they
had 566, and just checked this
morning. They now have 574
filled FTE. So this is just a
snapshot in September as of now,
it's 570.
Turning to the next slide,
you'll see a breakdown of how
the agencies's personnel costs
have increased, and you'll see
that there was stability from
FY17 to FY 21, and then pretty
continuous growth from there.
And you'll see at that top
column for FY 25, they've
increased the budget of the
personnel by 41% from FY 16.
This last two slides are gonna
be going over NMED's budget
request, FY 26. The agency is
going to be requesting a flat
general fund for its recurring
budget. However, it is going to
be requesting a non-recurring.
Uh, special of 6 million for
implementation of compliance and
enforcement strategies, it's
going to be increasing its total
FTE.
58 with a transition of 16 from
term to term, and then a further
additional 74.3 per positions.
You'll also see there that I
highlighted that they're just
continuing that special
revenuespe coding, budgeting
practice and moving those into
each of the divisions.
And then they're also gonna be
creating this new compliance and
enforcement division.
And the final slide of this
presentation, Mr. Chair, is the
non-recurring requests for NED,
the
The largest portion of their
budget request.
And is requesting 10 individual
specials for a total of 474
million, and the majority of
this 474 million is going to be
in two specials. It's gonna be
in 150 million for non-superfund
site cleanup initiatives, and
then 250 million for the
strategic water supply.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
forgot to introduce somebody
who's gonna be joining me, the
Secretary of the Environment, uh
James Kenny, who will be
answering any questions you
have. Thank you. You're
wondering who that gentleman
was.
That's a tourism secretary. Uh,
I, I guess the questions from
committee members,
Representative Armstrong, and
then we go to represent Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
I have a question about this,
uh, creation of a new division,
the compliance and enforcement.
Can you uh tell me a little bit
more about that.
And uh
And why, why we need it, if it,
if compliance and enforcement in
this, in every division.
Why are we creating another
entity.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, good to see you.
Um.
Uh, can, can I just take one
minute just to say thank you to
the committee and appreciate
being here to talk about uh our
budget and Austin did a great
job and I have team members with
me, 2 deputy cabinet
secretaries, Gilliam and
Roderick and um Jonas Armstrong,
our water protection division
director, uh, who's who's moving
on and moving up in our
department. So again, I just
wanted to thank you and um to
your question, Mr. Chair and,
and um,
Uh, representative, the, the
reason for the creating of the
compliance and enforcement
division is uh multi-pronged,
but I'll be brief in explaining
why we're creating this
division. So we administer
federal programs through
multiple federal agencies, but
predominantly the environmental
protection agency. Many of those
programs are codified into state
law as well, so we're
administering the clean Clean
Air Act, and the air Quality
Control Act, the hazardous waste
Act at the state.
level and the resource
conservation recovery Act at the
federal level.
Um, as you saw on our budget,
we're predominantly a federally
funded agency with other permit
fees coming in as well. Those
federal funds that come to us
are have certain restrictions on
them. And when we went to, when
we went to those federal
agencies like EPA and said we
will administer these programs
in lieu of EPA, uh, we made
certain agreements with those
federal agencies that said are
permitting and compliance
programs would be run separately
independent of each other.
the idea being that you don't
permit away violations, um, and
that the permit engineer is
different from the inspector who
would be doing that work. So,
we've not had that stovepipe
between uh our staff.
Our budget dollars, RP codes in
the implementation of those
programs.
For years
Um, so the one, so we're coming
to uh into conformance with the
way we said we would run these
programs and the way they were
given to the state of New
Mexico. So that's, that's the
first reason. And then secondly,
as you saw, there's many boards
and commissions for adjudication
of permit matters and
adjudication of enforcement
matters, those adjudications
should run through different
people in the department, not
Uh, the same person. Um, so
that's another reason we're
doing it, so we don't compromise
outcomes in that fair
adjudication process of permits
or enforcement actions.
Um
And then finally, Madam Chair,
or Mr. Chair and Representative.
The other reason we're doing
this is because our staff are,
uh, have the ability now to have
a greater um journey level with
the department, if they're not
doing everything.
The the breadth of what one
person does, means that the
depth isn't there, they're
capable of it, I don't get me
wrong, um, but uh, it's not
possible to be an NED employee
in our air program and do
everything. So, by, by
separating out function,
conforming with federal
requirements, conforming with
our federal grants, and then um
giving people the opportunity to
work in permitting or
enforcement will increase our
ability to recruit and retain
our staff as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman and,
and secretary. Um,
I, I just, I don't know, I, uh,
We're gonna grow this department
more.
Because this will be under NMED
or is it, this will be a whole
different, it'll still be under
your budget, and we could see on
the graph earlier how much this
department has grown.
And, and one comment that you
made, so you're permitting will
be different than your
inspectors.
Do any of your
Fines, where, where out of all
of these departments,
If there is a fine, where does
that money go to?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
the
Civil penalties that we collect.
Um, for the majority of our
programs, there's one exception
that I can think of, go back to
the general fund.
So, in FY 24, we returned 30.4
million to the general fund
compared to the 25.5 million
that we pulled from the general
funds. So we were in 18.4%
return on investment in terms of
the general fund based budget
allocation from the legislature,
so, and I'd be remiss to not say
thank you for increasing our
general fund budget over the
years.
Um, but our civil penalties go
back to the general fund for
your reallocation. Um, there's
one exception to that, and
that's our hazardous waste
program, those fines go into our
hazardous waste emergency fund,
which allows us to respond to,
like, Roswell this week, um, for
spills that occur on I-40 or
I-25 or uh for various things
that happen.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico that are hazardous in
nature and and threatened that
that money goes back into our
operating budget directly.
Um, thank you for that. And so
basically, Mr. Chairman, we're,
we're creating this in
conjunction with some of the
federal dollars that we are
receiving and managing it's, is
it part of their requirement?
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
is in, in
roughly the late 80s, early 90s
time frame, uh, the state of New
Mexico said as we were
implementing these programs or
got delegation or privacy to
these programs. This is how we
would run it. So we're kind of
returning back to how those
programs were intended to be
run.
Um, I should say this is exactly
how TCEQ the Texas Environmental
Agency runs, this is how all of
EPA has reorganized itself into
alignment this way. So we're,
we're coming back to what normal
is among environmental agencies.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative, we are, while we
will
Grow compliance and enforcement
over time with all the other
programs.
Um, we are not asking for
Recurring general fund to do
that.
We, we are largely shifting our
existing employees who have a
predominant duty of
Compliance and enforcement into
this division.
So I think there's roughly 98.
I can't remember the exact
number, but it's under 100,
about 100 people that will be
moving from within the division
they're located into this new
division.
So it's not a
Growth moment per se. I'd be
remiss if I told you we probably
will hire new people too, but
it's not an expansion.
Of the department at large.
OK, that, that answers a little
better for my questions. Um, the
other question I had is with the
clean fuel standards task force.
When will they get out their
first set of rules? Are they
close or do we have a timeline?
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you for
that question. Uh, we hope to
have our clean fuel standard
rules, uh, prepared and ready to
go to the environmental
improvement Board, which is the
board that would have the
hearing to adopt them, um, by
the end of the year. So we
should be seeing.
those rules very shortly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, secretary.
Thank you. I I don't have any
other further questions. I, I am
looking at your specials and
Striking through the revision
section of all of them.
I think you need, if you're
gonna ask for this amount of
money and
Some of it may be.
have to be there, the POS at
Clovis, right? That's a long
term.
that we need to look at, but
some of these other ones, I
mean, at the end of an executive
in 2020.
6, I think.
Uh, how we're going to spend
$250 million in in two years and
how we're going to spend it
correctly.
And some of those some questions
that we're gonna have to answer.
It did the water strategic water
supply. How did that come out of
the Dubai conversation or did we
learn anything from?
Stuff that we've been on. I
mean, Dubai was the water
initiative, correct? Right, Mr.
and Mr. Chair, can I address the
250 million.
Yeah, um,
The $250 million that's in our
special appropriations portion
of our budget is a placeholder,
um,
Or
Work that will occur in the
strategic on the strategic water
supply as well as the broader
50-year water action plan. So
what I think you will see from
not just my agency, but multiple
agencies that come before you in
the natural resource space is
that there we're all going to
have a component of
The 50 what are your action plan
in either our base budget, you
know, special appropriations or
maybe through a legislative
action, but I, the, the 250
million is a placeholder. I, I
don't expect that number to be
the number that
Uh, in the 60 day session.
And I don't expect that number
to be fully housed at the
environment department either.
So I think we will come back as
an executive team and have a
number for you, um,
At a, at a later date on that
particular topic.
OK.
I, I'm just, I mean, some of
these things are long term, some
of these things are short term
and, and how we're going to
spend the money and how we're
going to get it out, cause, I
mean, this is the year of, for
me, this is the year of timing
as we see going into a four-year
plan at 2030 that we're at the
peak, right? And we're going to
begin this downturn. So how do
we start to do that in in 2025,
you had 745 FTEs authorized,
right?
It
Austin, correct me if I'm wrong.
You might say yes, because they
can't see your head shake on the
web
uh, and then it went to in 2026,
you're
FTE went to 7:32.
But the actuals
We only 566.
I don't have the PS kelp. I'm
trying to back door this number
from 732 to 556.
Roughly 200, 180 vacancies,
correct?
That's correct. And and so the,
even with the increase in pay,
we still have that large amount
of vacancies.
Yeah, Mr. Ja, so some of the
numbers you're referring to are,
are
are encompassing both our
budgeted and unbudgeted vacancy
rate. So currently we're at
about 665 budgeted FTE.
Budgeted that we could afford
today, um.
We are as as uh my colleague
Austin just indicated we're at
574, so we're roughly 90 people
short, more or less of where we
could be based on our existing
FY 25 budget.
Uh, the good news is, is we just
onboarded 21 people this week,
16 people last pay period,
probably another dozen next pay
period because we filled 51
positions at a rapid higher.
Um
I, I would express from our
entire agency that the workforce
both the employees and the
morale of the work, the, the
workforce are extremely grateful
for uh the legislatures
increases to our department,
that 188% increase in general
fund has gotten the uh employees
to wear Spo would say they
should be based on their
education and compensation.
So we're in a great place that
I've never seen before since my
time at the department. Um, so
thank you for that.
And um I think based on the
general fund that we do have,
even with a flat budget and then
moving into increased spending
in our permit funds as well as
increased spending of federal
funds, we will be able to fill
and get to what I would call the
lowest budgeted vacancy rate in
25 and 26.
Um, that, that we've seen at the
Environment department.
And, but I'm just looking over
the entire period from 2014.
On Austin's sheet and you've
seen it, I mean, the, the sweet
spot for employment is, just
call it around 550, right?
And, and I don't know why we
haven't, even though you're
authorized to 7:45, but we've
never even got close, right?
Well, Mr. Chair, I would argue
that when, when you're
highlighting that sweet spot.
Um
You know, we didn't have the
money to pay people at their
education and work experience.
So while it looks like a sweet
spot plateauing at at that
number. It's not the sweet spot,
because people were still
exiting the department and not
wanting to work there when, you
know, M nerd or OSE or someone
else could pay them more for the
same education and experience.
So, I think what we'll be
telling us to where our sweet
spot is when we plateau in the
25, 26 time frame, and I don't
think we're going to plateau. We
had 250 people show up for 20
for 50, 60 jobs.
Yeah
So just pointing out we improved
our vacancy rate by 10% in the
last year. And again, I
That, that's a, that's a we
solve that problem between the
legislature and executive, so,
um, I think, you know, we, we
can see if my words are right,
but when we come back, uh, in
the 60 day session, and then,
you know, uh, through next
interim, I think you'll continue
to see that our
Uh, recruitment retention is
still on the rise.
Well, that, that's good news. It
came with hiring employees as
long as you got the money to
hire them.
Unlike tourism and some other
agencies.
And, and so when you stay within
those budget guidelines, I think
that's a good thing, but let's
see what happens in the in the
market, I mean.
Everything is changing and
everything's, I guess let's just
see what happens and we're gonna
look very hard at the
non-recurring quest of the 250
will be spread across planning
stuff and it'll be interesting
to see how we get there this
year.
Mr. Jaro be a,
uh a welcome first time for the
legislature to look hard at our
budget.
We always look hard at
everybody's
Representative Garcia, quick
question for you, one quick
question, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Uh, John or secretary, have you
guys done anything to help uh
small communities with their
problems on audits and.
Well for cause, you know,
there's a big issue on, on my
district on that.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garcia, we've engaged uh on
multiple levels as has DFA and
uh New Mexico Finance Authority
to provide assistance to these
communities to get up to speed
on their audits.
Um, to, to provide the basic
managerial services that we need
in these communities, uh, the
process has been slow, but we
are seeing improvement across
the board.
Um, the other thing that I'm
gonna put a plug in for one of
the specials, we've, we've got a
request in there for
20 million to the uh rural
infrastructure program.
And this is one of our funding
sources. It's a revolving fund,
but it's much more agile than
the others.
Uh, the, we have to meet state
requirements, but not all the
federal requirements and it
allows us to utilize funding to
communities.
Much more quickly.
Uh, and, and all, it's, it's in
smaller amounts, but it, it
makes it available to them to
jump start some of these
projects.
Uh, additionally, you know, we
have, uh, we have a pilot
project going with the
Northwestern New Mexico cog
council of governments in
Gallup.
Um, regarding regionalization,
providing administrative grant
support and things of that
nature to these smaller
communities, not physically
connecting them, but providing
uh uh essentially umbrella
services, um, so we started that
pilot this year, uh, and we're
looking to expand that.
Other places in the state.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you, John.
Represent small
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Briefly, um, the additional
positions that you've been able
to fill around the enforcement
side. I know you've gone through
this, but what is that
translated into for the state.
Um, Mr. Jared and, and
Representative uh uh
We've um
Just in, in our air quality
program and a couple others have
brought in in FY 24, uh 30
million plus in civil penalties
that go back to the legislature.
Um
We are splitting a lot of those
civil penalties with the
Department of Justice, because
uh as we build up our
enforcement.
Cadre of staff, then we'll be
able to take those cases on our
own. So there's probably about
I don't know.
1012 million that we've shared
with the federal government that
we could have brought to the
state of New Mexico. Um, but
nonetheless, we, we've now
offset our general fund in FY
24.
Um, by, uh, which was about 25.5
million, we returned about 30+
million to the general fund, um.
So that, that's just that
program. The other piece of this
that I was explaining earlier,
Mr. Chair and Representative, is
that one of our programs that
has waste emergency fund, you
know, when we collect a penalty
from, let's say, Los Alamos
National Labs or a different um
entity in the state of New
Mexico for hazardous waste that
goes into our has waste
emergency fund, which is money
that you don't have to
appropriate to us from the
general fund because we use that
to respond to emergencies,
spills, releases.
Uh, community issues and some of
that money is even testing for
PFOS, um, in, in people's blood
in private well water, which we
wouldn't do normally, but for
access to those dollars. Great.
Thank you. I think it, it really
demonstrates that strategic and
smart investment, uh, benefits
our environment and benefits our
state budget it leads to a
better, just sort of a, a better
state broadly in many different
ways. Secondly, um, Mr. Chair,
secretary as we continue to work
to be regional and in some
cases, national, maybe even
international leaders when it
comes to wise stewards of water
and being able to bring online
non-traditional sources of
water. Will that be front and
center as far as the
opportunities that you all are
looking at this upcoming
session.
And including sort of a credible
pathway to sort of um build
clear rules of the road for sort
of folks in the state about how
to, how to maybe bring online
non-traditional sources of
water. Yeah, Mr. Jar and, and uh
Jerry Small, we are very
Focused on um in our special
appropriations for FY 26, using
those dollars for uh water work
generally, um, not only
increasing the quantity of water
that's available for both um
conservation and economic
development and all those
pieces, but to improve the
quality of the water that New
Mexico has. Um, so those are
high importance to us, um,
especially when we have group.
like the Department of Defense,
uh, you know, just actively and
flagrantly violating our, our
laws and polluting our water.
Um, but we will continue to
focus on that. We're optimist, I
am optimistic that the WQCC will
continue to move forward on the
water reuse package, and I am
also optimistic that our
department will bring additional
water reuse rules to the WQCC in
2025.
Um
You know, and, and we'll
continue to move. We have to, we
have to do something because
we're not creating net new
water, um, unless we actively
move down these pathways, um,
and that's a whole of, of, you
know, with Secretary Black here,
that's great for us to be
working on those technologies
through LIDA, JTI bringing
people in. Um, it's also great
to have New Mexico Tech, New
Mexico State University, UNM,
we're partnering with them,
Sandia Los Alamos, and others.
I, I mean, there is so much.
emphasis on water reuse in our
state that, uh, I do feel
optimistic, but it's a lightning
rod in many ways, and, and we're
going to continue to work in the
hard space.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Secretary, and thanks
to your team. I really
appreciate the very diligent
work, the enforcement, uh,
actions that you all are
bringing, I think, uh, setting a
higher standard, uh, as well as
really helping us push forward
in essential areas, which I
think we all recognize that
water is one of, if not the core
for the essential uh on the
natural resource side and Mr. Ja
and chairman just on the, I know
that if I leave here without
saying this, um, I'm gonna get a
bunch of
Questions, but, you know, while
we talk a lot about enforcement
and returning more general fund
than we took. There are many
companies who are doing
absolutely the right thing and
going well above and beyond what
they have to do in our state. So
this is not all about the
environment department just
wheeling a heavy hammer. I mean,
there are some really egregious,
um,
Companies that we are alleging
violations of and collecting
penalties on who um are not
making our state better, and
there are many companies are,
and that valuing their
investment means that we have to
hold the bad actors accountable.
I couldn't agree with you more,
Mr. Secretary. I mean, that's
the issues that we run into when
we have people operating in the
way they should, people
operating the way you shouldn't,
and then
Everybody's cast with the same
shadow or blanket in and that
happens. Um, I, I'm
New Mexico needs to win on the
water side. I don't know how you
make us win in produced water, I
mean, those rules have to get
made. We have to get to a point
where we can win on desal, we
have to get to this whole water
issue that we got to get.
Your agency to make the rules so
we can clarify where we're gonna
head and and as you, all the
agencies ask for a portion of
that 250 million. That's gonna
be a key into getting that
complete, because if those rules
and those aren't in place and I
don't know if the legislature
has the appetite to, to
comprehend and say wait and
we'll see what comes, but.
I mean, if
If we don't forget about the
drought.
A year ago, right? And how dry
everything was and how demanding
water is.
Uh, for me, the issue could be,
you know, the Gallup pipeline is
hitting $2 billion right? If we
were to put a
$25 million desal plant in
there, we could get water
everywhere we need to get it in.
And and produce water at 25th of
the, I don't know how to divide
2 billion by 25 million.
But I mean, that is a key issue
cross, and I mean, and New
Mexico could win on that front.
We could win in the produced
water section, you could win in
the desal.
Other places in Dundee sell El
Paso one. I mean, maybe it's not
a win, but we can supply water
at a lower rate, I mean.
If I have to use the gallop
water.
pipeline to supply water, it's
probably gonna be cheaper to
bathe with bottled water than it
is with the pipeline water.
That's just a clear fact of
Of what water is and what it
means, so.
Mr. Chair, you're coming in loud
and clear, and, you know, I
think we're very on the same
page about where we have to go.
Uh, as a, as an executive, as an
agency, and where the
legislatures uh wants to see us
go. So I'm, I understand what
you're saying. I've heard you
say it before and it's, I, it's
coming in loud and clear.
So chop chop, let's get that one
done so we can understand where
we're headed.
Thank you. We, we won't appoint
you to the tourism secretary
since there's no money. I, I
might welcome in some days, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, we're gonna adjourn and
we're going to come back after
lunch to do.
Uh, veterans veterans and Indian
affairs, and so, sorry about
that, but we're just running
behind. We got caught up this
morning, uh, and what time is it
now?
Let's say, yeah, let's shoot for
1:30. Somebody comes back a
little sooner, we will.
