it's really wonderful to see
everybody here today and to be
at such a exciting really
incredible facility we'll get
started right away as we do
usually we're going to go ahead
with a brief member introduction
for the members who are here
then we'll go to our
distinguished welcoming
panelists and dive into the
agenda from their will go ahead
and start to my left and ask
representative saturday to tick
yourself please thank you mister
chairman and I am definitely
seriously represent house
district twenty one and here and
burned the county of the monzano
high score is escaped and part
of our cookies so it's agreed to
have this committee here and am
seeing what albert cricket thank
you.
Good morning a jonathan henry
house district fifty four from
artisa area so great to be here
thank you and we'll go to
represent dunkin really quick.
The.
Good morning mr martdunken
represents send one county.
Good morning mr cherry good to
see everybody horrible vincent
i'm in house district fifty six
link in a note terrible glad to
be here
good morning mister chair jack
chatfield house district sixty
seven call facts very hard in
question again it's glad to be
here
good morning everyone.
Mr chair vice to a charter
little representing her sister
sixty eight here now vocar key
northwest you great to be here
thank you.
Good morning and representative
married at stixon southeast
albuquerque district twenty
thanks
and will go over to center
pillar good morning mr chairman
and members of the committee mr
good morning everybody have
senator michael pavia represents
in a district fourteen which is
essentially the southern portion
of bernaldio county and also
service the senate majority
weapon and senate finance thank
you
good morning mister charico to
our director to members of the
LFC to our staff to our
panelists the people that are
paying attention online it's
great to be here in this amazing
facility and I really accept the
people in nursing
for the design and the work that
they continue to do but the the
instruction and if you all the
future outreaches we go forward
I am state senator peak
compulsory representing all the
parts of seven counties in
northeastern new mexico.
Good morning steveline air
senate district to and farming
to new mexico think everybody
for
having us down here and the
coffee is great.
Linda traheal senate district
twenty four which is the
beautiful city of santa fe happy
to be here what a beautiful
building.
Good morning thank you mr chair
I am senator in a call to buyers
and I am thrilled to be here at
UNM and in my home town of
albuquerque I represent district
twenty one northeast.
The.
Good morning no mister chairman
vice chair our state senator
robert thought i'll be on
sellers representing here part
of los angeles we are rebuilt
center and towels and what a
beautiful building very very
nice and I might just say that
ie stopped counting but at least
twelve members from my family
are unam graduates
will go briefly to
representative of lentil.
Good morning mr chairman a good
morning vice german if he's even
here can remember all those that
are intended of guests in and
visitors in those tunning and
online to join us this morning
thank you for the invitation my
name is derek lenti I am from
sandy a publo and is that a
public respectively my father's
mislead of my mother some send
the we make our home and send
the a public where I represent
the mexico house district sixty
five and that includes parts of
real riba county san want county
and sentiment counting and I too
am a lifelong lowball demand
undergrad and law school here
now she came back to teacher for
a while so it's gonna be back on
campus thank you mister chairman
thank you very much
good morning my name is nathan
small really privileged to get
to represent house district
thirty six in the private chair
lfc vice chair munios will not
be at the meeting he's a
communicated that but uh you
know it's a really incredible
being able to work with him in
his team uh recognize adrian
over there and so with that
we're going to and this is a
very special place although it
not a u and m graduate my wife
attended last school right
across the way and so turning on
to this brings very very fund
memories we're gonna go to our
welcoming panelist this is a
sort of a brief welcome from
distinguished panelists governor
chair
chief officer
and finance director were very
pleased that you're here
it'll be sort of a brief welcome
and then members if we have
brief questions obviously we
want to go to those and then
we'll go through with that how
about we start with our host and
take it away thank you so much
good morning mister chair and
members of the committee I am to
recent car stant need us and I
service the executive vice
president per financial
administration at the university
of new mexico and on behalf of
all of us here at you and m it's
a real pleasure to welcome you
back to our campus.
And thank you for being here
president garrent stoke stence
her warmest remark regards and
sincere thanks she's out of
state this week but asked me to
personally let you know how much
you values your continued
partnership and support and how
much she would gets missing this
mid visit she really does she
always looks forward to
opportunities like this one to
welcome are elected leaders
todays meeting is taking place
in a truly remarkable space and
we thank you so much for your
kind of compliments the new
college of nursing and public
health excellence building was
completed just this last far
it's a ninety three thousand
square foot facility that brings
together students faculty
classrooms and laboratories all
under one roof can solidating
what used to be spread across
ten separate buildings it was a
forty three point two million
dollar project make possible by
a combination of federal support
institutional investments and
your backing of the twenty
twenty general obligation on c
which provided thirty million
dollars we're very grateful
your support help bring this
building to life and it's
already making a real difference
for our state undergraduate
nursing enrollment continues to
grow and the building now
supports more than one thousand
learners along with the fact
that researchers who work
alongside them
as you know new mexico is facing
shortage estimated at more than
eight thousand nurses they were
very pleased that over ninety
percent of our nursing graduate
stay right here in new mexico to
practice and this facility is
helping us train and retain the
professionals that are
communities desperately need
it's also the first permanent
home for a college of population
health are relatively young
college it's already doubled at
a moment and continues to grow
its preparing students delete
and vital areas like
epidemiology health equity and
community based research.
The work that you do and the
resources that you allocate or
what make progress like this
possible and this building is
more than just a facility it's a
shared investment in better
health outcomes and brighter
features for the people of new
mexico.
In just a few minutes of here
more about our plans to
modernize and double the size of
the school of medicine from my
colleague doctor michael
richards expanding our health
care work force remains a top
priority
for
seats means I get this outward
for a state
thanks to the design funding
that you just provided this year
were already like laying the
ground work for that expansion
unm stands ready to deliver more
medical graduates including
degrees across the full range of
allied health professions and we
are grateful for your support.
You may also walk by that away
or college of pharmacy during
your visit another nationally
ranked program preparing nearly
every pharmacist in new mexico
and it too is beginning major
upgrades thanks to your capital
investments if you've seen the
recent headlines about the risks
of microplastics to human health
you may be interested to know
that some of the world's most
primitive research on the septis
is happening right here on this
very campus.
As you drove here today and I
heard some of you mention the
new UNM hospital critical care
tower that is near in completion
it'll open later this year and
we hope you'll all join us for
the ribbon cutting the tower
will expand care at the states
only level one trauma center
which serves more than seven
thousand of new mexico's most
critically ill and injured
patience every year this is life
saving care and your support is
what makes it possible.
As president stokes often says
we are the university for new
mexico and advancing new mexico
thank you is the first strategic
goal of our UNM twenty forty
strategic plan we say to look to
each other all the time we need
to advance new mexico that
mission is reflected in all we
do from offering eighty five
undergraduate and more than a
hundred and thirty five graduate
professional degree programs do
maintaining branch campuses at
gallop last alamos towes and
valencia those offer to
associate degree certificates
and transfer pathways and help
insure that access to higher
education is not limited by
geography or circumstance
we help make higher education
more accessible and affordable
for student state wide and the
public investments that you make
create opportunities for new
mexico to pursue degrees conduct
research and build career saw a
stake and growth and thrive.
Of course the economy is always
of harving in one exciting
example is quantum computing the
next front here and information
science and the future of
computing itself.
Thanks to your one point eight
million dollars appropriation
this past session unm is
expanding the capacity of our
quantum new mexico institute.
Quantum is but hot
transformative potential for
areas like cryptography cyber
security artificial intelligence
and advance materials and we're
making sure that new mexico does
not get left behind
we're also working
collaboratively with other
higher education institutes
national labs and community
organizations and industry
partners to secure competitive
federal funding where we can
unm is a part of a coalition
awarded funding through the
economic development
administration tech hub program
eday tech her program is what
they call it and is a semi
finalist for two different
national science foundation
regional innovation engine one
focus and quantum and the other
unwatered and energy resiliency
these efforts bring together
communities universities labs
and employers to build the
skilled work force our region
needs to compete and to prosper.
We remained deeply committed to
working with our state local
regional and federal partners to
expand educational opportunities
grow our work force and drive
innovation that benefits new
mexico and we know that that
work matters unm generates an
estimated five point two billion
dollars in economic output each
year supports more than forty
seven thousand jobs and
contributes one point nine
million dollars excuse me one
point nine billion dollars in
labor income making us one of
the states most valuable
economic engines thanks to your
support we're not just educating
students were building the
capacity prosperity and
resilience of our communities
and we will continue to put your
investments to work for the
people in future of new mexico
we're proud to be a partner and
we're grateful for your present.
The.
The.
From there
good morning mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you so much for being here in
alba currently it's a pleasure
to have lfc as an interim
committee i'm here in the great
city of album I send my married
kellers weren't warm wishes and
and unfortunately he was
traveling today and we were
unable to change his travel that
attempt
and we welcome the opportunity
to continue to work with you
obviously as we move forward in
this in this new year I
appreciate that as an interim
committee your work never ins
and and appreciate that you all
are here at a time when others
that may be on vacation or
a relaxing and I know that the
work and that you do is
incredibly important we want to
extend obviously our
appreciation and thanks we just
calculated quickly and it just
yesterday that in the last four
years the legislature alone has
provided more than two hundred
million dollars support to the
city of alba kirky you are
investments as a legislature
have made incredible difference
for the citizens and and the
residents said in alba kirky and
the improvements that we have
been able to make you're a
agenda over the next few days uh
we'll include many folks from
across the city of albuquerque
and departments that i'm pleased
how will have the opportunity to
give updates on some of the most
critical work we do and where
the investments from the
legislature has made an
incredible difference.
Um you will hear from our
director of housing honestness
health health housing and
homelessness gilbert remirres
tomorrow i'll talk with you
about an incredible investments
that have been been made in
housing and and serving those
individuals that are unhoused in
our community and that is
obviously been through and uh
significant investment and our
gateway system here now the
kirking and that investment has
resulted in our ability to think
through the dynamic system of
care that is required for us to
serve those individuals that may
not be that are suffering from
either addiction or other needs
of services as well as remain
unhoused that system of care
really comes as a result of our
ability to work with our
partners and then i'm pleased to
sit next to our partners here
and the university of new mexico
and bernio county as we have all
continued to march forward and
end determined ways to provide
an effective continue of care
and ensure that those services
are available in right here and
all the kirky as we serve folks
from all across new mexico
action in this system of care.
We have multiple pieces of that
system that will be continuing
to open throughout the fall but
right now and you will see I
think a you all have a tour a
planned late in the afternoon
tomorrow and the opportunity see
physically in each of those
environments how the pieces work
together and actually how that
system of care includes it of
course the state of new mexico's
department of health and the
providers that are located at
the gateway center here and gets
in.
We've also made significant and
estimates through our
metropolitan redevelopment
agency and are and health
housing enhance department in
housing and you will hear about
those investments in the ways in
which we've been able to
catalyse housing development
here in alba kirky both for
affordable housing and also
market rate in the entire stack
of housing needed in our
community we all know that there
is significant need and we've
had multiple projects that we
are really incredibly proud of
be able to work together with
our partners in the community
kind of quarter that the better
integration center we have an
incredible project coming in the
uptown area that related to you
maximizing a federal reason that
allows us to use state city and
federal funds and to be able to
connect individuals to housing
connected to transit options as
well.
And as you may all know we have
never endeavoured to
renovate and re have motels and
hotels in two housing options as
we've found these options to be
effective ways for us to convert
what maybe under utilized
property is into housing that
provides individuals a path
forward into permanent house in.
You know the housing funding
that you are provided through a
hb to has is going to have an
incredible impact in our
community and you'll hear from
gilbert remarries tomorrow and
at the how that work and how we
have endeavoured to provide an
appropriate package of
opportunity for that investment
right here in albert kirky and
in partnership with our mini
partners in the community.
You also hear tomorrow from
deputy chief jj creago who is
from the albuquerque police
department when you all have a
presentation in discussion
around technology in our
investments in in how those
investments that you all have
invested in have provided us the
ability to
take out tackle some of our most
significant crime issues in
albuquerque and how that
technology and partnership with
law enforcement officers and
civilians has been able to be
catalysed for utilise to two
expand our reach into the
community in a way that does not
require an officer at every at
every spot every incident it
also allows us to have as in in
places that you just can't have
two thousand after today we hope
to be at a thousand soon uhm but
that gives us that opportunity
expand that reach within that
presentation you also hear from
our director of other cricket
community safe safety jodie
escapel about current acs is one
of the national models obviously
around and an alternative
response and and incredibly a
proud of the fact that in since
their exists and they their
inception acs has responded to
more than a hundred thousand
calls in our community right
here in alba kirki it's a
significant statement around the
opportunity we've had to
defer those phone calls from an
eat a police officer's response
to someone that is the rate
response of the rate time for a
community and director escobell
as many opportunities are many
packs and opportunity to share
how we can think about expanding
acs to support our community
even further and what that means
in terms of the connections and
collaboration with a pd
to ensure that you know many
times the right person is not to
show up to an incident is not an
individual that is armed earn
with a gun but more armed with
the compassion and and education
and training to think through
the behavior of health response
that was supports that
individual.
You know they've every day they
were transferred many many
people to housing or shelter and
or services and in every one of
those cases we not we believe
that that's the rate response at
the rate time for the individual
that needs that support
the other cookie community
safety department err recently
also was able to we expanded the
model so that they divided the
city and we've been able to
think about our responses and
our ability to be responsive to
the community by doing that by
lateral division of the city and
and ensuring that that response
is more timely for the
individuals that need us.
And then
lastly in and very importantly
your investments as a
legislature have made incredible
impact on the quality of life in
our community we think about the
many mini parks investments that
have happened across the city
and and i'm always proud of the
fact that we as a city have been
a top ten
ranked city in the country for
parks access and accessibility
to a park is really an important
quality life issue not just for
our families but also for
the community that expects to be
able to have a place that is an
their outdoor access to greenery
play ground and open space it's
incredibly powerful
statistic when i've only been at
the city now for just under two
years and was really proud to
know that we have made such
incredible investments with your
partnership.
As you know we are under way
with the rail trail and
incredible asset within our
community that can allows us to
think about what many big cities
across the country already have
invested in which is the a
urban parkway walk away that
allows people to be connected
connected by to
commute to work and by bike or
walking in a way that has been
not necessarily about been part
of our downtown
access and opportunity but it's
also an app opportunity build
community the real trail is an
opportunity for us to tell the
story of us and and and i'm
pretty after the architect that
designed it i'm really grounded
in the idea that as we move
through the rail trail there
will be stories of each area in
each community that is along
that real trial and then of
course because my roots have
long been with higher education
they don't want to pass up the
opportunity to remind everyone
that next year we will have a
I think I revitalized a real
yards as you know many many
years to can't have we have all
spoken about how do we
revatalize such an incredible
asset no community and the cnm
media academy and the state's
media academy will be finished
in complete with hundreds of
students and community and
industry there at the real yards
next year as we open that and we
look forward to being able to do
that very soon.
I wanted to say that one of the
most important things that I
have seen over the last two
years of the city has been your
investment in community centers
and our multi gen centers are
opportunity to connect children
and are seniors to a third place
somewhere behind beyond their
home or their school or work
that they can rely on for
support services and and to
build community when I look at
the renovations and the openings
that we have had in just the
last two years ago all across
our city and those investments
have come from our partnership
with you and um the cities and
city councils investment it
means it creates a meaningful
place for our children to count
on and have and sir you've
served.
Lastly I would just like to say
that I know that we all work
together to invest in the
economic opportunity right here
in albuquerque we are really
proud of the ability to leverage
the state's leader funds in the
cities leader funds together to
ensure that we're making fatful
investments in businesses as
they choose alba cookie so it's
exciting when we have can work
together to make us an annual
four million dollars investment
in cairos and create a hundred
jobs right here now the kirki
solaro together we made a two
hundred million dollars i'm
sorry to two million two million
dollars investment in solar to
create jobs nisa film studios
and other seven those
investments mean that folks
right here now the correct you
have the opportunity to have
meaningful employment and
opportunity to have a connection
from their education that they
get at the university to mexico
cnm wherever that mean be within
the state's education system to
jobs that have meaning for
outcomes for their family so
thank you for your partnership
thank you for being here and
look forward to continuing our
work together thank you very
much
charlie was please.
Thank you doctor single good
morning chair small members of
the legislative finance
committee on behalf of the six
hundred and seventy one thousand
residents of brilliant county I
want to welcome you to our home
town some of you from here and
some of your for not or not but
welcome and I want to use my
time today to really reflect on
our shared challenges and
opportunities as we move forward
in the years ahead
I wouldn't express my enormous
gratitude for the collaborative
working relationship that we
have formed with the legislature
we have some real champions from
this county working on our
behalf in the legislature we
have many individuals from
across the state that don't
necessarily represent districts
in this county.
That have stood up for the the
needs and resources of our
county and of our citizens not
just here but statewide and so
thank you for the work that you
do afford the gruelling sixty
day session that I know you just
came out of and rolled right
into your interim committees
I want to recognize that you
funded critical projects across
the state but also here in
burning your county and from
everything to housing and
behavioral health were you made
massive investments to highways
and water infrastructure you
passed and strengthened laws
from extremist protection orders
limiting p fast and state
readiness work your work really
does truly benefit people that
we represent here in local
government and it's work that
collectively impacts the people
we serve.
I want to spend a couple of
moments talking about capital
outlet which I believe is a a
foundational issue to what we do
as you know we're coming after
coming off of the legislative
session that was historic from
the standpoint of funding
nearly twenty six million
dollars was allocated just to
burn your county government
along.
You said yes to many important
projects that are line with the
priorities of the residents we
represent.
But I want to recognize that
there is an implicit challenge
when you allocate those dollars
whether it's for community
centers or construction work
like the aslidable of our
project.
We must show that we are up to
the challenge by getting those
projects bid and into
construction as quickly and
efficiently as possible
we are already looking to
partner on future initiatives.
But I want to let you know that
it is my priority for the county
to begin to shift our focus to
doing fewer things with more
resources so that we can
complete projects more quickly
getting money out the door and
projects delivered to our
community the legislature has
been very generous to our county
but going back here after year
for a million dollars or half a
million dollars for multi
million dollars projects is not
a good way to fund those
projects.
To the distinguished members
here today I also want to
challenge you to consider your
capital outlet process and
better align new mexico's system
with best practices national in
a time of high inflation and
limited labor and material
availability we have to partner
to drive efficiency and I
believe that will require
changes to our systems at both
the state and local level.
As doctor single mentioned
before you made and enormously
impactful and bald investment in
housing through HB two hundred
and ten million dollars
allocated statewide we are
enormously grateful for your
investment and we recognize that
we must turn that investment
into action.
I think it's important to also
recognize that well communities
across the state struggle with
homelessness.
Close to sixty percent of
statewide homeless individuals
reside in the albuquerque
region.
The dollars you allocated will
help us collaborate to preserve
housing for low income families
build support of housing and
transitional housing for the
homeless and build new
affordable housing to attract
and retain workforce.
Again the shift the focus shifts
to implementation.
Our county is actively working
with the governor's office to
share local priorities we
believe the project lists that
we have proposed is quickly keep
quickly capable of placing more
than two thousand people in
affordable housing and housing
more than one thousand homeless
off of our streets here's our
plan to make this money work
number one we are committed to
collaboration we've developed a
project a project list along
with the middle real grand
housing collaborative and our
partners at the city of
albuquerque the state now has a
strong and community informed
roadmap for local investment.
Number two we are ready to move.
We understand that the
governor's office intends to
begin allocating funds this
fiscal year our project lists
the louser county to move
quickly and deliver that money
to shovel ready projects and our
listing corporate significant
leveraging with private and non
profit developers and third we
are focused on long term
sustainability.
Each priority project was
strategically vetered to
integrate with existing
community support networks to
avoid duplication and ensure
accessibility to services
needed.
It's important to note that the
middle real grand housing
collaborative has identified
over two hundred and fifty
million dollars in gap funding
that is needed for projects that
are ready to go.
We hope that the state will
continue with additional
investments in future years
beyond the bold one hundred and
ten million dollars down payment
that you made this year.
It's impossible to talk about
solutions to homelessness
without discussing behavioral
health they are deeply in your
twenty.
Brilliant county through its
local dollars has invested in
programs like the tiny home
village the family wellness
center the resource reentry
center for individuals leaving
the metropolitan detention
center these are lifelines but I
also believe their models with
stay collaboration we can scale
and replicate these initiatives
across the state.
Our brilliant county behavioral
health gross receipt tax
continues the fun critical
behavioral health services and
infrastructure.
For this fiscal year forty one
point eight million dollars is
budgeted for contracted services
and operating costs to support
everything from prevention to
intervention and treatment to
date our investments from the
behavioral health fund balance
have helped support crisis
response shelters and housing
including one right up the road
here such as the unmh crisis
tree I center
the gateway centers with our
partners at the city of album
the veterans integration center
through nonprofit partner and
are very own county owned care
campus so we look forward to
remaining focused on expanding
support and transitional housing
across our community and
delivering new services through
new projects
as our projects progress the
fund balance that we have
accrued over the years will
naturally decline as those
monies are deployed where
they're needed most
and I want to commit that
existing fund balance is under
strong consideration by the
board of commissioners for
leveraged housing focus
initiatives.
I also want a highlight the
partnership that we formed with
the city of albuquerque to
coordinate our use of up
settlement dollars we are moving
quickly to deliver our
investments from this one time
money to those in need funding
is focused on expanding
providers building additional
infrastructure and making big
investments in prevention
through our partners at
albuquerque public schools I
want to recognize and sure I
gratitude for the passage of the
behavioral health reform and
investment act at the state
legislature this is a
significant step towards
achieving regional coordination
and improving outcomes across
the state and I want to assure
you that we are burning the
county stand ready as a partner.
As we work to improve our
behavioral whole systems and
reduce homelessness it's also
important to recognize that
first responders are on the
front lines we are continuing to
invest in our sheriff's office
and are fired rescue teams to
ensure they have the resources
they need we ask for your help
to continue in sustaining an
expanding funding that insurers
they are fully equipped and
stuffed and thank you for the
investments you have already
made in recruitment and
retention for law enforcement
professionals.
So i've talked about housing and
behavioral health as a
foundation but it's also
important to note that we are
focused on building the pillars
that support longterm prosperity
in collaboration with our
partners.
In recent months we have taken
compelling steps to advance the
strategic growth of our county
under the leadership of economic
development director modicals
we have enlisted a steering
committee of experienced
professionals in the field to
solicit public participation and
in the fall we look forward to
their recommendations to tell
the county how to better do
business with business one of
the corner stones of this effort
has been a community dialog
series these are public sessions
focused on making sure that our
plans reflect the voice of our
residence and businesses.
And we have had a significant
participation of those
individuals informing these
sessions and one of the key
themes emerging from these
dialogues is the importance of
attracting and supporting
businesses including local
businesses that a line with the
county's existing strengths but
also help us diversify our
economy.
Speaking of work force as we're
here in the UNM center
businesses want to locate where
tell it is available and so to
meet the demands of the modern
economy we want to continue to
encourage you to make
investments in institutions like
you and m and CNN but also
equally important our
alternative vocational and
technical training programs.
The county recently invested in
a partnership with the semi
project along with our partners
at the city.
And this internship pilot
program will help create a
pipeline of young talented
individuals from underserved
communities to serve in climate
resilience and natural resource
fields so we urge the
legislature to continue those
investments and job training.
So all of this economic
development housing well being
all of these depend on
infrastructure and so I want to
continue to emphasize the
importance of the investments
you make in everything from
roads and broadband to water
infrastructure making those
smart impactful investments are
critical to the work we do.
So I want to close.
By sharing with you.
My view of the relationship we
desire with the state.
Bernilio county does not want a
hand out we want a handsheet
we understand the power of
matching funds that understand
that underscore are matching
commitment to do great things
together we are ready and
willing to leverage county
dollars private investments and
grants from other sources to
maximize our impact here locally
what we need from the state is
continued partnership and
support over the short term and
long term.
We believe that to scale up we
can build on what works and
build transformative projects
that move the needle for years
to come.
But whether we're talking about
housing job training or justice
we cannot go into long and
that's why it is so important
that we have our partners at the
table here today u n
the city value are quite low
governor.
Our partnership with state
government is equally important
as well and your help allows us
to stretch every dollar even
further.
Here in britain your county we
are not just the most populous
county in the state but I
believe we are a critical
partner in achieving the state's
broader goals if we want to
diversify the economy elevate
public safety and generally
improve the quality of life what
happens here in burning of
county has ripple ripple effects
across the state so we take that
responsibility seriously and we
are eager to work with you hand
in hand to turn our plans into
progress together.
Thank you for your time your
leadership and especially your
partnership.
Thank you so much mister chair
thank you very much german
governor here and please
you appreciate you by me here of
the morning everybody senators.
Representative
for most letter general
to open prior for start.
Me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hello and going only known for
november morning about willing
to do anything long.
Erida when I was on the
wall and could include a new
young
point in the house a honda who
will know no community can go in
there to to come with a compare
on the point in the puritan
record you're heading to fight
may not be no but now would you
move the type which can call in
but your hundred and
eighty moment market
will carry good to the two
community confirming they own
the world get to work or to work
someplace come to no more more
for your plate to attend for the
two thousand but while how we
were changing them they were to
call how
and again thank you very much
for environment today.
Even building another
consolidated but I guess the
remarks to know out of his
appreciate all you can stay.
Here you are now the.
We've been seeing some of the
point of slower every year we
have at least one or two
graduate for nurse.
Appreciate it or support in
everything that you guys do here
and though.
Could we be collaboring with
them have a couple of you.
I should I I
think he stated here
unfortunately
we're having problems with a
homeless
pretty much were in the middle
earlier last night and we will
collaborate with our transfer
how we can solve this problems
you know.
What was using zero point nine
slider where fortunately you
know as home as they're all over
the place the boss can ever be
number
okay stated and he's been saying
that I hope you guys move
forward and continue
supporting the funding for this
homeless and home because of
within the fact that you're
partners letter will see a lot
to come near the slowing down or
river and is effective no water
source you know we can be pretty
much usually for tv cultures
and.
Oh we're facing those issues
here no problems little for the
past five ten years is getting
worse in.
But a worst transcliber will
help you sitting and not see how
we can afford
it
appreciate you the comments that
you make in their own
as conditions this is going to
be a long time
issue that we have to start with
home nation unfortunately who we
are
time change no school
just asking you to send us and
i'll do to see if you can
support overcooking in some of
the funding of a restraint of
this home providing homes and
fair amount you need to be
very much appreciated great
thank you thank you very much
cover okay thank you all very
much will go now to committee
questions i'll go ahead and look
to my left first.
Representative instant please
thank you mister chair
just to go back
you mentioned we had eight
thousand nurses
that are not into our our
medical fields that's what we're
lacking right now
can you give me an idea on the
path that we are
when are we going to be made
hole in nurses.
Turn to thank you very much.
Turned to our ebp mike richards
who as part of his discussion of
the workforce expansion actually
has a lot of data on how what
the gaps are as well as how long
it will take us to get there
doctor richards was here here
out thank you you want to come
up and tackle that one
thank you so much.
Yeah.
So mr chair and represent
vincent so we will watch a talk
a bit more deeply about the
health care work force
initiatives here in the next
presentation but i'm directly
answering your question so it
right now depending on which set
of statistics you look out we'll
see that between about six
thousand shortage of nurses
right now in the state of new
mexico and up to about ten
thousand total gap in our
register or our total nursing
work force by twenty thirty five
I don't we are a commitment here
at the health sciences center is
to is to continue to grow those
work force programs annual in
one of the things that I was
going to mention in my
presentation is that that
through the support of the
legislature with things like the
r PS p and the endowments we've
been able to grow our nursing
programs and our partnerships
with nursing programs to wear
here at the UNM college of
nursing we've seen a twenty nine
percent increase in our nursing
work force this year so but even
with that graduation we will
have to do other things other
than just train our own to be
able to close that gap of the
total nursing work force so I do
believe our work for initiatives
will take us a very long way to
closing that but I do also
believe that this is gonna
involve us thinking about how we
grow a work four second do some
of those kinds of things that
that we have that we've asked
nurses to do so that those
nurses can be there to do the
work that only they do and we
also need to look at things such
as how we can recruit them from
outer state so the answer is sir
we we won't close this gap just
by education we will have to
have that as one of our primary
strategies but we'll need to
layer in other kinds of
techniques to grow that work for
our state.
Thank you mister chair and
appreciate that answer
always like a goal and then
what's the strategies to get to
that goal and then how are we
going to execute it and I used
to set on health and human
services and the older idea the
more of don't want her shortest
I want to be available because
if I ever do need one and I have
needed them in the past.
I've i've never really had a bad
experience with the nurse
they've always been outstanding
and I just want to make sure
that I heard you say twenty nine
percent growth in your program.
Is that a twenty nine percent
growth like we are putting
nurses in the work force or are
we graduating nurses and they go
into the workforce and then some
other state says they will pay
some more money come on over
here what are we doing to keep
them here so mister chair and
representative vincent so that's
a really great question and so
in terms of our nursing work
force we generally have about a
ninety five percent retention
rate on almost all of our help
professionals that we train here
at the university of new mexico
that doesn't mean that we're
able so we're not able to get
everyone to stay here but you
know that's a really high
success rate for us and so where
i'm actually very proud of that
kind of retention rate that we
have in the state and I and I
just also want to acknowledge
that that you point out the
incredible role then nursing
place in our health care
delivery system know that that
we share that respect for nurses
and and actually heard our
college of nursing we've got
national reputation for being
able to grow you know the kinds
of bedside nurses that everyone
is familiar with but also are
advanced practice nurses such as
our nursement whiffery and our
family community medicine nurse
practitioners all of those
individuals make incredible
contributions to our work force.
Thank you mister chair and I
appreciate those those answers
and to the gentleman I i'm sorry
adding get your name
okay mr leave us
you said something that really
resignated with me and you said
we're not looking for a hand out
we're looking for a handset.
And his a legislator I believe
that that that's one of my rules
is not to give handouts but to
bring people and give him a hand
up to where we can get our work
force and everything in in in
check and you know I was reading
the the chairman's.
Locing newsletter and I know
that we're gonna have to tighten
the strains on things.
And we're we're gonna have to to
really get.
Hi I guess pretty innovative on
how we're going to do things
because there is not going to be
as much money
potentially and with that work
force and no one that you don't
want the hand out you just want
to hand shake so we can get
people working
why are we not getting people
working.
We have helped one is signed
everywhere.
Thank you very much mister chair
representative vincent I I think
that's a a very important
question and a a question that
many of us up here at this table
are are in the trenches working
to solve i'm i'm a small
business owner myself and I know
the challenges of recruiting and
retaining work force and just as
you said I I could probably
double my work force tomorrow if
I had folks that were willing to
work
and so I think that goes back to
making these investments in the
foundations if you look at the
you know the basic hierarchy of
needs right people need to feel
safe you need to have a roof
over their heads they need to
have some basic level of health
and I believe that when you look
at the investments we're trying
to make through our opinion
settlement dollars and
prevention rate it's far easier
for us to start early and work
with kids then it is for us to
work with someone on the streets
get them off the streets get
them off the drugs.
And get them housed and then you
know down the line years down
the line in many cases get them
working and so I think those
investments in prevention are
are critical they're also an
important partnership with the
state
are investments in housing is as
I spoke to are also critical
rate to to help get people in
homes order in particularly
intervening when people are
getting close to homelessness
rate again it's about the
prevention piece that I think
allows us to intervene earlier
and keep people on the track
where where they are
contributing members of society
that are that are working that
are paying taxes and that are
not in need of an extreme amount
of social services and so I
think that that are commitment
to that that handsheet agreement
is indicating that we're really
willing and ready to put our
resources in two and that was
one of the commitments that we
made to to chair small and into
your committee the the house
appropriations committee
specifically right we were asked
a question about our fund
balance in the reserves that the
county maintains and we have a
strong commitment to using those
reserves but leveraging them
right not just getting rid of
them flushing them out the door
but making sure that we're
leveraging those with state
money with federal money with
private money was non profits so
that we stretch those dollars as
far as we can and get more
people into the work force in
contributing to our economy so
that we can grow uh what is
really a pretty abysmal number
of people that are in our work
force I think it's a very
important question sir thank you
mister chair and I thought I was
the only one that was still
quoting maslo's hire give needs
but the higher give needs it
it's really impacted me in the
last couple of weeks as my
community is going through
floods and that higher give
needs is gone in my community
and I know that whenever you
don't have those needs that need
to be met.
People are not right and so my
biggest deal is I know that we
have businesses well not just in
my district I I look here and I
see the help wanted signs
everywhere and what do we do to
engage to get people to go to
work.
And the only thing that I can
think of and I I just want to
say this publicly mister chair
and I don't I don't want to be
in sensitive.
But we can't give handouts we
have to get people had an in a
direction.
And the more you you know the
more you handed out the more
we're gonna have help signs up
in the windows we have to put
people on a path.
And we got him get we got to
have them into that pursuit of
happiness like a lot of us that
have jobs it feels good.
I've i've got those paychecks
and they weren't as good as I
want him to be but I wanted that
bigger paycheck in the just
moved me to a better you know I
I wanted to go give me some more
so I finished my degree and I
got more money and I did
different things and they got me
the more money I just want to
get people on that that thank
you mister chair thank you we're
gonna go to we have center for
the s and g zones are
representative little in
represent chart field center
pretty please thank you mister
chairman and thank you to our
presenters which love coming on
the u n campus it's always doing
such wonderful innovative things
appreciated that presentation
thank you to the city of alb
kirki I really do enjoy working
with you on a number of number
fronts and then that mr chairman
leaves a you know you as you
know my district is half
incorporated happening
corporated so I do a lot of
stuff and thank you for
mentioning it's liability number
of things that are going on
we're gonna get all that done
but mister chairman III want to
focus in on chairman or leave us
is comments and just ask you a
couple things
when you talked about capital
and yes I couldn't agree more
than we need to not put a bunch
of little dollars if you will
you know to us individually it's
a lot of money but to a project
that we want to get done with if
we just drop a couple of pennies
and each one of the buckets we
can never quite get there and
and then that one penny isn't
even worth anything in a two or
three year period
what will your approach be
coming forward then do you do
you have you have you had some
real thought around how you're
gonna approach capital because I
I love it that you're thinking
about it I wish more entities
and agencies would spend a
little more time on it what is
going to be your approach coming
at us this coming year
thank you very much miss why do
we need another
I I don't think any changes are
final at this point but I do
believe that that here in the
fall we are going to be looking
at an amendment to our cip
ordinance or capital improvement
ordinance
I think that it's very important
as I said in my remarks though
that we really align our
practices with the now we've
we've been operating under this
system for quite some time.
And it's it's really not
efficient for anyone and III
realize that
you know in my I have a very
rural district despite
representing up town albuquerque
you know some of the most
densely popular I also represent
the east mountains and so I
could come up with hundreds of
projects
but I have two legislators in
that area and they have vast
districts and if it would be
very challenging to fund in even
one project in that area much
less fun many and so I think
it's it's important that we
crafter system and what i'm
committed to internally at the
county is is as we do this
rewrite of our ordinance making
sure there's system really
incorporate
data driven staff driven and
community driven feedback to
prioritise projects and then go
to you all with a really well
prayer ties list and as a
political as we can make it we
know it never will be completely
a political but trying to make
that list really reflect what we
already have funding for what we
can complete in the next year or
two so that we can complete
those projects and we can go to
you next year with the next
highest ranking of projects so I
think it's really about merit
and and finding away to put
forward projects to the state
that are ready to go and and
we'll be able to be an operation
quickly thank you chairman and
thank you chairman or leave us I
I couldn't agree with you more
and I love the approach you're
thinking about if I could add my
two cents cause i'm one of your
key volcare that helps to get
things done um because of the
geographic position that I
haven't that III represent you
hit it right on the scrammer
loose used to say bingo you know
I mean get things done the
projects that should come
forward should be that get
things done you know starting a
whole new set of forty seven
million dollar blah blah yes
that's very important and we
want to get that done but let's
get things standard have a lot
of money in the I don't even
know mister chairman
I think it's three to five
billion dollars in capital
that's simply just.
Parked in that we can't seem to
get moving is that about right
yeah well thank you for playing
in and chairman or leave us and
we can turn off the micro quick
will have a
the capital outlay subcommittee
lead by our determined length
and that is really delving deep
into this so it encourage
everyone who's interested in
chairman only was you certainly
talked about it today to tune in
and perhaps participate there I
think it is as well over three
billion dollars but I think
under the leadership of chairman
lente and others along with uh
kelly cars well were
you we have some really good
ideas to bring forward and
yourself as well
thank you chair and i'm gonna
start my comments now but thank
you for bringing that up it's
something that's on all of our
minds and we want to get things
done so I think the approach
you're thinking about is is a
good one thank you thank you
very much senator pity next we
have senator
thank you all mister chairman
and thank you vice
percent or so thank you for your
remarks very.
In tune to but i'm I guess what
I want to start off with this
how albuquerque bernald county
is so important to the rest of
the state.
You know and are in so many ways
you were really provide and
really assist the rest of the
state and you know your thoughts
and you know your growth and
what you're working with but are
one thing that I want to start
with yourself we have a lot of
pressing issues that we're
working with but one thing
specially with what's happening
in washington is so health care
one of parts of that I really
see it or so I rural hospitals
have done a very good job for
many many years and if something
was to give within that burner
little can not handle you know
they entire load of the state
the other part is so individual
so would have to travel to
denver to texas to anywhere else
for health care will not happen
you know and we're gonna have a
lot of individuals really
hurting you know for health care
so that's one thing in mind that
you know that I see that we can
support each other but you know
how important it is to want to
the other
the other one that I wanted to
ask them chairman i'll try to be
real brief yourself but we're
seeing that at what has happened
to the motor area must be goes
and read also now within the
boss I don't know the area that
well yes there any potential
residence at our communities
that could be endangered by fire
that we could be a lot more
proactive to to work in with
that.
We have a coordinated focus
between our open space with
nparks and wreck and are fire
department and afar also in
collaboration with our public
partners as well as the county
and terms of the assessing and
insuring that we are providing
i'm going proactive and
preventative support of arboski
and ensuring that we're not only
doing an active monitoring which
we use technology to do that as
well as individual man power on
the ground to do to do that
monitoring but we also do
proactive work that is
preventative in terms of
clearing to reduce the the fire
risk within the basket I think
the coordination that we have
between africa open space the
county fire department and our
public partners that have you
know it's a
lands along the buyers in the
busket area and that correct
national i've been incredibly
impressed has been coordinated
in a way that shores that
everyone interesting both their
jurisdiction and they're all
when I watch and how are open
space folks work with an efr
directly and they identify areas
of concern and they do that work
well very quickly as a response
if we have a boss get fire you
have the response that occurs
but then the follow up that
occurs over the weeks that come
to make sure that we are doing
proactive work to to reduce the
likelihood of both a flare up
and then the next fire um it is
it is a very well informed and I
I think we have the man power
right now I am focused in this
way to help support us and put
that prevention.
Thank you i'll come back a
little bit after
all the other part that I wanted
to mention itself with the
individuals that have been laid
off from san diel labes is there
any outreach tool
hopefully that we don't loose
this individuals or that they
would move somewhere else
specially on a very high trained
individuals and though I know
that it's a very tough question
but i'll be one of mentioned
that one
unemptals really came through
where no sharon mining closed up
in the north you know there are
so close to nine hundred jobs
that went to nine hundred to
zero matter within training and
returning and just given
individual so
more skills to just to be able
to be to maintain you know
within the community and then I
hope that we can do something
too also for the individuals
that are being affected with
that.
The.
No note miss tremono the less
part that I have is so
for many years though
I have been a member of the
mortgage finance committee and
we met yesterday then we have a
vice chairman to heal that sits
in our committee
probably was the best meeting
that have ever attended an
everything that you mentioned
was addressed and even in two
more detail the part that was
very fascinating that it came
from the people in the trenches
and you know telling us what the
needs how it's working what
needs to be done and it's
amazing there were some very
very tough questions believe me
and for example I come let me
give you their son this is the
five year population growth
within the southwest and you
have never with the seven point
five u turn nine point seven
corout or six point two arizona
five point three texas eight
point seven i'll call him at one
point nine and new medical one
point three er i'd look at this
that's not bad are you know
horses lol because one of the
questions that are that could
not be addressed and could not
be answered you know by
developers and people coming in
is water
you know and you know can we
build a light but we have the
water and we have a proper
infrastructure to support the
entire part so one but you know
that's so one committee that you
know the especially yesterday he
was just really fascinating to
hear that he and other comments
and everything better everything
that you mentioned from there
affordable housing the homeless
then who can afford what and
then the the part that was very
interesting it they took it from
step to step to step to step
what it would take to own a home
guide it's almost you know it's
a tough swear map here.
To to get to that level and most
of it the ranges probably would
be in three hundred four hundred
thousand I mean
very few individuals in our
state can afford that you know
so well thank you again for your
common center I also believe
while so now in being a hovery
strong partner with this and for
a quite a few years I was a
chairman for a capped alone in
the house side then I always saw
that the communities that work
together or the ones that always
would win
you know hell from county to the
city to minister poweres you
know those who have a one set
really ring and want p that I
see missing here you know
another how we could tell you
too
is aps is a large system than a
big innocent this area and up
the alot also to see their
perspectives you know on how
they can get involved in having
the can work with but thank you
again for for your comments and
what you share with a thank you
thank you senator salads we're
gonna go to represent little
than represent chat field
thank you mister chair thank you
so much er for the presentation
this morning
last year I believe it was time
is flying but mister chair last
year
I attended along with other
individuals the uh grand opening
at the ribbon cutting ceremony
for the behavioral health
facility here and I forgive me I
forget the full name of the
facility.
I think i'm about to turn it
over to
p richers to help me with this
one also so we're done at the
new behavioral health facility I
just had the riven cutting
correct and so mister chair one
quick question that I have what
we saw
at this um ribbon cutting to
open the doors is that there is
a whole listing approach to
providing services to
individuals who find themselves
in crisis and either in danger
of hearing themselves or others
around them so working with law
enforcement behavior whole
service providers and navigators
and others in in that facility
that are there to assist is a
much better way to deal with
those circumstances we were very
pleased to see mr chair
this service being provided in
the state of new mexico it is my
understanding this is the only
facility like this for the state
at the moment my question mr
chair is are there a future
plans to provide these types of
services outside the current
metro area
thank you mr chair
so mister chair and and
representative so the so I
believe that we're referring to
our own crisis tree I center yes
and so that crisis create center
really representative tremendous
partnership between the
university and bernalio county
to build that facility and and
so we bought but that's not our
only approach and so I think you
you know that that crisis tries
center in it's kind of holistic
approach is rather unique
we do not at this moment have a
plan for expanding that specific
kind of program in physical
plant and other communities but
however we do have significant
plans to help support growing
behavioral health services
across the state.
And so one example of behavioral
services that you be able to see
actually just right across the
street is there new on children
psychiatric center which was one
of our ground breakings recently
and so that's the expand
adolescent and pediatric crisis
triation it will have something
like the crisis trious component
to it when we open up that new
children's crisis tried other
kinds of things that we are
currently doing that really I
think represent partnership with
the state of new mexico is that
you know we're very grateful for
the investments that were just
recently made on by the
legislature to create the
behavioral health reform and
investment act which we think
creates both resources and an
infrastructure to be able to
build out behavioral health
services in so the university is
participating in that by
offering up technical assistant
centers and building a technical
assistant center in doing the
simulation mapping with the the
sequential intercept mapping
that will ultimately help us
identify resources at the local
community level and so we look
forward to participating in that
that includes also using our
project echo to be able to
support that on both the door
the development in the
assessment work that will be
doing but also expanding our
behavioral health outreached
through using project echo and
then we are also looking at how
we can continue to build out are
a specific substance used to
sort out programs like you've
seen us to do at the match
political detention center and
through additional outrecharge
efforts like through our
telemedicine.
Thank you mister chair think
it's so much for that
information
as we're seeing now there's a
are many issues that young
people are grappling with
especially and i'm pleased to
hear about the
ground breaking certain money
that took place but
I see that this is a very good
way to address issues with those
who might find themselves if
they're not provided services
down a let me just say that the
this is a there being a loud
mister chairman to be put on a
path in a good path that's going
to help them with their future
whether it's a career a family
just a personal growth
so i'm really happy to hear that
and I see that this is one of
the this could be one of the
steps that also helps to address
the issue of an house
many as it it's known so I won't
go into that but I think that
this could also help address
those pieces as well for
individuals who might are not
otherwise have an opportunity to
uh fulfill have a life of a a
fulfilled life if you well and
that's all we wish for them
thank you very much mister chair
that was the end of my question
thank you represent little next
we have representative chatfield
and then senator here
thank you mister chair
mr chairman my
question goes to the money that
we talked about that was
appropriate for housing and we
put a lot of money into several
different programs to
uh increase the number of outing
to decrease the the amount of
homelessness in new mexico
I don't live in alva perky but
when I come here i'm a
starnished at the increase
number of homeless on the street
when I go to santa fe I am
astonished at the.
Increased number of almost uh
there.
I think most folks would agree
that drugs are the route of that
problem in the basis for that
problem I do not think that
problem will be cured by more
houses I think you could build
all the houses in the world
until you deal with the drug
problem
you're not going to solve that
almost problem you know i'm
listening to very excitedly
about your talking about the uh
help
behavioral health centers and
the things that we're doing to
do you have a program there here
is proven successful enough I
mean I know all those programs
probably change alive in one
line means everything but do you
have some programs that are
changing many lives and secondly
to you for see
a requirement to seek treatment.
And you know.
Get out of it
get over your addiction to get a
job before your given a free
house
number
mr chairman end representative
chat field I I will begin to
answer this but I also think the
county has a really incredibly
important role with behavior
health as well and the programs
that we at the city of a kirkey
have really focused in on in
partnership with community in
building out the gateway system
and support has been around how
we ensure that individuals that
are
seeking support for housing are
also receiving support for the
services that whether that is
for treatment or to maintain a
pathway in recovery at many
times in the developed
individuals that we're working
with have specialized needs and
support and that intersection of
behavioral health needs with
treatment and with housing is
absolutely where we as a
community are focusing our
energy and our partnerships we
we utilise our partners within
the community that have
specialised skills and
experience to do this work that
is you know nonprofit partners
that provide these support
services
in in these environments but
through the gateway system and
in you'll hear a lot about this
tomorrow from director ramirez
we have identified that housing
and treatment navigation is
really the essential elements to
support that they come together
that individuals need support
for navigating all of those
needs at the same time so you
just clapping somebody in the
house is not going to meet me
and make all of the other issues
that they may be encountering
just that magically disappear it
does go to nazzles at hiracky of
needs we need to support
individuals in in those basic
needs but also in the support
around work for skills and the
other services that they may
need to access so we have built
it out the gateway system of
support and and care based a
pine models that have been.
And tested across the country
where when you put all of those
pieces together you have the
opportunity to change someone's
trajectory in the and make the
take that path to to housing and
and recovery I think it's
important to note that we all in
this work and i'm not a
behavioral health and expert but
I have spent a lot of time with
them because we are we spend our
time every day working on this
it's very clear that we
know that it takes multiple
tries for an individual to move
through the the addiction to
recovery path and we know their
space to pine the many times
that are the cookie community
safety has an interaction in the
community at behavior of health
response that is needed in the
moment many times it hasn't
underlying addiction or drug
issue attached with that and we
may have that interaction with
the individual multiple times in
the community before they
finally have the opportunity to
say that I would say that the
the support service is kind of
stick and they have the
opportunity to move into a path
of support and housing.
And we have a c through this
through the met through what
we're doing with the gate with
system is we have to think about
the needs of the individual
based upon where they are in
what they are experiencing which
is why we have bill to for
example gateway recovery which
is fifty s tiny homes where
individuals will live in a
community together if they are
in recovery to support them
moving in through that recovery
process and maintain that but
then also move into housing at
the end of that that is
permanent housing so we package
that based upon the individuals
needs we also have a family
gateway in which we're
supporting families where they
are it's a it's a hotel that we
use to support families and
support them with all of the
wrap round sport that they may
need the successes we see us
when the adults have the
opportunity to receive this
substance support to the other
behavior health support they
need the work force training
support that they may need while
the children are being supported
and ensuring that they're in
school so when you package that
together you start to see family
outcomes that change and
families that move in to long
term outcomes I think that
intersection though of of
behavioral house treatment
services and housing is what is
exactly what we are all
wrappling with that you cannot
just do one you have to be
focused on the entire continued
care and I want to make sure
that a
partner at the county
primary focus and behavior thank
you very much doctor single mr
chair represent chapter i'll try
to be brief but but this is a
very complicated question and I
think doctor single really hit
very well on on many of the
resources that the city
administration and and the
county often in partnership were
making available to those in our
community but from the county
side I think it's also important
to think about the intersection
of courts corrections and
justice with the housing
homelessness and behavioral
health issues.
Um and from my perspective I i'm
i'm sure with you just a brief
sorry I just drove up zoo need
this morning and
this is not the city I grew up
in I love the sea but it is not
the city I grew up in it looks
very different and we have a lot
of work to do and I think it's
very important that with your
help and with partnership with
law enforcement and our
correction system
we have to make sure that there
are ample resources available
rate many pathways that's that's
the whole point I think of the
gateway name rate is it's a
gateway to many different paths
rate
but if individuals are unwilling
to utilize that system or
unwilling to utilize those many
and very significant investments
that we've made I think that we
need to have a very serious
conversation as a state about
what that means and about what
other options are available to
us so we see many individuals in
our correction center the
metropolity tension center which
is the largest detention center
in the state
frankly the vast majority of
individuals and that facility
have is substance use issue when
they enter rate and sell we make
available through our behavioral
health dollars medication
assisted treatment and mdc I
mentioned the resource reentry
center where we have individuals
channel through that facility as
their leaving the detention
facility to offer them resources
to after them access to you know
housing navigation access to
case workers all those types of
things but the issue with with
all of this is that in general
it is all voluntary rate and
that's a significant issue that
we grapple with and I think
while it's it's incredibly
important to approach this from
a human perspective and meet
people where they're at we also
I believe have an obligation to
meet our business owners where
they're at to meet our residence
where they're at and I think
it's incredibly unfair as I
drove down zoo need to see
encampments lining the walls.
Of businesses right that is
completely unfair to those
businesses and and there that is
not an acceptable way to expect
them to operate and so I think
that that we really have to
grapple with that I believe at
the local level we have done an
incredible amount of work with
your support to make more
resources available in the last
eight years then have been made
available in the last eighty but
at some point I do believe as
you are worked on the criminal
competency issues it's a very
important issue but that's just
a very very small subset of this
population we're talking about
but I think that that we really
need to see some some state
investment in leadership on
things like drug courts and you
know commitments to long term
recovery beds for addicts that
that need to be in recovery and
continue to
frankly harass our community
through through their behavior
so I think it's a very important
question and it's a question
that we continue to grapple with
them work on and and work in
partnership with you all
thank you mister chair mr lewis
I what i'm hearing is there
should be a requirement to seek
treatment in find employment in
I like that I like who
from the both of you
want to throw one last courage
you and that is this kids with a
age out of cyfd there is a
sometimes there in a we had a
ration center for short period
energies blue in many times if
they've been and see why after
custody for their whole life
they were fairly well
institutionalised and I am sure
you all are familiar with that
it comes from a variety of
different walked in life it that
institutionalism what are we
doing to address those kids who
young adults and see that they
go on to a job to education and
not to the street.
I'm districult representing chat
field i'm gonna let my colleague
from the city talk about this
but I I just want to commend the
city and to the city counselors
in my part of the city for the
work they're doing on this to to
make resources available to the
young people
thank you mister chairman and a
representative and chat filled
in the gateway system of care we
are actually working to renovate
what used to be the old same a
ton into a young adult uhm
gateway and and although this is
not the solution to the numbers
of student of individuals that
you may be speaking that might
be eighteen out of faster care
or this or a cfd system it is
meant to be an environment that
you know an individual that is
in a position of of being
unhoused and that is between the
age of eighteen and twenty four
has a place that does not put
them in our
west I get way west which is you
know a shelter of six hundred
and sixty beds we ensure that we
know that young adults need the
opportunity to be in an
environment to be supported
uniquely
that are intent with this in
partnership with are white are
non profit that will be working
with us to operate the the
invite that the shelter is to
also ensure that we're
supporting them in their
pathways to c n m and unm
we know that you all is a
legislature through the higher
education department on a great
job of supporting individuals
with the access to higher
education which is an incredible
support network and and I would
say safety net for individuals
at this age to have their
support resources and that come
from being attached to or in in
enrolled in an in a higher
education institution but it's
also the path to careers and
skills and opportunity for them
to change that pathway
themselves
and in through that and so that
is our
in this case system of care as
we think about the eighteen to
twenty four year old we know
that they will need additional
support and.
Creating that dedicated
environment to do so we also you
know in within the city and we
all know this in in in our focus
around community centers and
other yet youth programming work
to really focus on ensuring that
we're supporting youth and um in
after school programs at which
we partner with a ps obviously
in doing that work but we also
connected to this but not
directly is our school based
violence in red intervention
program without incredible
outcomes of yet use that have
been engaged in uh uh in
violence or have been exposed to
violence it in their teenage
years and are likely potential
repeat offenders engaged in our
school based violence for
intervention program with in
partnership with aps we have
incredible outcomes you know we
have eighty percent non reset of
his in the population we have
eighty percent high school
graduation in this population
and and these are folks that you
know were identified end and and
engaged in this knowing that
they wanted to change their path
now this does not intersect
correctly obviously with the
cmcyfd and focus that you had
but it is connected in the sense
that use that are at risk and at
our risk of not having the
support systems that they have
we've seen these programs work
and we would love to see them in
every aps high school as well
thank you for that at for those
answers and thank you mister
chair thank you very much next
we're gonna go to senator here
and then senator device thank
you mister chairman and and I
too want to say that yesterday's
mortgage finance authority was
really a very information on I
want to recognize chair women on
unknown who who is here today
and thank you for that
mister richards I think I my
questions are going to be
directed to you I think and
thank you for everyone being
here this is really valuable
information i'm wondering if a
UNM hospital
uses traveling nurses and if
they do.
What's the number of traveling
nurses that they use throughout
the year.
So mr chair and senator trekio
yes the university hospital in
our health system uses traveling
nurses and and so we have a
we've at our peak have been as
high as you know in the hundreds
of the five in six hundred
traveling nurses I believe that
right now we're in a number
that's around three hundred
thank you mr chairman I
appreciate that is there any
evidence from what you are have
experienced at the unm hospital
that traveling nurses stay in a
mexico
so mister chair and senator
trihio yes we do have examples
of where nursers will come to
work in our clinical delivery
system find that the environment
actually is better than other
environments where they may work
in that they do actually stay I
don't actually have a number of
those conversion rates but I can
follow up with you thank you mr
chairman I would really
appreciate that mr richards um
as many of you know the nursing
compact is the only compact that
we have in the mexico and one of
the questions that we've been
asked as we've been trying to
move other compacts forward is
is there any evidence that
compacts increase
the professionals in new mexico
rather than decrease and the
decrease would be that our
license is get licensed and then
go somewhere else that is also
in the compact so any
information in that respect
would in fact be really helpful
i'm wondering if you're
shortage numbers include the
shortage of nursing uh support
services needed in our key
twelve score.
When you talked about the six to
eight thousand shorted does that
include the shortages that we
have in our in our schools so mr
chair and in senator hero yes
the numbers that we were quoting
come from come from the national
work force database and they
include an est amount of the
entire work force which does
include school based nursing and
school based councilling thank
you I appreciate that and mister
chairman final question is how
many high school programs I know
we have a medical program at
capital high school in south
afraid and it's been incredibly
successful in getting
individuals not just into the
medical field but to graduate
from high school um nearly a
hundred percent graduation rate
for those that participate do
you know how many other trip
medical programs are are in our
high schools around the state
so mr chair and senator traheo
and included in the material set
that we'll be talking about when
we talk about work for us
expansion in that packet
starting on a page twelve and
there we talk about our pathway
programs I can speak
specifically to the unm ones but
i'm not I don't know the full
state available pathway programs
but between our communities to
careers and our other kind of
pathway programs we have about
twelve different pathway
programs that we that we are
participate in here at the at
the health science as center
that include forty five
locations nineteen counties over
seven hundred k through twelve
students with over with over
three thousand total
participants in the reason why
that is so important to assess
that that we recognize that as
we think about growing a health
care work force from the
prospective of being the
university of new mexico are
goal isn't that is obviously one
of the things we want to do but
we also recogni.
I said there are there are
almost no things as consistently
powerful to change the life of
an individual or a family or a
community than to give them an
educational opportunity and so
we think about trying to create
that educational opportunity not
just to meet a work force need
but because it helps change new
mexico and so so connecting to
those communities making sure
that individuals know that we
want to build these programs for
them and their communities
that's why we focus on these
pathway programs thank you
mister chairman thank you mister
thank you very much center trial
we have sent our to bicycle and
then center line center to buy
some place thank you mister
chair mr my first question is to
you
what are your thoughts around
how do we attract and retain a
medical professionals i'm
specifically doctors in new
mexico and here in albuquerque
where the majority of our
population lives uhm when we
have so many challenges even
from a business perspective for
those medical professionals to
make a living so what are your
third sign solutions that we can
bring to the table as
legislators so mister chair and
incentive to bias and so
this is actually what we are we
are focused on right now which
is the idea of of how we help
build the work force when I
think about the the strategies
that we can approach as a state
obviously one of the first
things that I bring to the table
is the idea that that we can in
fact train a work force and so
that is one of the primary
things we do as an educational
institution however that can't
be the only strategy and I think
as a state we also have to think
about the ideas of recruitment
and so this gets back to some of
the comments made by senator to
hear about about ensuring that
we have things like the compacts
and that are a license or
mechanisms are also supportive
in that we create things that
are tracked individuals.
To want to come in practice in
new mexico another really
important piece is that that we
have to retain individuals once
we once we put them in the work
force and we have jobs for them
and so thinking about things
that that that crade
environmental support for all of
our health care workers much of
that is done by the work by the
employers who bring the work
force in in a to create those
kind of support systems at allow
them to be successful and want
to stay and our environment and
another really important peace
that I have to think about for
us is that that we often talk
about the importance of the
workers the work force as a as
helping us close that access to
care gap but another critical
piece for us is the idea that
that we also have to have health
care infrastructure and because
health care workers particularly
physicians but nurses and all
health care workers work inside
of health care infrastructure
these days and so we have to
think about how we build health
care infrastructure that that
creates the opportunity to then
recruit them into that health
care infrastructure and i'll
talk a little bit about why that
such an important piece and how
that allows us to think about
growing our educational programs
and then and then lastly senator
to buy a send I think that
there's a host of work force
environmental things that we can
do that crater and environment
that also support happened
beyond what an employer can do
but what we can do through
things like state policy that
can help retain individuals so I
don't believe that there's one
answer but I believe that there
is a constellation of things
that can help us be successful
thank you mister chair and think
your doctor richards I would
welcome a meeting with you and a
conversation I can tell you as a
business coach I have coached
everyone from start ups with a
small coffee sharp to executive
that actually you and each i've
coached doctors and attorneys.
For almost twenty years in I
hear what you're saying but I
think you're also missing a few
key points of why doctors are
telling not only people like me
but even their realtors when
they're selling their homes and
leaving the state why they're
leaving and I think that we're
at a point where we have to have
some uncomfortable conversations
around the crasis that were in
an access to medicine just like
we're in a crisis in the war
zone also known as the
international district I am I
think some people take a fence
to the name warzound but then
again some people take a fence
to the name international
district and we have to look at
some of these key factors of why
one we're losing people
especially people in the medical
field that's a fundamental in
life we all need i'm access to
medicine and doctors and but we
also need to live in safety and
we have to look at what's the
common sense approach to keeping
skilled workers I know that here
at UNM we lose many more new
doctors than we do attorneys I
don't remember the numbers that
I know it's it's pretty stark in
we have to ask ourselves at some
point the green shilly the
beautiful mountains and open
spaces the incredible culture
that we offer here in new mexico
just isn't enough any more to
keep people here and yesterday
we were at cnd labs and I would
have shocked that the number one
reason that they said they have
trouble recruiting scientists
from all over the world in the
country from retaining them is
crime
and so we have so many different
topics that are so important to
people that are educated in
particular that just want to
live in safety they want to know
that they can let their kids you
know walk down the street and
and visit the neighbor rate they
want to know that they can go to
the store I mean myself I am
careful where I go when I go to
a store because I have been
approached or.
Yelled out or threatened by
people just in the parking lot
at smith in my own neighborhood
so I think we have a lot of
things to talk about
and I figure it it's hard for
employers when when I talk to
doctors that own their own
practices they can offer enough
anymore we're actually driving
the private practice what
medicine was really created for
everyone wants to know their
doctor keep their doctor they're
not looking at going to a big
institution and every time they
go they see a different provider
that's not really what I
consider access to medicine
because you really do need a
relationship with whoever is
your provider
so I know i'm i'm going off on
this topic so I appreciate that
but I would welcome an
opportunity to visit with you
i'm in my next question and or
is somewhat statement is is for
mrs sengolan and chairman here
and alva kirkin bernard leo we
just are facing a lot of issues
and i'll speak right now ours a
small business owner myself in
someone who who has worked with
hundreds of not thousands of
businesses around our state in
our country
here I would say that we're
added a tipping point from a
ball small business perspective
small business owners don't feel
heard or supported in the city
of albuquerque and I can say
that definitively because I talk
with business owners every
single day of every week and
what they're telling me for
instance commercial property
owners
if you're a new commercial
property owner you are taking a
lot of risk especially the
closer to central that you get I
know I see you not in so you
know you probably know where i'm
going to go on this I have
friends that are commercial
property owners clients who are
commercial property owners in
the only reason why they are
still own those properties and
still conduct business in
albuquerque and new mexico.
Is because they own those
properties outrate and they
don't have mortgages so their
self insured at this point
because they can't get insurance
because of the crime that
continuously happens in their
buildings so they don't even
report the crimes any longer so
when I look I think i'm in to
have a I don't know what page
this is well you'll know the
pages the summary of the crime
report I think a lot of us is
small business owners in the
city of albuquerque take
exception when we hear that
crime is down that property
chrime is down because so many
property owners and small
business centers are not calling
in the crime because of
challenges also with insurance
so what is your focus in helping
the small business owner in the
property on owner and
albuquerque continue to conduct
business here and have faith
that the taxes that they pay
which in some cases are very
handsome that their taxes are
going into the right funnel rate
into the rate part in that they
will be heard and that we're
going to see movement here in
our city.
Thank you mr chair senator to
biced and I think that's that's
a very important question and as
I looted to my in my last
comments the situation that we
see on central I I think is is
unacceptable it's it's not the
city that that I grew up in I
love this city I will continue
to say that I I never want to
leave here I want to make it
better right and I think as
important it is as it is for us
to identify the problem and I
think you stated it very clearly
I think we have to work towards
a solution read at this point we
know what the problem is
we've talked about it all
morning rate behavioral health
substance use housing shortages
cost of living challenges or are
all inner related and driving
people to a life on the streets
and so we have to make it we
have to incentivise as as with
the conversation with
representative vincent we have
to incentivise that kind of
positive wife balance rate
moving people into a place where
they are productive citizens
from the perspective of the
county what we're doing to
support businesses and I hope
that you that you're involved in
this and and and your clients as
well but right now we're looking
at our economic development
incentives and and really doing
a deep dive and asking questions
about how we're doing economic
development and how are we
supporting in particularly for
me local business because I
represent much of the e central
corridor and so are to me the
conditions there are again
they're unacceptable rate we
have some estimates of close to
fifty percent of business fronts
or are vacant that's not a
that's not the city that I want
to live in that's not the city
that I love and I and I want to
change the and so we're
committed to making sure that
our incentives actually work for
a local people right now just
going for the big fish which are
important but how do we make
sure that we can incent local
people whether that's three
things like a landscape
transformation's lady in
cameras how can we help local
businesses and local property
owners invest in their own
properties I think that's
incredibly important.
But I think there's also the
enforcement side and I think
we've seen this with with
sheriff allen chief medina I
think we've seen state police
we've seen probation and
parallel all them working
together along the route sixty
six quarter to target crime to
target drug use opener substance
use latering all of those issues
as as we've been talking about
all morning I think that we've
got to make sure that we have
many pathways for folks to move
to success but it's some point
when people are unwilling or
unable to do so on their own
accord we need a lawn forcement
response at some point to say we
have to move you in the rate
direction and we cannot continue
to ask private property owners
and business owners to shoulder
an undo share of that burden in
our community I think that that
is the role of law enforcement
that is the role of government
at some point to step in and
help get people on the right
path and we are going to need
your support to do that in your
assistance to make that happen
and i'm sure my colleagues that
the city have something to see
mr chairman
I senator to buy a sin I
appreciate your question we see
we see everything that we also
all see in the same things in
our community and it is
unacceptable for us to see the
ongoing challenges that we're
facing it is the intersection of
all of these issues that is
creating the greatest challenge
and it is relay does cause us to
have to rely on our entire
criminal justice system to work
through this I spend almost
every day looking at crime stats
and not just from the
prospective of what number can
get reported to me but how what
is it actually fundamentally
mean when we talk about our
crime stad speaking down I I
respect your your statement that
folks you know when they have to
deliberate about whether
reporting the crime is going to
affect them in another way
whether that's insurance or
other issues I I would hope that
we can continue to have crime
reported so that we can we can
deal with the crime in the
instance and.
And use the tools that we have
this goes to what you all would
be discussing tomorrow with
deputy chief creator in terms of
looking at the technology
investments that have been made
and that goes all the way to
investments that were making
west small business and and so
we have our small business uh we
have sorry they're business I
should say cause it is it
exclusive a small but our camera
grants so that individual
businesses we will help support
them in implementation of
obsecurity cameras that are then
connected to our real triumph
time crime center and we've done
store front and window grants
recognizing that support in the
moment of when someone is
dealing with the issue is
important for them to record no
that we understand those
challenges but the intersection
are behavioral health drug drug
addiction drug trafficking and
then general crame issues that
we are official I do believe
that what we've done is made
many of the investments in with
with you are all support to put
the system in place so that we
can expand our reach and that is
why we're seeing
when we talk about crime being
down it's also the solve rates
are up for example in in him
side it also means that.
And you know arrests are up
swear and when we look at that
that direct correlation of the
understanding that we you know
we arresting when we arrest one
individual we may bring
dealing with multiple crimes
that that individual may have
perpetuated over the remainder
of their time if they had not
been arrested the other issue is
as that you know I spent time
looking at the outcomes of those
arrests you know plea agreements
deferrals
dismissals you know how the
correct criminal justice system
is working wet through a
together is going to be critical
as we move forward we arrest
more people but we may not see
more people in cars you know
serving and there is a mixture
that has to be in on the table
for us to think about an
individual that may have their
fourth misdemeanor arrest that
is homeless a diversion program
might be the solution because
they might actually be in a
position that they say yes to
services and now we change their
outcomes for what happens and
but it might not it may not
always be the right thing based
upon the history of that
individual I think we are right
now poised as a community around
the criminal in the criminal
justice system to and come
together and discuss both the
interests well really the
relationship between crime in
the criminal justice to some
behavioral health and and that
came from euro insignificant
investment that in our behavior
health system that in this last
session it will be an
opportunity for everyone to pull
in the exact direction you're
asking which is how do we see a
change in what we when we drive
down the street and it's the
intersection of these things
together and I do believe that
you know the use of technology
and civilians with increased law
enforcement and recruitment that
we have done is contributing to
this this change that we're
seeing but it will take the
system coming together and
solving four.
The issues that just seem to be
repeated over and over again and
when we I think we have that
commitment in our community rate
now to do that work and and to
see a different outcome
thank you and mr chair and I I
will say the last part of what
you're talking about is what i'm
wanting to hear and want into no
more about
not just for myself but for
every citizen in albuquerquene
bernalio
we need people to be held
accountable and so arresting
them the fact that a restaurant
the fact that we're bringing all
this technology it's almost
meaningless at least to the
person living through it which
are thousands of us
we still need to know that these
people are one held accountable
and two if they can be helped in
some way that they're getting
that help and that's where I
think we're at that that point
of conversion of how to we
ensure that that happens for
really the safety and sanctity
of our city which is no longer
and the the city that you grew
up in i've been here almost
twenty years and it's not even
the city that I I moved to i'm
from halfway across the country
I love the city as much as you
deal but what we're doing right
now it's not enough and it's not
happening fast enough so i'm i'm
encouraged by what you're
talking about I just hope that
we get to those solutions and I
do know that the route sixty six
focus while I appreciate the
mayor and the da for their focus
in the war sound on central in
finding these criminals and
arresting them the question begs
to be asked where are those
criminals now and I also know
that a lot of that especially
cartel activity has i'm
desperate throughout the city
and it has moved all the way up
to the very north corner on my
district of the city
I know that for sure i've heard
that from several people and we
are not looking for an answer to
just um.
Does seminate all around the
city in the county we're looking
for answers to start it and make
it permanent so thank you so
much I appreciate you being here
thank you next we have senator
linear in the more briefly go to
represent the hon then on some
closing questions senator in
your place good morning thank
you mr chairman thank you for
coming in at presenting to us I
think you guys all did a
fantastic job.
I tend to look at the state new
mexico through an economic
development type lens and so
everything that we're talking
about today I tend to relate it
back to economic development but
mister richards I want to I want
to start with you and I want to
I want to thank you for reaching
out some of the rural hospitals
you know I know you reperform
return and and I can you just
kind of explain
how how are you as you and m
trying to help some of our
smaller hospitals through the
state
so mr chair and senator in the
nearer so in terms of the the
way that I think of the
university of new mexico health
sciences center
is that that are goal is
actually to improve the health
of new mexico and part of the
way that we do that is through
educating a health care work
force not just for us but for
sand one regional medical center
or christopher st venton or
press baterian or loveless that
is one of the main ways that
that we as a and I can academic
institution and help support
those those rural hospitals but
more directly some of the things
that we are that we do to help
support rural hospitals and that
we are continuing to advance
right now is to place outreach
clinics into those communities
and so the most recent one that
we've actually completed was an
new mexico where we play stay
rep where we placed it a outrage
clinic for obstructive care
we're contemplating right now
and starting to work on creating
a clinic location that we would
put in los vegas and so that I
know that that was originally
connected to the idea for
reproductive health services but
we believe that that kind of
clinic could also be an outpost
for us to be able to connect to
the community with larger kinds
of health care services we also
are provide support through the
rule to the rural hospitals
through our telemedicine
programs and through our
project.
Echoes but I I don't believe
that that's all that we can do
and I and I look forward to
working with the legislature and
the executive branch to think
about other ways at the that are
health care delivery system can
provide additional support for
these smaller hospitals what we
watch right now is that that
their volumes are going down
because patient cares being
moved from the inpatient setting
into the outpatient setting and
that's been something that's
been occurring in health care
for some time and then but the
other really difficulty is is
that that that that some
hospital based care is being
moved from the local hospital to
regional referral centers in
part because of the work force
issue you know that they don't
necessarily have that depth and
breath and the specialty
services instead of those
patients are being moved into
the regional referral areas I
think that we can we only
recognize that that is a reality
of the way health care is
evolving and that we can start
to think about how we can create
networks to support the doctors
who do stay in those communities
to be able to have the kind of
backup and in the connection to
a deeper set of experts in the
example that I would offer for
that right now this are long
standing physician access line
where individual physicians can
call and talk to you on a
specialist position here at you
and m in a month recently what
we've done to help support that
is that we've now put physicians
in their answering and the
phones in helping identify in
what kind of support local
doctors mean I offer those up
senators just a few examples
thank you and mister chairman I
appreciate that answer and and
i've seen some of that in action
and and I think it's working out
how.
How is your doctor and nurse
retention compared to the rest
of the state I don't know if
that's a fair question to ask
you or not but but we're being
told.
That there is I mean the senate
was told google it there's no
shortage of doctors in new
mexico
so mr chair and and center
linear
so that the direct answer to
your first question wishes about
our retention rate so at the
university of new mexico health
system are average attention
rate of faculty physicians is
just under nine percent it's
about like eight point seven
percent the national average is
about thirteen percent so we are
performing much better than
national average on physician
retention I know that that's not
always the story that's told but
that's been consistent for us
for for for over five or six
years and in fact other academic
medical centers look to us for
how we've been able to bring
that number down and I don't
mean to interrupt you mister
chairman but is is that UNM or
is that the state mister chair
number and certainly that is
only you and m
and so for our nurse retention
rate we're right out about the
national average which is
between a sixteen and eighteen
percent attrition rate of nurses
and so we are obviously like to
see that a little bit lower but
we we have a national app
essentially national performance
on that metric on the the other
question that you that I believe
you were asking is a little bit
about up about overall retention
for the rest of the state yes
doctors and nurse yeah and I I
think that mister share and in
certain I think this gets back
to the to some of the questions
that senator to buy a sin was
kind of alluding to set that
there is a host of things that
we have to do to create an
environment that that helps
attract and retain not just
healthcare professionals but
high earning professionals who
once they have a degree you know
can pick the communities that
they want to work in and and I
do believe that those
environmental factors do include
things like ensuring that
there's a.
You know I sound educational
system and that the communities
are safe in that and that we
create the kind of business
environment that supports having
them want to work and in these
communities for us one of the
things that we think about in a
very deliberate at the union
held scientists center is that
that we know that working in
rural communities is more
difficult on our health care
professionals and we know
recruiting into those areas is
more difficult and so while our
national statistics will say and
I think that this is sometimes
where the debate occurs that we
actually have per capita the
same number of doctors as the
other places in the united
states that is a fact but that
is not a helpful fact because
what that tells you is the
supply it does not tell you the
demand or the need so what we
really have to measure is you
know not our supply but what is
the gap to what we need and so
right now most of our health
care professionals were about an
eighty five to ninety percent of
what we need across the state
but when we look specifically at
rural areas that number almost
consistently is half or whatever
the state number is so if it's
ninety percent adequacy in the
urban area it's almost certainly
forty five percent adequacy in
the rural area and so I think
that that kind of represents
senator some of the the ideas
that you're advancing that it is
harder to get people under the
rural areas so what we do here
at u and m and this isn't
incredibly important part is
something like we talked before
about the pathway programs
getting to those rural
communities helping identify
potential individuals who want a
health care profession career
thinking about when we bring
learner's into the institution
giving them as much exposure to
the role practice of medicine as
we can create helping support
either other institutions or us
building rural health care
education tracks in and our
offer up.
Probably the the most important
one that we've done most
recently which is our new family
community resonancy program and
sheprice new mexico don't and
collaboration with inhs the very
first of that kind of gme
program and the united states
that helps individuals you know
get the unique kind of training
that they need but almost almost
more importantly getting
connected to the community
because what we know is that
people from those communities
are more likely to go back to
those communities and that's a
one of our important strategies
alright thank you it was
rechairing my last question for
you mr richards is
what let let's say you're going
to high a specialty higher a
special tea doctor today
add on pick something into
college
what do you have to offer them
to get them to new mexico
while mr chair in in cereal near
I I think that what we have to
do with the health science the
center is a little bit different
than what I think the rest of
the state has to do and what
other practitioners have to do
and health systems because the
the the reality is is that that
it working in an academic
medical center is is a diverse
and rewarding career for health
care professionals I we don't
struggle with recruiting
physicians and to our clinical
delivery system unless we're
looking at the kinds of
specialties where the where
where the entire united states
is struggling because we're just
simply not producing them like
for in in your example a
periodiatric interconologist is
extremely difficult to recruit
but even for us it's much easier
to do it here because we have
over a thousand physicians so
they get to join a big community
of health care professionals
they're surrounded by learners
they're surrounded by the
education in the research that's
a different kind of recruitment
environment I do think that what
other communities have to
struggle with.
When they think about recruiting
is that again the issues are you
know you'll can you create you
know an attractive community
where again education and safety
and compensation and the kinds
of clinical infrastructure that
they need to be a successful on
their practice those are the
kinds of things that have to be
done along with creating the you
know an attractive medical
practice environment but mister
chairman do you have a number
what what's their pay skill when
they first come so so mr chair
and and and certainly near the
we pay right now and we for our
physicians we we should
forgetting to the average of the
the accident the association of
academic medical colleges
compensation to ultimately get
our average compensation of
physicians at that average it
varies why up among the medical
specialties and so i'm some
specialties
we really are talking about a
range that can be from just
under two hundred thousand
dollars a hundred and seventy
five hundred and eighty thousand
dollars up to well over eight
hundred thousand dollars
depending upon the specialty of
the practice great thank you and
the reason I bring that up
mister chair is because
someone regional were about six
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars just get a doctor to
come up there
we've got a problem.
And unms not going to get it all
solved by you taking over all of
the the smaller hospitals or
anything like that we understand
that's not going to work so
economic development again we've
got to find a way to attract
these doctors not just in the
educational part of it through
UNM but we we've got to get some
doctors to artisure to farm me
to to gala two carry we we need
doctors everywhere and so we we
need to come together in I know
it's a the white elephant in the
room and nobody really must talk
about because you know it's
gonna upset somebody somebody's
going to get mad
but if we don't.
We are going to start closing
pass bills you know like alama
gordo like gallon there's going
to be an issue.
So we would like to work with
you and some of those rule
hospital directors and see if we
can't figure out a way to get
people out of the city of
albuquerque and out to our rural
areas.
You know I know we have the
traveling programs and and that
that we're that helps a lot but
it's still not solving the issue
and you know health care is
going to be one of the huge ones
huge so I thank you
I had questions for you guys a
little bit long so i'll go
kitchen out now thank you very
much so in air briefly to
represent you with her thank you
for the your presentation I was
a little bit late I apologize
but
I was up in laws uh las vegas
yesterday mr chair and talking
about the same issues and
talking with their local
government some of the things
that they're doing so my
question is
what what are the things that
they're working is this the semi
project which you may have heard
and we're looking at rule new
mexico of course rate but what
they're doing is the really
integrating
training program's introductory
programs with their use and
making it's huge investment with
their youths and really focusing
on our medical
work force and I just read up
just a bit here students at a
summer health care academy is
what they've created the center
has also incorporated home
growing programs such as the
homey's mentoring program a
restored of justice program that
you utilize as a mix of group
discussions and hands on
projects in construction and
other trades
they explore the health care
work for us in newsmentoring
program so i'm wondering how are
you integrating here and in the
city you know and in the urban
areas and really integrating
with boys and growth current and
these other youth programs
during the summer time when you
there is a there is a chance to
really integrate what is going
on on with some you know you're
programs into the youth and
really you know from the
upstream two where you can get
to these these youth to really
solidify you know some of these
work force.
Ideas for them to charge.
Thank you mister chairman
representative hunt we just hear
curious talking about
integration with health are we
talking with integration with
their activities in the city in
account in about the integration
with health and have programs
mentoring programs that really
grow your own programs and how
you're working with you through
those type of mentoring programs
much what they're doing in los
biggest and I bring up plus
biggest because they're creating
the model and if you don't know
about it and maybe you want to
go up there and talk with mr
amount probes to is the pa up
there that is really formulating
how we get this done so chair
so mister chair and a represent
luham in and when we move into
the health care i'm section
there is a packet that then i'll
be speaking to starting on page
twelve of that packet and
probably for the next five pages
is some discussion of our health
professions pathways programs in
a minute and one of the things
that we focus on is how do we
encourage you know individuals
from all over in new mexico you
know to be prepared and to be
interested to pursue a health
profession's career and so
starting on page twelve there we
talk about our communities to
careers program which is a state
wide initiative that you know
that that touches you know seven
hundred to a thousand students a
year another really important
program that we have at the
school the medicine is our bank
md program where i'm where
individuals are targeted per
dominantly from rural
communities
to enter into a trouble pathway
program to become a physician
starting with their entry into
college so those are two
examples and then a third one
that I would offer up is that
there are office of community
house we have a whole host of
what we call are health
extension officers which cover
all of the counties and part of
what we want them to do is to
participate in both those
communities careers programs or
in lasa.
Or our band program also helping
those communities in individuals
know that that that we want to
create health career pathway
options for them but I senator I
mean representative I just want
to say that that your exactly
right we have to start early.
Um encouraging individuals to
pursue these kinds of careers
when we look at our numbers of
individuals per capita that are
seeking out this kind of
education it would indicate to
me that we do not have enough
individuals who are both
interested in pursuing these
opportunities thank you
so they have numbers of how they
are really integrating this and
i'm not hearing the numbers on
this end so i'm just saying you
have the money we have the
resources here and from what i'm
reading from what what we have
the money we've been putting
forward from the state is really
how are you grasping it and i'd
like to see the results in the
numbers of that because we have
a working model in one of our
most rule areas and they have
rural hospital there and they
went from
was it twenty nineteen
twenty seventy twenty three
physicians there they have three
physicians now.
So I I really want to see some
some better results when we're
under utilizing the funding that
we have and really into these
programs and this area is
getting results thank you mister
chair
thank you
thank you are very much uh we
very much appreciated the
governor he don't as well couple
of brief questions from my and
and were very excited
vice president richie obviously
for the next part focusing sort
of two of the things public
safety and housing that we're
talked about
first on housing the sort of
transitional housing
distransitional housing have a
thread a drug treatment in
addiction come component
perspective from the city in the
county.
Er mr chairman think you and
when we talk about transitional
housing and is absolutely really
with uh case management and
support services that those
individuals would be connected
to services while in
transitionalizing
okay in the soon sort of the
same perspective from the county
yes mister chair I I think
that's absolutely the case for
example at our tiny home village
location connected to those
types of services for for those
in need and I think that that is
our intention for any new
projects going forward our
family wellness shelter any of
those types of facilities for
transitional housing I think
it's imperative they they have
to be connected that is best
practice and and that's what
both governments are are doing
that's great so as we see the
roll out of the funds that the
legislature you know we're proud
to start in the house really
grateful for our senate
colleagues.
Then transitional housing should
be a key focus for investments
in burned is that right with
wrap around supportive services
so in in the package that I
speak for the county but I
believe the cities very very
close to us here in the package
of projects that we have
presented through our commission
to the governor's office for
consideration it's really a
diversity of projects so there
are transitional projects as you
speak to that offer those types
of supported wrap round services
but we also recognize that you
have to have somewhere for those
folks to go right and so you
can't create this pipeline that
is completely front loaded we
don't you know we can move all
the people into transitional
housing
but it is successful
transitional housing program is
just that it's transitional and
so are at some point we want
those folks to graduate out of
that program into a more
independent circumstances we
have everything from you know
hotel conversions and additional
tiny home type operations that
are in the transitional
component and then we have
others as the ca mention like
the upton connect project that
is more of a mixed rate of
affordable project that we would
hope that we could have people
move from after they complete
successfully through their
program
okay
thank you in
you
will have this conversation
adding you know we have all of
the elements so from housing to
medication assisted treatment to
the public that there'll be
further parts of the program in
the agenda and want to think the
director in the lsc staff for
building an exciting agenda
I will be very focused on sort
of the front and in you speak
very clearly about the
unacceptable nature of sort of
the eastern parts of central I
drove down from ubank yesterday
after a visit to send you
we have got to see sort of the.
Frustration in connected to the
sort of the solution chain
because the legislature is
stepping forward and a very
significant way in a partnership
way
in in its all about rapid and
successful implementation will
hold ourselves accountable will
hold the executive agencies in
the governor's office account
was they do a space of versa in
that has to extend sort of.
Across the entirety of of the
public uh the public
representation
moving to public safety that
what we have here and it was
referenced earlier this is
sort of quarter one twenty
twenty four to quarter one
twenty twenty five and some of
the things that stick out most
there were connected to some of
the things we heard shooting
with injuries down fifty percent
harmer sides down forty eight
percent
is there a connection there uh
doctor single two some of the
used violence interruption
programs that you talked about
and also some of the technology
investments that that you're all
or leading and were for sort of
following and supporting
on thinking mr chairman in your
question is exactly on point to
work with believe is making a
difference in these crime stats
in we talk about violent crime
stats which are the two that you
just mentioned that others
within that crime update
what we know is that if you
committed if you shoot someone
in all kirki today we have a
ninety eight percent likelihood
that we are going to find you
and put you ngl and arrest you
and put you in jail that is as a
result of multiple pieces of
informed pieces of
infrastructure in an investments
that have been made twenty
percent of our city has shot
spotter technology that shot
smarter technology is where if
you've when that gun is fired
within forty feet of that of
that we can we know where that
can we was fired we can then go
out and find the key scene of
what uh that that was that came
from that gun we can put that
into a database and find out if
that that got came from my
weapon that was stolen had been
used in in a previous crime and
we can then connect to the
person.
We also have license plate
technology read your technology
in the area so now we know that
when the gun was fired and we
fight and we know where it would
happen we can look at license
plate reader technology and see
what we vehicles were in the
area and understand through the
camera through cameras as well
and would that yet where that
vehicle is going we can follow
that vehicle through the city
identified through that license
pleate exactly who owns the
vehicle where that vehicle goes
and then I likely very much show
up wherever you are not the two
fired the gun but I was using
you as an example and wherever
you are and arrest you for that
the crime that you have
committed that investment is
significant and it has made as
we believe in a significant
opportunity for us to
leverage our line forcement
officers leverage our real
trimecrime center to
to solve crime and that's what
those statistics and that you'd
be specifically spoke to
represent and we believe that
that is prior to that we also
know that it's because we were
using civilians to help us with
response to nine on one costs so
when we talk about alba cricket
community safety responding to a
hundred thousand calls in the
last three years that means that
officers that would have
previously responded to those
calls are available for crime to
respond to the calls for crime
and spend the time and solving a
those crimes but I do also
believe that it is related to
the focus we have in
intervention who are with us
that we know that those are
school base intervention program
when we let violence
intervention program when we
look at what is happening and
the numbers are not grandiose in
the thousands but they are
absolute number is related to
each of these individual
students that have been in
engaged in violence or exposed
to violence in there in their
lives and they are engaging in a
program that we have and I
mentioned already so hate to
repeat myself but.
Um we have an eighty percent
successory in reduce recentivism
we also have an eighty percent
success rate in in their
graduation from high school
these are kids that were not
headed for graduating from high
school and now today we can we
we had a wonderful graduation
ceremony of many of them a few
weeks a few months ago with a
aps in which we can see that
these kids have made a different
decision in the path that they
are headed on I also believe it
has to do with am going back to
mazlos hierarchy as we begin to
provide individuals with service
and support of their
fundamentals of put what makes
someone feel safe you start to
see individuals making different
decisions and but I do believe
the investments that you as a
legislature have made in with in
partnership with us in
technology it is what you know
it we are all recognized that
technology is taking over our
lives everywhere we we talk
about quantum we're going to
talk about it the i'm sure the
use of technology and medicine
but technology and crime
fighting is making a significant
difference
great thank you very much and I
want to give a special sound out
to them chat field he learned
the pushed last year where we
included six million dollars for
license plate readers and
it's great to hear that that's a
component and again we'll hear
more sort of the specific parts
I want to think the members for
a really really good questions
strong discussion we've
obviously went over time there I
want to think our presenters
doctorate you will ask you to
stay up there and for our final
thing today
we're going to really distill
that so that'll be me making a
few comments and mister solely
also talking about our sort of
federal funds approach at the
end but thank you all very much
thinks the members for a great
conversation and somebody bring
back vice president richards and
water
or coffee or both.
The.
So mr chair and a members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to continue
the discussion on our work force
needs doctor michael richards
the executive vice president and
of the union hell science of
center and and sitting of the
union health system in today i'm
joined by dean patricia fan dean
of our school of medicine and
mister stewart lebsi are
director of hse capital projects
I know that as we go into this
discussion on work force issues
that we've kind of laid some of
the groundwork already and that
form some of you have had an
opportunity to meet with you or
present the material and more
detail and we've just handed out
a packet of information and that
includes about a fifty page
power point presentation we will
not be going through all of that
material today I will actually
point to a few of the sites but
I would like to offer up that if
there's any members of the
committee or with your staff
that would like to go into this
material and and more detail and
especially to explore some of
the items that we won't have
time to cover today know that we
would really welcome that
opportunity so today will focus
on as we talk about the school
medicine projects you know some
of the background material to
set the stage but then land on
the updates and where we are
currently in in hopefully for
the committee members to leave
some opportunity for some
discussion so we'll start off
with the kind of reactivation
that we have significant work
force needs in the state of new
mexico and we've talked a little
bit about the role of the health
sciences center in addressing
that we are the states are only
acted to make medical center in
the major trainer of health care
work force for the state and we
take that responsibility very
seriously and we think about
this as being a state wide
mission included in the packet
in this may for some that that
are interested in the the
numbers for the work for
shortages on page six we
actually do outline some of them
some of those specific health
care work force needs.
But before I get into talking
about the school of medicine in
particular i'd like to just for
a moment highlight that we are
very fortunate to have some
outstanding national level
health care education programs
here in new mexico at the hill
scientists center our college of
pharmacy is ranked number three
in research funding in the
united states and as you heard
people constenate us talk about
some of the science that occurs
in our college of pharmacy is
some of the most important and
talked about items in an
biomedical science right now
like microplastics are college
of pharmacy we are very grateful
for the investments that you've
made and were happy to report
that that the trend in new
mexico is very positive for us
relative to pharmacy with them
with a year of year seven point
three percent growth in that
that work force group our
college of nursing which is in
the building were in right now
ranked in the top eight percent
of nursing programs in the
united states in some programs
like our nurse midwife you know
ranked among the best in the
united states our college
remersing undergraduate this
year year rearm enrollment
twenty nine percent increase and
so we're we could only do that
because of the investments that
are being made into these
educational programs and we also
mentioned our college of
population health which is in
this building with nursing and
that program is ranked in the
top one hundred for graduate
program some population health
in the united states this year
with a nineteen percent increase
in year of a year enrollment of
these represent movement towards
helping close this work for us
gap.
But most importantly for today's
conversation is the school of
madison
our school medicine programs are
also nationally recognized and
in fact a legacy of what we've
done here and our school of
medicine has changed the way
medical education occurs in the
united states the problem based
learning methodology that's the
predominant way by which we
deliver undergraduate medical
education was pioneered here at
the union school of madison
but the issue that we've got
right now is that our school
medicine
at you know has been limited in
its ability to expand its
educational programs the school
the medicine is a very large
program and i'll show you some
date on that in a few moments
but we have over four hundred
medical students over seven
hundred held professional
students so our school medicine
is the predominant place where
we train those health
professionals outside of nursing
pharmacy and population health
the reason why the school
medicine programs have been
limited in its reset expansion
of educational programs comes
down to the idea that health
care professionals especially
physicians in the kinds of
health care professionals that
were talking about today require
a clinical delivery system in
order to be trained our last
major expansion of the union
health system occurred in two
thousand and seven with the
building of the pavilion
that has been a rate limiting
step so over the last couple of
decades that clinical delivery
system has largely become
saturated with learners so until
we can expand the clinical
delivery system we're not able
to grow the educational programs
and that's because we have to
ensure that we give them the
right kinds of patient exposure
but these programs are also
credited and so the that is also
one of the rate limiting steps.
The other really big
consideration and i'll talk
about this and a bit more is
that the main educational
building that supports our
school medicine which is fits is
nearing its end of life and has
to be replaced so that we'll
have the appropriate venue to be
able to expand and train health
professionals now want to move
to one of the slides which I I
would like to reference and this
is on page ten of the packet
in that is the one that the
spiral bound package
because what I would really like
to focus on for just a couple of
moments is this unique
opportunity that we have in new
mexico at this moment
so the union health system is
actually on the eve of being of
growing substantially
as you look out and drive here
today you saw that that we have
you know significant expansion
occurring with our critical care
tower but also with things like
our children's psychiatric
center and that growth really
set up a unique opportunity for
the state to help address this
work forced need so some of the
things that come together to
make this a unique moment for us
is that as we've talked about
today there is more than enough
patience who need patient care
so growing this facility makes
all health care delivery systems
stronger prespectarian in
loveless or the two largest
referral centers for us and so
when we have more beds it makes
their delivery system stronger
so there's more than enough
statement another thing and I
would like to just note that
that this is because of the work
of our state and including the
legislature that you've created
a payment model for for clinical
care for the university that
supports us delivering the care
and that's largely done through
medicaid and while there may be
some changes to that the state
support of medicaid can not be
under emphasized.
In its importance of our ability
to both grow infrastructure and
to be able to deliver a care and
we are incredibly grateful for
that the other really unique
thing for us is that is that we
have been
very successful it partnering
federally with the housing and
her reading development to
create federal backed loans for
building our infrastructure
those hot back loans give us
access to the capital at at a
rate that lets us build the
infrastructure so when we put
those three things together then
that allows us to do the growth
that we're talking about the new
critical care tower will open on
october fifth and there'll be a
ribbon cutting for that on
september twenty sixth and we
look forward to seeing all of
you there that sets us on a
trajectory where over the next
ten years as we build out that
infrastructure that will see
about a seventy percent increase
in our inpatient care volume
that sets up the opportunity for
us to not only deliver more
patient care which is needed by
this community in the state but
really importantly it allows us
to grow the school of medicine
clinical faculty that clinical
growth will mean that we'll have
the opportunity to bring in
about three hundred to three
hundred and fifty more
physicians enter the union house
system to deliver a clinical
care those three hundred to
three hundred and fifty
physicians then allow us to grow
our educational programs that's
the unique moment that we find
ourselves in not many
communities have those
constellations of things
occurring all at the same time
the clinical expansion the
ability to grow the clinical
volume that the support both for
our capital projects from both
the state and the federal and
the reimbursement models that
let all of this work for us.
But one of the rate limiting
steps for us that remains ashed
after we build the clinical
delivery system is that the
clinical infrastructure that we
use for growing our medical
school programs both the
physicians and those help
professionals that we talked
about is that that facilities
need to be replaced we've made
significant investments and
pharmacy and population health
and in nursing but we haven't
yet in the school of madison and
the main building that were in
which is fits har was built in
nineteen sixty seven really not
aminable to either remodeling or
two renovation or expansion so
we really are at the place where
that facility is not
representative of contemporary
educational facilities for
medical education and must be
replaced so last year when I had
an opportunity to meet with you
we just embarked upon a process
by looking at replacing that
facility that started with an
assessment of statewide need
which I think we've all well
established that we need this
work force but then it started
with a business plan that we put
together that included a ten
year per former included in your
packet as an executive summary
of that business plan but it
also includes things such as the
economic development and impact
that business plan and i'll talk
a little bit about in a minute
i'm did a firm that that that
this is something that is within
the reach of the UNM hell
science the center in the state
the business plan then lead to a
programming process where where
we looked at both the size in
the use and the location of
where a new school of medicine
would be we also as part of that
process did an economic impact
analysis and then and and then
to ensure that we had continue
of operations here at the hill
sciences center we've also added
in a decommissioning of the old
medical school building.
Because we have science
occurring in that building right
now and and it provides support
and infrastructure for other
research facilities here on
campus so the transitioning out
of an old building into a new
building you know is something
of significant consideration all
of that lead to to the
discussions that we had during
the last legislative session and
i'd like to just acknowledge
that that we did receive that
thirty million dollar
appropriation for the next phase
which is designed and we have we
have kicked that off in and
store it lives who will be here
to talk a little bit about that
what i'd like to do now before
we get into those updates as I
would just like to hit a couple
of the key highlights from
things such as the business plan
so and for that i'd like to
reference slide twenty five in
the packet.
So a couple of the key things
that came out of the business
plan was was most importantly an
affirmation that this doubling
of the size of our school of
medicine over the next ten years
and doubling of all of the
health profession programs
associated with it is clearly
within our reach and needed by
the state of new mexico a couple
of the items here on slide
twenty five in one of the blue
boxes towards the right you'll
note that new mexico has twenty
seats per hundred thousand
population for alloy pathic
medicine or md training the
national average is about twenty
nine and for states that have
been aggressively approaching
this workforce issue they've
been creating forty to fifty
seats per hundred thousand
population this affirms the need
to grow the size of our school
matters and class another
important thing that I want to
note on this is that if the
bottom of the slide where we say
ninety five percent it's
actually ninety five to ninety
seven percent of all of the
entrance into our media school
school program come from new
mexico the remaining three to
five percent are typically
individuals who are native
american who get in state
consideration in our medical
school.
Another important aspect of this
is that if you'll notice that we
have about two hundred and
eleven applicants
from new mexico to medical
school anywhere in the united
states that number is too low
that number is half of what we
should have for the state of new
mexico so as we double the size
of our medical school class we
also need to double the number
of individuals who are prepared
and applying for medical school
in this I think support some of
the comments in discussion
earlier today about the critical
need for you know for our
pathway programs and supporting
your educational system starting
from k through twelve
so those are some of the
important points on the
demographics of our medical
school the program that business
plan also confirmed are feasible
confirmed the need for replacing
the clinical facility and in a
couple of slides you'll see that
we're really not able to start
growing the medical school class
until we actually get a new
contemporary facility it also
confirmed the importance in the
of our clinical growth we would
not be able to have this
conversation today if it were
not also timed with the growing
of our clinical delivery system
that growing up the clinical
delivery system gives us the
patience but it also gives us
the opportunity to recruit the
physicians who pay for
themselves by taking care of the
patience so that is one of the
key elements that make this a
viable plan for the state of new
mexico it also confirms the the
overall economic impact beyond
just creating health care
positions and grow and and and a
new work force included in the
packet that we gave you there's
a summary of an economic impact
report that we did by trip on
back that was part of our
business plan.
That showed that the proforma of
the school of medicine moves
that the balance sheet or the
revenue from the school of
medicine from about seven
hundred and thirty four million
dollars a year to about a
billion dollars a year or two
hundred and fifty two hundred
and thirty to two hundred and
fifty million dollars increase
per year almost all of that
increase is covered by the
additional clinical revenue in
research that will be conducted
by that faculty and staff that
we will be recruiting you know
impart for the clinical delivery
system there is a bit of a gap
but that gap that that that we
would have at ten years out
eighty five percent of it or
eighty percent of it is covered
by that clinical revenue and and
so there are some additional
work that will need to do to be
able to close about a forty five
million dollars gap on a billion
dollars of revenue at about ten
years out the other really
important point about this and
this is on page thirty of that
is that this is a tremendous
economic value to the state of
new mexico one of those economic
values is that are to wish for
medical school at unm is half
that of other public
institutions for medical school
where about twenty thousand
dollars a year other public
medical schools in the united
states are about thirty nine k
our state support even if we
were to have the state support
to cover that forty five million
dollars gap comes in just below
what the national average of
state support would be for
undergraduate medical education
and again a lot been said today
about the importance of economic
development and impact as part
of that trip study we show that
the school of medicine component
only not including the clinical
delivery system peace changes
the economic impact of the
community from one point six
billion dollars.
To about two point two billion
dollars that's the school the
medicine component only with
that it's generates about a
hundred and thirteen million
dollars a year in tax value to
the state and what what what we
are able to show is that the
economic return for every dollar
invested in our school of
medicine brings about forty nine
dollars of economic impact to
the community into the state so
there's a lot more information
in this business plan and again
we want to just show and and
highlight that this shows that
our state needs this educational
program we need the building to
support it we've got a performer
that demonstrates that this is
within our ability to achieve
this doubling of the school of
medicine but we would offer up
the opportunity to go into
detail with any members that
would like to go through more of
that information i'd also
mention that a big component of
this was the programming in so
the philosophy behind their says
that that we were when we were
contemplating the idea that we
need a new contemporary school
of medicine building we were
challenged to say let the
programming drive the
conversation about what that
building should be where it
should be located what size it
should be and let the bench
marking of the national
buildings of this type drive
with the cost of it should be
and so with that in mind we took
the program the business plan
material from the ten year
proforma and their requirements
for a creditation for medical
schools and we engaged a
national consultant to help us
you know convert that into what
a new contemporary physical
plant would look like for the
school of medicine for the next
fifty to sixty years this was
largely a benched marked project
because our current school the
medicine building was built in
nineteen sixty seven it is not
informative.
To us at all about what we need
next because we're transitioning
into very different kinds of
space and environment with new
in different approaches to
medical education turns out that
this is a good time to be doing
something like this because in
the united states now there is a
lot of movement towards
replacing the medical school
buildings which were built in
the sixties and seventies and
growing medical schools over the
last ten years so there's lots
of information from peer
institutions in other states
about what these buildings look
like and and what they should
contain and what they should
cost and so we largely are
proposing today what we would
call a benched mark approach to
this replacement facility we
also confirmed that that we
could in fact be in this
physical plant by the fall of
twenty twenty nine with the
first graduating class by twenty
thirty four for the school of
medicine obviously helped
profession programs are a part
of this they go up much quicker
included in that business plan
packet in the matril of today it
shows the timeline of how that
those those education programs
would grow over a ten year
horizon i'd like to now move to
the other another slide which I
really want to highlight which
is on page thirty eight
part of this process was where
where would we locate this
building and and and what we are
contemplating right now is that
this building would be located
on the corner of university and
lomes and so on that slide you
can see the galleries you know
i'm old car dealership and the
lower left of that graphic you
can see the school of medicine
on that corner and then the
green boxes that you see just to
the right of that represent the
new union hospital critical care
tower the building that we will
be occupying starting october
fifth.
Of this year the yellow box
that's in here is what we
contemplate is where we would
locate our next medical office
building that becomes an
important part because the
adjacencies of the school of
medicine next to the medical
office building next to the
hospital critical care tower
allows for that flow of doctors
and learners across their work
environments the other really
important piece of this is that
we believe that placing this
kind of facility on that corner
will be a change a dramatic
change to the entrance into the
university of new mexico but
also would be likely to to spur
and you know significant
economic development along that
longest corridor so we're very
excited about that being the
potential location of this
facility and what i'd like to do
for just a moment is that if
you'll flip over to the next
couple of slides I just want to
just use these photos to
demonstrate what contemporary
educational space looks like
you're sitting in one right now
so this is an example of what
contemporary educational space
looks like and if you visit it
our old school of medicine
building you will see that it
does look like nineteen sixty
nine lecture halls you know and
that's not conducive to the
kinds of ways that medical
education is delivered now on
the next page another important
part of this is that is that the
research component is an
incredibly important part of
training biomedical scientists
and physicians and included in
fits hall is a research platform
you'll see at the top of slide
forty two on the right is a
picture of one of our actual
research laboratories these are
in the basement or windowless
rooms their spaces for one or
two investigators they're not
adjacent to education space.
You can see that there's a does
not represent the kind of space
that you need for contemporary
science the slide that's a media
or the photo immediately to the
left of that shows what
contemporary laboratory space
looks like and then the graphic
that you see demonstrates that
this contemporary laboratory
space is open its modular it's
built around core facilities
that the scientists share which
makes it much more efficient and
then it's adjacent to
educational space so that all of
those missions are tied together
not just science and innovation
but also with our research and
education and on slide forty
three you'll see a graphic of
the integration of simulation
and two classrooms i'd like to
note that that the state has
been very generous and helping
us build contemporary simulation
space especially in our dominity
education building and we
utilize that fully but as we
continue to involve into this
introducing area education model
you know we rely more and more
on simulation in this shows how
the simulation is actually built
in to the classroom but it
doesn't stop there the whole
entire building is is
constructed and thought with the
idea that the space must be
flexible multiple use support
collaboration and be technology
enabled in those kind of
represent you know what what
occurs and contemporary medical
education buildings now we think
of this building is being that
hub for our health professions
in school of medicine that would
exist for the next fifty to
sixty years for the state of new
mexico so now i'd like to go
added and move to slide forty
eight which is a number that
you've seen
the total cost of the school of
medicine building at this point
is about six hundred million
dollars again that is a very
large number.
Um but again I want to just
point out that it lives in a
school medicine who's annual
revenues at the time we would be
fully expanded would be about a
billion dollars a year and and
while this represents a large
investment in a physical plant
it does really represent
something far more than that
because this is not really about
a building we have to have the
building to do what is the most
important thing which is to grow
our educational programs to
support our science to develop
that work force that the state
of new mexico needs and to also
support the faculty that are
going let us grow their
educational delivery system as
we've just talked about so that
concludes the highlights of the
material that are in the packet
we certainly didn't cover
everything and again i'd like to
offer up the opportunity to meet
with individuals if you would
like to go into a more detail so
this takes us to the next step
which is really where are we
write at this moment so with our
thirty million dollars
appropriation that lets us now
move into design i'd like to ask
mr short level see to kind of
help give an update on on where
we are in that process in in
some of the thinking that we
have used as we have engaged are
architect in partner for this
next fees so mister chair of
your permission that's great
thank you very much for just
doctors
thank you very much stuck
richards are mischairman members
of the committee I think you
threw time this morning I would
like to add a quick update on
we're out with the design fees
doctor richards mentioned we
wrapped up are planning on
programming efforts at the end
of march so that program was
delivered to us on march thirty
first that program was then
released in an rf process that
was a competitively bid we
actually had a an excellent pool
of respondents we are about
eleven different firms and joint
ventures respond to us.
Are other which include local
partners as well as national are
experts partnered with those
that was individual respondents
we then went through a valuation
of the other response we near
that down to a short list of six
which we conducted finalist
interviews with
and we'd narrow that down to to
a finalist that we're currently
are in contract negotiations
with our to to be able to bring
them on board with the goal of
of getting that contract
executive at the end of this
month i'm so that point will
kick off the design fees where
we'll pick up where the
programming left the programming
really helped us to find as I
could return it and how big is
the box and what goes into the
box rate but we need to get a
little bit more detailed with
things like you know what
typical equipment package is
that we need to have what
medical equipment do we need to
have in our simulation spaces
and and what we need for the
research and to support the
modern medical education and for
that will be partnering with the
infound in the school the
medicine are getting those
stakeholders and gets and really
understanding how can we help
build a facility that that
empowers the faculty and the
learners so it's to move this
product forward
sir and i'll send three
questions about it
you're sir so I think type of
mine on everyone's radar is is
the cost of construction your
inflation is is definitely a
real thing and so one of the
reasons that we selected the
firm that we did was actually
they proposed a strategy with
using bid lots to help us cost
manage the project and what that
means is we want to try to break
the construction project up into
multiple smaller packages so
that we can insulate ourselves a
little bit from the risk of of
some of these inflation
concerns and what I mean by that
is feel for example we might
have an early work package that
doubt deals with our site work
in our foundations followed by
another bid package that deals
with the structure that steal
the envelope and those kinds of
things followed by
interior fed out.
Furniture fixtures and equipment
in those kinds of things and
this was a there's a great
strategy that's been used
elsewhere in the country and in
fact was used successfully in in
a couple places like phoenix
denver a portland so there
there's a number of different
areas where other folks are
facing the same concerns that we
are in terms of cost escalations
and this then successful
methodologies
and so you out like so where
were pleased that the firm that
it actually did we did end up
having a finalist for the local
new mexico firm that's partnered
with the with the national
partner as well so that they
we've got roots here we're not
getting a building that's
designed from you know from an
outside interview without some
context of what's happening here
in new mexico
chairman i'll turn back over to
richards thank you great thank
you
so mr chair and clean members
the you know would also like to
just kind of recognize that that
we greatly appreciate the
discussions that occurred in the
last legislative session in i'd
i'd like to know that senator
gonzalez is as a bill four sixty
four
contemplated potential funding
mechanisms to to support the
school of medicine project and
also recognize that
representative of lentes you
know house bill for forty nine
and collaboration with the lfc
staff created a potential
mechanism to sport these very
large kinds of educational
projects you know and so we
appreciate that they're still
significant work to be done
with a are stakeholders to
determine how we would finance
and and capitalise this
projector but again I just
wanted to note that we greatly
appreciated the conversations
that were started last session
excellent thank you so much
doctor richards doctor to see
the inducted will go to
questions.
In in very clear that the great
deal of work has gone into and
is ongoing so the chance to see
okay we're gonna start with
representing the hunt
thank you mister arm great so
it's just a little bit of
clarification back and we had a
presentation in december before
the session began on this was
the estimate that you gave us
four hundred million and now
it's gonna significantly mister
chair
so i'm mr chair and
representative of luhan eight
when we were first contemplating
the building using just the
business plan we we did in fact
have very early on in the
process last summer the idea
that this might be a four
hundred million dollars building
once we completed the business
plan and the programming and
then we're able to compare that
with the actual size of the
building that was needed and
bench marking it against current
construction projects for school
of medicines the project price
did change to six hundred
million
thank you mister chairman just
thank you for that clarification
I just wanted to know how that
through that increase was and
that's wonderful question that I
have is there is a piece of
legislation that I also worked
on and was looking at
contemplating AAA medical school
in south a and
we ran into some some issues
with them because it was
actually not as
I don't think as well planned is
what you're doing and what we
need through the scope of what
you're your presenting with us
to my question is if we had
other opportunities for other
medical schools in the state
because you and m is so big and
because you know other things
and again i'm i'm in favor of us
growing in and making sure that
we have everything we need here
at u and m
in albuquerque but.
How how how do you or is that
come into any of your planning
if there were other medical
schools or other types of
medical schools that would have
complimented you're doing with
you and i'm sorry
mr chair and and representative
luhan so what what we believe is
that our job is to support it
edge growing educational
programs in any way that fits
for the state of new mexico and
so you'll you'll note that we
really try and support growing
the gme programs and other
institutions in an increasing
collaborative such as our nurse
education collaborative for
nursing and I offer those up to
say I really want to highlight
that that we are committed to
helping grow the educational
programs in any way that makes
sense
but for for medical education
one of the things that we that
we are uncovered as part of the
business plan process and that
was on that um like page
ten or not ten but page
twenty five of the business plan
showed that that if we were to
to do that the expansion of the
unm school of medicine as as
contemplated that we would be
above the net just above the
national average for the number
of seats that we would need for
physician training and then then
we would still have to be
focused as you pointed out
representative luhan on working
very diligently with local
communities and educational
systems to encourage individual
walls to be both aware of and
prepared to pursue medical
education so we are still
looking at if trying to double
the number of individuals who
are applying to be able to take
advantage of doubling the number
of seats we believe if we did
this that we wouldn't
necessarily need another medical
school to meet those needs for
the state of new mexico one of
the things that I also didn't
mention to this is there.
That has growing the work force
and one of the unique things
about doing it here as a state
wide initiative is that we'll
also be growing our graduate
medical education programs to
and so right now we're at about
seven hundred and eighty seats
we would be able to grow to
about a thousand seats for
graduate medical education and
that would put us in one of the
top ten largest in the united
states
thank you mister chair in you
know a courtesy for working on
this but is there any
possibility for any type of
satellite
opportunities across the state
as we keep on discussing trying
to solve the the rural issues in
our in our state I really feel
that we grow our own we need to
really contemplate with that
looks like as we've been
we've had legislation passed
this last session that's a
dressing the regionalization of
behavioral health and creating
those those are yeah those
regions this to me is is
something that that really would
be influenced kind of a vision
here and if everything is just
isolated consolidated into one
area I feel like that we're
gonna we're going to hit our
ourselves over the head in the
in the future
checks so mr chair and in
representative luan exactly
right about the idea that we
have to get learners into other
communities from a
cost perspective it would be
more economical and expedient to
keep the undergraduate medical
education in one location but
clinical rotations both for
clinical clerk ships of medical
students and graduate medical
education represent
opportunities for us to put
those learners and other
communities which as we talked
about earlier you know give some
the exposure to those
communities it helps them to see
what those opportunities are and
we are committed to continuing
to advance those programs.
Mister chair thank you for that
and that that goes directly to
the next question I have into
the information that i've been
receiving and and the rotations
and the types of rotations that
are that have a lot of
requirements attached to them
and therefore they're not
internet except those rotations
in our rural communities so I
would like to know how we
grapple with that in early
change.
Where do we where do those
changes happen or they from from
the university level are they
from the state level are they
from the federal level because
that is one of the the reasons
why our local hospitals if you
will are suffering if they don't
meet some requirements or
certain requirements for those
rotations they can't you can't
get in there mister charles
mr chairman in representative
luham when it you know there's
one of the rate limiting steps
for us is that is that we are we
have to follow our creditation
rules and so those are those are
things that have to be taken
into consideration but they they
don't prohibit us from being
able to create some kinds of
rotations in educational
experience and maybe I could ask
if mister chair your permission
is dean fend to make a comment
of that
mister chair and committee and
representative thank you so much
for your question a absolutely
agree with you that
um
you know really having an
experience we have some standard
rotations as you probably know
between your first in second
year and medical school is this
emergency in rural communities
rear medical students spend a
significant man on time during
that summer and that reflection
to your question often does lead
significantly to someone staying
there so they're they're
introduced but two these other
questions of ensuring as as you
know we all have to live by
rules and regulations is very
important in medical training we
want the best train so we have
to live to credentially but we
are really trying to open up and
partner and meet and visit with
other hospitals as to what the
potential
is for increasing those
rotations for allowing those
experiences for meeting not only
with potential faculty but with
administrator so she really
echoed doctor richer's words.
We hear you we hear how
important that is an an I do not
think that
we have done as much as we can I
just want to make sure you know
that and we if I can affirm is
you probably heard from
everybody here in this table we
are affirming to how important
it is for the entire state of
new mexico and actually for the
country in the world to ensure
that folks have in opportunity
you have those educational
experiences and not just I just
if I mean I just can
not just for mds but for all of
our eyed health professionals
throughout the community and
insuring that we have touch
points there thank you mister
and I would go into the
conversation with residencies as
well and that's I think that's
really where the crisis and
getting this residencies are
credited into these real areas
i'd like to
really work on this with you and
see how we can be expensive with
us because you know it's great
to have the herb and everything
in all in all the things here in
albuquerque but our rule
communities are suffering the
most
in my last question is is would
you or are you considering at
all because of our behavioral
health prices to give it a
focus on on
behavioral health miracle
providers empties psychologists.
Etc
so mister chair and and
representative lou honey
absolutely and so I I think that
the best opportunity there is to
look at how we grow our gme
programs associated with
behavioral health and across the
health science to center how we
grow other behavioral health
educational programs such as
advanced practice nurse
programs specializing in in
behavioral health so so that I
think is an important issue that
goes beyond just the school the
medicine in something that we
could look at in our other
colleges to really appreciate
that institute because those
those pathways are more feasible
in liberal communities and don't
have so much of it the red tape
if you will thank you to charge
for the opportunity to speak
great okay we're gonna go to uh
dixon central health center
goods all this and go from there
percentage
thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation I have
appreciated learning about this
project
over the course of last year and
am really impressed with the
thoroughness of the materials
that you will have provided and
the information that are
companies that
really quickly and are
lfc brief
which in case folks messages
behind tab
one of the things that are staff
highlights for us
is national data shows sixty
eight point nine percent of
those who completed
undergraduate and residency in
new mexico is connor here just a
um ears undergraduate rate oh
conner
sorry I had a question about the
on page three of the brief
am just reading it it says
national data shows sixty eight
point nine percent of those who
completed.
Ume and residency in new mexico
remain in the state upon
completion of their medical
residency vs only thirty eight
point five
percent of new mexico um
students who become licensed
positions in the state and so I
just wanted to
ask about that figure and if you
could so can't maybe if you want
to explain that but then doctor
richards
how
the school of medicine how the
expansion are can sort of help
with that particular
aspect
so mr chair and representative
dickson so thank you very much
uh what you're referring to I
believe would be the two
thousand and twenty three twenty
four double amc data on
retention and so the the the
thirty eight point five is right
at the national average for for
medical school and so when
revert to um
that really means individuals
who are graduating from medical
school with the md degree and so
those numbers are right at the
national average you know what I
would hope is that in what we
would work on is is as we create
the additional kinds of growing
of the school of medicine you
know that would be the
opportunity to to the carton
play growing things like the
bamd program or other special
tracks that dean fen has thought
about that would ultimately help
both prepare individuals to be
able to take advantage of the
medical education but also
hopefully encourage individuals
that come from rural communities
because again we know that those
are the individuals who are more
likely to go back and so while
we're at the national
performance of those two items I
believe that we can do better
than national average.
And mr chair representative
dicks and I think
with respect of those two points
we're really saying is that it's
not just the medical school
there new hospital tower is also
giving you
really great opportunity to
leverage a doubling of the
medical school into more gm
slots and so if we have folks
coming in to the system doing a
medical school just ume and then
being able to find an
opportunity in new mexico for
their residency that's what's
really going to driver attention
and that's what's going to lead
to those new physicians staying
in the state and growing the
states physician capacity over
time
thank you thank you for that and
I have another question but I
will go ahead and pass it on to
others and follow up offline
thing you have sent dickson next
we go to senator to health
care mister chairman thank you
mister richardson group for this
presentation I first want to see
just thank you thank you thank
you for the super comprehensive
information about career
pathways there was pages of it
and i've been divided dolding
over that so thank you for
making that be in this um
presentation in on page twenty
five you've at the bottom it
says nearly a hundred new mexico
residents applied but didn't get
into any medical score
are we doing anything to help
those I mean you've got a
hundred people who have said I
want to be in medicine and i'm
wondering if we're doing
anything to either help them get
better prepared or to cancel
them into another medical career
that they may qualify for.
Mr chair representative tree
hero perhaps a dean fin to
answer that
thank you so much mr chair and
representatives and thank you so
much for that question I think
that is the key question and I
hear that we have to begin early
lifeline education commitment
tonight so that is part and
parcel of our passion and their
commitment but how does that
actually take form so I think
it's really important number one
to think about the majority
actually of our of of those who
enter a medical school come from
u n
undergraduate not the medical
school so just insuring that we
have that type connection just
to the universe i'm just going
to talk about the universal i'll
go back to high school and
grammar's coffee kids are
current in the second but just
making sure that those
connection that there is best
repair the b a md is one program
but we also have another program
which for those who may not be
quite ready but need more and
that we can go through well
outlined all those of the
programs that and they're really
important and that get to I
think doctor lump senate
representative lou hans question
about we have to have these
programs we begin that pipeline
not just for empty but for our
allied health professionals love
to talk to you is offline till
you exactly what we're doing how
we're going for it but we're
we're not going to start them we
understand how important there
is there's a number of role
models throughout the country of
when you start again with folks
in me if you have if the highest
math costs that you've heard in
high school is else that is a
whole different game than and
that's not bad were good that's
just important data for us to
know because the will is there
the commitment is there the
passion of our kids is
extraordinary I invite all of
you to come to our graduation
date we we allow the person who
is most important to you to hood
you on that important day so to
see single moms and grandfathers
working that is the kind of
community so their intelligence
their ability is on parallel but
we need to give them those
resources we have several
programs.
In place where working rapidly
with others but remember I
mentioned the unm undergraduate
community but we recognize how
important it is for those
outreached programs everywhere
to see okay what is your dream
how can we help you do that
whichever there is how do you
become an engineer like stewart
or your doctor like him or i'm a
political is there something and
you don't have to be I talked
about your committee to
healthcare and I can't remember
if someone was talking about
that it's your joy in your
passion in your job is so key
and important so I would be
happy to talk about telling you
about those programs will be are
very committed and we understand
oh I forgot to tell you what the
matter is just completely one of
the so when in the admissions
process if you do not get in you
can which is very unique and I
think whether a process
admissions dean and the
admissions committee you can
come and chat with that person
make an appointment and find out
what we are so just letting you
know we try to make sure that we
give everybody the best shot
that they have or what is the
things that can change I as a
dean can you can't be nice to me
to get somebody yet i'm not a
big and it that is decisions
just being clear but we can give
you processes and way to do that
so I hope that answers your
question there's a lot going on
happy to share and we haven't
even put that all in here no
mister chairman thank you so
much for that I will just say
when I was knocking on doors
last year that I did come to a
couple of houses where families
indicated that they're their
loved one had attempted to get
into medical school and didn't
so it'll be nice to have
information to say hey go back
and talk with them and see what
other options might be available
so thank you for that last
question real quick mister
chairman uhm we know we've got a
housing issue um
where are we going to do to make
sure that these expanding
candidates is their student
housing for them would we do we
have this covered I didn't see
any.
In this presentation.
So madam chair in a central line
yep so there so we
i'm sorry to hear so
or all family
sir so thank you yes they're the
university as a whole is working
on creating options for for
student housing and you know and
in one of the things that not
included in this packet but we
did briefly mention was that
there would be you know the
potential for economic
development along the law must
core door in so things that that
folks have been excited to kind
of you know and think about is
that would that ultimately
create opportunities for the
kinds of partnerships that might
might allow for building of
housing options you know in that
area as part of that economic
development you know for both
students and for health care
workers there's no definitive
plans on that but we do believe
that this is the kind of thing
that would kick off those kinds
of conversations in more
meaningful ways you mister
chairman so there's a lot of us
on this committee they're very
interested in housing get a good
group here thank you great thank
you very much center going sauce
and then center with.
Thank you all mister chairman
and thank you twelve twelve for
your presentation on page forty
nine
dollars the proposed that you're
looking at is that blue color
so on that.
On the collar of the blue they
entire part would be building
so mr chair and senator gonzalez
on page forty nine the dark
tealbox
is in fact the school of
medicine building it would
occupy most of that space almost
all of the space between the
corner of or between lomis and
tucker and so again it's a three
hundred and fifty thousand
square for building that does
accupay almost all of that
footprint in that in that teal
box and mr chairman number to
the right side i'm looking at
to repaid
that white part what would that
be parking so mr chair and
sergeant is almost the white
part right there really kind of
represents in this particular
case we're showing that there's
no development on this
particular graphic one of the
other graphics I showed that in
that white part showed that we
could in fact potentially put a
parking structure there and then
south of that which is on the
blue box that you see here is
where the medical office
building would go so the the
plans for what we would put
immediately to the right of the
school the matters and building
right now have not been
finalized but what is
contemplated that would go into
that space would be parking and
clinical delivery space per
dominantly in multi specialty
medical office building and so
that would take up that whole
core door that you see between
the green arrow that shows the
major flow into the hospital and
lomis okay there no that orange
line
had intersects with that green
line.
So next to it
turned up that's also vacant
right so mr chair and sandra
gets almost the immediately to
the right of that orange line
where you see the p in the box
that is our brand new parking
structure that is associated
with the hospital which is the
blue box immediately south to it
so that white box with the p on
it is actually a physical
structure that now exist and has
been in operations for about a
year in its the patient parking
tower for the new hospital so
the what is intended to be shown
on this graphic is just again a
reaffirmation of the flow of
individuals to kind of
demonstrate the importance of
the proximity of the school of
medicine building to a proposed
place where we would put our
medical office building to the
hospital to the old hospital
tower to kind of show how that
is a connection all the way
across that wellness front the
pink boxes that are to the rate
of the orange which is
university those paint boxes
really represent the concepts
that economic development could
accour along that longest core
door.
Are the less part
in the actually comes from a
director charles lisa we're
having a discussion so within
that part is there any thought
of form maybe a private
partnership my car hotel
that could come in and at same
time what serve
to have a place for
patience family or to recite to
be close to
everything so mr chair and in in
sandra gonzalez yes so as part
of the integrated campus plan
with a contemplate the things
that could occur along that long
as corridor i'm and that work is
lead by you know executive vice
president costunities from
earlier today it does
contemplate that that you know
that ideally we would have a
hotel in that location and that
we would have mixed commercial
space you're not a long cordor
of that would potentially have
retail and housing you know
potentially housing you know
with retail combined there in
many kinds of places where this
kind of thing has occurred there
have been other public kind of
partnerships where you know
a public a private partner might
come in and help build the next
building in an air area sent to
a school the matter that would
include you know housing
private research space retail
space I think all of those are
very exciting ideas that could
happen along the lowest quarter
that we don't have definitive
plans on I personally would love
to see a hotel right there on
that corner that could be part
of supporting the school of
medicine and the clinical
delivery system or a hotel in
close proximity which is
something that we would need but
again those are ideas that that
that that are still being
contemplated without a defendant
of plan.
Okay thank you thank you for
your response that the last part
is approximately how much land
are we talking about
road on this area
mr chair and senator gonzalez
also go stewart to answer that
thank you richards i'm mister
chairman
senators always think you for
the question that area
represents a bounce a little
over three acres of land.
How are the thought it was
larger than three and and a
mischairman senator results i'm
sorry i'm referring just to the
teor box where the site of the
school the medicine is i'm not
referring to anything else
further to the east alright very
well thank you mister thank you
thank you very much
and passed right over to senator
with thank you is chairman sorry
about being targeted this
morning.
The questions I have
first to
the legislative finance
staff
is it should it be time that we
need to set up some kind of
funding
through much like we do with
public education for a higher
education
second
we
we find a lot of capital for
higher education through valid
initiatives
to selling barns being paid back
to property tax due should we
think about increasing the
amount of balance that are sold
in I have assumed that would be
a constitutional amendment
and then to
the the
panel I would ask for question.
We're talking about uh
a poor retention rate
of regraduating students from a
medical school a poor retention
rate in state now have been told
in the past that is because we
don't offer enough residencies
for those so what your plan to
increase that before we start
talking about expanding and make
and more more
positioned available for
students
shouldn't we start talking about
how we're going to retain the
doctors we graduate
any comments on that yet so mr
chair and single woods yes we
are we we believe that the
graduate medical education
portion of this is absolutely
essential so we're right now at
about seven hundred and eighty g
me slots and so as we grow our
hospital beds we can't completed
that we would our initial plan
is to grow one residency slide
for each new hospital bed that
we that we build an um now
that's predicated on the idea
that you know you know that our
gme funding mechanisms both at
the state in the federal level
don't change dramatically but we
would add an additional
approximately two hundred and
fifty more residency slight that
would take us to over a thousand
gme spot for our institution
that will make us one of the ten
we believe right now would make
us one of the ten largest gme
programs in the united states so
we have we have tremendous
success with our gm programs we
have bring in about a hundred
and eighty new gm applicants or
new interns are every year and
we get about thirteen thousand
applicants for a hundred and
eighty hundred and eighty spots
so they're they're very
competitive.
And an ideally we would like
there to be as many new mexican
graduates either from us or from
other training programs in new
mexico in you on one of the
things that we could try and
can't complain and I believe
that we will as at are their
ways to create some tracks
directly into residency training
we don't have those right now we
largely rely on the national
residency match system for a
filling those positions and so
we do believe that as we grow
more these spots that are create
more opportunity but we
completely agree that that is an
essential part of growing the
workforce and in I would have
stopped right there mister chair
but I got one more question
where are you going to get these
high quality teachers from to
teach
this
new group a student we're
talking about so what have our
how are you going to attract
compete
probably worldwide
to bring in the highest quality
teachers though we need to make
their successful so mister chair
in central woods
I I would say that that we'd for
recruiting our faculty into the
school of medicine and for all
of our help professional
colleges we compete nationally
for those candidates and
and eight you know as we talked
about earlier our attrition rate
within our school of medicine is
well below the national average
you know I I actually i'm in I
don't want to sound overly
optimistic but I want to sound
optimistic here because you know
we've we will have one of the
best academic medical center
hospitals you know in the
southwest and in the united
states soon we have incredible
health sciences center
infrastructure we if we have the
opportunity to build this
building.
We will have state of the yard
educational space I believe that
we are an incredibly tractive
place to recruit physicians to
come work and I am not is much
worried about us recruiting you
know outstanding faculty members
to come here to be a part of
this and I think another
important piece is work on a
train some of these people we
want to train some of these
individuals who you know who are
going to be from our medical
school and from our residency
program and from our state we
want them to be on our faculty
too because we know that they
are world class providers once
they've gone to this process
with us
and in
apologize mr
one last question that promise
how are you rated in the
southwest today
so are until I can also ask the
informed debt to talk to
breakdebt as we we talked about
for a school of medicine weak we
come in very highly rated on
things such as our primary care
are diversity and are a
commitment to rural medicine we
rank nationally in those places
we as a medical school rank in
the middle of the road in terms
of it in about median
performance and almost all other
measures but I want to explain
that just a little bit
we are committed to creating
these educational opportunities
for new mexico
for all the reasons that we
talked about before that we want
these to be new mexico
applicants who fill our medical
school class and who then go on
to work and our state and go
back to their communities as you
saw we have almost twenty
applicants for every medical
school seat but we give those
states to new mexico students
and n we don't.
Go through and say the top
earning or the top score per
former gets the chair that's not
the way we select who gets into
our medical school and if the
only thing that we wanted to
focus on where the best
performance on board scores we
would be picking those
individuals but we don't believe
that that's what new mexico
needs and we don't believe that
being the top performer on on a
standardized test makes you the
best doctor or makes you the
best doctor for our state so we
want to make sure that that that
are educational programs remain
a credited we want to make sure
that we select qualified
individuals and then from there
we want to make sure that our
performance is exactly kind of
where it is that it's that it's
in that exceptible range for
medical schools is consistent
with our peers because then that
allows us to advance the things
that we care about the most
which is getting the right
people into this health care
professional work force not
necessarily the highest score
takers thank you very much for
your responses thank you mister
thank you very much
okay I think that that wraps up
the questions that we have
I guess with one quick question
from my end in a big things to
connect for the work I think
there's a number of mechanisms
and chair lend
a
that we can utilize
being able to look at sort of
very significant state
dedications of funding on the
front and in the process sort of
the timeline is very helpful
here does that offer a benefits
for the for this effort.
So mr chair thank you very much
and I I do believe that there's
some significant work that we
need to do with you and other
key decision makers about what
is the appropriate ambass
funding mechanism for a project
of this magnitude and we we look
forward to having those
conversations and and again
maybe picking up where we left
off there were some really
incredible ideas that happened
in the last legislative session
from the work done by
representative line today and
senator gonzalez and the other
staff and so thank you very much
for for for for bringing that up
and we look forward to being at
the table for that that's great
thank thank you very much thanks
to the three of you think if
there are gonna solve us
representative lent a
in wall look in in conversation
with director silly
this committee has shown an
appetite for making bigger and
bigger investments when that
confidence level in the product
is there anything what we're
seeing in the process here today
is really emphasising how that
uh is it really a positive
feedback here to a worse
approximate and want to look at
that for this
okay we're gonna transition
briefly as director silly
to give a few remarks as you can
see from the schedule um we're
going to jump right in there
from lunch will go to lunch and
go to the the two or let's focus
on economic development this is
very much focused on federal
funds as we know the
reconciliation bell has passed
there are significant challenges
for new mexico and other states
uh
at the same time sort of the
timeline in the timing from many
of those federal changes in the
federal reductions and cuts that
timeline is really important for
us in talked about that in the
newsletter director silly is
going to talk about it more
here.
Uhm you know as members I know
some members have gotten calls
from royal hospitals who are
very afraid about
what the future holds many
entities from schools to
hospitals and others are gonna
be thinking about sort of making
pre emptive decisions you know
essentially like we're going to
get ahead of that cut that's
coming in two years and we're
going to have to
you know take actions
we're going to talk and we're as
we look at our budget
one of the thing we're going to
be dealing directly with that
and looking to avoid negative
impacts than in mexicans in as
many different ways as possible
particularly using uh if we need
to non-recurring funds so if
that will go to director silly
we're going to be having
additional brief things on this
and time to go into much greater
detail so we just wanted to
squeeze it in now since it's on
everybody's mind doctors
yesterday mr chairman will send
out a links for a team's
briefings for committee members
they will go through this more
in depth but when I testified
before you entouce
the senate was just getting
ready to finalize its work
and we thought we had dodged a
bullet on a bunch of provisions
how the bill came out in the
house we didn't do in the senate
so I would turn your attention
to
slide fourteen and behind tab
see this is important because as
a chairman talked about the
timing of when many of these
things go into effect uh will
push out they are needing to be
some potential budget impact in
this next budget cycle but
you're wanna look over the
horizon the other thing is
there's been a lot of back and
forth in in in the media about
whether these are cuts or
whether spending is continuing
to.
To grow and
kind of interestingly both can
be true so there's going to be
reductions in provider payments
there's going to be reductions
in the number of people enrolled
likely reductions due to an a
number of different things
including the the new work
requirements.
But those are also reductions
against what is called the cbo
baseline so you can see on that
first line where cbo is
projecting medicaid over a ten
year period remember all these
numbers that you're hearing in
the media over a ten year period
not necessarily one year so they
they project a program growing
from six hundred and eighteen
billion and twenty twenty four
to nine hundred and eighty six
billion and then you can see a
lot of the the reductions
primarily due to lower
enrollment really started twenty
thirty and later so about seven
hundred and eighty billion of
the trillion dollars and reduce
spending starts in twenty thirty
so time to first state to you
know make adjustments to how
they work with their medically
clients there could be a
potential windfall coming to the
state for our are rural
providers there is a fifty
billion dollars addition that
the senate made for rural
providers we still have a lot of
questions about how that formula
will work the legislation said
the first fifty percent of it is
equal amongst the states and I
ask erica my staff does that
mean where the same as
california which would be pulled
tremendous for us but I mean a
bit big departure with hell
federal funds were have been
allocated whatever way you slice
it if we look at our kind of a
traditional rule of them is that
mexico gets about one percent of
medicaid spending well that
would mean you know a hundred
million dollars a year for the
next five years which is bigger
than what our supplemental
hospital payment system used to
be so on the one hand worried
about what might be coming over
the horizon on the other hand
potentially potentially we still
don't know how that would be
rolled out some other funding
besides state funding to help
mitigate the effects of that the
next couple of slides go into a
little little more detail I
think the slides.
To really pay attention into
here on page seventeen this one
we may want to turn into
something you can carry any
wallet
just because I think it really
shows like when things go into
effect congress cannot do what
it just did in in fact there's a
thing that congress does every
year it's called the doctor
fixed for medicare where all the
way back in nineteen eighty
nine's budget reconciliation
they said okay this complicated
formula for how medicare rates
for a primary care physicians
needs to be cost cost neutral so
you can raise what one aspect
everybody kind of cut the other
one in each year congress comes
back and and does that so it'll
be interesting to see how if any
of these things play out in the
same way that my bigger worry at
this point is whether a congress
is going to do what's called
another recision package they
just did it for basically
sweeping a frozen accounts for
public television and some four
in but it looks like and that's
what's been going on in this
spring is it the administration
has been scrambling to try to
freeze as much unobligated finds
as they were scrutinizing to
make sure that other funds that
have been allocated or alignment
with their vision as an
administration
but there is a a and provision
in federal law that allows
basically cbo to forward
requested budget card so or
these frozen accounts
and congress only has forty five
days term respind if it's going
to do it or not and so i'm
expecting another package in the
next couple of weeks and that
could have the unintended while
the intended in my view.
It's gonna potentially blow up
how the regular appropriations
process works which require
sixty votes in the senate so why
would the minority go along with
the appropriations package that
can then just be undone with the
simple majority a couple of
months later so that's that's
the political wrangling you're
going to hear the next couple of
weeks that's where you'll see
some of the education funding
has been frozen there are cash
balances for the same programs
that pedi's working with
districts to send that out we
want to spend the old money
first until they sort out what's
going to happen with that there
was some arp of funds that work
for solutions I think originally
some folks that then it was a
well funds but we've confirmed
that there old arp of funds that
they're pulling back from the
pandemic but you'll see this
kind of on a regular basis where
they'll be news media accounts
and that's what's happening as
they're trying to freeze these
accounts and they're going to
put for another recision package
for congress to have to to act
on does that mean the funding
goes away permanently or is that
mean congress is just sleeping
it for one year and they're
going to have to do this again
in the future those are
additional questions will have
to do again to and then mr
chairman I think kind of setting
up your points about what are we
going to do about it starting to
throw out conversations about
like a framework for how to deal
with this on page twenty eight.
And the draft budget landlines
that will go over this week
contemplate treating back
filling federal funds either
using one time or multi year in
treating it just like we're
trying to do for regular general
funds spending increases for new
programs you gotta justify
getting a recurring general fund
increase just the way that you
would justify it is if you are
coming asking the legislature
for that on it back on a back
fill basis but first we're going
to figure out what are back
fillable options and that's what
still what we're we're going
through but we've got a a
potential framework that will be
able to brief you on attack
through and get feedback and
make adjustments as necessary
that mr chairman
great thank you very much
director thank you for that as
folks have questions of I think
we want to stay on schedule so
we'd like to go to the I think
we're gonna go
and then will have over to think
at but there's this is obviously
going to consume really a bunch
of our really the remainder of
our work with with budget
building we want to go through
this today so to give the update
as folks have questions we will
definitely work to address those
with that thanks everybody
thanks for everybody being here
thanks particularly to uh the u
n school of medicine and being a
very robust part of both
presentations this morning we're
gonna be adjourned for now
members will grab lunches and
hop in the transportation and uh
transport yourself it excuse me
we'll transport ourselves okay
generally here it's only a gym
of those and there will be a
reception and dinner yes
