I'm doing good on my surgery, so
post-surgery. So thank you very
much and uh happy to hear all
the reports coming up. Thanks.
Right, Senator Pope. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Senator Harold Po
Junior, District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque. Happy to be here.
All right, Madam Purton, good
morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and everyone, happy to
be here. Mimi Stewart, District
17. It includes the
international district and the
East Gateway area of
Albuquerque.
All right, so we'll go to
represent Baca. Good morning.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, my name is Brian Baca. I
represent House District 8 in
Valencia County just south of
Albuquerque. Thank you, sir.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. John
Blockhouse District 51 in
Alamogordo. Great to be here.
Yeah
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, everybody. I'm Joe
Garrett from Northwest
Albuquerque and Berlingo County,
home of the petroglyph National
Monument with volcanoes, which
you can see from every place in
Albuquerque.
All right, uh, vice chair of
Seoul this morning. Good
morning. I'm Bill Souls, state
senator from Las Cruces, the
beautiful Oregon mountain desert
Peaks National Monument area is
right in my backyard.
Right, and I'm Representative
Andres Romero. I represent House
District 10, which is far South
Valley of Berlio County and
parts of southeast Albuquerque,
um.
Director center, you would
introduce yourself, the staff
here this morning.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, good
morning, everybody. Uh, John
Senna, a staff director for
LESC.
Um, always a pleasure to be here
with you all. We have our staff.
Uh, Alonzo Baco in the back
running our our web.
Just like a halfway policy
analyst.
Merrit Andrews.
Connor Hicks, Annie Armitage,
Daniel Leupinan, Natasha
Davalos, and right in front of
you, Tim Bado. And if I could,
uh, Mr. Chair, normally we don't
do this, but uh obviously you
all know Sonny from LFC. He's
got a new partner in crime in
the education, uh, realm LFC
Rachel Ma, policy analyst at LFC
covering education as well, so I
thought I'd introduce her as
well.
Cool.
Thank you so much. So we'll get
started. Tim, please, when
you're ready. Excellent. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and thank you
members. Good morning. Uh, I am
Tim Bado. I am your senior
policy analyst for uh school
data assessments and
accountability, uh, and our
first item on your agenda today
is a discussion of New Mexico
vistas and recent support
designations coming out of the
newly revised methodologies for
calculating uh vista's ratings.
Um, so I will be referring to a
staff.
Bree, uh, that is behind tab 2
in your binders and spend some
time walking a little bit
through that brief, and then
we'll turn it over to uh Doctor
David Wingham from PED who's a
director of research evaluation
and accountability for the
department.
So, school accountability has a
somewhat tumultuous history in
New Mexico, uh, to be on page
one of your brief, you can see a
discussion of that history, uh,
beginning under that first blue
heading, uh, talking a little
bit about the A through F school
grading system or sort of the
foundation for school
accountability. Uh, the A
through F grading system was a
system where schools were rated
based on their, their primarily
based on their academic
performance. Uh, they were given
a, uh, an A.
BCD or an F uh based on their
performance. Uh, over time,
Stakeholders began to notice
that this uh accountability
system was very heavily based on
proficiency rates for the most
part, uh, and for that reason,
it was actually very correlated
with school poverty. And so in a
lot of ways, uh, labeling a
school with a D or an F, uh, was
just a proxy for measuring
poverty in New Mexico. Uh, and
so that that punitive system um
became very, uh, um.
Uh, it, it was tumultuous and it
became very um difficult for
schools to exit that that rating
because it was so heavily
influenced by their poverty
rate.
Um, in in 2017, the legislature
passed Senate Memorial 145,
which uh asked LSC to convene a
work group, uh, to study the
accountability system and make
recommendations towards a new,
uh, system. And at the top of
page 2, you can see some bullets
on what those recommendations
were. Um, by 2018, the work
group developed four
recommendations, um, first, that
the new system should shift
philosophy from labeling
failure, labeling failure, or
giving schools an F.
you providing support or
providing resources to schools.
Uh, second, that the system
should provide an opportunity
for schools to share their story
with their community. Third,
that the system should rely on
us on a strong assessment system
that supports student learning,
and finally, uh it should expand
the information available to
communities on college and
career and civic readiness, uh,
indicators whether students are
on track to graduation and
school climate and school
culture. So based on those
recommendations in 20
19, the legislature put together
a bill called the School Support
and Accountability Act and got
rid of the A through F school
grading system and statue. Uh,
that school support and
Accountability Act was primarily
designed to provide state level
accountability, but it was also
designed to comport with the
federal requirements of the
every student succeeds Act. Uh,
you can see in the middle of
page 2, the three main
categories that schools can be
identified for support on those
three categories are for
targeted support.
where one subgroup of students
uh performs under a threshold
set by PED that represents the
lowest 5% of schools in the
state.
The comprehensive support
schools are those schools that
need overall support that uh
they're, they're, uh, overall
performances beneath that 5%
threshold.
Or if they have a graduation
rate below 66.6%.
And finally, more rigorous
interventions and the MRI
schools or those schools that
fail to exit CSI status after 3
years in that status.
And so those school support
ratings, according to federal
law, must be based in
substantial part on academic uh
indicators. So those include
student proficiency, student
growth, and, uh, progress of
English learners towards English
language proficiency as well as
graduation rates.
Uh, in addition to academic
indicators, federal law.
Also requires school support
ratings be based on indicators
of school quality and student
success. And our law codifies
that uh those types of measures
must include chronic
absenteeism, college and career
in civic readiness and the
educational climate of the
school.
Uh, the school support and
Accountability Act envisioned a
very deliberate system where
schools would be identified for
support, and then the state
would be able to provide
resources and target those
resources to the schools in the
greatest need, rather than
labeling schools as failures or.
Uh, to implement the law, PED
put together a school dashboard
called New Mexico Vistas, uh,
and that is at NMvistas.org. And
vistas includes all of the
academic data that we just went
through and is working on
including some of the, the other
requirements of the law, uh,
that I mentioned before that are
those indicators of school
quality and student success. Um,
so currently the dashboard does
not include those information,
uh, but it's probably worth
noting that since the law has
passed,
that information has not been
available, so um this iteration
of vistas that is currently live
on NMvistas.org, uh, is actually
the best iteration of Vista that
I've seen, uh, since the law was
passed in 2019. It's very user
friendly, it's very easy to see
the data, uh, at the school or
at the district level, and PED
is working on, on including all
of the requirements of the law,
uh, including those things like
school climate, uh, and educator
qualifications, uh, and there's
a, it's a little bit dubious uh.
The law also requires um the
vistas dashboard to include the
mission, vision and goals of
every school in the state, uh,
and right now it's unclear if
that will be part of vistas,
but, uh, some of that can be
found on the dash dashboard,
which we'll talk about in a
little bit.
Um, on page 3, you can see a
discussion of the as the state
the ESA Consolidated state plan,
uh, particularly the
accountability provisions within
that plan. Um, so back in March
2024, uh, the US Department of
Education published a very
comprehensive 122-page report,
um, very detailed and breaks
down uh several elements of the
accountability system that we're
failing to meet the requirements
of federal law, and based on
that, uh, 122 page report PED
went into a uh very
comprehensive planning process
to update the SS state plan to
uh comport with federal law and
to uh redefine how schools were
measured, uh, underneath, uh, to
be categorized in uh TSI CSI and
MRI.
Um, so I've got a discussion.
Of a little bit of those new
methodologies. I do want a PED
to sort of, um,
Uh, really walk through those in
depth with you, those new
methodologies. Um, but I, I
will, I will walk through some
of that right now. So, uh, the
first thing that you'll notice
at the bottom of page 3 is a
table showing how points are
allocated to schools based on
the several indicators, um, in
the new accountability system.
So you can see uh the first uh
thing in that table is academic
achievement, and that's measured
in both math and reading
proficiency, uh, important to
note, these are not proficiency
rates.
This is something new called the
proficiency index, which I'll
talk to you about in just a
second.
Uh, the second thing there is
academic progress, which is, uh,
measured with student growth and
reading and math.
Uh, the third is EL progress
towards English language
proficiency, um, the fourth is
graduation rates, which is
measured with the 4-year,
5-year, and 6-year cohort
graduation rates.
And then the final element is
school quality and student
success, uh, which PED is
measuring using growth and
graduation rates, science
proficiency points, attendance
and chronic absenteeism and
college and career readiness
metrics, uh, for K2 schools, you
have a possible point total of
45 points, uh, for your
elementary and middle schools,
you you have a possible point
total of 100 points and for high
schools, you can see the point
totals are adjusted a little bit
to account for the fact that
graduation rates are included at
the high school level, um, but
also
also have a maximum score of 100
points.
On page 4, you can see a little
bit of a uh uh discussion of the
new cohort method, the PED will
be using to identify schools,
uh, previously schools could be,
would be identified and exited
every year. Uh, currently, PD
is, is moving towards a cohort
model where schools will be
identified every 3 years, uh,
and then we'll have those
subsequent two years after they
are identified, uh, in which
they are eligible to exit their
support status, and they may
exit their
status by improving the metric
which identified them in the
first place. Uh, so for
instance, if a school was
identified for targeted support
or TSI based on the performance
of its English learners, if the
school is able to improve the
performance of its English
learners over that three-year
period, it would exit TSI
status, uh, and, um, the
resources that that that school
was provided, uh, will still be
provided if that school decides
to opt into those resources, um,
but if the school
I would like to discontinue
whatever it was doing, uh, it
can, it can do so it has exited
status, it has improved the
performance of its EL students.
Uh, in the middle of page 4,
there's a discussion of the new
proficiency level index. Um, so
proficiency rates are very
dichotomous, uh, measure. You
can say a student is proficient
or not proficient. Uh, and
there's a lot of nuance actually
in, in student scale scores, uh,
that suggest whether a student
might be nearing proficiency,
whether a student might be far
exceeding proficiency. Uh, and
so the proficiency index is a
new measure PED developed to
account for that nuance by
providing partial points.
To students who are nearing
proficiency and additional
points to students who are far
above proficiency, and those are
broken down by performance level
of the students. Uh, so you can
see those bullets right there, a
student at PL1 or the lowest
level of, of performance, it's 0
points in the index, a student
at PL2 gets half a point in the
index, a student at PL3 is
considered proficient and will
get 1 point. And then a student
at PL4 would be considered
advanced and would get 1.25
points. And the incentive
there is 4 districts to uh push
students up from there, from the
lowest level of proficiency
towards proficiency. And if
they're at proficiency, uh,
continue growing that student
till they reach a level of uh
advanced.
Uh, the chart at the bottom of
page 4, compares proficiency
rates to proficiency, the new
proficiency index. And so you
can see there's a strong
correlation, which we would
expect, um, but in almost every
case, that proficiency index is
going to be higher than your
proficiency rate because you're
giving partial points to
students who are nearing
proficiency and extra points to
students who are far above
proficiency, uh, and you can see
there's some variation in that
as well. Um, there are some
schools who actually fall below.
that line, and I've got an
example of that on the next
page.
So on page 5, to sort of break
down how that proficiency index
plays out for schools. Uh, let's
say, uh, we take all of the
schools in the state that have a
proficiency rate of 40%. Uh, you
can see that the proficiency
index, uh generally fluctuates
between 0.547 and 0.678 for
those schools. Uh, there's one
outlier at the very bottom, that
has a proficiency index of
0.153. Uh, this school actually
failed to meet the 95%.
% testing requirements. So
there's a requirement that 95%
of your students be tested if a
school fails to meet that
requirement, PED actually
adjusts the calculation and
assumes that all of those
schools that all of the students
that weren't tested are not
proficient. And so that that can
result in a proficiency index,
uh, far below what what was
measured in the students that
were actually tested.
At the bottom of page 5, there's
a discussion of student growth
percentiles. I'll let Doctor
Winham really handle the student
growth percentiles conversation.
Um, the most important thing for
you all to know is the student
growth percentiles is a much
better measure of student growth
than was used in the past, um,
student growth used to be
measured using the, uh, the
change in proficiency rate. So
if the school went from 30%
proficient to 37% proficient. It
had 7% growth. Uh
That's not how you calculate
growth, especially for
individual students, um, the
student growth percentiles
metric is actually a much better
way of isolating individual
students uh growth over the
course of a year. It accounts
for demographic characteristics
of students, uh, so that if a
student, um, uh, a student is
compared to academic peers and
uh to demographic peers to
ensure that uh growth that is
being measured is actually
significant uh versus
is what you would expect uh from
other students in that
demographic peer group.
Uh, finally, at the very bottom
of starting at the very bottom
of page 5 and continuing on page
6 is a discussion of what
happens after a school is
identified. Um, after a school
is identified, PED moves into
full support mode. Uh, so right
now is PED is going through the
motions of uh visiting every
school that was identified in
the state, talking through uh
the metrics that identified them
for support, uh, and this is a
process that's called the uh
school dash plan or sometimes.
called the 90 day plan or the
educational plan for student
success. Um, these school dash
plans are built off of 6
components which are listed on
page at the top of page 6.
really focused on building a
core team at the school level
that's responsible for improving
those metrics, and then they set
a student achievement goals. Um
these goals have to be smart
goals, uh, specific, measurable,
attainable, um, or.
And timely. I don't remember
what our, you know what ours.
Yeah
They're smart goals. Um,
Yeah, specific, yeah. Um,
So the, uh, the third part of
the dash plan is to conduct data
analysis and identify a single
performance challenge, uh,
schools are required to conduct
root cause analysis and to
select focus areas for
improvement based on that root
cause analysis, uh, and then,
uh, school 5, or sorry, part 5
is sort of where the
implementation of the plan
begins, um, your, you're
crafting your outcomes, you are
developing your progress
indicators and your specifying
how you're going to measure.
progress,
uh, and then you are saying what
are the things that you're going
to do to improve progress, and
then 6 is the implementation of
the plan and uh regular progress
monitoring.
The school dash plans are
developed, uh,
Very closely tied to the
indicators that uh identified
schools for targeted or
comprehensive support. So if you
are a targeted support school
for your English learner
population, you will have to
fill out a specific school dash
plan uh that has a specific
requirements for English
learners in that plan. If you're
a comprehensive support school,
uh, you have a different
template that you use, um, that
is specifically for
comprehensive support.
Uh, schools identified for CSI
that that sort of middle level
tier and MRI as well are
eligible for uh Title One
funding for school improvement.
And those funds are designed to
support evidence-based
interventions, which has a
specific definition under Essa,
um, those, uh, interventions
have to meet certain research
criteria to be considered
evidence-based under ESA, uh,
and schools can spend their uh
federal funds to pursue those
interventions.
And uh last year in FY 24, about
$10 million went out to schools
to support school improvement,
uh, in FY 25, this amount
increased to $16 million.
Um, I'll talk a little bit
through what we saw based on
these methodology changes, uh,
that, that changed how schools
were identified in the newest
cohort of schools. So the SY 23
cohort was the beginning, and
this was uh not this previous
school year, but the school year
before that, um, those, that was
the data used to identify
schools for this 3-year cohort
of schools. Uh, so no new
identifications happen this
year. But using SY 24 data,
Schools were able to exit their
support status based on um those
designations. So at the bottom
of page 6, you can see a set of
uh graphs there, or sorry, a set
of bars on this graph that uh
tell you how many schools were
in each support category. The
schools that were in more
rigorous intervention, 10 of
them exited based on improving
their uh the more ostensibly
improving the metrics, although
this might be more due to uh
changes.
and methodology, which we'll
talk about in a moment.
Uh, about half of the
comprehensive school supports as
comprehensive support schools uh
exited their status down from
108 to 43 schools, and a
whopping uh quick math, 94
schools exited their targeted
support status based on 95, 96,
96 schools, uh, exited their
targeted support status. Um,
this, uh, is very anomalous, and
this is almost certainly due to
changes in methodology.
Uh, which we'll talk about
shortly. Um, but all of those
schools you can see moved from
those uh MRI, CSI and TSI levels
to what's called traditional
support or to Spotlight, which
is the top 25% of schools in the
state.
Uh, on page 7, at the very top,
you can see a graph that shows
the reasons schools were
identified in the first place,
and uh how those identifications
persisted from school year 23 to
24. Um, so the schools that were
overall low performance, massive
decrease. Um, what I think is,
is uh very worth mentioning is,
uh, those 4 bars sort of in the
middle,
as economically disadvantaged
students, English learners,
students with disabilities,
Native American students, those
are our marks.
Tina's Yazi subgroups, uh, and
you can see that the schools
that were identified for support
for those subgroups, uh, have
all suddenly exited their
status, uh, and, and that might
be more due to the changes to
the proficiency index and uh
student growth percentiles more
than anything else. Um, you can
see in figure 4, a discussion a
little bit about why that might
be happening. So, uh, we, we
only looked at the CSI schools
here that were uh exited for
overall low performance. So this
is essentially
On figure 3, it's those first
two bars, uh, those, those, uh,
fifty-ish schools that were
identified for low performance,
and we looked at their
proficiency rate, uh, and you
can see in reading and math
about 1/3 of those schools
actually decreased in
proficiency rate, uh, but their
proficiency index went up, and
that allowed those schools to
exit their support status. And
so the change in the methodology
in the middle of the cohort
ended up, uh, resulting in a lot
of school.
exiting status. Uh, primary
concern from LESC staff's
perspective is that those
schools should continue to get
the supports that they need, um,
that the, the, uh, use of a new
methodology shouldn't be
conflated for actual genuine
improvement of those schools and
that those schools will need to
continue to make improvements to
ensure that um that they
continue to serve the needs of
those students. So we end the
brief on some policy
recommendations.
And then I'll turn it over to
Doctor Wingham and some policy
recommendations for you on page
8. 1st, the public education
department should fully meet the
requirements of the school
support and Accountability Act,
including the requirements to
report on chronic absenteeism,
college and career readiness,
school climate per pupil
expenditures and the local
mission, mission vision and
goals of every school. Uh, these
are requirements of the acts
that are currently absent on
vistas, although PED has
indicated they have plans to
improve that, uh, starting
January 2025.
that information will be
available on vistas.
Second PED should maintain
continuity by using consistent
measures of school performance
over time. This is related to
the discussion of uh schools
exiting status because of a
change in methodology, uh, for
the foreseeable future, PED
should probably keep the same
methodology to ensure that the
schools that need support are
identified for support.
Uh, number 3, PD should
carefully study why schools are
exiting their support status,
including determining whether
the changes in the methodology
are prematurely exiting schools
that still need support, uh,
including Dash plan goals
directly on the vista's platform
to better contextualize school
performance, make sure that
schools are following through on
the goals that they're setting
in their dash plans and
improving school performance
over time and then building a
community of practice around
strong interventions that help
schools.
their status. For instance, if
I'm a TSI school, uh, and I used
a platform and it helped me exit
my support status, that resource
should be available for other
schools, other schools should
know that that exists, um, and,
and PED has the opportunity to
uh share what those
interventions are, uh, on
something like vistas or on the
PED website.
Uh, 4th and finally, PD should
also determine the supports that
schools exited this year will
lose, uh, what and whether the
loss of those supports will
impact those schools'
performance in future years. If
those schools were exited
prematurely, and they lose
significant amounts of supports,
uh, does the state need to come
in and provide additional
support to those schools uh to,
to ensure that those students
continue to be served.
Uh, the legislature, you all
should consider whether the
statutory framework created in
the school Support and
Accountability Act still
reflects your goals and your
needs, uh, or it needs to be
adjusted to better reflect your
long-term vision for education
that we talked about at our last
meeting.
Second, uh, consider revising
the SCG based on a stakeholder
input to better target general
operational funding for the the
schools in greatest need of
support, uh, primarily in target
including targeted funding for
economically disadvantaged
students through the family
income index and uh for English
learners through a standalone EL
factor.
And finally, uh consider whether
a formal data governance
structure, I'm, I'm always going
to beat on this drum, uh, can
improve the calculation uh of
school designations and the
efficacy of the vistas
dashboard and whether um you all
have a role in creating a formal
accountability, or sorry, data
governance structure.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, I will
turn it over to Doctor Wingham
for his portion of the
presentation.
Um,
excuse me. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you members of the
committee. My name is David
Winam. I'm the director of
research evaluation and
accountability at the
publication department. Um,
thank you also to Tim, um, for
including so much helpful
information in that
presentation, um.
Particularly helpful maybe as we
go forward is the the table of
um points assigned by each
indicator.
Um
I want to apologize in advance.
This is my first time presenting
before a legislative committee,
and so if I breach protocol or
if there's any technical
fumbling, um.
My apologies.
OK.
Um, so to give you some, some
broader perspective. The average
student succeeds Act requires
state agencies to differentiate
schools and require requires
states and LEAs to post report
cards publicly on an annual
basis, um, in New Mexico, this
responsibility is carried out by
the public education
department's research evaluation
accountability Bureau.
Um, there are, are two large
parts of that. Um, one is the
asset accountability model, the
annual meaningful
differentiation of schools, um,
that generally
Ideally happens in November. Um,
and the purpose of that is to
identify schools in need of
support.
So the other requirement and uh.
in January 15th is the um
district and state report card,
which includes some of those
additional indicators that Tim
alluded to, and I, I want to
just, I want to say that
Insofar as goals and and values
are, are concerned. We're
actually adding that 10 and
vistas, um, by the 15th. Um, so
that, that will be included via
a link to schools websites and
via um a link to the dash plans,
which you mentioned.
Um
We, we would like to have in the
future every school include a
statement of its goals and
values on the Nanvista site
itself, but quite frankly, our
deadline is January 15th and
schools would not forgive us if
we demanded that they provide
that information to us by then.
OK.
Um
So the state's plan for rating
schools was approved by the US
Department of Education on
October 18, 2024, so the CSP
received considerable feedback
from through through notice and
comment, um, also from the
Department of Education itself.
We, we got feedback from
organizations like uh West Ead
um and the National Center for
the Improvement of Education
Assessment, as well as from
stakeholders in the community in
New Mexico and we, we responded
to all of those comments.
Um
So
In the CSP, states are required
to describe their accountability
model, which, which Tim very
helpfully reviewed with you, um,
and which is in that brief.
Once that's done, the
designations, the points, and
all of the.
Constituent elements need to go
up on a public facing um
resource, which in New Mexico's
cases and in Vistas.
So under the new consolidated
state plan, the public education
department has improved its
measurement of proficiency and
academic growth measures in line
with best practices in other
states and in collaboration with
the National Center for the
Improvement of Educational
Assessment.
So, 173 schools have exited
support status in part due to
those changes, um, but also
In part due to support that PD
provides to schools and school
leaders and and real changes and
improvements in schools.
And so the upside is that with a
smaller number of schools
identified for support, the
public education department can
prioritize resources to schools
in the greatest need.
Um
You know, resources in in terms
of funding and and personnel.
They, they are limited and so
being able to target those to
the places that need them the
most is is valuable.
So
Kim already reviewed this a
little bit with you, but we've
made a significant change in the
way that our proficiency
indicator is calculated.
So
As compared to 2022, 23, when we
were simply measuring is a
student proficient or not?
Um, we're now using an index,
which allots points based on the
performance level of each
student. So novice students um
are 0 points in the index
nearing proficient students are
0.5 point on the index,
proficient students are 1 point
on the index, and advanced
students are 1.25 points on the
index.
And while this is not the
Most widely used method um in
across the United States, 15
other states do use a similar
type of index to report
proficiency.
So, just to give you kind of an
example of how this shakes out.
This is a hypothetical. Um, so
school A has 100 students.
And it
Has 50 students in performance
level one, novice, and 50
students in performance level 3
proficient.
That school would receive a 50%
proficiency rate, and it would
receive a 50% on the proficiency
index.
School B also has 100 students.
There are 2 students in
Novice category, 30 students in
the nearing proficiency
category, 30 students in the
proficient category and 20
students in the advanced
category. So this school would
receive a 50% proficiency rate.
But a 70% on the proficiency
index.
And just kind of looking at
these two cases, I think it's
pretty straightforward that
these schools are qualitatively
different. Um, one school is is
performing better. It, it has
some students in advanced and
has a lot more students nearing
proficiency. That's a meaningful
difference and we want that to
be reflected in our
measurements.
So, um, the brief includes a lot
more examples than just this
one, but, but to give you
real cases, um, Santa Fe High
and in mathematics, received a
proficiency rate of 22.3%, but a
proficiency index score of
36.2%.
Cleveland High and in Rio Rancho
for language arts, proficiency
rate of 50.2%, but a proficiency
index rate of 63.7%.
Um, and I, I want to mention
something and from the the brief
on page, I think it's 5.
So that school at the top of the
list, Rio Grande preparatory
Institute that had a proficiency
rate of 40% and a reading
proficiency index of 15.3%. I
just want to clarify.
The proficiencies that we have
always reported are attenuated
by the the number of of students
who um participated.
And so, the number that's being
reported here, the reading
proficiency rate would be lower
once attenuated, and that is
what we reported in Evistas, and
that is what we have reported
going back years.
So, um, that's, that's the
reason for that particular cases
like large difference.
Um, so moving on to growth
calculation.
So
We, we now use a method called
student growth percentiles.
Um, and this is a
an improvement over the 2022-23
method, which was simply change
in proficiency between the
current year and the prior year.
And this is a little bit
complicated, and I'm kind of
going to explain it at the
highest level of of intuitions.
So
Student growth percentiles
measure individual student
growth, and the way they do that
is this.
Each student is grouped with
every other student across the
state who has a similar test
score history.
It doesn't include any other
information. It includes which
students.
Received comparable test scores
in the prior year.
And comfortable test scores 2
years prior.
That's the limit of the data
that we have available going
forward, ultimately, we, we
would include more, um,
But that is the only basis upon
which students are compared, and
they're grouped into a a
comparison group.
So within that group, we look at
which students grew the most
between the previous years and
the current year.
So then every student is ranked
into a percentile, um, first
percentile to 99th percentile.
And
The advantage of this is that
even among very high performing
students.
There's a range of, of different
growth amounts. So a student who
was
You know, advanced in 2022, 23.
Going into 2023, 24 is also
advanced. We can still see how
much they improved relative to
other students who are also
advanced in 2022-23.
Um, and this, this makes it more
meaningful to measure
differences in in schools
effects on students.
Um
So then
That is translated into a score
for school.
Um, by taking the median.
So, literally the middle value
and the distribution of all uh
all different student percentile
ranks. And this is a method
along with taking the mean,
which is recommended by Damian
Bedeenner, who is the um.
Who is the architect of SGPs,
um, this is, this is the method
that many other states use as
well.
Um, and SGPs are in use by 23
states across the US. They are
the most widely used method of
growth calculation with others
like value added modeling um in
use by only 8 states.
OK, so those are changes to
improve, uh, measurement.
There are also some changes to
designations and and
Um, kind of the chronology of
designations, Tim already
helpfully went over this, um.
Schools are identified as ATSI,
CSI, and MRI every 3 years. Most
recently in the 2022, 23 year.
In 2022, 23, schools could exit
from ATSI, CSI, and MRI every 3
years.
And they would exit in the same
years that they were identified.
So there's just this kind of
continuous 3 year cycle in
identification.
In 2023, 24, that changed.
The changes that schools can now
exit every year. So they are
identified every 3 years. They
exit, they have an opportunity
to exit every year.
Um
The other substantial change to
designations is that schools are
no longer identified with the
designation of excellence.
So
The reason why we've removed
this designation, mainly it's
because it's caused confusion.
So the intent is to measure a
designation of excellence in
schools that are in the top 10%
on a specific indicator.
So
We did that in 2021, 22.
In 2022, 23.
We erroneously included it as
the top 10% overall. So in total
asset points.
We then updated that in May.
And
What we found was a lot of
schools reached out to us kind
of in confusion, saying we have
a designation of excellence. Why
are we an ATSI?
Um
Because it's quite plausible
that a school could underperform
for a particular subgroup, but
also could do very well in
attendance overall.
And so that sort of mixed
messages to schools about
whether they were performing
well or or poorly.
OK, so,
This is a different way of, of
displaying the information that
Tim showed to you earlier, um.
It's, it's probably a little bit
hard to see in the the gray
scale in the printouts that you
have, but this bottom row
support status includes every
school that's designated ATSI,
CSI, or MRI.
In 2022, 23, there were 248
schools in support status.
Now, that's, that's 30% of
schools.
And that actually reflects
another issue that occurred in
2021, 22, which is that
NPD identified schools into
support status.
Now as we mentioned earlier,
there's a 3 year cycle, so that
shouldn't have happened two
years in a row. And that was a
finding that the Department of
Education had against the
department. Um,
However, we were not allowed to
exit schools from from status
that were identified in 2021,
2922. So this number 248 schools
reflects.
A larger cohort of identified
schools than there should have.
So in 2023, 924.
There were, there are, um, 73
schools under support status,
um, or about 9%.
To just kind of give you a
perspective of how this looks,
um, compared to other states.
So states vary quite a lot. Um,
some states have as many as 50%
of schools being identified, um,
usually though, that's for, for
TSI status for which they don't
receive funds. Some schools,
some states have a number of
schools identified as low as 6
or 7%. And so this is, this is
not unusual, right? We are
within the distribution of other
states.
So let's talk about some success
stories and how this, um, how
the changes in measurement have
have served us well.
So 215 schools were identified
as spotlight schools in 2023,
24.
So
Wouldn't mention this in very
much detail, but Spotlight
schools are schools that rank in
the top 25% on the overall ass
up points index. So 22 schools
became spotlight schools for the
very first time since the
implementation of this system
and and um New Mexico moved away
from the ADF rating. So schools
have never been identified
before, and this map shows where
in the state they are, and, you
know, kind of happily they are
all across the state, um.
pretty evenly distributed.
And some examples of schools,
um, that were served well by the
change in um
The change in the designation
system and the change in um
Oh, just the change in the
designation system being allowed
to exit.
Our Indian Hills Elementary in
Gallup, um, which left ATSI for
students with disabilities to
become a spotlight school.
So this school is under
consideration for the National
Blue Ribbon schools um group.
Now there is Oho Caliente
Elementary in Mesa Vista. They
left ATSI for Hispanic and
economically disadvantaged
students um to become spotlight.
And to just kind of keep that in
perspective. These aren't low
performing schools that were are
are now being overlooked. These
are high performing schools,
they're in the top 25% of
schools.
However, if we retained them in
designation, they would continue
to have been ATSI all the way
through 2026.
Um, which we don't feel is a
good use of resources or an
accurate representation of of
how these schools are
performing.
Um
More success stories, so 173
schools exited support status in
2023, 24, 98 exited uh ATSI 65
exited CSI and 10 exited MRI,
and you can see in, in that map,
the schools that exited the MRI
designation, which is the most
um most severe designation.
Um, and there somewhat evenly
distributed though, the mostly
in the the north and center of
the state, but
There are fewer schools. And
some examples of this are um
Charlie Y. Brown alternative,
that left MRI.
So
As, as chosen the name Charlie
White Brown alternative is an
alternative school, which means
that they serve students in a
different population than the
rest of the schools in the
state.
Um
Generally, students who are in
credit recovery, who are not on
track to graduate will um move
to an alternative school which
can focus resources and, and
help them get the credits that
they need to graduate. You know,
if not on time.
than actually graduate and not,
you know, fall through the
cracks.
Um
Because the Department of
Education doesn't allow
alternative schools to be
treated differently.
These schools often fall into
designation.
Um, they're identified as as MRI
or CSI and, and they stay in
that designation.
And that's not really accurate
to what they're doing, because
they serve a different
population of students and to
devote additional resources to
have them look like schools that
serve it.
Um, the general student
population.
Would be maybe misleading.
Um
Another example is 21st century
Public Academy, they left ATSI
for students with disabilities.
And
This is a, this is a high
performing school. They have
been.
They have consistently met the
criteria for spotlight.
So they were identified for
students with disabilities back
in 2021-22.
And under the
Kind of um requirements of the
Department of Education, they
would have stayed in that
designation all the way through
2026.
Um, and again, this is a high
performing school. They
currently do not meet the um
The threshold to be an ATSI for
students with disabilities, but
they would have carried that
designation with them through to
2026, which again we feel is a
good reason to have schools have
the capacity to exit. So how is
the public education department
supporting schools?
Um
With a smaller number of schools
identify it for support, PD can
prioritize resources from across
the agency to the schools with
the greatest need. This includes
prioritization for structured
literacy supports and
opportunities, targeted
professional learning to support
school improvement and
transformation to include
teacher teams.
Monitoring and technical
assistance through data-driven
site visits and cross
collaborative supports from
within the public education
department. There's a new
initiative that the public
education department is pursuing
called Tiger Teams, where a
number of pilot schools who who
volunteer will receive
wraparound supports, um, from,
uh, programs across the bureau
to improve and get out of
designation.
OK, so,
What will happen in the future?
The public education department
will implement the consolidated
state plan for the 2nd year in a
row.
Um, you know, ideally we will
not make any substantial changes
for quite some time. Um, except
as genuine issues are
identified, if any, um,
proficiency in academic growth
will continue to be calculated
in the same way. So, so speaking
to to Tim's recommendation, um.
We do not intend to change these
measures. We, we intend to carry
through these measures
consistently so that we aren't
comparing apples to oranges,
we'll be comparing apples to
apples.
Um
Schools will have another
opportunity to exit ATSI, CSI
and MRI in, in the coming school
year.
Or current school year. Um, and
no new schools will be
identified the 2nd year in a
row.
Schools will be identified in
the accountability system for
support in the 2025, 2026 year,
at least using data from that
school year.
So I wanted to just um
Show you a little bit of what an
Evista looks like. So this is um
using um one of the schools as
that was shown as an example
earlier Indian Hills Elementary.
And so you can see the um
The overall asset points, uh,
62.2, the designation of
spotlight is there, um, in the
upper left hand corner a little
bit below the overview.
And we show proficiency for
reading, math and science, and
then further down the page, show
um.
Um
progress, um, attendance rates.
Um, student growth percentiles.
And so, for example, for this
school, you can see that for
student growth percentiles, the
median student is ranked in the
73rd percentile for both reading
and math.
And, and that means that these
students are receiving
essentially more than a year's
worth of growth.
Um
Going into one of these um
indicators in in more detail. So
reading proficiency in this
case.
You can see on the right hand
side, the comparison between the
specific school between the, so
that would be in the yellow
bars.
The district in the orange bars,
and New Mexico as a whole in the
green bars.
So
Just going back briefly, um,
I mentioned that we intend to
include goals and values as part
of the December 15th release and
so those would go in the the
section next to that speedometer
with the 62.
There would be links both to the
school's website and to the dash
plan.
So, thank you all for your time
and I look forward to answering
questions.
Great. Thank you. I'll send it
Souls.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
a couple of questions. I'm not
sure which one of you kind of
want, wants to answer the, one
of the things that's always
concerned me is how many.
Schools do we have in some level
of designation that are in a
fluent communities.
Uh
And
this you can yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator so that that's an
excellent question. Um, I think
we could certainly look at the
FII to try and uh
Try and get you a number there.
I think the uh
Currently, FII is not something
that's included on Vista, so it
would be sort of an original
analysis that we could put
together for you, but right now
I don't have that. Thank you.
uh, you know, when I've asked
this and I've asked it at the
national level, and essentially
it comes back, there aren't any,
uh, that
shows that a whole lot of the
school designations are
typically, uh, we're not
accounting for the affluence or
the, the poverty levels of the
schools very well in the school
rating system. Um, I think the
things that you prepared or
talked about, get at it a little
bit better because we're doing a
little bit more on growth rather
than just on straight
proficiency, but it's still
heavily weighted towards where
are they actually adding
proficient level rather than how
much.
Difference are they making based
on poverty and other indicators
would indicate that they might
be, so more of the regression
model.
Of it. Um
How does this new method, you
know, how does it try to
levelize for poverty and
affluence as far as how the
schools are then raided. It
looks, it appears that it
accounts for it better than just
a straight, um, proficiency
model, but can you talk a little
bit more about that, please?
Uh, certainly, Mr. Chair,
Senator so I'll take a stab at
it and then I'll pass it over to
Doctor Wingham to to finish up,
but what, what you all
envisioned in the school support
and Accountability Act is, is
part of it, um, and, and that's
sort of, it, it's more around
the messaging than anything else
that um schools should not be
labeled as failures because they
have uh high poverty rate, uh,
rather, those schools should be
uh identified for support that
the state needs to provide
additional resources.
To those schools. And I think
that that's something that you
all have adopted, not, not only
with this accountability system
with your approach to the SCG in
recent years and changes to the
at-risk index, understanding
that poverty is, is directly
linked to student performance
and providing resources to help,
um, those students in, in
elevate themselves um to, to
levels of proficiency that you
see elsewhere across the state.
Um, what I will say about the
student growth percentiles
metric, and I think, uh, I think
Doctor Winham for, for clarify
ify ing so the, the only thing
considered in in uh student
growth percentiles is 2 previous
years of assessment results and
that's, that's something that we
looked at in our growth model as
well when we were doing growth
earlier this year. Um, the
poverty piece of that is about
80% accounted for in 2 years of
prior test results. So, uh, in
other words, if you're, if
you're looking at students who
perform, uh, you know, maybe,
uh, 10th percentile.
15th percentile, the 20th
percentile, you're capturing the
effect of poverty by looking at
their previous test scores, um,
but I'll pass it over to Doctor
Winham.
Um, so thank you for that
answer, Tim. Um.
I, I would add that for some of
the um.
For some of the designations. So
for example, for CSI low
performance. Um, the only
schools that are being included
in our Title I schools, drift
schools identified as including
underserved students. So that
that captures part of it, but I,
I, I would also echo what what
Tim says is that um.
This isn't in, in the sense of
the previous A to F system where
we're we're labeling schools as,
as having failed somehow. We're
labeling schools as needing
additional support, and the, the
designations reflect that
additional target support and
improvement, comprehensive
support and improvement. Most
rigorous improvement. And so,
We we might expect somewhat um
for that to be correlated and,
and, and that's the goal. The
goal is to help schools that are
underserved by providing
additional resources so that
they can improve and serve their
students better.
They can do it, and I do very
much appreciate trying to
de-stigmatize the labels
towards, you know, improvement
rather than towards failure. Um,
so often we try and label things
with grades and things of that
sort, um, and this may be a
question more for Greg sitting
behind you, but do the supports
that we have.
For schools that are in need of
improvement are they able to
work on factors outside of
school that are the community
problems that contribute to the
schools.
Um, issues. Does that make sense
what I'm asking is, you know,
how much are, can those supports
be used on fixing
Making the communities healthier
so that the students do better
in school rather than just your
school issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Vice Chair. Uh, the supports
that the agency is providing
around, uh, the school
designations really are more of
the school supports the
traditional supports that
schools can provide, not so much
community supports or even wrap
around support some of the other
wrapround supports that the
agency does provide through
community schools and other
programs.
Thank you, because you, we know
lots of the, the low performance
is due to social determinants of
health, uh, you know, it's gonna
allow for more social workers,
more, um, school nurses, you
know, more of all of those kinds
of things, and that's kind of
back to, um, I did write down,
um, are you able to do community
schools, are they able to get
additional funding for that,
even beyond the basic community
schools funding, which is a
known model for fixing lots of
the, the social determinants of
health within.
school systems, is that one of
the supports that's pushed
through.
For for schools to look at.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr. Vice
Chair, the, the, they are not
necessarily related. The
supports that the party schools
Bureau provides around school
designations really are more
academic-based, uh, whereas
community schools and the other
wrapround sorts of services are,
um, our other programs and um
though we definitely want to
look at how to integrate our
services uh the, the, the
different programs that the
agency provided at this time,
they are, they're not
necessarily linked in that way.
Thank you, uh, one of the things
I regularly tell people is lots
of the problems in schools are
not in schools. You know, it's
the problems of the community,
which was kind of the first
question is how many are in the
affluent communities that have
the services and the supports
and the money and the family
structures and all of those
kinds of things, um.
I appreciate, you know, and I
had written a note here and then
you kind of addressed it, don't
cut the extra funding as soon as
the school gets out of it
because you need that funding
for maybe another year or two so
that you're providing the
structural changes so that it's
sustainable rather than than
temporary. And so I appreciate
that, um.
You see, yeah.
Is there a way of looking at the
schools that are on the cusp of
needing support and getting them
some extra services so they
don't drop down into needing
support. It seems like that's
more preventative work rather
than waiting until somebody's in
serious need that we know that
they're starving that we start
giving them food, yeah, let's
give them food when they're just
hungry. Is there a way of, of
working with the schools on the
edge, and is the or is the
department looking at that?
So I, I can say.
In part, the designation system
apologies, Mr. Chair and Vice
Chair.
Um
In, in part, the, the
designations are are meant to
capture that. So for example,
um.
The TSI designation is an
associated with with funding or
or supervision is meant to be
like a warning sign, um, to
notify schools that they are,
you know, potentially in danger
of falling into ATSI in in the
future and that designation,
unlike these others that are
identified in a 3-year cycle, it
is every year.
So that is, that is one way that
the system informs schools.
Thank you. And yeah, I'm gonna
take this moment to just kind of
plug something I've been working
with Stan on is trying to get
some money to districts that is
unallocated within the normal
system so that the schools that
are in danger of falling off,
that the districts can start
taking actions to prevent that,
where right now the SAG and
everything is so
So tightly funded that there's
very little flexibility for
districts to do anything
different until they fall into
it and then, you know, we, we
start trying to deal with it and
so some unallocated funds,
anybody on finance committee,
the districts would be very
helpful so that they can work on
these issues before they fall
into formal designation
template.
But certainly, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator Souls, I, I, uh, I do
want to mention that some of
that um work should be happening
already, uh, although maybe not
funded in the, in the way that
you're looking to fund it. Um,
I, I didn't mention earlier,
every school regardless of their
designation has to do a dash
plan, has to do a 90 day plan.
So every school should be
looking at the data, their
metrics, and should have an
understanding of the trend and
whether they're in danger of,
of, of uh crossing that
threshold, right? Um, so
another support sort of exists
in the system that data should
be out there. Uh, it's a matter
of, as you said, tying the
resources to support the
activities that you want to see
those schools participate in to
the the plants. Thank you, Mr.
Jared, yeah, let me just close
with New Mexico is not a poor
state. We've got plenty of
money, yet we, and we need to
quit acting like we're poor,
particularly in the education
realm and gives districts the
funding they need so that they
can deal with these issues
before getting formal
designation that comes with kind
of required funding once.
They, they get identified. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um,
I'm gonna start out with just
with the statement regarding
what we're dealing with today.
And that is consistency, right?
The Mississippi miracle was a
work 20 years in progress.
One of my friends owns a very
successful company, says we're
an overnight success 30 years in
the making.
Let's be very clear about the
importance of consistency.
Not just in leadership.
We changed, you know, as far as
secretary beds every
few months.
Superintendents, school leaders.
That's like having a new head
coach every football season like
we're gonna have with UNM as far
as um
And welcome to Kochek if you're
out there. Um, welcome to UNM Go
lobos.
But it's also about assessment,
you know, as far as we talked
about that we have to be able to
measure apples to apples, and
that means that we have to be
able to pick an assessment, make
sure that it's aligned with what
we want to our kids to know and
learn at each grade level
because every kid needs
enrichment. Every kid needs
acceleration. Every kid needs a
remediation and grade level
content.
But if we keep on changing
assessments, and we have no
correlation between our short
cycle assessment and our
summative assessments were
always going to be coming here
before the committee or in
presentations saying that our
data is not aligned or it's hard
to make.
Really good, uh, the decisions
of whether we're making
progress.
Uh, finally, regarding the data,
um,
We talked about the early
childhood and I, and I, I have
to commend my friend um and
colleague, um, Senator Souls.
We're not a poor state.
You know, the oil producer in
the 2nd, we have money and as we
look at early childhood, the,
the question that I have and
I've brought before the
committee before, Mr. Chairman.
It is about our early childhood
programs.
And how many, I, I know that
when we say our our kids are
coming to school 2 years behind.
Uh, they're not kindergarten
ready, that they're all, we
start 2 years behind, we grow
them a year.
But they're always behind 2
years.
Well, we're allow Mr. Chairman,
we're, we're approaching a $10
billion fund in early childhood
trust fund.
And, you know, Mr. Sanchez, my
4th grade teacher, he said, I,
you know, needed to learn math.
Um.
Well, now I have people like
Charles and Daniel and Sonny to
do math, but if we took the 10
billion and divided by all of
our preschoolers are 3 and 4
year olds.
That's a lot of money, and I
hear questions all the time that
there's people, there's some of
our students that don't have
money to buy books or they've
never held a book before they
get to kindergarten.
Well we're looking at probably
about several 100 you know,
several 1000 per kid. Let's get
them books and let's get him
what we can, so that we provide
them that resource.
That's an important, um,
That's an important part of it,
Mr. Chairman and Tim, you talked
about reporting and in the
vistas and validity of
reporting.
Briefly, can you tell me what
are some of the inconsistencies
or what are the the variances.
That
cause us to make that statement
that we may not be accurately
measuring.
In the area of attendance,
graduation, and proficiency.
Uh, certainly, Mr. Chair
Representative Baca. Um, so the,
the, the primary one that we
looked at in this brief in front
of you was that change from the
proficiency rate to the
proficiency index, um, in, in,
in my opinion, that, that uh
tended to inflate school's
performance in uh in a way that
caused a lot of schools to exit
and, and I appreciate uh Doctor
Winham pointing out examples of
schools that that are very
successful schools that that
might have been identified and
that had the opportunity to exit
because they, they
exited their status. Um, our
analysis suggests that for
every, every 2 schools that that
did that, that actually did
improve, and, and we want to
celebrate that improvement.
There's one school that, that
actually fell behind um that was
able to exit status. Um, so
that, that major inconsistency
for me uh indicates that, that
there, there might be a, a, a
set of maybe 33% of the schools
that were exited that still need
targeted support. Um,
In in terms of, of other things
like chronic absenteeism, uh,
and, and, um,
The educator salaries and things
like that that are are
forthcoming, it will be added to
Vista soon. Um, some of that is,
is included in the calculation
of Vista's ratings, uh, some of
that is, is sort of contextual
information that that doesn't
impact the school's rating, but
is provided to stakeholders as
sort of an indicator of like, uh
how much is the school spending
per student, uh, things like
that that are, are, are, um,
required by the law as sort of
contextual indicators or.
Uh, description of a local
context, um, but that may not
impact the school's
accountability rating.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you and let's, since we
talked, you, you briefly talked
about funding, uh, one of the
one of the um.
One of my superintendents in my
in my district said,
That with the, with the ending
of Eser funds and is we're
seeing a potential decrease in
Title One funds, many of these
efforts, there's a gap between
maybe continuing what was
started as COVID and these funds
drying out. Have you guys
through your data, I know you're
not the finance, OK? So they get
mad. I talk about uh program and
finance and and education, you
know, I talked about finance, so
have we seen that? Do we have,
you know, with the targeted
supports,
With funding, are they adequate
to continue what we have told
them to do.
Um, and to continue programs
that may
Um
have started with these other
funds, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Baca, that, that's the million
dollar question. I might
actually look to Sonny if he's
here to answer sort of the
status of, of that, that uh
COVID fiscal cliff that that we
saw from the Esser funds. Um,
what I will say in terms of the
Title I school improvement
funds. Uh, we actually saw an
increase in funds, uh, directed
to schools for, for those Title
One improvements. And at the
same time, a decrease in the
number of schools identified for
improvement. Um, so the
theoretically, if you're asking
if an amount is adequate, um,
that, that's a pretty subjective
discussion that I think you'd
have to have with the individual
school sites. Um, but that
amount should have gone up for
those schools that that remained
in CSI status because the pool
of school improvement funds went
up and the number of schools
identified for improvement went
down.
Um, Sonny, do you have info on
the ER fronts.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, one of the
things that we have had in the
past is funding uh through ESR
and other sources for school
improvement and transformation
to support this work, and uh we
did not have any of that funding
available last or for current
year and we didn't, so we
requested money, the agency
requested funding to support
that work, um, 20 million
actually, we did not receive an
appropriation for that. And so
this year we are, uh, again
asking for an appropriate.
to support that work because the
work of the priority school
schools Bureau to support these
um
Schools and designation, um, it,
it really is important work and
hasn't been funded to the level
that the um that the agency
needs to appropriately provide
supports.
Mr. I just reiterate what Greg
said, but um one thing that we
did learn from the 2019 MRI
schools was that.
As they exited those status.
Um, the federal funding stopped
for those schools, which created
essentially a cliff in the
supports that they are receiving
and uh that is driving part of
the department's request for
additional state appropriations
to cover that difference as far
as the Esser cliff, um,
Schools uh have for those that
PD applied to extend their
funding, uh, about 14 months
after the September 30th
deadline to finish expending
what's left of the Esser.
Uh, funding, but it's generally
for
Say subscriptions or things that
they had already been paying for
that they need to draw down
funding for, it's not
necessarily to pay for more
staff or buy more new things.
It's just spinning down the
fence or some questions
representative.
And think, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that because what
I understand is that in the
difficult, difficulty when we're
looking at is title ones as I
know for sure that schools in my
districts in my are are actually
seeing a decrease in Title One
funding.
Which then must be, um, as far
as covered by operational costs.
So our, our state, Mr. Chairman,
has made great strides, and when
we looked at the last week, so,
we looked at somewhere between
120 and $15,000.
For New Mexico student is what
we're, you know.
On an average.
Um
Less and less of money is
actually reaching it down to the
students.
We're, we're talking about this
as school districts have to
cover gaps in transportation in
these programmatic supports for
programs that they've already
been initiated and we've told
them to do. Um.
And as we have other folks
taking there, where the money
that we're doing, Senator Soles
and others.
I think we're not actually
making and having the people are
pulling off the top of it, so.
I just wish um
Mr. Chairman and others that we
just kind of take a look at that
and see, and from the school
sites, you know, I, I appreciate
the data up here.
But from what I'm getting from
my schools,
is we're not, we're not, they're
not receiving because once we do
reach that a certain designation
or a certain reach, the support
stop and it doesn't need to
stop, right? If we're talking
about continuing the programs
that we need to finish this out
so it doesn't just become an
intervention, it becomes a part
of the culture and how we do
business.
And that we have our folks in
there and our students are
receiving this high level, high
quality supports as they come
into our schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Roy Buck, how are you?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you very much for your reports.
They were very um thorough, and
I appreciate the um changes that
you talked about in terms of
data collection. I'm still
remain very concerned.
And my concern is that
For as long as I've been a
legislator and as long as I've
been in our communities.
Um
We continue to kind of piecemeal
some of our approaches.
And you've heard me say this,
Mr. Chair, and others over and
over again, that in order for us
to be able to deal with and, and
resolve.
Um, what was addressed in the
Yazi Martinez and other lawsuits
because it wasn't just theaim
Martins, but all the precursor
lawsuits, we have to
Step away.
Um, what is our
Nature, and that is being an
institution and being a
bureaucracy.
You have a job, PED and I know
is an institution, and it's
certain patterns and practices
that have to be or that don't
have to be, but have been uh
placed, but sometimes we have to
step away from that. And so my
point is, um, before I ask two
questions, um,
We know for a fact that certain
models have addressed.
What we
are facing that we need to
address in the Yazi Martinez
case.
One of those models that has
been exemplified has been the
community school model.
And the reason the community
school model makes a lot of
sense in New Mexico is we may
not be a poor state in terms of
the amount of revenue set that
we are accumulating, but we have
Large populations, the greater
populations living in poverty.
That's a major problem. What
does that tell you? We're not
poor because we have all this
money, but we have the greater
populations living in poverty.
That means that those greater
populations, Mr. Chair, have
faced inequities, inequalities,
lack of access, lack of
opportunities, and they're not
being treated in the same
fashion.
As the greater the other
populations and so that tells me
that if we continue to have
these populations living in
poverty. We're not getting out
of poverty, then that means that
all the revenue we have, all the
money, all the resources, all
the support services.
are not accomplishing what
should be accomplished. So
thereby if I were evaluating
this, Mr. Chair, I would be
looking at what do we need to
institute within our structures
and our institutions, right, or
greater educational institution,
and then I look at our lower
our, our um school districts as
our particular structures, what
do we need to incorporate
structurally.
In order to
Get us out of that constant
state of poverty.
And that's unfortunate. I get
told by legislators around the
country, well, you, you know,
you all have all this money.
But you're not addressing the
issues.
So
Brings me to my question.
How is Pete, one question, um,
how is PED currently
incorporating um the community
school model, another successful
models within its institutional
approach to delivering um or
administering, I would say, um.
Education in our state, and
again, it's coming from the
approach of the umbrella, the
comprehensive approach, whoever
can answer that, that's
questionable.
I'll come up here. Um, thank
you. um, chairman uh Romero and
um Representative Caballero. I
think that, uh, the two things I
would like to highlight about
community schools. One,
the community school model right
now is um looking truly at how
we can um evaluate the
effectiveness and continue to
sort of monitor and track how it
actually correlates to student
out.
Comes year over year, um, and,
and that is, uh, you're gonna
actually hear more about that in
coming days. So that is one way
to, I would like to address that
on the New Mexico vista's
website, um, part of one of the
enhancements that was made to
the actual website, so this is
just a bonus, is that schools
that are community schools in
particular are identified, um,
so you can look up any school um
in the system.
and you can see if they are um a
community school, and it is
marked with a little um ribbon,
um, to identify that so that we
can monitor those schools that
are maybe in designation, but
that are also using the
community school model. One of
the outreaches that the
community school team has done
really a nice job in the last um
year that I can speak to is that
when we're looking to bring new
schools.
Into the community school model,
we are asking them first, how
what was your last year's school
designation so that we can
support.
With um preference as they are
working through their
application because you cannot
just come in and say, OK,
school, we're gonna come be a
community school now. Um, it
requires some background work
from the school leadership and
the teachers and the um
educational supports as well as
the community to prepare for
that. So we're not mandating it,
but we're certainly encouraging
and prioritizing those schools
that wish to implement it as a
strategy to support them as
they're making um improvements
in their proficiency ratings.
Thank you.
You and the only thing I would
say to that one particular point
is that
The same uh measurements that
we're using.
Um, for example, the designation
uh.
Measurement and others, we have
to look at those and apply those
appropriately to
The the socioeconomic, all the
other indicators in order to be
able to say that we're
measuring, I mean, asking them
to provide those outcomes.
That's, that's all I would say,
and then I'd like to go on to my
last question. Um, so the last
question, and thank you for that
clarification. Um, my last
question is, um, can the, in all
the data that you presented at
the very beginning and um
In your report. Um, is there a
way to extrapolate uh poverty?
Uh, individual poverty.
In, you know, as an indicator,
so that I I understand I don't
want to go back to the labeling
of failures and all of that. I
don't never have it agreed to
that, agreed with that, uh,
however, it's important for us
as legislators to understand
So that particular indicator
because our charge is holistic.
We have to look at many other
policies that feed into that
indicator. So is there a way to
pull that out? Thank you. Uh.
Mr. Chair Representative Royal
Caballero, um, I, 1st, 1st I'll
say, and this is, this is true
of the Martinez Yazi lawsuit as
well. Uh, it, it's that there,
there's a distinction drawn in
the school support and
Accountability Act between uh
inputs or inputs that create um
the, the school environment and
then outputs or outcomes that
happen as a result of that
environment. Um, the school
support and Acountability Act is
specifically designed to measure
the, uh, to measure both, right?
And to provide
Uh, local context, uh, the
inputs of an educational system
and then right next to that have
the outputs of, of what that
those inputs created. Um,
currently standalone poverty is
not something that that is that
is required by law to be
included in vistas, uh, we, we
certainly look at that through
things like the family income
index, and uh if in previous
years when the family income
index was an award program, the
schools with the highest
poverty.
in the state were eligible for
funding from that family income
index bucket. It was, as you, as
you alluded to earlier, sort of
separate from, from this school
accountability system, not, not
fully systemically linked and
sort of
That's kind of why the, the, we
saw some issues with the family
income index earlier this year
when we did our evaluation.
Schools uh didn't have a, a
strong grasp of what they were
receiving the money to do. Um,
and so, uh, a more explicit link
to uh to those types of inputs
in the educational system. um,
is, is something that you could
consider strengthening in, in
the law. Um, I don't know.
Doctor, if you have anything to
add.
Um, so,
I, I could say just generally,
um, while
Historically, we've been.
Reporting the, the minimum of
what is required because that's,
that's what we can do. Um, we
are, are now beginning to report
more indicators and and vistas,
so in this page, I don't know if
it's really visible to you, but
on the, the bottom right,
there's a, there's a tab there
that says non-Sy metrics. And so
for this year, for the first
time, we, we reported something
that is not required, which is,
um,
Early literacy.
And we could certainly include
additional um pieces of
information there. So for
example, the, the family income
index that Tim mentioned, so
that um
Members of the community would
have a fuller understanding of,
of what's going on around at
schools and in districts. Um,
and then I just wanted to
mention uh the
Indicator of community schools
where it is on the page because
it it's.
Not everything is, is
straightforward defined, but
under that gauge, um, the
speedometer that says 62.2 right
beneath it, there's a little
graphic that one says spotlight
because this is a spotlight
school, but if it were a
community school, there would be
a graphic there to indicate
such.
And, um, hover text to explain
what that means to somebody
who's not familiar.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and I appreciate the
comments and questions, um.
Um.
My colleagues.
Um, I just wanted to add, I
think just a request to see if I
heard or to.
Jump on to what um Senator Ses
was asking with regards to um a
map of where the schools with
the designation of ATSI, CSI,
MRI. There's like 73 schools, I
think, right? Currently.
Can we get a map of that?
Um, I'm a visual learner, so
this stuff is really good, but
I'm, I'm a visual so I like to
see something that I can um look
at something similar to the
graphic that you have here in
our handout, so I would request
if we could have that.
Certainly, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lopez, I'll, I'll work with PED
and we'll see what we can do for
you on that. Uh, what I will
say, uh, on the map is, you
know, school grades used to be,
uh, you could go to a map
version of the school grade
site, uh, all of the dots are
like really overlapping.
And it made it pretty difficult
to see, um, but, but I'm, I'm
sure we could do something that
that allows you to zoom in and
see, uh, look at your community
or any community in the state,
uh, just a visual representation
of where those schools are.
No, and I think that would also
help too, as we talk about where
um the different pockets of
poverty are in our state.
And um it's just a visual um for
us to look, uh, I would
appreciate that, Mr. Chair.
Um
The uh
The other
And comment I wanted to ask was
um with on page 18.
And um you have the trends, of
course, and there's again, as I
mentioned, the 73 um difference
of 248 to 73, where the changes
are.
So, as I was writing this, um,
So that the the schools that in
the drop of numbers, they either
went into traditional or
spotlight or do most of them
land up in the traditional
designation. Where did those
Schools move up to.
Um, chair and Senator Lopez,
yes, you are correct. Um, most
of them went into the
traditional designation. Some of
them and, and some of the uh the
schools that we looked at as, as
examples or, or some of them
that that went into the
spotlight designation.
So a handful of them went to the
spotlight.
OK, and thank you, Mr. Chair,
and what I just wanted to do to
ask is in the movement of the
248, the drop to 73 for those
schools that um moved up, which
is really wonderful news to
hear.
Um, do we have a list of those
schools? Is that someplace,
someplace where we can go on pad
or where can we find?
Those schools that moved Mr.
Chair, just for data, for
information.
Uh, chair and Senator Lopez,
could, could you clarify one
more time? I, I may have that in
an appendix slide in this
presentation. What is it
exactly? So in other words, the
schools listed for 22 to 23,
there was 248.
The difference between 248 to
73. I didn't do my math.
Um, but for those schools that
moved.
Who were they? Who are they?
That's what I'm asking for that
list if I didn't explain myself
correctly. Sorry.
I need more coffee.
But if I could see, I'd like to,
I think that would be
interesting to see what who
those schools are.
And where, um, again, where
throughout, um.
Um, Sharon and Senator Lopez,
uh, we, we would happily provide
that. I don't happen to have all
of the, all of these for the um
presentation, but you'll see
there on the.
The right hand side um schools
exiting MRI. So that's a list of
the the names of the schools and
their um ID number. We, we can
absolutely provide additional
information um and
and Mr. Senator Lopez, I'll add
that that, that will be an
element of our data reference
guide that will be published for
you, uh, and pending your
approval, um, will be available
for you during session. I
appreciate it, Mr. Chair, and I
did see the last page, but
that's not the difference
between 248 and 73. So I'm
asking for the complete list
just to see who all the schools
were. I should have clarified
that too.
Um, the other, this, this is
just a comment, Mr. Chair.
Um
I've been working with the task
force on Senate Memorial 5
looking at CYFD.
And
Changes that can be made.
For that particular system that
works with our children, I call
in need of services in many
different ways.
Um
As we've heard testimony
throughout this interim, Mr.
Chair.
A question that I have in my
mind, and a few, I think a few
others on the task force are the
systems that we have in the
state.
We have silos.
And we talk about the efforts
that community schools, and I
think the the value that they
bring into the community is so
valuable and how do we
Work on that and expand it for
services for families.
Um
And you know, it, it's a systems
approach and we've talked to how
do we work with early childhood
which representative Baca
mentioned.
That's the, the first
opportunity I think when we talk
about um with families come
because of
Wanting to better write for our
children.
But early childhood, of course,
is now developing and has
systems of what services they
offer for the families.
Then we have public education
department with what we try and
do within our school districts
to offer services for our
families. And then we have CYFD
who's also trying to work with
families who are in need of
services also.
Um, we talk about behavioral
health, which kind of covers
everything together because
that's an important component of
what our children and their
families need to, I think
increase.
Uh, the ability to learn and all
the other factors that, you
know, affect our our abilities
on that.
So Mister Jarrod is not an
overnight solution, but we
figured we, there has to be a
way how systems can talk to each
other.
And what we have found, Mister
Chair, on this task force, um,
there's a lack of communication.
And a lack of sharing services.
It's your problem, you guys do
your thing.
He does their things, the
schools, there's in some
communities, there may be some
opportunities that are working
wonderful.
But again, I think it's part of
that map of the pockets of
poverty, maybe in different
areas of our state, Mr. Chair,
where
We need work. We have work to
do. Just wanted to add that.
It's just, it's it's not
overwhelming, it's doable.
But um it's not just one
department that has these
issues.
It goes, it cuts across
everybody.
Thank you, just to comment.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
just want a little bit more
information about how you're
dealing with growth.
So I'm looking at page 3 on Tim
Bado's staff brief, um.
I know what you're.
You know,
How you're talking about growth
for individual students by
looking at previous 2 years of
measurements, but how are you
really doing that, you know, so,
so growth is 15 or 15 points in
elementary and middle, in
reading and in math, and 5 in
high school, in reading and in
math.
How do you get that data.
But surely you're not looking at
every individual student and
their previous test scores. Uh,
but if you are, how are you? I
just don't understand how you
translate that into these
points.
Um
Chair and uh
Senator Stewart
We, we indeed do look at every
student, um, so we look at
specifically the MSSA tests, um,
and we look at all of the years
for which we have data available
and we, we calculate for every
single student who who took an
MSSA test, what percentile they
fall in using a method called
quantile regression.
And that's it probably gets a
little bit technical, um, but
that, that is indeed how we
identify those percentiles.
I'm not sure if I've
sufficiently answered your
question, please, please, Mr.
Chairman, what tests are you
referring to?
What test are you referring to?
Are you, you don't have tests
for K1 and 2.
Um, that only starts in 3rd, so
I don't know how you measure,
well, you're not measuring K-12,
K2, you're doing elementary, so
you're only doing 3rd, 4th, 5th,
with 3rd, you've only got a year
with 4.
Uh, you've got 2 years with 5th,
you've got 3. I'm just curious.
I mean, I think rogue.
should be the primary measure of
what we're doing with students,
because no matter where you are,
uh, if we can get uh uh at least
a year, and, and in many cases,
we need more than a year of
growth, then we're doing our
job, and I, I just fail to see
how we're really doing that. It
must be some computer issue,
we've got.
330,000 students in New Mexico.
Uh, you're telling me you're
taking every one of those
students and looking at growth
over the previous years. I just
find that hard to believe.
That's really what's happening.
Um, chair and, and Senator
Stewart, we, we do have plenty
of processing power at PD, um,
to elaborate a little bit on, on
the grades, the, the great range
in the data available. Um,
you're, you're right, and, and
that's a very incisive
observation. So for example, um,
students who were in the 3rd
grade, they simply won't have a
prior year of, of the MSSA test.
And so what we are able to look
at is grades 4 through 8. And
you can see that that's included
for high schools. In fact, most
high schools will not have a
growth measure, um, we include
these points for high schools
because
Um, there are a number of
schools that serve like a
non-traditional range of grades
going through from like K to 12.
Um, so for them, we are able to
calculate growth.
Unfortunately, because
The SAT tests in high school and
11th grade.
Don't have enough prior years
of, of testing to connect them
back to 8th grade because we
have 3 years of tests and 3
years back from 11th grade
doesn't quite reach the 8th. Um.
We were not able to calculate
growth scores for those
students.
That's something that will
change though, but potentially
we will be able to include more
years of information in the
future.
The reason why we don't also
Um, calculate growth for earlier
grades. So, um, 82 is because we
don't have a summitative
assessment that it really makes
sense to compare with MSSA and
SAT, um, we, we do calculate
proficiency using iation, but
that's, that's not an ideal
solution, um, because of it
being an interim assessment, um.
Yeah, I, I'm happy to answer
more follow up questions if if
you have more.
We, we definitely do have the
processing power to calculate
this information for every
student just using statistical
programs.
So Mr. Chairman, do you, do you
actually have that in the
database so you could, you can
show a growth measurement for
each student.
Um, chair and, and Senator
Stewart. Yes, absolutely, we
can, and it is our intent, um,
moving forward with the priority
schools Bureau PED to provide
this information to schools
which are under designation and
then um going forward to provide
it more broadly. We actually
have shared this as part of the
embargo process, um,
Whereby schools check their data
to make sure that we don't have
any inaccuracies. So we, we have
provided individual level data
to schools. Now, it's a little
bit difficult to follow, and
we'll need to do some some
training and and work through
this with them so that they can
make it useful, um.
But, yes, ultimately, we can.
So, Mr. Chairman, I'm almost
finished. Page 15 of your
handout, um, where you're
showing the uh Indian Hills
Elementary Growth, uh, math and
reading at 70.
3rd
73rd.
73
73rd does that mean?
percentile, OK, so.
So how did you come up with
that?
Senator Stewart, that 73rd
percentile is the percentile of
the student in the middle of the
distribution. So there are a lot
of different ways to measure
central tendency in a
distribution of numbers. What we
are doing is, is literally the
middle student, so the student
who is at um, you know, 50% if
you were to put them all on a on
a rank. And so,
That student is the student
whose percentile we show there.
And the reason why we use median
instead of a mean is because it,
it's more accurately captures
like where the largest number of
students fall.
Um
And so this 73rd means that the
median student in this school
falls in the 73rd percentile,
which means that 50% of students
will be above, 50% of students
will be below. And so, Mr.
Chairman, 73rd percentile of the
score on a standardized based
assessment.
Um, chair and uh Senator
Stewart.
So
That is the
Let me make sure I explain this
as accurately as possible,
because it's, it's not a
percentile on an assessment,
it's the percentile that each
student falls compared to their
peers, and each student is going
to have different peers, right?
So if you're a student who has a
history of of high performance,
your peers are students who have
the same history of high
performance. If you're a student
who has a history of middling
performance, your peers are the
students who also have middling
performance. And so each student
is compared
to their peer group.
Having compared each student to
their peer group and and
attained that percentile, then
those are all, um, you know, put
in order and then the middle
student is taken for that
school. OK, but
we just uh
We just have to jump through
hoops to come up with these
assessments. I know we had to do
this because the.
Federal education department had
a lot of questions about our
assessments. We all have a lot
of questions about our
assessments. I just still don't,
I just don't think that we're
we're quite there yet.
Um
You know, but I will say, Mr.
Chairman, I, I had one of the
MRI schools in my district, as
did you, uh, back when we had uh
member secretary Roskowski, uh
tried to uh close the 3 MRI
schools, so the MRI school in my
district is now traditional.
They are so proud of it. You
walk into the little foyer, and
there's this huge banner talking
about how they moved into the
traditional category. Um,
So it, it's a good thing for us
to do this, to be able to have
schools, uh, be proud of this
and to move up even
if it doesn't reflect as much as
we would like it to reflect. Uh,
and what we did for those MRI
schools, 10 more school days and
a longer school day, so they can
do a genius hour. These genius
hours are the most fun thing in
the last 40 minutes of.
school, you can every 6 weeks
they change. You can do chess,
you can do work, you can do
yoga, you can uh learn to do
video, uh, so kids are there for
the whole day. They're they're
longer because of the genius
hour. a million dollars per
school was the cost of 10 more
days and a longer day. So we had
to really fight with the APS to
try to keep that. They haven't
kept it all, but uh.
You know, I, I don't want them
to drop back down into the MRI,
so, uh.
I don't know. That's all. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
yeah.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for bringing us to the world of
data, which is always somebody
wants something other than what
you did. Sorry about that. So I
have a couple of questions. Um,
My first question is,
The dashboard as somebody who
worked from the very beginning
with a dash. The requirement, I
guess what I want to know, I, I
personally think it's very
effective if done well.
So the school I worked at, we
had instructional counsel, a
grade levels, uh, ELL,
everything was represented
robust work to come up with the
90 day plans. I analyzed data.
We looked at, you know, we
actually used it. So I guess
from PED our people actually
using it.
And how much are you able to
monitor it? Cause I know there
were some schools in UPS where
the principal did it.
It wasn't really a team effort.
How, how is PED monitoring that?
And if there's somebody else
that wants to talk.
I, I just think it's really
done, it really does empower
growth.
It, it's very true, uh, Chairman
Romero and Representative
Garrett, I think that you um are
are hitting on something that
we've been feeling for a long
time that there needs to be this
continual monitoring of the 90
day dash plan.
So schools that are in
designation, uh, received 3
different actual in-person
visits per year to review even
outside of what a district might
be doing to review what the dash
plan, um, how the dash plan
rather is informing the
instructional practices and
improvements that are taking
place at this school.
For the TSI traditional in the
spotlights, we are going in to
ensure that they have completed
them, but then and um Doctor
Wingham alluded to it. We have
established, um, a new program,
I guess for lack of better words
called tiger teams. So tiger
teams will be going out to
schools to support um the
reviewing of the 90 day dash
plan with the school team to
ensure that the team is actually
that those
folks who are making and they're
creating the dash plan, um, and,
uh, that, then they will be
coming back to help think
through other technical
assistance that we might need or
be able to provide as well as
any professional development
opportunities that we can
recommend to a district or that
we can provide as a state if
it's looking like it's a really
global issue. So, um, that is an
enhancement that is in process
now, um, to just really link on.
to a 90 day plan, school
improvement plan for schools.
Uh, thanks, Mr. Chairman and
thanks for sharing that because
I'd be, and you don't have to in
now, but I'd be curious to see
if the schools that are making
the most effective growth.
Are they using that plan with
that kind of true fidelity. I'd
be curious to know that, and I
think it would be good.
to put the 90 day plan on the
vista.
Because then you can see, you
can see what's going on. I'm,
I'm comparing Vista to the
strategic analysis and program
research or the SAPR the APS
uses because if I look at Vista
and then I look at the um
SAPR thing.
There's, there's information
that's on one that's not on the
other, and I, I wanna use the
example, um, having worked at
Emerson, I looked at Emerson
Elementary School, which is high
poverty, a school with 37.9
ELLs.
And on the vista, it says
English learning progress, 17.8%
overall English learning
progress. It doesn't mean
anything to me.
But then I look and I find out,
oh there's 359 students, 136 are
English language learners and,
and so I guess I want more
specific. What is 17.8%.
Progress mean? Does that mean
that 17.8, it says that they're
on track to receive, uh,
achieving English proficiency
within 5 years. It's just if
we're going to have data and
percentages.
It has to
It has to be transparent what it
actually means because I'm
sitting there, what the heck
does that mean? We just explain
the mean for some of the test
scores, but as I look at
Emerson, I'm, I'm
It doesn't mean anything. So I
just want to stress.
Our data, our percentages, our
numbers, they have to actually
mean something. So that, that's
a concern I have. Um,
But that's uh
That is all. Thank you, all of
you for your hard.
Work.
And helping schools identify how
they have to grow and helping us
understand. And my final thing
which is task force, sometimes
call some of the LES people to
say, does this make sense to
you? That would be helpful. Just
saying thank you.
Yeah, sorry, I'm opening the
final for my students right now.
So that they can take their
final. OK, I'm ready. Um, so I
think Senator Stewart was
hitting on something, um.
About, well, breaking down what
this all means for us as
legislators, um,
Who have varying degrees of
tenure here. um, and it's very
difficult. I'm wondering how the
department articulates this to
these communities, because I
think there's still the stigma
in these communities of the old
grading system, still a stigma
attached to some of these
rankings. So I'm wondering if
it's taking
How the department is handling.
Working with
Parents, the educators, the
administration of the schools in
articulating how these
determinations are being made.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me
So
We work most closely with the
administration of schools. So,
One of the things that we
provide, um, is, is public
facing documentation of the work
that we do. And so on this page
you can see in addition to the
vistas, there's a technical
guide that explains how each of
the calculations is arrived at.
There is also a kind of general
overview of the accountability
system. Now I know that's, you
know,
Potentially some place that a
lot of folks might not look.
And at least in kind of the
process of releasing an invita
we work closely with the
administration of districts and
schools, um.
Charter directors.
To communicate how everything
was calculated and to review
their data with them. So for
example, we had um several sets
of hour-long trainings with them
over the course of
Of creating the data that
appears on an invistas, and I, I
know that's not reaching out
specifically to parents and
community members, but, but.
It's our, our hope that
providing this additional
documentation, um, and, and
being transparent and, you know,
address that part way.
And, and I guess in
So this is to
The administrators.
Um, this documentation is
provided.
How does this translate into
targeted interventions for the
populations of students that.
share. So
This so first uh a small
clarification. This um
documentation isn't just
provided to administrators,
it's, it's provided to everyone,
it's uh available on the public
education department's website
and anybody who's interested can
go and follow it in greater
detail, it's also linked from a
couple of places inside
Nanvistas. So someone who's
who's interested and inclined to
be curious can can find more
information about that. To the
second part of your question,
how does it connect to the more
targeted
interventions.
Um
The
The entire system of of
designations that identifies
schools as as needing support
for specific groups of students
or for a indicator like
graduation rates, um, that,
that's all explained in, in the
documentation.
How does that connect to more,
more targeted interventions that
the agency is doing, that's,
that's through.
Um, a variety of, of personnel
that are a little bit beyond my
expertise, um, but through, for
example, the priority schools
bureau's work, um.
Um
Composing those dash plans and
and meeting with schools to make
sure that they, they meet them.
I mean, I certainly like to hear
from the PED folks about who's
doing that work, what it looks
like, how this data gets
translated, how it filters down
to our schools and communities.
Yeah, so we, we can be the phone
of friend for this, so Chairman
Romero, the, the work of the
accountability team, um, they
crunched the numbers for us and
so it's assessment
accountability, and then once
the schools are identified, then
it moves over to the priority
schools Bureau. So the priority
schools bureau is using a model,
um, around improving leadership
and teacher leadership for
buildings, which includes data
literacy and includes doing.
a sort of deep dive into.
how to get to the understandings
for what interventions will be
most reliable, plus then um the
priority schools team visits the
schools that are in designation
to be able to monitor and
support the schools with um how
they are working, so, um, for
example, um, a school might be
in designation and they are
needing support around.
Um, maybe English language
learners or students with
special needs. And so helping
the school to design and to
develop professional development
for teachers, that's real time
that they can take back to the
classroom is part of what the
school leader's job should be
and so we work with the school
leadership. We work with the
district, then at that point,
and so then it becomes really,
it's called a differentiated
model of support for each of the
schools. So
it might not be one particular,
um,
Pedagogical shift that is
happening at a school, and then
we do rely heavily on district
leadership to support all of the
work as well, and I hope that
that answers your question, but
if you want to go deeper, uh, I
stand for questions.
Yeah, no, I I appreciate that
and I mean, I think this
conversation for me is is very
pertinent to have right now
because um my son's school just
went through this process. They
had their site visit, uh, it's a
school that my wife works at as
well, and she was on the parent
team, I guess part of the
concern that um my wife has and
I have as a parent of the school
is, I mean, you have to seek out
the information is what I'm
hearing. So if you're
interested,
You get the information and can
seek more information, um, but
my wife is 46 months tried to
reach out to the PED about the
school designation. Um, I think
on Monday she sent you Doctor
Wingham, an email, um, that had
been forwarded for the past 6
months between two different
folks, um, asking about the
school designation a school
that's in um Senator Lopez's
district. Um, and I think is
very pertinent to the
conversation that we're having
here is that um,
It's hard for her to.
Understand.
What the designation means, um,
For her and somebody who, you
know, um, uh, is very well
versed in statistics, um.
And, and trying to advocate on
behalf of her school as a parent
and a staff member there. um,
but like also trying to get down
to what exactly
The school is to do about the
population of students that
they're having issues with or
being um uh are having issues
with. So, um,
I guess it's, it's the
information part, um, but also,
um, the lack of clarity as to
what those supports might be or
are available because my
understanding of this was that
um the folks who had come on
Monday were saying, well, what's
the problem? You're getting more
money.
Um, and it wasn't necessarily,
we offer these supports to
target those students here the
specific issues that we seek to
address whether it's reading,
uh, related, whether it's math
related, um, it was, uh, uh, we
don't understand what your
concern is in the statistics,
you're just getting more money.
Um, and I think that's
very concerning if that's kind
of the message is if
folks are having to seek this
out, um, on their own, and then
the idea of exactly how this, I
mean, I think.
A lot of us here, and I think
it's fair to say that like we're
still having an issue with how
these designations are being
made, um,
And we're, I mean, cumulatively,
we probably have.
50 years at least of cumulative
legislative experience in
education, plus the our work in
our personal lives in education,
trying to figure out what these
systems are, how they're being
translated, and then put into
actual practice on behalf of our
kids, because this is obviously
super, super important, um, and,
and just having that experience
most recently of how this is all
being translated to a TSI.
A school, um, I think is is
leaving me with with a lot of
concerns, um,
Moving forward, so, I mean, any
Direction on how communities can
get better information, how this
can be articulated to um the
stakeholder groups that are put
together and how these
designations are made and
certainly with the view of here
the particular issues and here
are some solutions that the
school can utilize to address
it.
Um, would certainly be the most
helpful, um.
With that, I don't know if you
wish to respond or no, I would
just say I think that that's
really good feedback to hear,
um, and I would just say
Chairman Romero, our plan was
approved in November, and I
think that that is really great
feedback as we're taking it back
out into the community, um, or
as the plan was um approved by
the Department of Education, um,
less than a week before we went
live with all of our data and so
catching up with that um is
something that will take back as
well as ensuring that
there is a very explainable
translated um version of how the
data gets supported. I will
defend the team in comparison to
the value added model that was
used previously, um, this is a
much less complex. I would, I
just remember several years ago
looking at the equation that was
used for the value added model
and um it was super complex.
This is, um, way, uh, more, um,
one, justified.
able it is an authentic model
that the team has worked with
several um national um um brain
trust in order to create the
model that we are using now and
um I do see that we will be
getting better, and it would
also just um like to add one
more comment that because school
designations were not done for a
couple of years. I do think that
um our community fell out of
practice with looking for data
for looking at.
what a school designation might
be for a particular school, etc.
and so we have found that we
have had to go, um, really.
Back in order to sort of start
from scratch, which is kind of
what we're doing, but thank you
for those comments. Yeah, I, I
appreciate that and I was the
house floor sponsor of the Ber
PLV A through F grading system
with um uh Senator Stewart on
doing that. So I'm certainly
happy we've, we've moved from
that model, but I think, like I
had mentioned that the lingering
feelings around what a
designation is along with the um
lack of clarity on exactly how
it's arrived at and what those
solutions are, I think is, is,
is something to overcome. Um, so
I guess it's, it's not an entire
knock on you all, but it's, it's
just something to be cognizant
of in in a lot of the community.
But certainly, thank you all for
being here. We really appreciate
the work.
Mm
Thank you. All right. Um,
Because.
OK, I'm doing a quick count. OK,
so we have a couple business
items to get through while we
make our transition. So we have
our agenda to approve, which
we're not like more than halfway
through with for the first time
before we can make a vote. So
can I have a
all right.
Second, do I have an objection
to the motion to approve the
agenda.
Seeing none.
Yeah, we have an approved
agenda. And then we have the
minutes from our November
meetings so representative Lara
said he would give us the
highlights.
Absolutely.
All right.
I'm taking that as a punt. All
right, do I have an emotion, OK.
Thank you, Representative Lara.
Do you have a second?
Don't be shy. OK. Thank you,
Senator Stewart. Is there any
objection to approving the
November minutesing no.
All right, we got our business
out of the way. Thank you,
folks. All right, Mary.
Please, when you're ready.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mary
Andrews, and I am your senior
policy analyst. I am honored to
be here today with Julie Garcia,
director, civil rights
specialist for Palm's Risk
controlled and insurance to talk
about preventing abuse in
schools.
If you open your binders to tab
3, you will see a staff brief to
provide some context on the
issue, and then you will see
Julie's PowerPoint behind it.
Awareness of the prevalence of
sexual misconduct in public
schools has been growing over
the past 20 years.
Sexual misconduct in
kindergarten through 12th grade
public schools can be in the
form of either student on
student sexual misconduct or
educator, sexual misconduct.
Student on student sexual
misconduct is any form of
unwanted sexual conduct or
behavior between students,
including touching, sexual
comments or advances.
Educators sexual misconduct
includes both contact sexual
abuse, which is a clearly
defined term in federal law, as
well as non-contact sexual
abuse, for example, showing a
student sexually explicit
pictures, acts of exhibitionism,
boundary violations, including
sexual talk, jokes, gestures, or
questions.
New Mexico law defines educator
sexual misconduct under the
broader umbrella of ethical
misconduct and includes both
contact and non-contact sexual
abuse.
A seminal report for the US
Department of Education
estimated 9.6% of students
nationally experience contact or
non-contact educator sexual
misconduct at some point during
their K through 12 education.
The most recent data from the
Federal Office of Civil Rights
shows contact abuse has been
increasing in K-12 schools.
In 2020, there is a 55% increase
in total incidence of sexual
violence, defined as rape or
attempted rape from the 2015,
2016 school year to the 2017,
2018 school year, and a 53%
increase in sexual assault,
defined as sexual misconduct
other than rape or attempted
rape from the 2015, 2016 school
year to the 2017, 2018 school
year.
Importantly, the Office for
Civil Rights notes the increase
in reported allegations may
reflect underreporting in the
2015, 2016 school year, an
actual increase in the 2017,
2018 school year or an increased
sensitivity to this issue in the
2017, 2018.
Researchers note official
reports are believed to
significantly underestimate the
true prevalence of educators
sexual misconduct. For example,
the federal US Department of
Education found only 6% of
students who experience educator
sexual misconduct, formally
reported.
Data from NIPSA indicates child
sexual misconduct has been an
increasing burden on K-12
schools in the state, both in
terms of educators sexual
misconduct and student on
student sexual misconduct.
Child sexual abuse in schools
has far-reaching impacts on
students with research
indicating students who suffer
educator or sexual misconduct
experience more difficulties and
social emotional functioning,
increased alcohol and illicit
drug use, suicide attempts,
coercive sexual experiences and
lower levels of psychological
flourishing.
In addition, increasing NIMSA
employee on student and student
on student claims present a
financial challenge for both the
agency and the state.
This is a vast important study
topic where they worthy of
further study by LESC.
However, today we will focus on
current NIMSA data, the national
policy landscape, and efforts in
other states to prevent child
sexual abuse, current work in
New Mexico to keep students safe
and recommendations for
lawmakers, the public education
department and schools.
Nemsia was created by the
legislature to serve as a
purchasing agency for school
districts and charter schools
and post-secondary educational
institutions.
Today, Nimsia serves member
schools, including all
districts, except Albuquerque
Public Schools to offer employee
benefit and risk coverage.
Preventing sexual misconduct is
part of Nimtia's risk control
and insurance work.
NIMsia provided LSC staff with
data on all open and closed
claims of educators sexual
misconduct and student on
student sexual misconduct from
the last 10 years.
If you turn to page 2, you will
see figure 1, sexual misconduct
claims timeline.
It's important to get a sense of
this timeline before we look at
the data, because numbers are
based on the day of loss. In
other words, when sexual
misconduct occurred and not when
the claim was opened or
reported.
As you will see in figure one,
the date of losses when the
incident occurred.
After that, there is the date
when the claim was open.
NIMsia data shows that sometimes
there is a major gap between
when sexual misconduct occurs
and when a claim is opened after
a claim is opened, the last step
is when a claim is closed, and
if damages are paid out, that is
when this happens.
It's important to note that the
charts we're about to look at on
page 3, the dates represent the
date of loss and not the date of
payout claims can take years to
be settled.
It's also important to know that
open claims include a minimal
dollar amount to hold the claim
as close claim costs are fixed
as they have been paid out open
claims can be held with an
amount as minimal as $1. This
means the charts you are about
to see show claims only as they
stand currently as claims are
closed and settled, dollar
amounts will likely increase,
especially for recent years that
contain open claims.
You turn now to page 3.
You will see 2 charts with NISA
data illustrating employee
sexual misconduct claims and
student on student sexual
misconduct claims from 2013 to
2020. Regarding educators sexual
misconduct, NIMSia data
indicates that from 2013 to the
present, there have been a total
of 129 educators sexual
misconduct claims for a total
cost of over 73.2 million,
including one held for $1 for an
upcoming claim in 2020.
5
Of these educators sexual
misconduct claims, NEM reports
54 claims have been for sexual
assault at a cost of 26.3
million.
39 for sexual penetration at a
cost of 25 million and 36 for
inappropriate conduct at a cost
of 21.9 million.
Of the 129 educators sexual
misconduct claims, 106 are
closed and 23 remain open.
Regarding student on student
sexual misconduct, nysia data
indicates that from 2013 to the
present, there have been a total
of 76 student on student sexual
misconduct claims. He total cost
of 19.8 million.
Similar to educator sexual
misconduct data, the time
between the date of loss and the
of a claim being opened can be
substantial. For example, in one
case opened in 2022 of an
alleged rape, the date of loss
was more than 1790 days prior.
Of the 76 student on student
sexual misconduct claims, 58 are
closed and 18 remain open.
Data from NIMSA illustrates
educators sexual misconduct and
student on student sexual
misconduct.
Impacts LEAs across the state
from large urban districts to
rural school districts and
charter schools. There is no
type of LEA or area of the state
that has not been impacted by
educator or sexual misconduct or
student on student sexual
misconduct.
You're following along in the
brief, beginning on page 4, I
provide an overview of the work
NIMSI does to prevent sexual
misconduct in case 12 schools.
However, since Julie is going to
cover this in depth, I'm going
to skip over this section. I
just want to highlight that
included in Nemsia's work are
some of the requirements
included and laws 2021, chapter
94, House Bill 128, which
created several preventative and
responsive measures to address
ethical and sexual misconduct.
public school employees.
Moving now to page 5.
Let's talk a bit about the
national policy landscape.
State legislatures can play an
important role in setting policy
to eliminate sexual misconduct
in public schools. The primary
levers that state legislatures
have used to prevent child
sexual abuse in K-12 schools
include employee training,
employee screening, and
criminalizing educator sexual
misconduct.
Regarding employee training, New
Mexico law has strong
requirements, stipulating that
all school district personnel,
including volunteers and
contractors must complete
training in the detection and
reporting of child abuse and
neglect, ethical misconduct,
professional responsibilities,
sexual abuse and assault, and
substance abuse.
However, there is still work to
be done to ensure that all
schools are implementing
training as required by law.
Regarding employee screening,
New Mexico law contains most,
but not all, best practices
regarding employee screening.
The law requires applicants for
licensure from PED to undergo a
state and federal criminal
history record check and for
LEAs to develop policies and
procedures to require criminal
history record checks on all
applicants, as well as school
volunteers and contractors who
may have unsupervised contact
with students.
Law also requires
superintendents to report to PED
any known conviction of any
felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude, as well as
ethical misconduct and
allegations of sexual assault or
abuse, which also must be
reported to law enforcement by
any school personnel, including
volunteer. PD must also maintain
a list of the names of people
reported to PED who have been
convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
and have been found to have
committed ethical misconduct and
update this list monthly.
He is also authorized to
suspend, revoke, or refuse to
renew the licenses of any
superintendent who fails in
their lawful duty to report and
any licensed school personnel
who fails to report child abuse,
neglect, or ethical misconduct.
While New Mexico law contains
many best practices. It does not
require schools to collect
written affirmation from
previous employers regarding
discipline for sexual
misconduct, and according to
Nimsia, there is much work that
still needs to be done to ensure
all schools are conducting
reference checks, including
checking applicants' social
media accounts.
New Mexico law does criminalize
educators sexual misconduct. In
New Mexico, state law defines
and outlines sexual exploitation
of children. In addition, law
outlines that licensed or
unlicensed school employees,
contract employees, school
health providers or volunteers
can be charged with a 4th degree
felony for criminal sexual
penetration of a child between
the ages of 13 and 18. The
punishment for this crime is up
to 18 months in prison and a
fine of up
To $5000 and the offender must
register as a sex offender. It's
important to note that while New
Mexico law does contain the best
practice of criminalizing
educators sexual misconduct,
state penalties for
criminalizing educators, sexual
misconduct very widely, ranging
from months to life.
Turning now to page 7. Let's
talk about policy considerations
and recommendations.
The legislature PED and school
districts and charter schools
all have a role to play in
preventing child sexual abuse.
2021, chapter 94, House Bill 1
128 took important steps to
prevent and address sexual
misconduct in K-12 schools, but
it is imperative that PED and
LEA's fully implement these
provisions.
In addition to the full
implementation of laws 2021,
chapter 94. There are additional
steps, lawmakers and
stakeholders could consider to
address child sexual misconduct
in public schools.
The legislature should consider
amending the criminal offender
Employment Act to stipulate that
this act does not apply to PED.
Similar to or as an addendum to
a bill proposed by the early
childhood education and care
department for the upcoming
session, as discussed in a
courts corrections and Justice
Committee meeting in November
2024.
The legislature could consider
amending section 220 A 5 NMSA
1978 to provide concrete
consequences for failure to
report beyond action to to
suspend, revoke or refusal of
licensure.
The legislature could consider
funding a national database on
verified educator misconduct
cases that's accessible to the
public as opposed to Nasdaq,
which is only available to
members again.
The public education department
should consider providing more
support to school districts and
charter schools to provide
professional impartial
investigations of allegations of
sexual misconduct.
PED should ensure reference
checks for all public school
employees, volunteers and
contractors are happening,
including checking social media
accounts.
PED should ensure
superintendents and licensed
school employees who fail to
report child abuse, neglect or
ethical misconduct are held
fully accountable.
School districts and charter
schools should evaluate school
culture to determine if schools
are promoting and protecting
perpetrators and discouraging
the abused child.
If necessary, provide increased
training and accountability
measures to ensure all school
staff understand their duty to
report sexual misconduct,
including utilization of NIMSA
resources like stop it.
Districts and schools should
ensure follow-up and increased
supervision when a red flag is
reported.
Districts and schools should
work with NIMSA to ensure full
compliance with laws 2021,
chapter 94, Julie.
Thank you.
I understand that I'm standing
between you and lunch, so I'll
try to be short and I wanna, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Soriaga.
We're gonna rename HB 128 to
your name.
Um, NIMSA has
Spent a lot of time providing
services to public schools to
reduce the cost of sexual
molestation in public schools,
um, we're providing training to
all staff, not all staff is
participating, but we are
providing the training. We
provide the training online and
we're also providing training in
person.
Um, we have recently done an
online training for the New
Mexico Athletic Association.
To provide to all of their
coaches and volunteer coaches
since we saw an increase in
sexual misconduct on the by
coaches.
Um, we have just started a
healthy relationships training
for students.
Understanding that students are
a clear, um, first reporter, and
that the more information we get
to them from them, the better
off we are and the more we talk
about healthy relationships with
them, the better.
The environment's gonna be. Um,
we also have stop its resources
on our um anonymous reporting
system for parents, and we're
gonna be expanding that, trying
to get that out to more
community members. Um, NIMSA has
paid for and provides an
anonymous reporting system for
all public schools and charter
schools except APS.
And we have um training for
mandatory reporters that we've
just started.
Re-emphasizing.
And then we're also doing audits
on whether or not schools are
actually complying with HB 128.
So on the on the training, we're
using NIMS is using vector
solutions, safe schools training
its consistent consists of.
Oh, you're due to 21 modules um
that cover grooming, off-site
boundaries, um, on-site
boundaries, social media, gift
boundaries, student to student
boundaries, mandatory reporting.
It's, it's pretty healthy. It's
21 modules total. It's about 13
for elementary schools and 13
for middle to high schools, and
it, it can be a heavy lift.
We're asking all we've
Actually, HP 128 requires that
all.
Faculty
Contractors and volunteers do
the training, although not all
people are are participating in
the online training.
Um, we have approximately 12.
Child abuse course is completed.
Which is pretty, pretty dismal
when you think how many
employees and contractors and
volunteers are out there.
However, we also have, we also
have in in-person training, so
we anticipate that some of those
102 completions are done in a
group as opposed to individually
online. Our preference is the
individual online. The in-person
participation is large group or
whole staff where we'll go in
and do training for all of the
administrators, all of the staff
in high school or elementary
school.
The Student healthy
relationships is for students.
That's our newest training. We
started it in July at 24. Since
July, we've had had 4000, almost
45,000 students participate in
that program. Um, parent
resources, which is on stop it
solutions, which talks to
parents about how to recognize
grooming and sexual assault.
We've only had about 210 people
that have actually opened up and
viewed it.
An anonymous reporting, we have
102, 120,000 students who are
actively involved. Um, we have
about 8000 downloads and the
downloads are training programs
and resources available through
Stop it.
Um, we have about 2000 incidents
that have been reported, and
that's everything from I don't
like my teacher to, I'm.
I, I was sexually assaulted in
the bathroom. Um, we have about
4 4500 messenger reports that
are just messages sent to
schools.
Um, we then broke down some of
those incidents into concerning
incidents, emergency
escalations, crisis text line
interventions and get help
resources. The emergency
escalations are suicide.
Um, violence in schools and
we've upgraded to sexual
molestation is also included in
the emergency escalations. That
means the school has to respond
immediately.
It can't be something they wait
24 hours to respond.
In the anonymous reporting, the
stop it data, you can kind of
see some of the incidents, the
cutting and self-harm is 55
thread of a planned attack is 68
and then it goes on down.
sexual assault is 43 complaints
out of that total.
We also conduct HR audits and
trainings for districts, um,
we're looking at board policies.
Do they have board policies that
can
Comply with the statute, um,
staff training, are they
actually doing staff training if
they aren't doing vector
solutions, they aren't doing
in-person training, are they
getting training someplace else
and is that training
Comply with the requirements of
the statute.
Um, we're looking at what are
the questions are they asking on
their applications. Are they
doing reference checks? How many
of those reference checks are
coming back in a timely manner,
um, and is there an obstacle to
getting those reference checks
done.
Um, we're looking at hiring
practices. What are the
questions you ask in an
interview. Um, I had a
superintendent, one of the
questions is, have you ever been
investigated for sexual
misconduct. I had a
superintendent tell me that an
applicant stood up and said, I'm
not gonna answer that and walked
out.
And I'm like
See see you outside the door.
Um,
Duty to report is always an
issue, less than 11% of school
staff will report a fellow staff
member.
And we've got to overcome that
and make that much more
significant and robust, and it
continues to be a problem. Um,
this next slide, and I think the
slide after that's a repeat,
shows you the the school
administrative staff that have
gone through the training,
pre-auit training, where we just
tell them this is what we're
looking for. We need you to go
back and look at your school
policies, look at your employee
handbooks, all of those things,
and then the schools that are
actually undergone audits, which
you're
Pecos Bloomfieldrioso Raton and
espanola, um, those schools are
selected by the staff because of
the high frequency of claims
they've had or issues that we
believe they've had.
Um
So what are we found in the
audits? Reference checks.
It's terrible.
Schools, schools at the
beginning of school and to
representative Bacchus.
Comment about um people moving.
I made a reference to the
superintendent transfer portal
the other day.
Um
Generally, generally they
aren't.
Checking references the way that
we'd like to have references
checked. We have anecdotal
information of parents who have
checked social media and found
out that.
Um, people who passed all the
reference checks that were done,
the employer said they were
fine, but they were then
convicted and accused of sexual
molestation in the states
outside of New Mexico.
Um
One of the recommendations we
have made to the NIMSA board is
that maybe Nimsia ought to start
going out with an RFP to look at
companies that will do those
social media and extensive
background checks for schools,
smaller schools have a lot of
difficulty doing this cause they
get bombarded with needing to
get new teachers on staff and
they just don't have the time to
wait, and we still have a lot of
reluctance from other schools to
pass on information.
Um, inadequate investigations is
always a problem. There's a line
that has to be drawn between
what is acceptable behavior and
what is unacceptable behavior
and has someone crossed the
line. So for example, grooming,
one of the grooming behaviors is
I, I hug kids a lot.
So if I hug kids a lot, that
doesn't necessarily mean I'm a
sexual predator.
It just could mean that I grew
up in New Mexico and I just hug
everybody.
Um
But it's the, the, it's the
trapping kind of hugs. It's the
uncomfortable hugs. It's the eye
of the beholder hugs that are a
problem, and we need to have
someone who can go in and make
that distinction for a
superintendent or help a
superintendent say.
We don't think that crossed the
line into misconduct, but it's
something that you should have a
conversation with the employee
about.
So we're looking for
Who can do that investigation
and who can be that complete.
Unfortunately, at PED if a
complaint of misconduct is
filed, it takes 2 to 3 years
before that's resolved.
Um, inadequate reporting,
failure to report is huge.
And we can't put our finger on
why people are not reporting.
There's, there's a term a
psychological term called
cognitive dissonance, which
could mean that if the
statistics are correct and 1 out
of every 10 kids in the United
States has been sexually abused
at school. They may not want to
adult may not want to report
because they don't want to
relive the trauma.
So rather than report, they
don't report. We hear a lot of,
well, I just didn't think that
was right, but I didn't want to
get anybody in trouble. Well
then you find out that behind
closed doors, they were touching
inappropriately.
Um,
So
It's not the responsibility of
the reporter to do the
investigation and come up with a
conclusion under both the
criminal code and the, the, um,
educator code, it says if you
have a reasonable suspicion, and
I tell people reasonable
suspicion is that butterfly that
you get in your stomach, but
that doesn't help. They still
won't report.
So that's the end of my, my
report and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you. Um,
I'm acting chair right now and I
think I'm the only one on the
list so far. So well we'll,
we'll go ahead and let you start
so I can act more as chair
instead of questioning. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a
question in all the reports that
I've heard in the various
committees. One thing that's not
talked about is educator on
educator, sexual abuse because
In my 28 years of education.
Um, there were many instances
where, for example, a principal
sexually abused or used
inappropriate language and
touching.
with an assistant principal.
And this happens has happened a
lot in this state.
And the, you know, we
Call that 1:28 past the trash,
but sometimes it's an adult on
an adult.
And once it's known, it's
settled out of court and that
person gets passed on to another
school district.
Do we have any figures on that
or is that
Uh
contained in the educator.
At all, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um,
Employee to employees covered
under Title 7 of the Civil
Rights Act.
Which is sexual harassment,
which is governed by the EEOC
and the Human Rights Division.
We occasionally at NIMSia will
get a complaint that's filed on
the basis of that, but usually
those are resolved with one of
those two agencies and not
necessarily brought to the level
of a civil lawsuit, um.
So our records on educator to
educator misconduct or limited
to those tort claims that are
not filed because they're
resolved administratively.
I don't, I, we could probably
get that data from HRD but I've
never asked for it.
Thank you because.
I
It's happening. It has happened.
And
Again, just like the statistics
for
educator on student or student
or student, I think it happens
more than we realize it.
Especially with young educators
or
People finally getting a job.
Anyway, thank you. If, if it's
possible to get figures, I would
like to have them. Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'll,
I'll ask HRD if we can get that
information.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
For many years I was a
principal. I had the statewide
intake number memorized because
regularly I would know of kids
or I suspected. Is this now
requiring people to report
twice, once to the statewide
intake when they suspect abuse
and then another one to Nysia.
Uh, how does that work within
those two separate systems? Is
it a double reporting now, Mr,
Mr. Chair.
Senator souls, there are not two
systems. NEMSA does not require
reporting to us. We are not on
the reporting list. Um, the
reporting list is to the
superintendent and to PED and or
law enforcement.
They're the ones, they're the
ones that get the reports. If
there's an intake list, um, I
presume that's through PED. I
don't know who administers that,
but NIMSI, the only, the
statistics that we have are
statistics where there's
actually been a claim.
Yeah,
so, you know, I, if the question
is still there because I'd have
teachers would come and make a
report to me and I tell them,
well, you still are required to
do the statewide intake, you
have now compelled me to call
the statewide intake. And so I
imagine superintendents when
they get notified, they now know
of an abuse they now have to
call statewide intake according
to the law.
Yeah.
This
It seems complicating things
when everybody who learns of it
now is required by law.
Because if you know of it,
you're, you're required to call
statewide intake and so as it
goes up the chain, the
districts, this compels
superintendents to call
statewide intake for everything
they hear about as well, doesn't
it?
Mr. Chair, Senator, so I don't
know who, who statewide intake
is. It's the CYFD child abuse
hotline number that you're
required if you know or suspect
of abuse. So let, let me
clarify, Mr. Chair, Senator
Soltz, CYFD has been very clear
that they're responsible for
child abuse that happens at
home.
Or buy a parent.
When you get child abuse that
happens at school, they're
totally.
Not in a position to take care
of that, so the school reports
fall to the bottom of the line.
And when we
When the task force was created
to discuss the creation or the
writing of HP 128, CYFD pretty
much said they wanted out of
school business.
So the the statute changed to
say that if you're aware of
child abuse happening at school
by a school employee or a school
volunteer or a school
contractor, you have to report
that to the superintendent who
then reports to PED or law
enforcement because it's a
different kind of channel. It's
a different intake system, and
it's outside of the home, so it
gets kind of complicated when
you talk about in loco parentis,
which gives
School teachers and school
employees, the in place of a
parent status, but because it's
happening at school, CYFD has no
authority to remove a child from
school, nor did they have the
authority to remove an employee
who's acting inappropriately.
So they, Miss Garcia, I don't
think that's how the law is
written. It's like if you
suspect abuse, it doesn't say at
home or at church or if you
suspect abuse, you are required
to call the statewide intake.
I, I don't think it designates
not at school. Mr. Chair and
Senator So, you're correct. The
Children's code says if you're a
parent or guardian.
That you must report to CYFD if
you're aware of abuse. HP 128.
Said if it happens at school,
you have to report to the
superintendent who then has to
report to PED and so Mr. Chair,
I think so it could be one of,
one of my concerns when we were
looking at the law was that dual
process.
And when CYFD
Pretty much said in the task
force that they would take those
school complaints and they fell
to the bottom of the list and
one of the complaints we were
getting from teachers who were
reporting was, I reported to
CYFDI I never heard anything.
And so we wanted to try to fast
track that and take that out of
CYFD and put it where it really
a department.
Mr. Chair and, and Ms. Garcia, I
think that's what the law reads,
which now sets up there's a dual
reporting because the CYFD law
and whether they put it at the
bottom or not, it is still the
law that educators must report
if they suspect, regardless of
where it occurs. Yeah, whether
it's at a gas station, you know,
teachers have an obligation to
report, and this now requires
them also to report to the
superintendent who is still
under obligation under the CYFD
one, you know, and I think that
may be something we
really need to get some
clarification, and if it exempts
in the schools, I think that
sets up a bad precedent for the
CYFD type of things. And yeah,
Mr. Chair, in kind of response.
Oh, does this count as his
public comment time? I don't
know how long he goes.
All right, I'll, I will
definitely give up my public
comment time for this.
Mr. Chairman, it really is a
two-part question.
Any school employee.
Who knows of child abuse.
Regardless, must report that to
your CYFD law enforcement, that
strand. Now let's take that off
the, off the plate.
The issue that Ms. Garcia is
talking about.
When it happens in schools and
now you get to the enforcement,
the investigation, and all of
and the liability work that has
to be done.
It's correct. CYFD takes this as
a low priority, they deal with
all this stuff out of school as
their priority.
And they have relinquished that
to the schools.
As their priority for
investigatory purposes, you
still notify law enforcement.
You still go through
notifications to them for the
liability, you actually
Want to report to the
superintendent so that the
investigatory process that sets
the liability part in action is
processed, and that's what the,
that's what the House bill did,
uh, when we, when we uh brought
the legislation is, is to
tighten that up, because what
you wanted to do is take
effective.
Measures
For employees.
If there are
Main tensions on their part of
their things that rise to the
top for investigation and
intervention, and lay that
clearly on the lapse of the
schools to do and therefore,
that's why the superintendent is
part of that, um, by the way,
under, underreporting.
A teacher as an example who uh
is aware of abuse, isn't
constrained to report to the
superintendent under Part A that
I just talked.
They have to report directly.
Unimpeded by the school
district, but for the Part B
part I talked about them, they
also need to lead, if it's an at
school issue, the superintendent
know and or a designate a lot of
policies have the school
principal as an intermediary for
the superintendent as you move
this thing along in your
process. Does that help?
Mr. Chair and stand, yes, and,
and so I guess you're confirming
it is, if it's at school, it's a
dual process. I'm thinking about
as a principal and a teacher
comes to me to report what they
already were required to report
to the CYFD system, that now
obligates me as the the law is
written to report to the CYFD
system also and advance it to
the superintendent.
Because I now know of abuse, I'm
required by law as it's written.
You still have due I'll call it
Part A and Part B. You still
have to do part A.
So part A's got two people now
are required to report is one is
still CYFD and or law
enforcement. It's an ARB issue
in Part B is the liability issue
for the reporting inside the
education system and the
insurability and those kinds of
things that occur and the, the
issue is to tighten up
internally to assure you have
investigatory efforts underway,
if there is issue or if there
are issues at school, part, in
part because they are.
the lower of priority in CYFD
processing.
And we could debate whether or
not that's right or wrong, Mr.
Chairman, it's been true
through.
Or administrations. So it is Mr.
Jared stand and Ms. Garcia, I'm,
I'm
I don't want to sound like I'm
arguing that we shouldn't be
doing this because absolutely we
should. I worry about people
when multiple people feel
they've got to do multiple uh
reports that you're less likely
to get them to follow through on
those where where a teacher
thinks I called CYFD. I'm good,
you know, and it doesn't get
reported then on up the chain in
education or a principle that is
getting all of these type of
things now having to, to make
the multiple calls also because
things are being
reported, so that's where my
concern is, is making sure that
it's clean and smooth so that
the, the investigations and
things happen as they should
rather than impeding because of
multiple reporting requirements.
And Mr. Chairman, final point,
that's part of the training
aspect and the training, the
trainings that are had a lot
help teachers understand.
They don't get out of bay,
number one, but then there's
this additional, you also then
need to report to the school
system essentially so that it
can also intervene if it
occurred on school campuses, or
by the way, daring or in school
events.
OK. I, I, I'll, I'll drop it at
that. I, Mr. Chair Senator
Souls, I totally agree. I think
that the the dual system is
confusing and, and
Going forward
I would like to see that less
confusing.
Thank you.
Uh, represent boo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you very much for your
report. So I have a question,
um.
Um, on the policy briefs that we
were given,
sorry, going back to page 3.
Aunt Mary, sorry. Um.
Under the educate well.
For both those at the bottom,
educator or sexual misconduct
and then student on student.
Who is settling? Who are these
cases being settled or are they
going to court? Or how is there
a mix of going on it's um
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative,
it's a mix. What you see on the
report are total incurred, so
those are claims that have been
filed with the public
schoolsurance Authority. Some of
those, most of those have been
settled.
Um, once in a while there'll be
a claim that will go to court.
And unfortunately claims to go
to court are difficult, um, the
insurance authority took just
recently took a claim to court
that involved um a Las Cruces
case where it was a an
individual that was hugging
students and touching students
over their clothes.
The jury got very angry and came
back with a $44 million
judgment.
I saw that, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. And uh so who
represents
The state in this
case, I guess insurance
authority has a cadre of
attorneys that are assigned
through the insurance authority.
OK, thank you. And then I have
um
Another question, and it is
Miss Garcia on the on page 9.
Of your
Report. I, I'm interested in
knowing because you have a
recommendation assignment of
state agency to assist schools
with proper investigation. Have
there been conversations with
the Attorney General's office,
uh, relevant to this, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, we have conversations with
the Attorney General's office.
I, I don't want to say they were
fruitful, they weren't
necessarily set with immediate
actions, but we
Yeah, I don't think that the
conversations came to a
conclusion, but we did open the
door and ask for their
assistance and if there was any
process that they could put into
place to assist with the
investigations.
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you. I, the
reason I'm asking is because I
was trying to recall the
Attorney General's um
This last session, I'm not quite
sure when it, I think it was
this last session, um.
proposal to create a children's
cabinet, I think it was referred
to it just came to me. Um, and I
think the pro the reason was
part of the reason was because
of what we're finding within the
school systems, but also because
of our findings relevant to CYFD
and then other types of
Um
Problems that we have with
violations. So I would, I would
say that that's a strong
recommendation to continue on
the path of to the Attorney
General because I the attorney
general.
does have the civil rights, the
civil, the criminal, however,
having a children's cabinet.
Focused
Specifically on these types of
cases, but also would be very
proactive in terms of um
preventative measures given the
fact that
They deal with these kinds of
issues quite a bit, and it would
centralize the investigative uh
aspect of it too. I, so I would
strongly recommend going that
route. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for all you do on
this, on this um work, you know,
it's hard, um, so my biggest
concern I think is still
training. How are we gonna? What
are you looking, what are you
doing to get more people train,
I mean, I know it's hard and as
a teacher, you know those
modules we have to watch. There
are so many, um,
We used to do different things
to get them all done in groups,
but so that I know that's
difficult, but anything you're
doing specifically to help get
more people trained or. So, so
one Mr. Chair Representative,
one of the considerations being
process through the Nimsia board
is to include training as one of
the criteria for
Designating premiums.
If you don't participate in
training or if the majority of
our staff is not participating
in trainings, then that's a
criteria to raise your premium,
which is about the only hammer
that NIMSia has, but we've,
we've gone out with a lot of
advertisements. We've, we're
talking about the NMAA video was
one that was produced by my
staff. We're talking about maybe
reproducing some of the vector
solution stuff to make it
shorter.
Although all of the information
is critical and it's hard to
condense it down to something
that's less timely. Right.
OK, I, because I, I do believe
that Mr. Chairman, that that's
critical part because even as a
teacher, you you you you.
When I was teaching, it was
tough to decide when to report
if it was really something or,
or not because the kids, but
whenever the kids came to me, I
would report, but when I thought
maybe that wasn't uh it's, it's
hard to to to figure it out, but
you're right, I guess it's a
butterfly thing and and you just
report, um, but thank you for
all you're doing. I appreciate
it. Thank you.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Just a couple of questions, um,
when it comes to this reporting
and the issue we're talking to,
um, how does hazing coming in,
come into play in this
reporting, and I asked this
question because I'm going to
bring back some anti-hazing
legislation looking at K through
12, and so I have to assume that
when it's in sexual in nature,
maybe would fall under this
reporting and the
accountability.
Uh, mister, Mr. Chair, Senator
Pope, that's correct. Any, any
hazing that's sexual in nature,
that results in a tort claim is
reported to Nimsia. Um, we will
get anecdote anecdotal
information about hazing that is
not reported to NEMSA and we
will go ahead and investigate
that as well. Um, we are
actually developing a training
program for coaching staff on
hazing and recognizing hazing.
Hazing is
It is like sexual molestation, I
think it's like solving world
hunger because hazing has been
going on forever, and not all
hazing is
Um, has long-term impact on the
student.
So it's it, we go, we get back
to where do we draw that line?
And, and right now, any issues
of hazing involving group people
were, were actually going in and
doing some training on.
that school.
Great. That's great to hear. Um,
I guess the next question is,
besides that and that training,
um, are your thoughts on
Legislation going forward as far
as hazing and I know you're
dealing more with K through 12,
but
Do you think it would be, I
guess the right path to kind of
set up this same type of
reporting system, um, for hazing
in K through 12, um, I guess in
addition, maybe even fine tuning
it a little bit with some of the
concerns that Senator Souls is
talking about, and I say that
because I, I think I wanna.
Talk and work with you folks and
kind of see what we can uh work
on together to get the right
type of system to protect our
students and really hold those
in leadership positions
accountable for reporting and
their actions. Mr. Chair,
Senator Pope, um, any
legislation and, and I, I can be
pretty radical, but I think we
need to be looking at what's the
penalty that goes with that
legislation.
Um, for, for example, we had an
individual who was a coach who
was texting a student and he was
sending nude pictures to that
student.
That case was handled by the FBI
so it was prosecuted under
federal court if it had been
prosecuted in state court, it
would have been a $5000 fine and
maybe a year in prison in
federal court, it was 22 years.
So I think we need to look at
What are our penalties and our,
do our penalties fit the crime?
The failure to report in New
Mexico is again $5000 and maybe
a year.
But what's the long term effect
on a child that you failed to
report.
And so I think that when we look
at that kind of legislation, we
need to be looking at is there a
punishment or is there some kind
of penalty for
Failing to comply with the law.
Thank you. I, I appreciate the
comments and I'll be reaching
out to you as well just to get
some more feedback. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
All right, other questions,
folks?
All right. Thank you all so much
for presenting. We really
appreciate it. Thank you.
All right, folks, so that takes
us to our lunch break. We're a
little bit behind, but we're
going to get started at 1:15,
right? So we have an hour and 15
minutes.
Exactly.
