We can't get everybody in their
seats and back in again it's
wonderful being chair of
education because people know we
start with the bell they get
back on time so that's good
apologize for running a little
bit late today we had a very
good robust bearing daughter
conversation on map and math
education about teaching which
we know is an area new mexico
does not do well and I think
we're on the right track for
doing the right things to make
it better
but thank you all for being here
and this presentation progress
report on pre kinder quality and
educational outcomes so with lfc
and secretary thank you for
being here and and welcome and
understand your part technical
expert if they're questions but
also have lots of deep
information about all of this
subject as well so thank you for
coming here being doing so
good afternoon mister chair
members of the committee
thinking so much for inviting us
up to present to you this
afternoon.
My name is doctor saraving and
i'm a program evaluator with the
legislative finance committee
today my colleague doctor ryan
told me and I will be presenting
the committee with a progress
update on new mexico state
funded pre kindergarten program
which you will find under tap
nine in your binders and it
looks like this
before we begin I would like to
think secretary elizabeth
against and the staff of the
early childhood education and
care department for their close
collaboration on this report as
well as the pre kindergarten
teachers administrators and
coaches across the state who
welcomed us into their
classrooms and contributed their
insights to this evaluation
mr chair and members of the
committee if you will turn with
me now to page one of the report
you'll find the executive
summary which outlines our major
findings
this update builds on a twenty
twenty lfc program evaluation
which found that participation
in new mexico prepaywas
associated with improved student
outcomes across the numerous
social and academic measures.
Since that time the state has
significantly expanded access to
precade for three and four year
olds and has established a new
state agency to oversee early
childhood programming we are
very pleased to share with you
today the findings from this
progress report which reaffirm
that pre k continues to deliver
strong academic results
especially for low income
students these results have
bounced back from an events her
past what eleven c observed
pretty pandemic not only have
statewide beginning of your kind
of garden test scores recovered
but pre kind of garden students
are getting a bigger boost than
ever additionally thanks and
part to ecitis investment and a
validated system for measuring
classroom quality we can now
show for the first time that
high quality new mexico pre
kindergarten classrooms produce
better outcomes for their
students
using the same tools we can also
understand how quality differs
across pre kind of garden
classrooms and how to
potentially address these
variations the twenty twenty
evaluation found disparities in
the standards and outcomes of
pre kindergarten programs across
the state and recommended that
ecocd work to standardized
program requirements quality
measurements and data tracking
to date ec has made significant
progress in implementing many of
the twenty twenty reports
recommendations however some
challenges remain especially
when it comes to collecting and
using the student data
equalizing teacher
qualifications and encouraging
the use of evidence based
teaching tools and helping
providers leverage their current
precade funding
mr chair members of the
committee if you'll turn with me
now to page three.
The background section of this
report provides a brief history
of new mexico's pre k program
launched in two thousand five
new mexico's pre kindergarten
program was designed to improve
kind of garden readiness and
close achievement gaps by
expanding access to high quality
early education since that time
of c has repeatedly found that
pretty kind of gardened works
and leads to improve student
outcomes in twenty twenty lfc
found that participation in pre
kindergarten was associated with
higher scores on early literacy
and math assessments better
attendance and a higher
likelihood of exiting special
education services
see also used launch to know
analysis to show that pre kind
of garden students eventually
graduated high school at higher
rates compared to
demographically similar peers
turning to page for i'm looking
at church too
you can see that this progress
report extends those findings
showing that the statistically
significant bump in graduation
rates persist across the three
most recent cohorts of call of
high school graduates the twenty
twenty report also found that
for every dollar the state
invested in pre kind of burden
it's not about six dollars in
returns these findings are
consistent with a large body of
national research literature
showing that the long lasting
benefits of pre kind of garden
for at risk students and a
consistent return on investment
looking for their down page for
you'll read that the expansion
of new mexico's pre kindergarten
program brings quality and
access challenges even as the
program continues to serve
behind population
when the program first launched
it targeted students with one or
more risk factors today even
though the most recent cohort
of.
Pre kindergarteners was more
than ten times larger than the
first one two decades ago new
mexico pre case still serves a
population more likely to be low
income and english learner's
compared to state why
demographic averages.
On page six
you'll see in charts three and
four that under easy cd programs
have largely shifted from half
day to fall day and that slots
for three year olds have also
grown rapidly rapid pre
kind of garden expansion has
benefits but also risks recent
studies from other states
suggests that it can be
difficult to maintain quality
and to ensure that at risk
populations continue to have
access to the highest quality
classrooms.
If you'll turn out of page seven
figure one shows the right of
programs that can apply for a
new mexico precade brand in our
state you'll find pre kind of
graduate and classrooms
operating at your local public
school with nonprofit providers
such as daycares and child care
centers and recently within
federally funded headstruck
programs although easy has
consistent standards for all
classrooms that's also means
that everything from a single
classroom operated out of the
license tone to the ninety nine
pre k classrooms across the
albuquerque public school
district use the same new mexico
pre k label
as shown on page eight in chart
five.
Most students across this plan
are enrolled either with small
or with very large providers
on page nine you'll read that
program funding has nearly
quintupled since fiscal year
twenty eighteen that investment
previously focused on program
expansion but new mexico pre k
is now at a key point in its
growth if you'll turn to page
ten.
Chokes seven shows enrollment
versus slots since fiscal year
nineteen
even a few years ago some of new
mexico's pre k programs were
wildly over enrolled in that was
recent school year enrollment
has settled out around eighty
five percent suggesting that the
program state wide anyway is
reaching scale as supply catches
up with demand
having made major strides and
state white access easter city
is now turning to the related
problems of quality and outcomes
tracking considered in this
report
now hand things after my
colleague doctor told me to
introduce the reports to major
fine first two major findings
thanks
mister chairman members of the
committee a few please fall with
me on page eleven I will discuss
our first finding that new
mexico continues to approve
reading proficiency in
kindergarten especially for low
income students so as we've
discussed one of the primary
goals of precase to build a
strong academic foundation for
students before entering the kid
off system.
As your call when you mexico pre
key launched nearly twenty years
ago the primary goal was to
serve children from low income
families to help close
educational opportunity gaps in
is my colleague doctor roving
highlighted with graduation
outcomes precare new mexico
continues to deliver on that
promise
so how has pre k interstate than
doing
if you will turn with me over to
page twelve I would like to
direct your attention to charts
eight and nine.
Even in the immediate aftermath
of the pin damage on average all
pre kindergarten students were
still more likely to score
profession on isolation
assessments at the beginning of
kindergarten compared to their
peers which was particularly
true among lower income students
who qualify for free reduced
priced meals
given that we were particularly
concerned with the pandemics
effect on young children and
this was the period of rapid
expansion for pre can the state
we find the pre key is still
effectively boosting reading
levels in kindergarten
ecd and the legislature of work
together to ensure that precake
and scale in the sustainable way
which is helping me mexico avoid
some of the pitfalls experienced
by other states in the move
toward universal pre k access
so it seems to provide students
with the bomb at the beginning
of kindergarten but what is pre
kids long term effect.
Over on page thirteen as chart
ten highlights these academic
benefits are not just short term
gains
utilizing watching to know that
analysis we found that the pre
key bump last longer for low
income students compared to
their non f
indicating that the program is
helping the students more for
whom it was originally designed
in other words our analysis
clearly showed that in him
pretty k is not only preparing
students for kindergarten but
actively hoping to close it she
guess for those most at risk of
falling behind.
If you will now turn with me to
page fourteen.
Now for the purposes of this
valuation we have student scores
on beginning of your ice station
measure the effects of pre cake
or kindergarten readiness.
The state however continues to
operate without a set of
statewide bench parts for
kindergarten readiness which
makes it difficult to monitor
progress comprehensively despite
recommendations from the l c's
twenty twenty pre k evaluation
report
over on page fifteen figures
three and figure for highlights
the various other assessments
implemented in pre k in
kindergarten that seeks a metro
various domains
in pre kindergarten most of
these assessments the ecd has
selected emphasized social
emotional growth and executive
function
however starting in kindergarten
assessments like ice station are
set up to measure activity
proficiency
as a result pre k teachers may
be aiming for one set of calls
while kindergarten teachers are
measured something entirely
different
is the cd has resolved invested
in a new tool called the early
development instrument which is
the national revalidated
observation or tool that
contains a variety of academic
and social outcomes if
implemented correctly in
connected to other data sets
this new tool should provide
targeted insights to inform
future policy makers and target
quality improvement
however if you will turn with me
to page seventeen.
We find that this assessments
are silent in the seats
fragmented out infrastructure
continues to hamper
accountability
the state's ability to leverage
and learn from tools like the
early development instrument
depends on its ability to die
just analyze and use the status
however near neither the early
childhood integrated data system
were easier nor the new mexico
larger to not data system is
fully operational it cannot
track individual students as
they progress from precate
instituted twelve
given the comprehensive sweet of
support programs that ec now
offers we need to understand
which progress delivered the
biggest impact in in what
combination the soft progress on
these data systems limits the
state's ability to ensure that
we are investing in what works.
If you will please turn with me
the page twenty
I will discuss our next finding
that instructional quality
matters the differences across
providers persist
in this chapter I will discuss
why quality of instruction and
precame matters and highlight
two ways to improve that quality
primarily teacher training and
evidence based instructional
tools
so in the lsc last evaluated
mexicans precase system and
early twenty twenty the early
childhood education care
department had only just been
established until that point
school based pre kindergarten
programs were administered by
the public education department
and community based programs
were overseen by the children
youth and families department
that pay for tated structured
leds a major differences and
program expectations data
tracking in access to supports
since its creation cd has made
significant progress and
standardizing practices in a
lining expectations across
provider types however
meaningful differences storm
mean particularly in the quality
of instruction in the resources
available to support and monitor
that quality
over on page twenty one
one of the most important
findings from this chapters that
quality matters students and
programs with higher
destructional quality tend to
score better on kindergarten
assessments
this finding reinforces what
national research has long shown
that investigating quality
precade proves student outcomes.
So how can we measure pre k
quality
beginning in swite twenty three
is the city began using the
class or the classroom
assessment scoring system across
both school and community based
providers which was one of our
recommendations from our twenty
twenty evaluation class isn't
naturally valid tool that as
this is three key domains of
classroom quality emotional
support classroom organization
and instructional support it
provides not only a high level
view of classroom teacher
student interactions but
specific actionable data they
can guide coaching professional
development in continuous
improvement
so how is the quality pre k
classrooms in new mexico well if
you will turn with me to page
twenty two and look at chart
fifteen
you will see that on average
only miscook classrooms are
doing quite well in score high
on measures of emotional support
and classroom organization.
However school beast predicate
classrooms tends to on average
scored nearly a four point
higher uninstructional support
the other community provider
counterparts
so why does quality of
instruction in the pre k
classroom matter.
Over the page twenty three chart
sixteen shows that instructional
support appears to be linked to
student outcomes for the first
time of the evaluation staff for
able to match the class quality
scores with kindergarten ice
station data and found that
higher instructional support
scores are associated with
better kind regarded meeting
outcomes
this type of analysis shows the
power of linking data sets and
underscores the importance of
the logic in all data systems I
discussed previously
a few tours made a page twenty
four and looked at chart
nineteen
it's worth the emphasising that
the overall gap and student
proficiency between school based
in community based providers is
not insurance.
You can see that the students
from school based pre key
programs were on the average
more likely to square
professionalized station in
kindergarten while significant
there is a lot of overlap
between community and school
based providers in fact we
actually calculated what it
would take it would take just a
hundred and fifty more students
from the community based
providers scoring
professionalized station so
close that gap entirely with
targeted quality improvements
that goal is well within reach
so again what can we do to help
prove improve pre cape quality
over on page twenty five i'll
discuss one of the first ways
one can improve quality
instructions in the plaster
which is teacher preparation.
As you can see in chart twenty
as the status rapidly expanded
its pre tender garden work force
differences a teacher
credentials have wided the share
of school based precautions with
the bachelors the greatest
remains stable while the share
among community providers has
declined.
Prior ls research has shown on
the boucheles level preparation
is correlated with improves
student outcomes
if you will turn with me now the
page twenty six chart twenty
three highlights or analysis
which finds the teachers with
the bay are more likely to
remain in the community provider
work force for four or more
years.
Offering additional return on
the state's investment in
professional development
instability.
On the bottom of h twenty six
this makes the state's new
professional development
information system especially
important
once fully implemented the
system all allow the states and
monitor the impact of
investments like wage
supplements and scholarship
programs and evaluate whether
instead of such as pay party are
cheaping their intended results
over and page twenty seven
the second way one can approve
quality of instruction in pre k
as the use of evidence based on.
School base pre key programs are
more likely to use correct on
the line subject specific tools
that had demonstrated impact on
student outcomes so for example
many school based prekey
programs used to digital
learning tools however despite
strong evidence that these tools
can improve early literacy they
are not currently used by any
community providers
if you will turn up me over to
page thirty
curriculum and coach and also go
hand in hand is easy is taking
important steps to expand job
embedded coaching and provide
sports supports about school and
community based providers
however the structure in
instance of the of coaching
models are still different
significant across settings as
you can see in table three.
More over data tracking systems
for coaching remains
inconsistent limiting the
state's ability to align
practices between public school
and community providers
thank you and I will now start
the presentation back over to
doctor roaving for next finding
thank you after all that mr
chair members of the committee
if you'll turn with me now to
page thirty one of the report
the final major finding is
technical assistance and
improved coordination can help
providers leverage funding
new mexico has made a
generational investment early
childhood and the state
currently ranks number for in
the nation for per child pre
kindergarten spending the
national institute for early
education research or near found
and twenty twenty four the new
mexico means nine out of ten of
the institutes quality
benchmarks near estimated that
new mexico would need to spend
only twenty five million dollars
to meet that final benchmark as
you can observe on page thirty
two in church when he seven.
Beginning and fi twenty six new
mexico prekay will receive fifty
five million dollars each year
and recurring revenue from the
early childhood education and
care fund or more than twice
that estimate from near of what
it would take to close that last
bench mark.
The challenge now is not raising
new revenue but ensuring that
existing funds are directed for
the strategies that will yield
the greatest return for
students.
On page thirty three you'll read
that easy ecb should encourage
best practices to help community
providers navigate a complex
financial landscape what
budgeting looks like and how new
mexico pre k grants are spent
can look quite different between
provider types public schools
tend to have a little bit more
financial room stemming from
larger economies of scale and
the ability to blend new mexico
pre k grants with operational
dollars curriculum funding and
other district resources and as
discussed further down on page
thirty three not all new mexico
school based precake grants are
being fully spent
for community providers by
contrast financial liability
depends on hitting the right
student and romance and staffing
ratios and keeping operating
costs with an narrow band as
shown in the cost model on page
thirty five even with adequate
per child for funding finding
the right balance can prove a
technical challenge especially
for smaller providers
one third of community providers
operate only a single precape
classroom and an additional
third operate only to precake
classrooms these smaller
providers may struggle with
administrative overhead
facilities maintenance and grant
management and ways that larger
programs do not
do address these challenges this
report points to several
strategies starting on a page
thirty four and continuing on
page thirty six
one is encouraging greater
consolidation of grants and the
formation of shared services
alliances which can help small
providers will administrative
functions share staff and
improve purchasing power
easy easy they could also
support expanded access to back
office supports and technical
assistance for smaller grand
teens.
The report also points to the
importance of a more uniform
attendance tracking system and
clarified enrollment policies to
ensure that funding is going to
the programs where children show
up regularly and stay in roll
continuing now on page thirty
six you'll see and table eight
the new mexico ranks tenth in
the nation for average per kind
of garden teacher pay an
achievement worth celebrating
focusing on teacher pay and
retention has been a
recommendation of past lfc
reports and eccd has created
several programs designed to
encourage teachers to pursue
higher degrees and to remain
with community providers ecc has
also implemented new and direct
cost policies that place
reasonable limits on
administrative overhead but
continued attention to this
issue will be important to
ensure that funding remains
focused on the classroom
starting halfway down page
thirty seven the report also
addresses facilities which
remain a persistent challenge
for many community providers
while there are multiple funding
sources available including the
recent expansion of the child
care facility revolving loan
fund small business loans and
local government grants many
providers lack the technical
capacity to access these funds a
stateway facilities needs
assessment combined with
targeted technical assistance
would go a long way to helping
providers improve their physical
environments
turning to page forty one a
final strategy this report
suggests is the creation of a
universal application portal a
centralised system would make it
easier for families to navigate
available options reduce the
administrative burden for
providers and ensure that
children are placed in open
seats as officially as possible
such a portal would also support
better data collection.
Funding forecasting and equity
in program access statewide
mister chair members of the
committee this report contained
several key recommendations
which can be found at the end of
each chapter we've gone through
but we will highlight a few here
in closing
first the legislature should
consider creating a statutory
definition of kindergarten
reading based on a future
recommendation for me cc
accordingly and in support of
their recommendation is the easy
should after refreshing the
states early learning guidelines
recommend a definition of
kindergarten ready nest to the
legislature for consideration
the report also recommends that
the agency developed and present
a plan to legislature for the
use of increase of the use of
the increased early childhood
trust fund distribution with a
focus on quality improvements by
december of twenty twenty five
and then re iterating a
recommendation from our twenty
twenty evaluation this report
recommends that ec use frequent
occurred and and kindergarten
assessments to track students
short and long term success and
inform quality improvement and
support for educators and
administrators and finally the
report recommends the agency
used the new professional
development information system
to track the effort of the
department's various
professional development
initiatives starting and the
upcoming school year thank you
so much for your attention and I
don't know secretary if you want
to say anything now stand for
questions I was gonna ask
secretary of you'd like to
respond to any of those things
incredible amount of information
i'm trying to keep up yeah I
give you the right questions we
are two pages further on
because yeah i've got lots of
questions about it but secretary
did you want to make any
comments at this point thank you
mister chair and just want to
thanks error and ryan.
For the partnership and
recognize the staff here dc cd
shot around kids are deputy
division director of early care
education and nutrition and she
spent a lot of time with sarah
and ryan along with her team and
calling lambert is our direct
deputy director of policy
research and quality and sarah
torrell is our policy specialist
and maria sprayers are policy
coordinate yourself everybody
working together we feel that
this is a you know a very
excellent report in terms of
showing the progress and agreed
strides that the state has made
in investing in prescore what I
brought for you as a snapshot of
where we are for fy twenty six
were over twenty thousand
children and over twelve hundred
classrooms starting this school
year of new mexico pre k and so
you can see in the departments
in our analysis program schools
had starts tribal communities
and community based programs are
able to apply for different
types of pre k can I have date
what we call basic full day
which is at least ten ten eighty
hours of instruction a year and
then full day plus which is
thirteen eighty hours of
construction all of our models
require ninety hours of parent
and family engagement and a meg
stage classroom would figure
about fifty percent of the
children or four year olds and
fifty percent or three year olds
and so that gives you a snapshot
of and what we funded based on
the applications we received in
the scoring and then the next
show to just kind of how that
breaks down across our mix
delivery system I think the
report that saran ryan highlight
it is you know we are it it is a
big eco system we have family
child care school based on
community based tribal and head
start programs all part of the
new mexico pre k they all
operate under the same high
quality standards and are
expected to meet.
Meet those standards so I think
that issues then pointed out in
terms of data I want to share a
couple things we're doing and
and hope that the the committee
here has some good questions for
us as well and to push on this
but it's pretty incredible that
we are going to be over twelve
hundred m classrooms
implementing and thinking about
the kind of technical assistance
the coaching on the next slide
you'll see the pre k
professional development
requirements these are for all
educators regardless of setting
and hopefully you'll see this is
the structured literacy that new
mexico pre k has been
implementing since two thousand
seventeen and we did it as a
pilot was some federal money
when we took over as the the one
new mexico pre k as ec ecd we
made sure that these resources
were made available to community
based settings and you can see
that they have a lot of
expectations in terms of
professional development it is
our expectation that all
teachers have a bachelor's
degree in early childhood and
the assistant teacher has an
associates degree we work with
the community based programs to
they can ask for a waiver they
have to come back every year and
make that case we do have some
hardship waivers and will look
at that but that is an
expectation and that will get us
that tenth of mark on the near
quality standards and as the the
report points out that that's
very important to improving
student outcomes as well
the next step slide five I
showed you this I think this
might be a little updated data
from what they shared in terms
of the number of observations we
made on the classroom assessment
scoring system for last school
year and this graph I think is
so promising because you can see
that we're really getting close
in both community based in
school based are having very
high scores
across instructional support and
those are things that we know
them that children in those
classrooms are learning that
they're getting the kind of
exposure and experiences that
they need.
And very great scores around
emotional support and classroom
organization so and we know that
this continues to be a focus and
with our expansion to our child
care and looking at our chalker
system we're going to be
introducing this measure also
into our childcare settings so
that we're going to understand
better the experiences that
children are getting in fence
toddlers and preschoolers
we are working to the point that
they made about our assessment
and the data that were
collecting and we are working on
right now and requests for a
proposal that will be issued
this summer to replace the early
childhood observation to all
that because it's not a so great
tool that it's it's administered
in one way i'm in the school
based settings we use it at a
different way way in the
community based settings but we
don't have a real clear I look
into how children are doing what
are those assessments look like
and being able to provide to you
as policy make person to us as
administrators and the precade
administrators really good
reports about where young
children are and where how we
can adjust that so this will be
a line to early learning
guidelines and we will have a
review committee made up of
community and school based pre k
up administrators so that
they're going to help advise or
see when they can't set on the
rfp committee we want to make
sure that and we already have
some people who have said yes I
want to be part of that cause
it's a big deal and you don't
know that better than I do
implementing assessments in
school settings and what that
looks like in the number of
people that need to be involved
in that decision we have our
rolling out executive function
as you all sitting at this table
probably no executive function
is the most important and that
one one of the most important
things is human beings that we
can develop it really helps us
control our thoughts are actions
in our emotions and the period
of three to five is when
executive function really begins
to be developed it has to be
talked it has to be understood
and what we're excited about is
this.
Some assessment out of scotland
minnesota executive function
scale the only one about it and
they the kids play virtually
five minutes max maybe every
couple months or so and a
teacher can measure where a
child's executive function is
and with that is that supports
around strategies and ways that
they can increase that
classroom that are coaches are
consultants that work with the
precake teachers are getting
trained on this understanding
how to
implement it and how to help
support that growth we did a
pilot this last year with the
next slide will show you
nineteen programs fifty
classrooms six hundred and
seventeen children and we start
that are average executive
functions score of our
preschoolers was about the forty
fifth percent and the national
average is about fiftieth cell
it buried anywhere from thirty
three percent up to fifty seven
percent so it was a wide range
but this is going to give us
some very good data to
actionable data that the teacher
can mention strategies and
implement things in the
classroom with their students
and so the final slide just
gives you our plan for rollout
we're already well under way
next week we have our precade
administrator meetings that over
three hundred and sixty people
coming to albert kirki and about
a hundred and seventy to last
christmas had to kick off the
new school year and talk about
this assessment what's coming
the new the request for proposal
for the full developmental
assessment I won't roll out
until the next school year
because we need a lot of time to
do the professional development
and but again we we agree that
linking the investments that
we've made in the predate to
five system to wear children are
when they inter kindergarten is
critical
we have been working on the
early childhood integrated data
system we inherited that from
the public education department
as a new agency in september we
should be able to show about the
twenty three and twenty four ice
station data.
Where children as it looks those
who had early intervention those
who had child care and so we
agree and we're working towards
that to make sure that the data
is there so
what we're we feel really good
about the supports that the
department is providing and we
agree that more technical
assistance listening to the
provider communities getting in
there to you know how do I help
a one classroom family child
care compared to aps with ninety
nine classrooms you know those
are the conversations that were
having and look forward to your
questions in your advice and
also get thinking on how we can
continue to make new mexico pre
k the premier freaking program
in the country at the results
are fantastic and we know that
we can continue to do better
thank you.
Thank you anything the health
ready for question
I think will stand for questions
to chair thank you and
personally complement that
secretary against
the early childhood education
care department again you were
at the education commission to
the states is last time in new
mexico regularly gets lots of
account sport the funding that
we're putting in the programs
were putting in lots of people
asked how do you do that some of
it is we are very fortunate we
have money in other states down
and that's been very helpful
thank you to the southeast new
mexico center
and northwest a little bit but
you met skills and it's
positioned and that we have but
substantial funding into those
programs that allows us to do
lots of good things questions
from the committee sure block
representative representative
block
you were referring to my
colleague in the senate we have
the same so thank you mister
chairman thank you guys so just
a few questions i'm just trying
to wrap my my head around some
of the data so i'm gonna start
on I think graphs
eight and nine I believe
actually start on grab chart too
which is on it for
and i'm just looking at.
The data when it comes to
significance I see that we have
a little star looking at the
significant differences and then
we see seventy five point seven
percent versus seventy seven
point eight percent and i'm just
wondering what is lfc looking at
when it turn comes to
significant what what is that
threatened we're looking at is
at one percent half a percent
chair representative of block I
mean the stature we use up
you've less than point of five
does the entire.
A methodologies in the appendix
in the back I think it believe
its dependents be
but really it's also taking into
these other accounts in it's
because of those small
percentages that we also took
into account these other factors
like.
Um whether the student was
designated for l
it's kind of the community
school level on classroom
factors and so I was also taking
to these accounts as well
another thing to consider with
these statistical analysis is
that you have large number so
it's easier to achieve
significance with
slight percentage differences.
Thank you mister chair thank you
for that that answered doctor
tomorrow so then i'm also
wondering because our our
program is fairly new in the
state a few years and so i'm
wondering where we get
information pertaining to
graduation rates and
significance of pre k at the
beginning to graduation at the
end since state has fairly new
data on that so we're getting
that mister chairman
chair represented a block we
requested the graduation dot
directly from public education
department
and then staff we basically just
linked it together from prekay
enrollment from those years
since they just matched national
and to clarify mister chair
representative black
you know even though the early
education
incurred department is new
we do have data from back from
two thousand five when the
program initially started so now
that first coherent and we
didn't look at college
graduations that I better next
progress report well
has just hypothetically
graduated from college and so
that's what we're looking at
when we're pulling those numbers
that is very first coherent so
that was not the focus of the
report we really wanted to
highlight the progress that has
been made under easy cd but
thank you for calling that to
our attention
thank you mister I was just
wondering where the idea comes
from but i'm glad that we've
been carrying it for all these
years twenty years worth the
data it's good so okay mister
chair and
presenter so I i'm also just
trying to figure out I know
we're talking about significance
we're saying half a percentage
is significant and I guess my
problem with all education not
just early touted is our
proficiency rates even when we
are showing apples to apples is
like hat it's like fifty percent
so i'm just wondering do we have
any strategies that ecect that
we're going to be employing to
ensure that.
We help get that above above
fifty percent I would love to
see a
little higher than that so do we
have any strategies from maybe
nationwide or what are we
looking at in terms of getting
the best thing for a buck so to
speak
thank you mister chair
representative block such an
excellent question and I think
it is the the full investment
that the legislature has made in
the department starting
prenatally and having make sure
that families have access to
that high quality home visiting
that then connects them either
to early intervention if they
have any concerns about their
child's development and then
high quality child care and that
those but those opportunities
then lead to entry into high
quality pre k which we continue
to focus on very much the strong
structured literacy but also the
social and emotional and
development and again now this
executive function really making
sure that children are getting
access to
really well compensated and
credentialed educators who can
then help them develop their
skills and their knowledge
through development appropriate
interventions but I think it is
the whole package it is the
investment that the legislature
has made in this high level
cabinet level governance of
early prenatal to five and
that's why that early childhood
immigrated data system
dashboards that we'll have for
you at the end of september will
hopefully be able to show how
children who have had access to
these programs how their ice
station data looks in in
kindergarten and again then
we're growing huge growth and
prek was in twenty four when the
language permanent fund was
passed by the voters and you
know we went from
for twenty million and we got a
hundred nine million from the
legislature that you're so that
was significant growth and and
we're still making sure we got
to keep the due diligence to the
quality and that compensation
are credentialed educators.
Thank you mister chair not sure
to be as brief as passwords have
two quick questions so one I see
in a few parts of this report I
think on page four it says that
the results from these studies
find it there's a plato by third
grade and then I also saw
somewhere else on paid eighteen
it says staff has compared
kindergarten assessment outcomes
for students who attended
various formats the pre k twenty
to present but found that the
variety and largely
insignificant results and so
when we're talking about really
targeting our approach I think
that's probably something we
need to focus on I really don't
want to be part of a
quarter billion dollar
investment a year and then
having it plateau to just meet
all the other kids that did not
go to precaution so I I guess I
would just be hyper focused on
on those statistics to make sure
that we
we don't plate to I do not want
to see that so I guess I will
just ask my last question maybe
to secretary kroganski is
quarter billion dollars a year
enough to get to those results
we're looking for
mr
thank you mister chair and
representative block a good
question we have and where were
finalizing a five year finance
plan which is part of the
requirement of our statute that
created the department and so
i'm gonna have punt that one
till we get that data because
it's going to show both the
direct service costs as well as
the quality and infrastructure
costs that we need to make sure
that these programs to what your
point is of the highest quality
so that we don't get that plate
but i'm I think that probably
more investments will be data
but I think they need to be as
you said very strategic very
targeted in the areas that we
know make the impact and get the
outcomes with one
thank you mister chair thank you
all thank you representative
represent get
thanks mister chair thanks
everybody.
I am most inspired by page ten
of doctor kroganski presentation
I mean the solder executive
function scale because it
mentions plain I really thank
you for that because
I stations are very quantitative
and frankly I hate it others be
real and the fact that it's even
being used instead of its easy
but has limitations the
qualitative is harder I think my
because concerned as the
transfer of the data once you
have the administrative
executive function i'm very
familiar and have given the
economic early childhood
observation to kindergarten
observation to the biggest
problem what is the data didn't
transfer so the precade the ecot
in the kindergarten teachers
didn't have it school districts
and charter schools need to have
it so that's that's my only
request please make sure that
the data is available to the
next level of teachers and the
book i'm reading which anybody
interested in early trying to
should read is besides the boy
who would be a helicopter so if
you're not familiar with that
book please read it
we have data coming out of
every part by but we can't
forget the quality of
comprehensive stuff that I
station is never going to give
you a million years so just make
sure the data systems transfer
to the next level that's my
request thank you thank you
similar
mr chairman
representative just jump try the
middle of the question I was
going to ask okay so i'm not
going to be redented here
I would like to secretary and
see good to see you again.
Whenever you're saying that
you're going to have training in
alba kurki and los cruise will
that be soon available as well
for those people that can't come
in from the eastern side of the
state
mister chair senator is that it
will know it's all in person and
but it will be recorded and it
will be shared okay just trying
to make sure everybody was gonna
go to be able to do that I was
noticed among page twenty seven
of the hand out of the I think
i've got my pay to mark no I
didn't for my paper.
Page twenty seven it's it gives
the different
curricular that is being used in
the mexico can you tell me.
What's at the stage is using
frog street.
Mister chair
senator thank you for the
question after type of my head
i'm not sure which of the
programs that we look at
specifically but I would be
happy to follow up with you and
send you ccd as an excellent job
of tracking which curriculum
each program uses and they
retain a pdf every year that
tells which which correct once
have been selected by each
program thank you very much for
that and going back to
representative care brought up I
think that if they're but it can
get on the same page here it
with tracking that much of the
very beneficial to the shunk
students
also is for is what is happening
on the federal level how is
heads start going to be
impacted whenever the mexico
already has early pre k going on
and everything if those funds
are cut do you see a jump in the
environment in these programs.
Yes mister chair center is an
excellent question we do have
the head start state
collaboration directory in our
department and we need to
regularly with the new mexico
headstart association just lead
by patricia grovin down in hobs
at the league county children
and family center that we have
another phone with them about
this recent rule that was issued
around status of children and so
we stay in close contact but
ultimately you know if there was
a cut in head start we would see
our head start programs asking
to be able to retain
access funding they have asked
us is there going to be any help
if in fact we do have our funds
card and of course they say well
I know that the legislature is
very interested in making sure
that what's happening at the
federal level doesn't have to
negative impact on new mexicans
so we monitor it almost on a
daily the weekly basis and right
now we have seen no cuts in our
new mexico headstart programs
okay and mr chairman that brings
me to my next question regarding
that if there is major cuts to
the start broken how rapidly do
you see the integration of their
young students coming into the
pre early pre k program
yet mr chair senator cell I
think they I mean there they
have the facilities they have
children many of them are
serving arguments at corporate k
children also so I could see
them coming in asking for
funding to so continue to
support the children that they
are serving with federal heads
are dollars if that in fact game
but
they would
does that make sense
what kind of sort of that if if
the funding for does go away do
you see a best immigration of
these student young students
coming in to the early pre k and
without the hiccups that
sometimes are involved but there
is a transfer I think mr chair
and senator result.
With the support of the
legislature the government if
resources became available to
fill that at those it would be
almost seamless thank you very
much for that and my last
question has to do with the
early pre k a you're requesting
that the providers have at least
a bachelor's degree you said
that there is becoming a big
problem why is that happening
mr chair center is out there new
mexico precase standards always
have required that there be a
bachelor level early childhood
teacher I think the report you
showed
you see that at the decline
which
we are seeing and increase in
the number of teachers i'm with
batteries degree so I think
we'll just take a look at our
data but I think with the free
college we've been promoting and
supporting them in taking the
six college credits so that they
can get the free college and we
provide a lot of support around
college access and scholarships
so I I don't know that it's I
mean it continued to measure
because they have families young
children you see all the
professional development they
have to subscribe to as are the
pre k and the work but we
continue to learn from what's
happening as we hear from
providers and again they can ask
for a waiver of that requirement
to hardship waver of it that
happens on an annual basis
one my next presentation what
kind of show are our our work
for some and our challenges
around being able to access
higher education across the
state
I didn't mean to jump again on
it there thank you very much for
your response to settlements to
chair thank you other questions
yes representative thought is
the last.
Thank you mister chair
while this isn't amazing report
thank you so much for all of
these information I have a
question
about the ice station and
I
am also wondering in terms of
the current assessment that is
being used
back in twenty ten
p was in the schools and and and
also in the community there were
six domains of early learning
outcomes and those included
physical development health and
well being
literacy numerous and special
relations as that it creativity
scientific conceptual
understandings soft and family
and community and approach to
learning and i'm wondering if
those are being included I know
that you'll have developed in
the last fifteen years but i'm
wondering where those went to
and if their measure don't
meritable on a lay station thank
you mister chair.
Thank you mr chair
representative towards the last
guest.
Part of the reason that we used
item station is because we have
I station
I do want to give all the credit
to eccd for picking up the
early development instrument
which shows all of those
same domains that you've just
listed and now with the the
first set of data then because
of the data tracking and right
by report his father so if you
can page sixteen
is where you'll find the church
showing some of the early
promising data coming out of
this more comprehensive tool and
currently because of the way
that the data set up we can only
link students who are in pd
programs and not students who
are with community providers but
across all of those domains we
are seeing a boost and them as
well for students who have
participated in the p p d pre
kindergarten program and then
our entering categories the
biggest boosts are incognited
function and communication are
more kind of academic outcomes
but we do see a significant but
small boost and all the other
domains as well so credit is
easy for choosing a new tool
that will be able to show us
some of those other domains that
you've mentioned that are so
important thank you mr chair and
i'm just wondering i'm looking
at page sixteen where do I find
for example physical development
healthy will be on this page
thank you mister chair
representative we've
recite that in the taxed we've
just pointed to
maybe mister.
Mister chair representative at
the bottom of the page we
discuss that
settings to the class
significant moderate
correlations and that we would
basically were also showing that
this correlates with our ice
station find things as well at
least across the academic
outcomes and we can get used
specific scores for the other
domains if you're interested
in what else
get a couple of questions in a
couple of different areas
the first one
could we have a co
in the state of about twenty
thousand of each great direction
here i'm about twenty thousand
babies or born each year so
that's practical
as I look at this they're about
ten thousand
each great level of three and
forty year old so only fifty
percent are taking advantage of
my understanding that correctly
of the
preschool programs and mr chair
and there are also an additional
forty five hundred children
being served through head start
in addition these are the ones
that are funded by new mexico
pre k so I did miss that I did
not though it is that you're
referring to my side rate about
the twenty thousand
just kind of been general
worried about eighty four
percent of four year olds and I
think about sixty sixty percent
of three year olds have access
to a preschool experience either
through the mexico pre k
tribally
run programs and headstart
so the access are there waiting
list you get into those programs
and are those available in every
community I think about like
reserve where I know if it's not
at the public schools there in
any option type of things what
is the actual access available
or they're waiting less to get
into the the the higher quality
programs.
Mister chair so we do have a
eighty nine school districts
eighty six of eighty nine school
districts are participating in a
mexico pregate and we have
coverage there and we don't
track individual programs
weightless so it's it's a a data
point I don't have my assumption
would be that there are
weightless in in some in some
programs in some places but we
all work very hard to make sure
that people are fully in rolling
and that we require through the
mexican pre case standards that
everybody providing prek in that
geographic region come together
and collaborate and do not hold
weightless if there's you know
another program that has
openings and that families are
made aware of all the programs
and I think it goes to the
recommendation coming from the
lfc
the lfc is about more universal
application and so right now a
parent goes out there and maybe
has ten options and they are
filling out ten different
applications and getting on
either way less than so you know
that's that's a improvement that
that this report is recommending
I don't know if I mention your
question but we don't have that
data point for individual
programs about their weightless
thank you because you know
having your programs and things
but if there isn't space for
somebody in that community that
doesn't help your referring for
services that government
available
is it useful to get anyone and
so that's encouraging that you
know if we have eighty four
percent of the cohort are
actually in programs that's
encouraging because and that's
lots better than a couple of
years ago some of the data for
things the next question i'd
written down and and I had
bunches of them can scatter
through it it seemed a long real
fast
talk about requiring a batteries
degree and early childhood how
many of our institutions have
early childhood be a degrees
because I don't think very many
of them.
Do they have associate degrees
and lots of those got cut is the
big economic downturns of around
two thousand ten but are there
degrees that the higher that are
available and if we require that
where they get.
Mr chair I I get my team to give
me the exact number but yes we
do have a number of ba programs
across the states we have
western we have eastern we have
at the unm of course
and in this next presentation
that i'll do well it will kind
of look at what we did a higher
it inventory for this exact
reason and to look at where the
capacity is and where
institutions need to grow and
i'm let's see we have ten
bachelors degree programs across
the state
okay thank you
jumping the gun into the the
next presentation as balance at
all they save some of the
questions along long bad area
one of my main concerns with the
less presentation and others
have kind of alluded to it is
yeah I used to teach early
childhood education
developmental psychology and
most of the research in that
area indicates that it's much
more important to deluction on
brain development not specific
skills not unreally not on map
not on specific topics lots of
the presentation here is about
specific topics and those that
teach map as a separate school I
was reading through have higher
eyes stationary outcomes most
early childhood education
experts would print like no
don't do that other countries
don't even start kindergarten
first great until seven or eight
years old
your early childhood and
principle shouldn't be early
first grade you're much
different focus and so it's kind
of you respond to we often take
what's easy to make sure that
make it important
seems like we're taking
something that's easier off of
ice station in saying it's more
important into representative
philosophics.
Physical development you know
you know how are they learning
to move in control their bodies
and get along with each other
and all these other things the
the focus of early childhood is
not to make sure they're going
to be complaint kindergarteners.
So
sir my misunderstanding or what
we
help me
thank you mister chair for the
question
yes we definitely thought a lot
about that and putting this
report together and certainly
the critique that kindergarten
has become the new first grade
and pretty care has become the
new kind of garden is you know
something that we really tried
to take to a heart and I think
something that that is important
and perhaps gets buried in all
of the date of this report is
that the new class tool that
we've introduced part of what
it's measuring is whether
teachers are deploying
developmentally appropriate
practices in their classroom
and so that instructional score
is not just did the teacher get
up there and give a math lesson
like first graders would get but
did they introduce math concepts
and a way that was
developmentally appropriate
through play and all of those
ways that we now know from a big
body of research literature
either best way is to develop
little mines so I think you know
what we're seeing and the data
is is that yeah new mexico is
really on its way
to teaching and a
developmentally appropriate way
you know maybe worth boring lfc
people that we also see
the value of play and I it's
very in the report but it's
there in the data showing that
teachers are teaching through
play i'm in a way that is
development appropriate
yeah I just a very concerned
that young people will take some
of this is like okay we're gonna
start putting three four year
olds in desk in people rose and
learn to be quiet and and that
staples bring development rather
than in hinting and and
expanding it because the measure
that comes a year later those
that learn how to sit still in
the chair of the score better on
ice station but they're brain
connections and development of
the neural nets is not.
Been increased it's already
started trimming them to early
no and so I I worry about trying
to find things that are easy to
measure and and try to make them
look like they're important as a
result so please be very careful
in making any kind of
recommendations of that sort and
yeah I see secretary not into
the early childhood people
moding that brain development
it's not how well do you read in
town as a five year old you know
though that may be some of the
measure with it I had no
inherent yet the average salary
for the
were all of that early childhood
educators I think it was
match that in part of the reason
is we always hear that those
that are in a public school
setting they're being paid
teacher wages those are in a
private setting or being paid
private wages and there's a
fairly large discrepancy that is
masked by having an average
salary.
Mr chair we we require that and
we fund so we do the cost
modelly fund at the fifty five
thousand now we had increased
the rates and because we
increase verse the paper
teachers so that is built into
the rate for all children per
child rate and so that's where
if the teacher is a level to our
level three then they apply to
our pre capabity program that
the legislature has generously
funded and they're able to get
that additional bump directly to
that teacher so but we find all
settings the same and we make
sure that there is enough
funding there to pay that entry
level teacher wage
thank you probably here way more
often than we do even leave even
back there some of the private
providers complain that as soon
as they're staff get a battery's
degree they rent at the schools
because they make fifteen to
twenty thousand dollars more and
so I know we worked on trying to
increase those wages at the
private level of those very
reasons thank you mr chair I
just want to think as earlier
i've got to say that is maybe
that reason we see some of the
turn over I did hear that
yesterday at our state white
advisory council but that the
parody has helped it has helped
people stay on those settings
but you know they can't compete
with the insurance in the
retirement in all those pieces
so we're what that is still
something that I think is part
of the ecosystem dynamic
thank you yeah what's lots more
information in here of which I
was just trying to keep up with
the the charts in the end the
the different pieces of it and
will look through it in in much
more detail
very much young and please that
this level secretary we talked
regularly about the conceptual
up until the three year old
level and how that's probably
been more important on a
cost benefit the heck models
that indicate at the earliest
levels and it's nice to show
them and I think it said between
two and seventeen dollars with
an average of about six dollars.
That the early childhood ones
the first two to three years
it's all an average of about
twelve dollars for every dollar
based on that the return on
investment so it it's nice that
we're actually doing that I
regularly there are people talk
about how much money is not
flowing in the easy
and trying to pull those moneys
off for other places I resist
that what we need to do is make
sure that that is the largest
funding that we are spending all
of that on kids because then we
don't have to spend as much in
public and doing remediation and
how impact tutoring and all that
on it on it on type of things
and so you know I I will assist
in trying to resist that they
refund all some of those might
be because I think you have
enough and continue doing
encouraging a push more of those
moneys out regularly the family
centers and other places so
i'm sorry
representative I didn't have you
on my list so I apologize please
represent it
thank you it's actually
your presentation actually
prompted me to ask a question so
that no no apologies thank you
mister chair
so I i'm also come from the
world of early child development
many years ago so my training
was
obviously I think about the time
that senators training was that
we had a different school of
five however
when the senator was asking the
questions
asking you to be conscionary
I looked at page thirteen in
your
in the l c presentation the very
parliament says how to think
about the kindergarten catch up
the fact they have been I had
circled that because it drew my
attention to everything that you
presented and then a questionary
flag right and so
the second paragraph.
The say ice station capture the
narrow range of academic skills
so it's limited in how it
is how we can use it and so I
want us to make sure mister
chair that that we understand
that because I too had concerns
about that the whole point of
why I entered into the early
childhood development arena back
in the eighties and over all the
programs that I will personally
now pass the was because of the
development hole aspect of
preparing our children to enter
in school system not till such
the two not to do any of the
others but to also
value
observed evaluate and assess so
that we can then help
inform the the greater academic
world on how best to
create the programs and
curriculum in training our early
childhood in those days we call
them the child development
in home child development
centers or forms
at that time because the focus
was not
starting another pre k or it
substituting or whatever right
preparing school it was to look
at how we could further enhance
their development the children's
development so that they could
develop further in terms of
their interaction with other
students other children
and a number of other spectrum
but more importantly it informed
how we were going to set up the
training and certification for a
providers that was really
the key to the development and
to how we were going to train so
we did not require it comes to
my other point.
The bachelors we never went to
require a bachelors because
we quickly realized back in the
eighties and nineties that it
wasn't the degree or what we
were going to benefit from by
requiring a pat for degree but
we needed to
develop a filing
to curriculum that was designed
specifically for child
development
centers
does that make sense for we went
to
the community college
arena and said
we have fifty six women on our
program that we'd like to enroll
in this type of
program can you develop the
program because we want to then
create a model for the state of
texas that would be
focused strictly on the
development that early childhood
development of the children in
preparation for their school
world but not to create another
pre k or any type of academic
free anything we wanted to focus
strictly on the development
each of the children and our
children were all hispanic
letting our children in that
grandchildren
spanish speaking only so was
quite a challenge but they
stepped up to the challenge so I
want to just make sure that
among the same lines as the
chair
just be precautionary about what
it is that our objective is for
these children because we're
looking at mulnible populations
and state new mexico and I don't
I hate to use the word
vulnerable but they're not
prepared because they're already
coming into the school system
called and quoted it
disadvantage according to the
school system.
In our view they're bringing
their announcement they're
bringing a lot more to the
classroom than what we ever
would have been able to dream up
so that is what makes their self
sensitive so I only bring that
up because I think madame
secretary are sign euro area we
need to look at that or maybe
perhaps we examine
what objectives really are in
preparing our children and not
get caught up into
this academic arena or this
arm structured
standardized expectation we
can't we've got a streamlined
according to our children's
needs and where they come from
what they speak and and their
cultural backgrounds and then
maybe utilize those as assets
and helping us then create the
criteria we need to
to to set up the entire system
of evaluation thank you that's
my think thank you for spring
that thought processed here
thank you thank you any other
questions
if not thank you very much I
appreciate very much and I hope
take some of the comments and
all
this moves for thank you thank
you very much for having us.
The secretary I think you get to
stay up there and just slide
over to the middle c
with the the powerful
microphone.
Okay
thank you mister chair
members of the committee I want
to thank you for this
opportunity and thank director
center for inviting me I think
this may be my first
presentation to lesc
and five years
but I am excited that's our
fault because you should be more
often though you're not
technically under our view
exactly it's it's important
that's part of all of education
and I hope that have more
opportunities because there is a
lot there is a lot of very
positive things happening that
relate directly to our cradle to
career educational government
system so in the statute that
created the department there was
a requirement that we create a
wage a comprehensive wage scale
in career lattice for all the
programs that we administer so
we took that of course as our
statutory obligation and we also
have it as part of our strategic
plan
and so school ready necessarily
number one goal in our five
years strategic plan and our
number one objective under this
is about early childhood
professionals all early
childhood professionals are
supported by a fully implemented
equitable career in compensation
system at so it's taken us a
while leave the letter governor
has asked for support around the
wage scaling career latest the
last few sessions and but we
know that in order to to do this
we need it to do it with the
field we couldn't just sit in
our office and think about what
should be in their so we were
fortunate to have support it
from the national early care and
education work for center and a
partner that we've worked with
on all of our costs modeling the
predate to five physical
strategies group and twenty two
incredible new mexicans who came
from home visiting an early
intervention and child care and
had started pre k and they sat
down and we established these
aims for our wage scale and
career lattice first importantly
it had to include everybody it
had include all the
professionals working in.
Those four core programs that we
administer through ecb
we wanted it to incentivise
professionals increasing their
qualifications we know there's a
lot of great reasons why the
professionalised the field
increase their earnings to be
part of a larger system of
professionals and to make sure
that we were looking at both
their experience and their
competencies and their education
so that's just kind of what the
the purpose of this was so the
task force that we formed which
is on page four was again this
group of about twenty one twenty
two professionals working across
all of these different places
yeah programs but we wanted to
build on the good work that new
mexico was already done this is
an area or new mexico has always
been a leader in early childhood
in in higher education in early
childhood development and so we
built on what the cradle to care
institute had already done
around early care and education
work force growing up mexico's
wage scale work the new mexico
pre capability and then all the
work that we've done around cost
modeling and making those
connections to the larger
population so what you'll see
here we presented this to our
advisory council yesterday but
we didn't have some of the hot
off the press slides you're
going to see today which will
court share with them I had a
big schematic of the draft wage
scale so you're going to see
here this is exciting where I am
very excited about it but roll
categories so first it was what
your role in an organization
what are your essential
responsibilities based on that
role what are the competences
that you would need to have in
order to execute that those
responsibilities and what are
the qualifications that would
help you gain those competencies
and then what should the minimum
salary floors be for people
holding those various roles and
having those competences and
qualifications.
So slide six showed you and
you'll see it's how it's all
laid out but we looked at five
levels so there's the leaders in
any organization then there is
what we and this was all denned
by this task force incredible
group of people are over about
seven months they met every
other week and really for like
an hour and a half worked in
working groups
of them they said there's a lead
usually early childhood
professional there's the early
child and professional there's a
specialist often in all of these
programs and then their support
staff and again here is all the
sectors that were included and
in child care it included family
child care as well as center
base care
so I won't go through all of
these but I want to give you a
sense and this is what director
of santa sar at the deans and
directors meeting as we were
presenting is so in home
visiting in the leadership
category you have program
manager executive director
program supervisor or nurse
manager so in this leadership
there are five levels you might
be starting just at the entry a
new leader coming in you should
be making seventy three thousand
and you should have a bachelor's
degree and zero to zero to three
years of experience or something
that we want to develop a new
exclusive carpetency based
equivalency so this work is
happening at the national level
but as I go through each of
these slides you'll see that and
again and at the end of this
will show that this has been
bettered a very extensively
throughout the state so at the
highest level you may have a
doctor a degree and five plus
years of experience you should
be making a minimum of ninety
five thousand dollars a year
working in any of these various
positions roles out what we
don't have here all the
responsibilities because it's a
very again a very large comment
that we have and the
competencies are not here either
which are very key and again
developed so slide eight shows
you want to lead early childhood
professional and th.
The types of positions in each
of these programs that you might
hold you might be elite home
visitor you might be a lead
teacher you might be a precade
coordinator or you may have in
the family and for toddler you
may be a family service
coordinator and a developmental
specialist and again at that
high level with a master's
degree in five years your
minimum salary should be seventy
seven thousand and so with our
professional development
information system in a safe
launch right now we're bringing
in programs we're gonna be able
to see where people are and this
is going to help us advocate and
really be targeted in our
request to the legislature for
funding to make sure that these
individuals who are I think were
at about sixteen thousand early
childhood professionals across
our state across these programs
art are not at these levels out
of pay in in most cases though
the early chatted professional
is the home visitor the parent
educator the assistant teacher a
family childcare provider and
developmental specialist in the
fit program and again at their
highest level level six with a
bapsler's degree
with three years of experience
they should be making sixty six
thousand so you can see their on
the early child had professional
your entry levels coming in at a
high school diploma with some
maybe zero to three years then
you're going to get to a child
development associate credential
in apologize for the acronyms
here they'll they're spelled out
later
but you can see then how how the
salary floors go up and again
minimum salaries
in our specialists we have
identified lactation specialist
infinite mental health
specialists and their home
visiting in child care
precaution heads are we have
nutrition coordinators family
service coordinators consultants
could go into pre cape class
from their child care and help
them improve their practices and
and in speech and fit.
Our family have a toddler of
course those are our speech
language occupational therapists
audiologist and these folks are
going to be paid at different
levels again depending on their
credential their qualifications
are their credentials and their
experience
so and then the support staff
are administrative support our
bus drivers are castodians are
data entry special answer
administrative assistance and
again they should be starting
they can start at a high school
or they could come in as an
associates degree and again
making sure that those salaries
are reflect their expertise
their credentials and their
qualifications
so in the task force completed
their work they were then asked
to go out and take this or
unslight twelve it gives we said
what this is great this twenty
two people have contributed and
done a lot of thinking on this
let's take it out to your
constituents and hold focus
groups and we also did an online
survey two hundred individuals
participated in our focus groups
and a hundred and fifty
individuals provided submitted
forms they were looking at this
scale they're looking at this
wage scale and career lettuce
and everybody was represented
and the feedback was very
positive so we felt like this
group was representative strong
support for the competency based
option there was a lot of dialog
to what representative robot
could be error was saying you
know the degree doesn't matter
does it not you know just
experience if that experience
was in a center that was not
that high quality or you're kind
of not supported or coached does
that equate to something ever
someone who received a lot of
coaching and has a child
development associate credential
or child development
certificate.
So it's important that people be
able to demon i'm speaking to
you know the quieter here that
you you have a be able to
demonstrate what you know and
are able to do and help you know
other help children be able to
do the same so
we want to work on that
competency being system and we
also want to continue to push
for and support the attainment
of credentials we think that
that's important for the field
as a whole and that we have
people really were talking in
the concerns that were related
to how are we going to
communicate this
we have to have a strong
communication strategy about
what this means and there has to
be a clear plan on how we how we
roll it out and of course we
have to have the funding so last
year we asked for ten million to
support this now we actually
have an actual wall wage scale
and career latest framework and
we have the engagement of the
field so we are taking this to
the advisory council the early
childhood education and care
advisory council that are
september meeting in silver city
um the sub committee on early
childhood professionals is right
now digesting all the
information and the data from
the focus groups and from the
report and they'll be making
their recommendations to the
full advisory council and then
of course it's up to the
department to implement what
those recommendations are and
we'll be looking to a
legislature for that support so
that's how it was but we knew
and i'm gonna take I learn this
lesson in dc when we set the
requirement that all teachers in
childcare had to have at least
an associates degree and that
that was going to be a
requirement and we had to keep
moving back that deadline
because the higher education
system was in no way prepared to
help them achieve the associates
degree and sell through this
work with the national early
childhood work for a center they
came in and did a higher ed
inventory and we were able to
work with the deans and
directors and the early child at
higher education task force.
And we wanted to understand what
is the reach of the scope to
your point mister chair of
aligned higher ed programs for
early childhood what is the
accessibility of these programs
language geography what are the
barriers and the facilitators
for students to actually
progress and complete these
credentials or degrees and we
wanted to talk about competency
based for you know credit for
prior learning credit for work
experience and then what is the
higher education capacity to
meet this demand because one we
put this out there and stay if
you have this credential and you
have this experience you can
earn at a minimum of these
salaries then that becomes
hopefully a driver for more
demand and if the system can't
be that then that's frustrating
for all involved so we have sent
survey dated eighty four
programs this is on side sixteen
we were only able to receive
fifty one and they are
continuing to do some outreach
and make sure that we did
collect all the data i've talked
to some deans and said I think I
did that survey and i'm not
seeing the the result so there
is some missing data
considerations in and what
you'll see here today but we did
programs were included in the
wage scale with seven master's
degree programs in the state for
early childhood ten bachelors
sixteen associates degrees
fourteen that offer the child
development certificate I forgot
to spell at that acronym I
apologize and the cba is
something called the child
development associate credential
it is nationally recognized for
the council for professional
recognition all had start
programs are required to have a
minimum of a c d a and that is
something that we offer at no
cost through our corner platform
spanish in english and people
can get on there and the
department will support them and
taking that competency based
assessment and educator has to
do a port folio and be observed
in their classroom but that is
something that you know as a
state we could look at in terms
of.
Many states give you college
credit for a cda and that's a
way to acknowledge credit for
prior learning.
Access for spanish speakers is
of great concern to us at the
department skill see here we
have zero programs offering
their degree in a language other
than english we see incredible
early towed educators who have
gotten that you can through are
a a programs there are three
that offer it and spanish and we
have four that offer the cdc in
spanish or in denay and the
naval hole but they are then
capped they can't go on to get
that higher education degree and
we know that it makes sense for
a state like new mexico for many
most dates to have a degree
that's offered in spanish all
the way through bachelor may be
even masters but that's
something we've been talking to
the deans and directors and were
hopeful that we can see some
progress on that maybe in the
next two to three years and I
talked to secretary rodriguez I
know she also cares deeply about
this as well so some of the
things that the higher add
institutions shared with us in
terms of student challenges in
actually achieving and attaining
these credentials and degrees or
things like technology you've
heard that transportation and
just the work life school
balance needing child care
assistance up financial barriers
hopefully those are not too many
in our state anymore but also
cultural and community
obligations there's a lot of
responsibility that are these
are people who are working full
time and then going to school
and they are also leaders in
their own communities and then
the thing that is really
academic preparedness that
they're not prepared to enter
the college work force either
from their english for their
math you know all the things
that we know you need to have to
get to that aa and that
bachelors but also real
challenges around practical and
that you may have heard that
here at this table but I think
that's an area that needs to
look out especially for early
childhood for instance our
family child care providers they
can't go to another setting and
get their practical hours
because.
They have to provide care for
children and so some areas that
we could look at to reform along
with the public education
department looking at their
their systems and substance that
are supportive our flexible
course formats a work force
alignment curriculum and field
based learning opportunities and
of course i'm cohort models we
saw this in that district of
colombia was key and we had a
programs that would have all
their staff be in one copor and
the faculty would come on site
you know so if we really want to
build the support for our work
force having a bunch of people
travel to different places or
get online all by themselves but
building more of these cohort
and peer support models is very
important for the field and then
looking at credit for prior
learning how could we take the
in delaware they give you twelve
credits for the cda start again
so now you're on the path and
you're getting closer others do
nine others to six credit hours
so I think those are
opportunities for us here in the
state new mexico is known so
i'll go to slide twenty three
for our very good articulation
agreements in our two in our
four year programs.
We have ten b programs that have
reported formal agreements with
ea program so that's fantastic I
will right now are working with
ten institutions to get their
teacher prep programs of
credited by the national
association for the education of
young children that is also
going to improve what's coming
out that teacher prep she
assessments aligned with very
newly developed not new fairly
nearly developed competencies
but again having those systems
if I take a few clock courses
here at c n m and then I go over
to you and how does that
alignment happen and we have
common course numbering across
all our systems in our
institutions and so the early
childhood system for higher ad
has done a phenomenal job
through the hire task force and
then credit for career technical
education again in the district
of colombia we had that we were
called the first step students
were graduating high school with
their c d a and they were going
on right into an associates
program up I know the hob school
district I believe is doing an
early childhood program but what
I did talk to the superintendent
he's that it had been
challenging so when I saw this
as an outcome
something at the department ecd
needs to figure out how to focus
on because that's a pipeline
those are students coming or
interested in working with young
children who could be finishing
high school but either do credit
or through their CTE begin to
work in early childhood and we
need them in the workforce
credit for prior learning I
talked about that a little bit
just that we need to explore
more with our higher
institutions how we could
operationalize that because with
a work force that
the representatives pointers you
know they've been doing this
work for many years how can we
through some kind of competency
based system have them
demonstrate something that would
then equate to college credits
that would get them on a path.
And and and and validates all
the good learning and the work
that they've done
credit for work experience those
are other areas this is
something that we did not see
really in any area that the high
red institutions are
even looking at awarding any
kind of college credit for work
experience or for professional
development and that there is
anyway book on about that and
then the at this gets now to the
point about our higher it
institutions what are the
challenges one of the
opportunities faculty
recruitment and retention is a
huge issue most of these
programs are run by adjunct
faculty they may have one full
time person and that really
childhood teacher they have like
five other responsibilities and
jobs that they're responsible
for that administrative and
operational overload
the streamlining just we have to
become more innovative to
provide more at that student
flexibility like I said higher
at faculty going on site to
community base places to be able
to to do those cohort models but
to have this incredible work for
us i'm child care as a work
force is probably you know the
most the furthest from where we
see the wage and scale and
career lattice picking up their
they have to have a high school
diploma to work in um
child care and then they have to
take
a number of courses and
begin take to get on the path
but some of the other areas they
already have requirements like
for a fit for a family service
coordinator you have to have a
bachelor's degree for pre cable
already talked about for home
visiting you know if you're
running the nurse family
partnership you have to be a
nurse a really child care and
that work force that is our most
growing work force is the
furthest from the kind of
credentials that they want and
that they need so we think i'm
some of these repair and again
this is all the results of the
service.
Were completed by our higher
education partners and site and
will go into all of them but all
the things that we talked about
a little bit of that is
redundant and then
this might be returned into but
at that last peace around the
family childcare providers
and also if you're in an early
head starter you're in a infant
toddler classroom you're
required to go get experience in
a pre k or an older age i'm
classroom as part of that
practice some of these things
become very challenging in small
rural areas where there are not
other programs and so those of
the types of conversations were
having coming out of this task
force the report will be made
available to all of you and i'm
happy to to come back and answer
any questions about that but
that is what I wanted to share
and just talk about them need to
really focus on our higher
education teacher prep for early
childhood one of the biggest
concerns you probably heard even
with the increase pay for
capable teachers you know they
forester pass what a higher edit
back to you member makes i'm in
the education a department and
worsingly see the same thing now
with this weight scaling career
lattice we have to grow the
higher ed faculty population and
we need to see at least a full
time if not a few full time
people in the early childhood
teacher prep because it is the
fastest growing
bad student body that's coming
into our education departments
is what I hear from across the
state because there for the
growth that we're seeing in the
early childhood system we need
to be focused on being able to
meet that demand at the higher
education level and I stand for
questions
thank you secretary and please
remind us to invite you back
more often if we don't that's
very helpful it and useful
questions for me members
represent a block
thank you mister chair thank you
secretary so I one thing that.
Come I I that we kind of just
keeped over a little bit was
dual credit and getting those
kids who are in high school to
want to be in the field and I
know this is the problem
everywhere we need more doctors
many more educators we need more
rocket significanc.
That's what I had thank you
mister chair thank you matter
sector thank you representative
representative color
chair actually so it's kind of
if you are blocked with going
representative block so we were
talking about the cte at hobs so
we are opening up our cte center
that's all that we are in
collaboration it's a
collaboration with seeing them
and for rear range of public
schools so I will send you the
fighter on it i've already
connected them with some other
industries to look at to get
into the cge so autodated
liveliness as well and can I get
that.
Thank you
thank you very much that's
honest you.
Thank you sorry the director was
whispering to me center poke
thank mister chair and thank you
better secretary for being here
and I apologize to step off and
look at the slides I didn't see
it i'm wondering has there been
any discussions or are there any
there has been any talks about
how we really look at the
mentorship for folks that are in
this career field and support
and the reason I stay that is we
hear just catherine twelve right
folks get their license thing
and feel like they're just
thrown into a classroom and you
know where's that support so
just wondering what are we doing
here with early childhood and
pre k because
I just don't want that same
thing to start happening again
and so i'm is there any plan for
that support for folks coming.
Yes thank you mister chair and
senator pope and we do have a
mentorship network it does focus
out more on a directors we also
do through our child care and
through our precaution of
cultures and consultants who
work with the class from
teachers but I think you're
right that it taking people from
a program and just putting it in
a classroom with children and we
we hear from our directors and
owners that you know something I
don't know this is what you know
early childhood was about it
sounded so you're it's it's a
great point and I can get you
more detailed information about
how we actually do that but it's
important to keep an eye on that
because it is hard to take your
practical book learning
knowledge and then apply it in a
classroom without that mentoring
in that coaching
thank you mister share and and I
agree and when I do stuff to to
direct doing the kindergar.
But
I can see how that could be
stressful if you show like.
Make sure that we get folks in
there but we make sure we can
keep folks and they don't get
burned out thank you mister
sender represented those of the
last.
Thank you mister chair
you're just so amazing this
report is incredible and to
think about all that you have
done from the start point two
today in twenty twenty five it
just blows my mind and I want to
thank you for everything you've
done
I my question has to do with
elsewhere forward have you
thought about you probably are
doing already intercepting with
what we're doing with health
flances will health education in
especially in rural communities
the health sciences program that
you are now has been working in
rural communities on various
grants for for decades and
especially when we're looking at
the premium east and the early
years there are some things that
maybe they could help you with
in terms of when you're looking
for that those credentials are
when you're looking for the
classes that teachers need to
take i'm wondering if you have
connected with them
mr chair representative towards
glass because thank you so much
for that compliment and also i'd
love that connection I think
that would be great because I am
not aware of that
thank you mister chair
thank you
thank you mister channel thank
you so much secretary you know
i'm a big fan of all that you
have done in the short years
that you've had that's because
you came fully equipped to hit
the road running so thank you
very much for all that and i'm
also a big fan of everything
that he presented in the in your
presentation today it also
curtainly that some of the
successful models the one that I
was referring to obviously that.
Um
I don't always use texas
thursday reference point they
did have a good model because we
set it up for them but it
encouraged to me that on your
last half twenty nine barriers
to student progress and
completion what we did and that
was very successful with on the
second point about guy childcare
needs is that we actually set up
a child development lab learning
lamp on campus I think i've
mentioned that before and so the
students could leave their
children but the answer because
it was a lab and a nutrition
center my mother was the
nutrition as for that center
they then were able to not only
leave their children while they
were learning and taking courses
in other areas.
But they also were afforded
credit for participating in the
lab
and
they also
and it was a great way to
demonstrate
cans on
the effective and the best
practices for child development
at that time and so and they
received the students received
credit and they also had to
participate
in their final year as part of
their for lack of a better way
of saying if work experience
in order to receive that final
certification and it wasn't a it
was an a degree with that
certification cd their child
development certification and it
was good for I think they had to
renew every four years and then
they had to comply with a
certain amount of
training annually on going
training but it was all done on
sight there at the community
colleges and at their very
satellite centers because not on
the community college and all
parcel wasn't just one kind of
campus that had multiple
satellite centers so it was very
excessive so I think that I mean
this was actually a model that
worked in your conversations
mister chairman secretary I
think it would be helpful to
look at those and maybe find
ways to
share and asked car share and
experience expertise share and
then look at ways in which the
state can institutionalize the
certification process together
with the college but it it was
it worked terrifically and
everybody loved to go to my
mother's
nature
healthy and fun foods because
they were also very culturally
oriented but healthy and
nutrition and mr and
representative brought about
compare we have great we have a
lab school at san community
college done.
Santa fe community college
eastern university has and they
do that those exact things and I
know there's more but you're
exactly right the ability to
learn hands on get the credit
and also pre apprenticeships and
apprenticeships are really
taking off santa fe community
colleges leading a very
significant one that's building
our work forced
you know across the state and
that's an area we're going to be
exploring more with the work for
solutions thank you mister
institutionalizing it within our
structure of the state is really
critical thank you mister
chairman
thank you direct
comments you might make for some
questions
thank you mister chair I just
wanted to say thank you to the
secretary as she said I saw a
preview of this of this study a
few months ago that instant
directors meeting which either
eye or usually one of our staff
are one of our analysts attends
to order to thank you for that
also wanted to think of
for other meeting that seen her
staff just a can I had a chance
to talk with her staff about a
month ago just.
Thank you for the partnership I
also just wanted to tie very
quickly the presentation to some
of the the larger conversations
I I hope folks realize there is
a method to the staff madness
here when we're putting together
the presentations for you
whether you're you're hearing
from about early literacy and
structure literacy to the
complexity of teaching math and
all of the matter of
conversations we've had today
we've heard a lot of talk to day
about alternative license
certificate holders and and how
they need both the content in
the pedagogy
I hate to say this but we're
rebuilding an education system
in in understanding that we did
not teach teachers how to teach
reading
and that the teachers in our
classrooms may be worth properly
trained to teach math
and without sending overly
critical
what did they get hard to do
if they didn't do either of
those things and the the wage
conversation is really important
both for every childhood key
twelve minutes secretary
mentioned a little while ago
higher red we've expected
educate the education system to
prepare people to do technical
professions and legal
professions and medical
professions.
By but put all that on the
shoulders of folks that maybe we
haven't paid well enough and
have not been trained
sufficiently
and then we're expecting much
different outcomes from that
system and so I thought I was
important that we put this even
though they challenged is not
technically under the perview of
lec that we start to make those
connections and I think hired me
be the next the next
conversation to have about how
we shore up those folks and the
education system who are then
responsible for I think
education folks service a lot
teachers train all other
professions
and so I just wanted to think
the the secretary again for for
being part of the conversation
thank you john and also don't
technically are not part of the
l c all of the early childhood
does come through the senate at
committee and the house said
committee and so it's important
that we are having those
conversations regularly as are
the higher it I do have a couple
of questions how far are we
currently on the salaries how
figured jump are these is it a
five percent is that a fifty
percent jump in the salaries for
these various things mr chair
sets such a great question and
that's where the the
professional development
information system that would be
fully released to the to the
field in september we'll be able
to start collecting what people
actually earn but if I take a
look at our leadership for
I don't know I don't know I can
after that so but I want to
answer that that is the question
that we need to answer and I
would say in some areas where
we're far off and I I do think
in some of those areas are the
leadership but also with our
like at an early childhood
professional so those are are
I mean I think for our fit with
the high school diplomat there
they're not making forty four
thousand they may now because of
just increased our rates at
closer to that but fifty one
thousand for somebody working
with a cd sir cda I mean they're
most make about thirty seven
thousand a year.
Someone coming in as an early
chat and professional in a
licensed in a license center but
i'm i'm spirit so that's pretty
not a good idea in front of the
committee so we will get that
what will do some analysis of
what we do know because we do
collect a wage data on some of
our professionals and such a
great question
thank you and as it's going
through and i've been around
long enough to know that people
are going to want to what we
can't do it all once we want to
phase it in what to make sure
that if we do have basic
conversations that the salaries
get increased with the inflation
not state static so we face them
to the same buying power rate as
they were
I always worry that
you're too many conversations in
the halls around the capital
that there are lots of people
don't think teachers and early
childhood educators are worth
that much out and that ray calls
me up and so I just want to make
sure that we stand strong that
these really are professional
wages and if we really think the
children are most valuable as
that we need to pay up more than
the brief state starbucks who
are educating them up
also
indicated lots of the
information about the higher ed
programs was based on survey
sent to those programs have you
gone through and actually
audited still a buying things of
that sword and part of the
reason I point that out is I
know the public ed department
gets very different data when
they audit actual solid by them
what they are told is being
taught about literacy and math
in those programs.
Mr chair we the work we're doing
with that group of ten
institutions naba who
the technically university and
then nine of our other state
universities to without national
association for the education of
young children accreditation
that is where we're getting into
the silibies and they're there
you know volunteering it again
we're we have a community of
practice so we support that with
funding and with a facilitator
and actually with namei see
helping them and that's that's
been I haven't been able to go
to all of them but it's been
very illuminating across the
system for all of them it's
great in a learning community to
be seen wow you're doing it this
way and then the key assessments
how are they assessing that a
student has actually learned
that concept and so that they're
working together to to share
that but we don't really have
oversight or per view over the
the higher education curriculum
but through the new mexico early
childhood task force which is
regularly leave since nineteen
ninety two a europe will allow
to be proud of in this state in
terms of what they have
accomplished with very little
resources and a very small
faculty uh they do incredible
work so I think it's it's a
great point and I like that
anyway see accreditation
because of ten of our
institutions are doing that
they're doing deep deep dive
western is are only institution
and the state that is currently
anyway see a credited in both
their two in there for year and
it's I think a very excellent
process
thank you
again just to concern that you
actually look at what what's
happening directly with those I
also had on here a concern about
how many full time that will be
are in those programs and it's
often one maybe and the mostly
add junk and then you also
address that can be salaries or
lower than what this
recommendation is for some of
the the bachelor level of
practitioners and so we need
certainly need to deal with
that.
Do you know of the programs what
percent is on the line and how
much is in person.
I worry about programs that are
entirely online but there are a
human interaction thing is how
you learn some of those kinds of
things online and not the
chapter right now but just
something something press to
follow up to keep watching that
we are doing it completely
online early childhood program
when it really requires spending
time working with kids not just
reading about how to do that and
I think senator rumbles yet a
question or follow up yes thank
you very much I appreciate it
and and mister chair of section
sector thank you very much for
this presentation it's been
great but I do have a question
on this is only for public
definitely programs correct.
Mister mister chair senator that
is a great question and we would
not want it to be that but them
it's a great question and then
with them all the laws that we
have in our constitution it may
be restricted but we would want
to see this as the profession
regardless of the received
public funding but that may not
be possible and would it it just
concerned me that the private
industry will be affected really
bad if this goes through because
i'm sure a lot of them applause
entering the
public programs now if this
doesn't go through also I mean
what i've seen in the past it
when teachers got there raises
they got the raises I think
we'll have a gravest intention
to give it because they deserve
it but after they got the races
they also negotiated higher
wages through their districts
and that took away from the
classroom how can we do
something to make sure that this
doesn't happen in this program
and the money says that
classroom.
Mister chair senator from
excellent question and it just
to be clear that most like all
these programs on visiting fed
they are either for profit or
nonprofit businesses and put the
majority of their funding comes
from the public sector because
they're delivering critical
services for us as a state so it
would it would apply to all
those programs I think about
eighty seven percent of our
childcare programs take the
child car assistance program and
of course all of our home
visiting and fit and those
programs are almost entirely
supported through public dollars
medicaid funding.
And so I don't know if that
so it's a deer point our goal is
to make sure that this funding
those to the people working
directly with families and in
the classroom and making sure
that families are benefiting
from those well compensated and
credential professionals.
It's a great conversation thank
you for raising that question
thank you sector thank you
and I thought of one other
question you talk about
the loophole of you don't have
perview over the early childhood
programs at higher education
we have purved you over the
teacher preparation programs
don't think that includes early
childhood education or whether
it does that might be some place
where we need some clarification
with secretary rodriguez is are
they only under higher education
per view or do they fall under
LESC per view or should they be
under easy cd per view for those
programs and I don't know that
that's ever been
fully forever you have mister
chair
it is a it is an interesting
sort of confluence of all the
things so early
educated preparation programs
are actually under the preview
of the public education
department including I would I
believe the early childhood
education so even though he ccd
mid not be able to say directly
this is what you should teach
the approval of those programs
by ped would go and there
professional practices and
standards council of something
like that
that that is over seen by pd's
some level of partnership but
also probably get at some
influence over what those
programs are offering.
The.
Anything else secretary
no mister chair I just want to
thank all of you and just you
know recognize that it is the
leadership of the governor and
the incredible investments and
support of the legislature that
is allowed myself and the
incredible team at eccd to be a
successful as we are in having
come into this state that it has
always been a leader and early
childhood I just want to give a
lot of who does to all that came
before us and that lead to this
moment where we can be standing
proud of what we're doing for
our families and children and to
see the results that we get to
hear every day about the
transformation will change
that's happening for families
for educators for home visitors
early intervention and that we
stand strong together and so I
just want to thank all of you
for your incredible support and
leadership around education
cradle to career thank you thank
you you are the savings bonds
that we are saving up for and
hope to make sure twelve you
know fourteen years later with
high school graduation so thank
you for what you do anything
else today director
public comment yes we have some
public comment thank you and
public comment you have two
minutes to address
some garcia
and you have the two minutes sir
yes sir
have you talked any of us out of
the hole but as far as the
public portion.
Hello everyone take our
local residence so right right
activists what's the recovery
from sending a national
additories or what is a material
came as because
my compliments
see not only for scheduling this
event here also for a
professional standard system
that you use I like it
like that
so.
So I do support for school and
class construction and perhaps
to me for teacher staff and
administrators I do not use
myself because I don't want to
pay for it and it could become
another digital addiction like
doing scrolling
everybody including all the
search and this point is in
search with capabilities of the
only use.
I do not support the development
stands yet I recently thought
you want to mosque a I grock
platform speed out some racial
animals and comments we have to
be very careful with generator I
think models that have buildings
or any kind of bias.
Many of the other grounds are
already wired in some way of
pressure
we do need some guide rails and
methods to particular students
teachers school institutions and
communities
support a I for school and
mysterious and teachers
generate to a I chat bods can
help for less than plans that
you go turns out and slide dex
and for students.
I was finally suggested that you
limit
for students and they're not
allowed to a I there are
platforms private platforms
please you can use on computers
that can run large language
models that allow students to
use a I full a I separate
standard one computers that will
not
expose them to wi fi or the web
and there would be a safe way to
say I first thank you very much
thank you sir.
I believe we have three online
for public comment we have that
set up to.
Okay I say this set our pacific
policy
yeah two minutes
thank you
for the committee
to say why policy
there is
educated
clear ways
and encourages ongoing
quality of care and address what
educators is also proposed
equity as a bill is priced
color
one second.
Okay.
The.
If you're with this please go
ahead.
The.
Hi everyone thank you.
Can you hear me.
Okay we'll be with you just a
second where having some
technical difficulties it sounds
like on the side to hold on
okay.
Yeah well you were working on
the technical things I don't
think there was a forum before
and I do think we have a quarter
of now and so we we could have
proved the agenda I could have
emotion please
move second is there any
opposition to approving the
agenda for this meeting
in the opposition
see no opposition the agenda is
approved.
Also approval of the minutes of
the last meeting
so moved second
somebody seconded I represent it
is any opposition to the
approval of the minutes from the
last meeting
seeing no opposition minutes are
approved.
Okay how we don't earn technical
stuff back there
not working
anyway yeah yeah we could
encourage them maybe we'll do
public comment tomorrow if we
can figure out what's going on
or how to make that work
we get pattern okay.
Hi there people know time stands
for technical information
manager.
Check one two.
Check one two
time that is much better.
Eight I can test it from this
side
okay we're gonna try and start
over with zero for public
comment and timber do we get
this do we have it worked out we
think.
Can you all hear me
yes we can hear you now and it's
clear you don't sound like a
polter guys to
some sort of a villain from
outer space so yes please go
ahead sorry we're laughing but
it sounded really sounded weird
the first time I think we've got
to figure it out is this so
please go ahead
more term and I appreciate it
and thank you so much for you to
meet the opportunity the speak
i'll keep it on quick and in
simple I was just going to add
the case on behalf of the wage
and could latter which can help
up on retain early challenge
that educators by providing a
clear pathway for a professional
growth better pay and economic
stability this model encourages
ongoing training while improving
quality of care and addressing
the work for shortages by
attracting new educators this
initiative also promotes equity
as the filled is largely
comprised that we're going of
color
and people are color in this in
and also aligns with our
national efforts to
professionalise and strengthen
our overall work in yielding
long term economic benefits I
want to think you all for what
you do for the state in the
mexico and I hope you all have a
safe trip back to wherever
you're going back on to so thank
you so much german thank you
thank you for the the public
comment tell they some madrid
are you still with this please
go ahead you have to make i'm
here.
Thank you thinking mr chair my
name is to this major thing with
the partnership for community
action I want to say think you
to eccd and the task force for
the ongoing work of the which
scale it's an important
unnecessary step toward value in
the workforce pca works with the
network of home beach childcare
providers currently seventy
providers actively participate
in our network meetings I want
to uplift the importance of
competency basis that recognizes
the skill and expert tease that
providers bring to the classroom
for many years some of them have
been in the classroom with for
over twenty years their lived
experience and deep
understanding of how development
must be honoured even if they do
not hold formal degrees at the
same time we must scaff of the
timeline in pathways to hire
education by a lining access to
degree programs and that those
programs that we ensure that
they're offered in languages
other than english I one also
state that it's critical that
the minimum wage standards
outlined in the skill are not
just reimbursed to centers but
are actually given to teachers
directly what we know is that
educators report wages as low as
twenty five thousand dollars per
year in twenty twenty two we
advocated for a minimum wage
that was equivalent to thirty to
thirty seven thousand dollars
per year but given inflation and
the economic world were in right
now we really want to advocate
for forty five thousand dollars
per year as a minimum floor
salary for these educators
perhaps there needs to be
criteria in place to ensure
transparency and accountability
that those wages are getting to
the teachers directly and then I
want to acknowledge the
conversation about work force
development organizations like
pc and others are actively
supporting growth by offering
coaching in training these
served proof to buy
early education credits and I
want to think eccd for funding
in some of these trainings but
it helps deep and the quality of
care that providers give thank
you for your leadership in for
senate these providers.
Thank you very much for your
public comments unless we have
jacob be hill with new mexico
voices for children
good afternoon mischair thank
you and think the committee for
your time I leave the policy
team in the mix voice for
children I just want to echo the
comments of my colleagues who
went before me are in thanking
the department for putting
together this really huge step
new mexico's been a leader and
early childhood for a long time
this really keeps us in that
space but we want to just insure
that as my colleague said
competencies and experience
continue to be valued and that
way do that the way just go
directly to the workers we
really urge on the legislature
in the the rest of the interim
in the upcoming session to
really consider this proposal
and how
their budget decisions will
support the implementation as an
establishment of this really
important step toward building
the system that we've only
really been building
comprehensively for the last
five years so again thank you to
the secretary and to the
committee for all your hard work
and support for this think you
thank you mister behale that
concludes what we've got for
public comment at this point
yes
okay please please come up you
have up to two minutes.
Is this on care great
thank you to the chairman thank
you for the members I will not
take up a lot of your time I
know you've heard a lot of
testimony about a lot of issues
and what I would like to start
by saying is thank you to john
thank you to
just occur thank you to daniel
for the great report that they
put together on eighty twenty
bill in roswell a few weeks ago
and for us at india new mexico
and after an atf the eighty
twenty bill is a serious serious
issue I started on january
thirty first my first
legislative report was that that
following friday I got thirty
five emails from members about
where is eighty twenty our
members are really getting hurt
with high health care premiums
like asset all of the education
unions were all in support of
this and I know we had great
meetings and there's been great
support from both sides of the
isle and I really appreciate
that a lot of really great ideas
were proposed in roswell but
that's something that we're
going to be working on we're not
asking for sport we're not
asking for sponsors we just want
to work with you want to figure
out how how how can we make this
happen how can we work it with
you with our members meeting
with you in in districts to hear
the stories of our members and
what they're dealing with to
with that thank you so much I
know you all want to leave so
appreciate thank you
thank you last chance anybody
anything for the the good of the
committee and stuff for today
otherwise we will be back here
at nine o'clock tomorrow morning
I think we finish up about new
actually about eleven thirty
tomorrow if we stay on time
thank you all for the great
engagement and everything today
I think we had a very good
robust conversations have a good
evening.
