All right
good morning everyone where so
please to be up here in the
house and really grateful for
the staff organizing a fantastic
meeting we'll go ahead and get
situated and we're going to
begin with member introductions
we'll go ahead and start on my
right with senator pavia and
then we'll make our way around
and get right to this morning's
agenda
and a reminder all of us to will
turn this off each time one of
us finish speaking
okay good morning
mr chairman and mister vice
chairman senator michael for the
representative district fourteen
which is the southern portion of
bernaldio county also service
the senate majority weapon and
senate finance thank you
and thank you for the
hospitality to the town of towns
thank you very much
good morning mr chair madam vice
chair mr various chair members
of the lfc committee to the the
uh people in the audience
tourist staff to everyone that's
here in towers
this is a course beautiful
country this is where you come
to a call on the soul state
senator peak complex
representing all the parts of
seven companies in northeastern
new mexico thank you.
Good morning everyone and
steveline air from district to
by farming turn and thank you
for for having us here I got
here a little bit late yesterday
afternoon but I did get to do
some driving around and and see
some things i'm actually stand
out in a
can ever say it right and
it's just got these big this
little case that has this big
windows and then you wake up and
you're just looking at it the
mountain
can you start your day any
better than that.
Thank you my friend for keep
talking while I was running to
heal a similar district twenty
four
but also have a a lovely home up
here in touch that we enjoy so
thank you for having this year
today looking forward to these
medians are really important.
Good morning i'm senator in a
call to buy a sin from northeast
alba kirki and i'm thrilled to
be in one of my most favorite
towns in new mexico so thank you
for hosting.
And morning is chair that would.
I represent senate district
service courier coyon curry
can't
courier que
union and hearty.
In wish chair I want to tell you
a minute about
the weed harvest it's going on
and current county and quake
county right now it's one of the
best harvested with average
experienced with had great range
and spring we had cool weather
the weak turned out really well
and uh I just thank god for all
that he has given us I noticed a
lot of green grass round here I
know it's a lot of cocho and
espinole as I come through.
A lot more to go to sale well
this year thank you mister
good morning no mister chairman
member so.
Very much to our guest or
welcome to tower so this is my
district senate district six.
And up which encompasses area
wise part of tow so something
fair rear reba end of sales
again no this is always a very
were very honored to you to when
we have a legislative committee
service and also participate by
using our facilities and having
our meetings here and i'm very
very sure that we're going to
have a very productive a couple
of days again a warm welcome and
anyway that we can assist you
please so let us know you can
take your strip
now we're getting switch over to
my left and we'll start with
representative.
Good morning mr chairman good
morning everyone uhm mark duncan
I represent district too in send
one county and.
I'm grateful to be appearing
grateful for your hospitality
what a when a wonderful
community.
Thank you mister cherry good
morning everyone horrible
violence probably serving house
district fifty six leaking and
otel glad to be here.
Good morning mister chair i'm
joseph sanchez say serve
district forty call that's
moderate birth and negative
tosscounties and i'm from all
called it just north of here
about forty minutes away thank
you for having us.
Good morning chair jack chat
field mexico our district sixty
seven starts at ratton in the
pertalist that's covered curry
hard and quake same miguel and
union counties as cla- good to
be here in towards is not some
cool looks like you all in rain
are happy to be here.
The.
Good morning thank you mister
chair i'm representative merit
of dixon frame southeast
albuquerque has district twenty
thanks for hosting us.
Good morning george miosena
district for its
and one countings it's always
good to be in northern new
mexico it's like it's gonna rain
today or they're calling for
rain until that's always a good
thing if they want to keep it to
the west cause I know they have
enough in the east according to
center woods well will take it
no center woods and I have this
conversation to renter in every
quick complaining too much rain
enough rain too much care cattle
or too high to low disappeals to
hide so feels too low
they're a little high
thank you very much we're going
to go ahead representative.
The.
Thank you very much okay we'll
go ahead and invite our first
speakers to come on up to the
table governor
and uh as you're coming up to
the table we're gonna turn it
over to director solely to
introduce to us a new staff
member
so just wanted to wear the game
ago up there is so introduced
carville he's new program
evaluated for us got a been
economics uh
from u and m a and j d from
university arizona's finishing
up right you're finishing up
your phd which hopefully will
will wrap that up soon as well
before that he work for the us
navy and department of defense
and we're happy to have a native
of the especial valley
welcome thank you.
Okay without further do
we're so pleased to be here
again in your wonderful
community uh i'll turn it over
to the speakers maybe uh mr mary
will start with you and be able
to go down the line and
again thank you all so much for
being here and thank you for
hosting us.
Thank you mister chair i'm
listed here first would I be
happy to defer to governor
conscious to welcome us great
thank government please.
Good morning mr chairman and
members of the community
my name is editing a conscious
governor taus problem on behalf
the problem my administration I
bring you goodings from one of
the oldest and continuously
inhabited tribal communities in
the country.
Reappreciate the committee
choosing to spend the day
holding his intermediate
hearings here at house.
Engaging in meaningful dialog
and working towards address and
critical state issues that may
affect tribal communities both
here and across new mexico
as background mr chairman I have
no doubt that some members of
the community are already
familiar with the status of
chips understandings as
governments.
I have no doubt that some
members of the community already
familiar with the status of the
tribes and their standards
community but to refresh your
understanding
possible is a duly recognized
sovereign tribal government
consistent about tribal council
governor and were chief
we each have our own respective
staff as leaders within tribal
government we are responsible
for a certain are sovereign
status and inherent rates.
But more than anything we are
responsible for protecting our
people.
Our lands our culture and our
way of life.
We are a small problem but we
have a huge set of
responsibilities.
We are an anchoring people with
a language that you need and
distinct I don't think it's
spoken anywhere else in the
country
we have a rural view I believe
system and a set of cultural
practices that connect as deeply
to this land this place.
We are of this earth.
Our traditionally home lens
extend north and east from to at
home the place of the red
willows clear into colorado.
We have cultural sites in many
of those areas that have a
stable continuous present and
connection to this area.
I migration stories tell us we
have been here for hundreds of
years and perhaps longer.
We have over twenty five hundred
tribal members living both here
the public and in communities
across the state and around the
country.
Are people consist of
traditional leaders who oversee
protect and preserve our culture
and are ceremonies we also have
working professionals from our
problem travel members who are
teachers.
Lawyers
are artists and administrators
who oversee our tribal programs
and ongoing projects.
We also have a skilled and
dedicated work for us consistent
of tribal and non travel
employees many of whom come from
the town of touch and
surrounding communities.
Despite our best efforts we are
still struggle with creating and
maintaining good paying jobs we
have a housing shortage and we
don't always have access to
adequate health care mental in
behavior health services
we were daily
eliminate property and to put
programs in place that provide
our elderly our children and our
families.
We have social service programs
are tribal educating department
accord system law enforcement a
police force and a small
detention center.
We work to protect their lands
in a natural resources from the
dangerous drought conditions and
the threat of wildfire
weaving her have they heard a
buffalo among with our
agriculture program
we have a good working
relationship with our neighbors
the town of touch the county and
the local critical
we all look forward to the
summer tour a season because we
all benefit economically from
the tourist tourism industry
I also believe we have
established a good government to
government relationship with the
state including working well
with the government and the
legislative body.
I certainly want to recognize
our state center to bobby
consolidating a representative
christina or test
they have always been willing to
listen to our concerns and work
on us and state and tribal
issues.
There have been some key issues
and concerns that my staff and I
have identified.
Some we have been able to
quickly address but others just
seem to persist.
They have become challenging and
frustrating.
I am sure you have a similar set
up experiences
when the state legislature
means.
Or maybe you don't
and everything is as smooth as
glass and killed
there's a crack or there's a
break in the glass shatters.
Then reality sets in
often a good fix requires time
and money and agreement on the
best way to make the repair I
think as leaders we have been we
have all been there we all know
that some problems are be good
in others and require more
thought and so stories this and
more funding.
I want to make sure we share one
of our major projects at the
public that we are especially
proud of we have initiative that
will hopefully create jobs
sustained or economy and benefit
not just the public.
But also the counter touch and
neighboring communities.
By joining the tourism market.
For that I want to ask our
tribal secretary jeremy luhan to
come forward and share some
details about economic
development efforts along with
issues and concerns that maybe
of interest to the community.
To the committee.
Travel secretary low hon here is
one of our young and upcoming
abstending leaders in their
community here is educated
speaks are language and is for
me to with our traditional way
of life.
He was appointed to search just
like all of us who are in office
this year.
Mister chairman please welcome
secretary lohan.
Secretary
good morning thank you governor.
Good morning mister chairman and
members of the committee again
my name is jeremy lehin I am the
tribal secretary for touch
public
for the year of twenty twenty
five for the record even though
I sure the same name is the
governor of the state we're not
related
at least I don't think we are
I want to take this opportunity
to let the committee know that
about a heritage center to set a
buildings near the entrance the
public but has become the focal
point of our most recent
economic development efforts.
Some of the plans ideas and
collective collective effort
have started from petition the
heritage center is one of our
major economic development
initiatives which will hopefully
become a major achievement that
the staff working for us can
take credit for and be proud of.
Economic development at the
publo has become an investment
not just for it today but for
the years ahead.
And want to create good ping
jobs fulfilled hopes and dreams
of long term prosperity.
And on the overall sense of
community well being we also
want to create.
Other economic opportunities
that will hopefully last into
the future
let me provide some q pieces of
information that what not only
benefit the public but also the
town of the house and our
neighbors in the surrounding
communities as governor country
has stated.
The heritage center which I hope
you will see if you visit the
public is located within touch
public and grand at the rib on
on the public aboriginal lens.
The problem has secured a twenty
year license agreement to own an
operate to me at the hotels on
the property and we have
developed a master site plan
featuring test public heritage
buildings a hotel event center
shops restaurants and a plaza
the public is working to secure
funding for construction utility
and sight infrastructure.
The mansion in the museum will
sit on fourteen point seven four
acres.
And are located with within a
half mile from the pause in the
town of towers in the main house
with its incredible scenic views
was built in the nineteen
thirties as nine bathrooms eight
bats.
And there's a casino in the
basement
just kidding
we had extremely proud of the
economic development effort when
it's far from completion funding
is always challenging especially
when you're starting with basic
infrastructure.
We hope the next time you are
here you'll have more to show
with you.
The.
And I am certain the tourists
tourism industry in our state
and around the world are
familiar with the printed image
of our public we have used state
phones in recent years to
restore section to the old
village and I am hoping you
might have time to drive out
and to visit the public it's not
only a unesco rope site but it's
also a visual reminder of which
most secret us in our culture we
have life.
On the infrastructure I want to
let the committee know that we
are extremely thankful for the
support toss but who has
received from the state over the
years especially in the form of
capital outlay.
We have put those appropriate
dollars to good use installing
new infrastructure and replacing
aging and outdated water and
sewerlanes however the need at
the public foreign exceeds our
travel resources we need
accurate adequate housing for
our families new construction
including installing waterlines
to a new subdivision trenching
sure lines to existing homes
repairing and maintaining large
sections of roadway just
recently last week.
We did our down banking for the
first set of twenty three homes
that are going to be the first
major construction for the
public since nineteen eighty
nine
we've received state funding
over several sessions for
elderly decade day care center
in fact we just broke round for
construction last month in may.
Once completed the senator will
provide the most vulnerable in
our community with the care day
deserve we also receives and
state funding for wellness
center that will begin to meet.
The health needs of the
community as well as finding
funding for the justice center
that will be that well house are
travel courts align forcement
and provide detention services
providing safety and security
for our growing community is
essential in a priority we also
have plans in the design in
place for a new library to
brought in the learning
experiences of our children it
will be coming to the state that
we will be coming to the state
legislature with the hope for
secure finding.
I am sure many of you aware that
the skyrock rocketing cost of
construction materials the
increase in costs has occurred
after the pandemic and hasn't
dropped significantly.
In addition the supplier isn't
just there it's in demand and
continues to drive up prices the
staff at the public have been
working terroristly to secure
funding from different sources
in order to complete ongoing
projects again we appreciate the
capital outlet the state
legislature and the governor
have provided over the years.
A priority is the travel
education I want to move on to
another crucial area the
educational needs of tower
students we've engaged in
government to government
discussions and formal
consultation with public
education to department at it at
the district level but yeah we
have to yet to see full and
complete compliance with the
mandates contained within the
yasie martinez court ruling
we witnessed only peace mill
approaches.
And we believe which needed is a
bolt forward thinking
when I am sure when it comes to
educational initiatives along
with other could targeted and
reoccurring funding.
Tribal leaders especially here
in thousands of continued.
To point out that the travel
remedy framework offers a quote
equitable and transfer it if
solution is necessary to meet
the needs of the mexico's native
children and their travel
communities.
The travel remedy framework is
bounded in strategies and
recognized travel sovereignty
and should responsibility with
the state and school districts
for the public education of our
children.
We are the way the most recent
court decisions that requires
PED to create a comprehensive
plan in response to the twenty
eighteen court ruling.
The published must be
consultated and our education
experts must be involved
respectfully as the committee
not to shy away from doing the
right thing.
The recent order has a very
strict timeline pediment
submitted draft action plan by
october first of this year and
over the past years travel near
leaders including all popular
council of governors have
repeatedly called for
comprehensive plant to guide the
state's education and it
initiatives and investments get
the state has continued to
operate with that one.
Neither students continue to
suffer from gops and
opportunities and outcomes
compared to non need of
students.
And it makes a good tribes as I
had mentioned came together in
twenty nineteen to create their
own comprehensive education plan
to travel remedy framework t f r
since then tribe advocates have
used this plan.
To push for legislation and
increase finding to me native
students needs.
Through collective travel
efforts and with top help of law
makers like representative
dericative we have achieved
important policies and funding
for indian education through
indian education act we want to
recognize and take
representative linked he has
been one of the strongest
advocates for native students.
The new court order requires PED
to draft an action plan with
participation of steak holders
which wish include new mexico
stribes publishing nations
we since yearly hope that
happens because we want our
telstra into obtaining education
that gives them a deep sense of
personal achievement.
But one that is in a at the
expense of our culture a way of
life and our language.
Protection of land and
partnerships with the help of
our travel obvious this past
session we focused on protecting
our lines and not resources that
includes protections from
welfares and drug conditions we
should our position during
legislative committee hearings
that it's necessary to create
partnership with the state when
it comes to mitigation efforts
those problems has utilised the
tribal forest protection act to
network with state forestry and
the public has also a while
learned prepared in this program
but funding from the beer of
window affairs is limited by
formerly.
It does not provide enough
resources to adequately it
addressed the gradual increase
of fuel accumulations occurring
in high mount areas over time
you'll have fuel and has your
accumulations will continue to
pose a greater hazard and threat
and the possible loss of natural
reservations have gone unchecked
as the state has realized with
the hermes peak calcanian
wildfire.
Now that the session is over we
want to access funds made
possible to recent legislation
passed through the session
including the wells wildfire
suppression and preparedness
fine.
The finding in that bill will
certainly help the public
with firefighting and management
and control of wildfire alone
with suppression efforts.
The other is wildfire
preparedness for in which will
help with thinning vegetation
and feel build up the finding
will not only help with fire
prevention efforts on proper
lines but also an adjacent loans
including suppression wildfires
that made a crew on federal or
steak lands
we want to take the chairman
representative small for his
support and a spicership of
legislation during the recent
session that meet the funding
available.
Indian water rights fund the
public has involved been
involved in a major court battle
to secure its senior water
rights.
Public water rights or not a
mirror clean on paper but
reflect a long historic public
presence and culture identities
than
any desire to maintain our way
of life on her ancestral lens
and that includes access to
fresh water and preservation of
natural springs and occupiers.
This is a crucial part of our
claim those problem has reached
a settlement agreement with the
state several years back which
was leader approved by congress.
The public water right
settlement agreement is known as
the beater settlement a key
component is a state finding to
finish wells and poke lines for
non public mutual benefit
projects that includes the s c s
the town of touch the old
product water and sanitation
district and the mutual domestic
consumer association
changes in the economy have
created someone for seeing
issues stating federal
contributions were not inflated
adjusted producing a major
shortfall now that requires the
state legislation to respond
with an increase in finding.
We are able to secure additional
finding this past session with
the help of chairman small and
thank you for that mister
chairman.
And that finding will cover the
states fiscal obligation for non
travel costs associated with
indian water right settlement
agreements and this is a
fundamental principle in federal
and state policy known as the
non indian caution which is born
by the state it's a requirement
of every water right shellmen
agreement with tripest.
Public safety law enforcement at
the public is difficult due to
the complex system of federal
state and travel loss governing
indian country.
This complex pack patchwork
typically creates jurisdictional
gaps that are at basically
affect policing efforts are the
law enforcement officials follow
the rules criminals do not
recognize jurisdictions
boundaries and this often evade
accountability.
The insurance of state
commission is to the task public
police department will permit
its tribal police officials to
hand the violations of state law
committed by non indians within
boundaries of our travel lines
without needing to always rely
on state law enforcement.
We are also be able to provide
line forcement coverage of
reservation if necessary.
We currently have officers who
are well trained certified and
all covered by the department's
liability insurance continued
cross commissioning will provide
legal protection of our officers
who are forcing state laws
outside of our boundaries of the
problem we hope a bill similarly
to one sponsored by senator
schendel we'll get reintroduced
in the future session to further
strengthen public safety
protections both on enough
travel.
In closing mr chairman and
members of the committee I want
to thank you for allowing me the
time to address you this morning
I appreciate both your time and
attention and governor couldn't
show an eye or available to take
questions.
I hope you will get a chance to
visit our public during your
time here and see for yourself
first hand the use of capital
outlet to be pair and restore
sections of our building of our
village using traditional
materials hiring and teaching
our young people traditional
building techniques including
the art of making and using
adobe learning to plaster in
making handmade doors and
windows we hope you will come
out to visit as today and our
traditional calendar we
recognize one so we have
traditional denses this
afternoon we welcome you all to
come out in first ten experience
that they're appreciated your
time today tar thank you.
Mr chairman if the committee
goes out to the public this
afternoon
take parting dances that we're
having when you get to the
public tell them that you're
with the committee and you'll be
escorted in without having to
pay the speed normally people
pay thank you
thank you very much thank you
governor thank you secretary and
that's an incredibly generous
offer
great thank you will have time
for questions from the committee
will go next
or with you yeah either either
way.
Mr chair members of the
committee misdirector welcome
back to tells great to see all
of you
I have a few things that i'd
like to thank you for for all of
your work that you're doing.
Last time you were entails you
may remember
the road being torn up downtown
and that has all been completed
I hope you had a very nice drive
in and I want to thank you for
your appropriations to make that
happen although that we were
ripping the bandit off for five
years
the project now you can see it
looks great and a lot of the
critical infrastructure
underneath has been replaced
setting up our what water and
wastewater for the next at
twenty twenty five years
also i'd like to thank you for
the raised funding the rural air
service extension funding in
house bill tool very exciting
for the town of tows we are
having our very first connection
from towers directly to denver
international airport
ribbon cutting ceremony is going
to be this thursday at noon so
our inaugural flight is flying
in
locals are going to have access
to the rest of the world now
through denver international
airport at a very affordable
rate and that was made possible
through the raise funding so
thank you for that
and we also have our ground
breaking ceremony for a housing
project and this is going to be
on july seventh this may be a
model for the state on how to
create pathways to home
ownership and so these will not
be rental units and we're
working very closely with an
exciting developer who is going
to use three d printing to print
some homes and we're shooting
for a sale price of around two
hundred thousand dollars which
is well below half of the
current media and home price
here and house so very exciting
would welcome you all to join us
and july seventh and on a side
note
I do serve as well as the
executive director of the new
mexico association of regional
councils is the seven councils
of government and economic
development districts and I know
today your agenda is focused on
environment and education but
would love to percent before you
when you're ready to discuss
infrastructure and give you some
updates on growth funding and
the the results of the capacity
building funding that was
awarded in house bill two.
And the cards are doing some
really great work in partnership
with the f a right now to help
get projects completed and get
those capital outlay funds spent
on behalf of the many rural
small communities across new
mexico and with that welcome
again great to see you
thank you.
The.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee welcome to touch it's
the pleasure of the university
of new mexico tasks to host
these meetings and it takes a
lot of us to actually make that
happen so i'd like this morning
to think stephanie madrid who
has organized much of what we're
doing today embarrassed wired
who will be your host
during the rest of the the
meetings
I think that one of the
beautiful things about house and
one of our strings is that we
support each other and work
together and I hope that you're
going to see evidence of that in
here stories of that during the
time that you're here this
morning i'd like to think holy
cross hospital and how ski
valley for providing lunches for
you certainly
bank for and house community
foundation for providing your
breakfasts and theography and
house bakes for providing your
snacks and teased while you're
here and buy some star who has
provided some of their product
as well
it gives you a sense of who is
in house and what is like to be
here during the time that you're
here on your stay
i'd like to think the
legislature for the support that
you have provided for through
opportunity scholarship and
moderate scholarship for higher
education at the university of
new mexico tasks we are seeing
the evidence of those dollars
making it possible for students
to come to school or to return
to score in far two thousand
twenty four we had our highest
and role
of the history of the
institution we started we opened
and twenty two thousand three
and were initially recognized as
one of the fastest growing
community colleges in the united
states and as you can imagine
covered put the break some that
we have recovered we are as I
said in rolling it rates that
are higher than we have.
I have ever before and I am very
clear without the funding that
you have provided for new
mexicans to come to college is
making that possible and look
forward to having an opportunity
to tell you more about the work
that you are helping us do but
just want a situation relative
to UNM t house as you were
coming in from the south you
passed our clour campus and our
newest facility which we were
just provided the former new
mexico national guard armory
which is bound to be the unm t
house work for center i'll be
telling you a little bit more
about that directly over to in
this direction is real grand
hall which is where we have all
of our health care programs
and I invite you to look at the
mural that's on the outside of
of real ground hole it's a mural
of historic women of house that
we are art students and art
faculty and put up on the
building the subject matter for
the for the mural was selected
by the tous public and so it's a
very inclusive art project I
think speaking again to that
that sense of what makes us
strong here is when we are doing
things together so welcome and
thank you
thank you very much okay we have
a little bit of time for
questions or will go to the
committee and we'll see if there
are any questions from committee
members
great we'll start with senator
video and then senator with
center pity please thank you
very much mister chairman and
thank you mayor and the governor
and presenters and director and
mister secretary I just quick
question under comments mrperiod
mayor related to the housing
project can you just expand a
little bit on the
were their state dollars put
into that project we did the um
opportunity enterprise act that
representative dickson and I
worked on very hard a while back
and that we could have worked
force housing is that the
project you're talking about
this project mister chairman
mister standard thank you
this project did include state
dollars a reserve a significant.
Capital appropriation for three
point two million dollars as
well as a one million dollars
appropriation through
the our performance that had
come through
what was difficult about this
project is we wanted to create
these pathways to home ownership
rather than rental units so what
is unique is we're putting a
very significant second mortgage
on top the second mortgage
covering the gap between the
sale price and the median home
value.
Uhm
so the second mortgage around
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for given after twenty
years and again the the three d
printing concept which I I think
many of us have seen on facebook
you to
now we're going to see it in
real life and it moves down the
track I think it builts one home
in seven days
pretty exciting stuff mr
chairman i'm glad you
highlighted that I mean we've
got to do everything we can
we've got about a forty two
thousand dwelling unit whole and
deficit mister chairman here in
new mexico this is a very
serious matter so if you could
tell us mr mayor
you know sort of end you sort of
had this idea this vision to get
this thing done
i'm sure there is ninety three
things that got your way but but
what was the end and start to
where we wouldn't you believe
you're putting shovels in the
ground and actually beginning
the project
my very first meeting after
getting elected three and a half
years ago was a housing meeting
and so the first step really we
had to get together build a
community partnership so is the
town the county
the lanther p UNM towers central
bank and we created a a
nonprofit called tous housing
partnership that took us about a
year to create that a lot of it
was trying to navigate anti
donation class how do two
governmental entities create a
non profit
once we figured that out it was
another year of fundraising and
that's when we were awarded the
capital outlay appropriations as
well as
one point two million from
senator hyneric's office through
a congressionally directed
spending request
the third year was planning
engineering going out to beard
and now here we are in the
fourth year about to break round
in just a few weeks.
And it was a long process and
this was the first time this has
been done in a very long time
and we've seen some of these
projects to current sanity
twenty years ago and we worked
closely with daniel where was
who provided us a lot of his
expertise
so it's we wanted to make sure
that we were going to get this
done rate the project out and
chummy so better than it's next
to the youth and family center
it's gone through this is going
to be its third iteration of
development the first two
they're about ten homes built
and the program didn't work out
really well there was like a ten
year gap another ten homes were
built in that program didn't
work out really well and it was
my intent to get all we have
about seventy two large that I
want to get built out
so so chairman and and ma-
mister how many units will this
app this current project just a
number if you could this first
phase is a seven this is a pilot
project were very optimistic
that things are going to go well
but we don't want to do all
seventy two at once if this
first seven goes
goes well we're looking at
applying through the department
of work for solutions for that
housing appropriation that they
were rewarded to complete the
building and mr mayor just one
last question then so now that
you been through this three and
a half almost four year process
to get this project done what do
you think you're next.
How much time were your next
project either because you know
if you have how you have a
materials cost as an example
four years ago they're wildly
different than they are now
right so so what do you think
the the gap has is down to now
to start a project and actually
get a shovel in the ground.
Now that you have learned a lot
I have learned to be patient in
my term of office.
The real you know what we're
experiencing and not just in
housing and the lack of
contractors and i'll give
another example we also just
broke round a couple months ago
in our new airport terminal
and that was five years in the
making that was awarded by the
governor in twenty twenty three
capital outlet that went out a
bit twice and we had no
responses finally we had to go
out and and solicit a ces
contractor.
And I think I mean those are
five million dollar building
it's essentially a large metal
building and we thought we'd
have contractors just chopping
at the
If you had to start a project a
new right now what do you think
the timeline is going to be to.
Get shovels in the ground
actually get a housing project
actually started.
Yeah.
If this were another community I
would say three years
the work that we've done I think
sets up up to support other
communities with a a model that
we've developed so maybe cutting
that down to a year and a half
to two years
but just the delays you know if
there were a capital outlay
appropriation in order to six
months from
when the bill is passed to when
we get a grant agreement.
Going through procurement all
those kinds of administrative
steps I think that's about a
year in itself okay so chairman
I guess the last thing I would
say then I I i'm assuming your
report part of the minister will
be eag and all that kind of
stuff I highly recommend that
that you spend some time getting
some airtime with with the other
municipalities here and just
share your experiences i'm
hearing some of this all over
and and you know that the the
timeline is just it's ridiculous
I mean it's you know how can you
really plan for with a budget
for something that's not going
to start for three years so I
think that you know learning
from you would be really
important thank you chairman
thank you were you gonna go next
to the senator woods and and
then reps have vincent then rub
somewhere chance center was very
very quick
mister president which chairman
not yet okay
okay.
Sector and that's your talked
about your captain outlay or
near.
And how could are you on that
capped out late you pretty well.
The capital outlet has been
really really key and in our
success and moving as forward
again with the heritage center
um I just think center
we've been able to again just
like no marriage and in the
infrastructure aspect to be able
to
provide the the groundwork for
for anything that we're doing
that's been able to to help us
secure
the water she will agreement
with it with the town of towers
but it's also been able to to
update services for
water services
which mean
really really updated we've been
able to provide that
framework to be able to
allow our growth to happen which
is just been a long time coming
but I think these past years
we've been having steady
progress we've been having the
support which has been able to
allow us to to move forward into
integral especially in the
economic development aspect you
you also talked about uh
the water settlement have you
increased your accounts
overcated land due to that water
so everything has already been
appropriate through calculations
we have the increase
of use actually we've been
trying to implement agriculture
which one had been the long
standing
downfalls that we've had but
we've been being able to raise
that and bring that up to to to
status again it's been able it's
it's one of the the keys to our
growth as well
um
but also being able to to have
the access for the water not
only for our public everybody
along the real band you know we
the headlighters sit on travel
and start at a tribal lanes and
they passed to us come through
the town of tower speed into the
real grand and.
Make their way out into the golf
so you know within that aspect
we we we look at the continued
support but we also look at the
preservation and also the need
the traditional aspect of what
water is to our community not
only us here but we recognize
within the town the tower still
used their water use the history
and the traditions that are are
slowly being moved out but we
know that these are these are
things out we want to make known
that the water has been done at
the keys to our success in this
valley not only for users are
tribal community but also
ringing everybody into the
valley as well in and also
mister chair and which blood you
talked about
what I think you said
was that that the travel
government offered qualified
immunity to your law officers
just that right.
No notion what we what we
provide is that the the tribal
law enforcement aspect
within that we were able to
govern our citizens within
within the travel community
however the laws that are
implemented to our travel folks
do not hold water with outside
non travel members
this create solid of of
confusion within the the
judicial court systems because
of these laws so
every nine tribal commits chrome
and travel lengths
if it's out of our hands unless
it's been appropriate then we
would get federal entities
involved in that aspect but yet
we're so within that aspect of
cross commissioning crossed your
stiction we'd be able to allow
our office used to be able to
imp- enforce and only state law
but also tribal loss as well I
would thank you very much for
those answers and in mister
where masters you talked about a
housing projects starting at two
hundred thousand for a house is
that also including the land
value.
Mr chair senator was good to see
you again
two hundred thousand would be
the sale price that includes the
land at this point and we were
very fortunate with this project
because this is a property that
the town of touch has owned for
several decades
however when we're looking at
future projects we we do need to
account for
all of the costs which include
infrastructure in land as well
it in kind of where is that land
located
that is just to the south of us
next to the youth and family
center so it's within the town
limits and very close to a blue
bus lying the north central blue
bus line
thank you german thank you very
much next we're gonna go to
represent
thank you mister chairman my
question is for her secretary
long and you talked about a lot
of the wildfire mitigation that
you're that was one of your
priorities and have you been
able to access any of the fines
that was passed through the
sersion and
will the telstra web low will
you be
doing your own risk management
and identifying your problem
areas or will you
have the state come in and help
you with that initiative
representative would thank you
within the that aspects we know
we have not been able to to have
access to to state funding as a
pet
currently we are talking with
senator hyndrick's office we had
a big window then back in
december of twenty one that
created a lot of windfall in
damage to a will be this area
if you travel to the ski valley
you can see reminance of that
event which happened a lot on
travel end that's within the
wilderness.
Uh we do have a compact with
them
within a bia we have a working
compact with the cartoon
national forest to identify a
key project which is the public
which it's right along touch
which extends to the east of the
communities of telstra like view
um
so
are relationship is is this
celerifying that aspect you do
the US d a for a service
we're looking at alternative
avenues will be within state um
due to multiple jurisdictional
we we are bordered by four
service reported by b l m or boy
quoted by stick four history so
it creates a pretty
unique situation for the tribe
we have a forest management plan
that's recognized the department
of interior
however with the way things are
going on the federal level
really concerned as as to what's
going to take place with in ba
um as of right now we're looking
at alternative measures to to to
seek how we can support our fire
program are for history program
and again a lot of trust
responsibility from from ba
department of interior
however with recent talks
that
it seems to be being handed off
we were six thirty eight tribe
herself governed
so within that aspect we're
looking at ways of of supporting
our tribal needs but again where
we're looking at the assistance
of the state now with him and
but also
to see which senator hyner can
do on the federal level for for
us as well thank you mister
thank you secretary
or your travel residence having
any problem with.
Insurance
we are home multiple areas of
insurance where identified is a
flood zone
so yes yes we do have an impact
with the the insurance portion
so
we're looking at ways to to work
with that uh to identify
how we can mitigate those
aspects but but again you know
if
it all depends if you know on
what happens you know we do get
a a catastrophic fire where
we're
we're in a great great area of
concern with that aspect so
yes we're looking at waste you
disappointment
they can miss a chair and just a
statement so
during the session we did get a
lot of while far mitigation
bills passed and it's a
bipartisan thing and I think
we're all on the same page that
were thirty years behind and we
have to we have to manage this
fuel or it will continue to burn
down people's houses and it's
going to cause flooding events
and
unfortunately we there was an
insurance bill that we were
run
running and we were able to get
the new mexico fair plan board
to act and unfortunately the
support tended of insurance as
cloud all the all that time back
on her caps and it and she
called it back on the twentieth
of june and now our people can't
get insurance again and
traditional insurance is not
going to come back to the table
until we do our due diligence
has start taken some of the risk
out and that means fuel and one
of the initiatives that's going
on in lincoln county one of the
areas that I serve is they've
we're able to take a lot of our
burn material to a facility and
their terminated into shavings.
And their cell in these shavings
back for stable bedding to the
race tracks so it has it has a
value to it they're talking
about bringing in a bill plant
and using a lot of the the bert
materials to make biodiesel and
we have to start thanking and we
have to get this fuel out of our
lands or we will continue with
beetle kill we will continue to
pay higher rates of insurance
and we will continue to burn
people's houses down thank you
mister chair thank you very much
uh next we're gonna go to
represent or test and then
senator
thank you mister chair welcome
so wonderful to see all of you I
have I have to make a point that
building housing takes everyone
rate it takes a village and it
and I want to recognize kit
carson electric cooperative for
being such a huge partner with
this things to the mirrors
leadership leadership at the
council the towers housing
partnership it really takes
everyone take build the housing
we need and we need way more
than we have the resources for
so i'm sure the town of the
county will be back trying to
get some more funding from us
because we have to build it if
we want to have a community that
is thriving I want to ask a
question of a governor
there are many people on this
site at least cause this is who
I pulled were very interested in
today's festivities could you
tell us what time we should be
there
if you can be there by at least
two thirty at the earliest and
we dance whether permit in today
will probably be densing until
six thirty seven o'clock in the
afternoon
thank you mister chair thank you
governor i'm also i'm so proud
of all the work that's being
done at tas publo
you are a valued partner and
neighbor in.
Friend and anything that we can
do to support what the public
needs please let us know thank
you and thank you doctor
cotatoes thank you very much for
somewhere tests.
Thank you are mister chairman to
our members so
they just want to thank all of
you know for your very well
welcome in remarks to the
committee but I just want to
highlight one thing is set on
the last couple of months so
with a kid cars and call up and
also with you and him towels
they have been holding some
community forums into anything
with preventing fires and just
getting that information and
getting no different speakers in
different perspective does being
extremely successful earned or I
just want to mention that
yesterday
about a mile of pasta solved
method as university in towels
are fire broke out and within
the four service and
tells fire department they were
able to put it out with them
probably an hour an hour and a
half and that's the kind of
response that you really want to
see is some the whole thing is
when you do have a fire is from
point day to point be health as
can you get towards and really
address it instead of them
growing from one acre to fifty
acres in them from there even
more especially with them the
element of the high wind so we
have been experiencing you know
that can really make something
here very very bad very fast but
on those forums were well
attended and you know I think
it's a community we just go more
of with everyone just
understanding and having that
information and just being
prepared he know definitely is a
big plus for everyone it's a
wind when thank you thank you
very much
we'll go to senator sender thank
you mister chairman thank you
governor travel secretary
stever no chancer
just group quick question with
for the tribal secretary on it
for s.
I know you guys you're
self governments so do you run
your own forestry program as
part of that or is that the best
deal overseas on your behalf
good morning senator schendel
yesterday we was under the the
compact six thirty eight we at
one of the primary focus is
attaining our own travel
forestry
however we we still fall under
the guidelines department of
interior p a
as far as the forest management
plan the wilderness management
plan those all have to be
overseen um before the allowance
to to move to assume that wrong
but it's something that we've
been wanting to do especially
with the longer standing
tradition that we've had within
their fire well fire community
you are all wear that we have
the the telstra place no balls
which is well then fire to um
been recognized federally
when we did take our six thirty
eight status in two thousand six
that was one of the the four
features that we had to to go
back to ba
under the compact we we are
allowed
a pretty small budget
but we have also um allowed to
use
uh department of interior
vehicles for for fire
suppression within that compact
we've been able to to purchase
too well for our injuries that
is our primary source of income
for providing four four street
program however
it's inadequate for staffing for
for supplies I know that that
was one of the big
travel responding trust
responsibilities that ba had was
to surprise supply that
supply it and cost to running
out proves
those are the difficulties that
we are having now currently we
have.
Twenty six twenty four red
carded personnel to welfare
engines and
we've been able to
assist with
severity is of today and then
we've also were able to assist
the hictory of nation with an a
small fire couple weeks ago
again short details and again
severely is what is the main
drive um that's something that
we have with the reimbursement
policy for ba so any trouble
finds that we spend for for
welfare mitigation those are
reinbursed back to the tribe
but again these are
areas of concern we we attained
lands from the the the cursor
national forest uh during the
return of blue leak
so that will do this management
plan is going on fifty five
years being outdated that's one
of the big key factors that
we're looking at is this is how
to restore
using traditional ecological
knowledge um to to support the
wilderness but also looking at
protection and preservation of
our watership to the through the
water department but also
incorporating that with our
forest programs well so again
difficult you're her to culture
those those those are the gaps
that were lacking in order for
us as a tribal nation to be able
to co- correctly sustain our
natural forest but again the
educational opportunities that
were afforded to us are young
students
we're looking at that aspect you
to to generate and and regro
that fire program press
appreciate the income chairman
and I think travel sector for
the item appreciate that and I
know that you know we've
appropriate some funds for how
should cruise in the state and
if you are responding to these
things i'm not sure of these
kind of things that were not a
cooperate with the tribes as to
in arm because their right
appear
their lands you know.
A but in on state blame or
service lance and all of these
are all or interconnected and so
forth so it's something that
maybe when we need to look at
and so for so thank you
thank you thank you very much
center next we're gonna go to a
representative.
I think you mister chair and
thank you panel thank you mayor
and
secretary and also our leader
union I
i'm just curious with the
changes at the bedroom level
that we've seen in the last five
months what would have been the
fiscal impact on your
organizations as far as those
changes coming down the line if
you could just briefly tell us
what the situation is in the end
and any problems you're facing
given new directives that seem
to be coming in daily.
Mister chair representative so
first
the impacts haven't been major
however there have been some
grants that we are awaiting
grant agreements
grants it should have been
awarded months and months ago
and that are just up in the air
also it's making us hesitant to
apply for additional grants it
takes a lot of our staff time so
where anything that's from the
federal government right now
we're prioritising state
opportunities and looking at how
we can fund projects ourselves
and just due to the uncertainty.
Good morning representative
horror is a tribal nation we
we have a lot of concerns
it's
it's pretty hard to to.
Pinpoint where we're actually
all of this is coming from a lot
of guidelines coming down a lot
of
requirements epa was one of them
a lot of our projects ah just
excuse me the
the solar the solar project that
we were expecting
that got put on hold and that
was already worked that was
going to start being implemented
is as a ground breaking of this
year
within the change of
administration that that aspect
was removed we were wanting to
it working with
icast we were going to create a
our own shoulder array
to support not only travel
community but to town a touch as
well
that aspect is still limbo where
we don't know
when or if it's going to go
forward um as far as health care
goes where we're we're looking
at issues at that within tribal
community
the education
we're looking at issues within
tipo we're looking yeah it's
it's a very impact of pretty
great
and so we have established with
the open finding that we
rewarded we have been able to
establish a
forward finding for
programs in her needs within the
within a trouble administration
so it kind of gives us a little
bit of breathing room but two
three years down the road I
don't know
with the other federal um with
with which we were what will
happen federally I think we'll
know within the next couple more
months I think to where it will
sit perfect how it will look but
I think we
we have some money to to to help
us out but I think once that
diminishes I think we're going
to be looking pretty rim at that
state but.
As of right now where still ping
the waiting game is do it
release going to it but how
we're really going to get
rightly impacted but those are
just a few with a things right
off the top of the pie that I
can.
Thank you chair and think your
secretary luhin and.
And that's what we're say i'm
seeing another communities it's
really it's really the cut back
and staffing that has lead to
really uncertainty as far as
delivering promise grants
funding that we're there and are
and just
just see uncertainty involved as
a that really has a fiscal
impact on both trouble
communities and cities and towns
and villages really it's it's a
whole state so thank you for
that thank you ma'am
mr cherish and representative
had it out happy to tell you
about what the impact that you
and in the house has been we're
a subwardy on a ground from
highlands university that has
jeopardized ten thousand dollars
of funding for us we are also
seeing grant delays in terms of
when funds are being received
and when grant submissions are
are opening up or results on
grant applications are being
heard currently on thursday we
have a ground do we had a thirty
day window for applying for that
grant typically we would have
sixty to seventy five days for
that ground seventy one percent
of the students that unhm's
house are pell grant recipients
or qualified for to receive pell
grants so all of the uncertainty
about power grants and the
reduction essentially and
funding a qualification for a
palgrants increasing the number
of credit hours that are
required and other aspects of
pelrants will absolutely impact
our students one third of our
budget is federal dollars so
we've been doing a significant
amount of contingency planning
to prepare for whatever may
happen we don't know and as you
said uncertainty is the the mood
of the the day of the month to
see his and
and so what that means for is is
more hour issues nationally we
know that ceo's are feeling a
five year low in morale for
themselves in terms of leading
and these times.
We are waiting for a recession
waiting for you know whatever
else's coming
in that has meant that for us
when we're running searches we
have smaller pulls were seeing a
lot more risk of version in the
in the climate people are
sitting take if they think that
they count so lights of impacts
and mr chairman
all of you i'd like to thank you
for your answers that gives I
think a lot of insight to as at
the state level
on how we're going to plan for
the future to an end we're kind
of all sitting in the same
I I hate to say that but it's
true thank you thank you mister
chair thank you thank you very
much
I want to think you all panel
that you've said a very strong
start for our day here in tales
thank you for your leadership
particularly with the publo
governor and tribal secretary we
deeply appreciate you being here
and you're very kind invitation
in merit there's a obviously a
great deal to see a great many
partnerships that have gone into
creating it and were excited to
really have started the day off
with you and thanks for the
committee for great questions
okay we're gonna transition into
our next panel two quick things
first i'd like to ask if
everybody uhm could join me in
just wishing a very big happy
birthday to jelisa rodriguez can
we get
she was exceptionally involved
in the planning of of many of
our this visit uh including all
of yesterday in a great job
second as we're inviting our
high green hydrogen panel up
we're gonna go to other members
to introduce themselves
and i'll go ahead
we're gonna go ahead and start
with representative ed eda
and then go to senator
schendelgood morning everybody
great to be here i.
Susan here I represent district
forty one which is kind of the
start of espinella
I go up btw to the border
through china I go out to cuba
includes sandabor county and
then and tell us I have for
prisings upper lower road around
hondo the respect to us and the
whole colleague the party task
county so a good to be here work
with a lot of people in the
north and i'm very proud of the
other citizen leadership in this
county.
Thank you very much next we're
gonna go to represent our tests
I think you miss your chair good
morning everyone i'm christian
retails I represent house
district forty two which is
where you are right now at most
of tales county are excluding
the person representative had at
a representative.
The.
Great okay we'll go ahead we'll
turn over to you mister meir if
you want to how are you the
three of you want to perceive
them maybe you would be
beginning will go from there.
If I don't yeah the very good
you can hear me now
mr chair members of the
committee
thank you for having us today
thank you for those who attended
our
tour in question yesterday
I i'll just do it with a brief
overview of the project a little
bit of a history in plastic
question was a mining community
for ninety eight years up until
twenty fourteen and twenty
fourteen
june the twenty fourteen to be
exact eleven years ago chevron
announced that they were
shutting down the mind and it
would never no longer be a mine
or money community on that they
we last three hundred jobs that
affected the
quaestar
tells county parts of motor
county and parts of southern
colorado
so just didn't affect west of
the economic impact was a cross
northern new mexico
since that day the mine has been
in the reclamation process so
there was a record of decrease
signed by the federal government
and chevron saying that they
need to restore that mandates
close to what it was
traditionally used as possible
so we have had contractors in
ports off of the last eleven
years working on that process.
What should I run has told me
that that's going to be a
bout earth through your prices
that will go into the twenty
forties
so right now we have a few jobs
for contractors have heard
locally but we still have some
of those former shevering
employees that have moved to
other minds in carl's bad
somewhere living as far as north
accord or south of court
colorado
what we're trying to do is a
with this green hygiene project
bring back some of those jobs
both work to reman long term
this project will create those
long term jobs good paying jobs
for a community
we also want to try and keep
our youth and are committee
last in twenty twenty four we
graduated nineteen students
requested of the nineteen only
nine left tenth state and
question so we need to find core
option is for those kids as well
and this is an opportunity for
them as well
we started there green hages and
processing twenty twenty two and
right after I
was elected mere we got a year
do you e
committees leap graph that was a
done through anywhere else on
a green hundred and feasibility
story
that lasted about two years we
also had
so they all had center you might
push to university they did an
economic impact and I was a
force and the green agent
project
we are asking
as the village request of for
fifty million dollars
to complete the solder build out
for this project what that will
do is create a constant revenue
stream for the village for at
least the next twenty years
that would allow us to hire
first responders.
As I talked to
our staff in truly at the
village
worth thinking that that will
allow us to hire up to twelve
firefighters
two additional police officers
and a couple of additional
public works employees
that's something that will
make question one of the safety
the northern new mexico
if you are now i'm a if though
you didn't know I would came
from
the public service I was a five
hundred and empty
doesn't that allows us to do has
changed question we won't class
or to we were an engine
community we were mining
community for ninety years.
Probably beyond that but as an
official mining company was
there for ninety eight years we
want to continue to be an entry
community hydrogen will allow us
to provide engine to the local
cooperative
but it will also pass me allow
so I energy down the line as
well so we want to continue to
be an energy community we want
to replace as many of those jobs
as possible
we want to replace some of the
economic development that was
going on two week
as I said last night I this is
the first project of its kind in
the country
will be a model for other
communities across the state and
the country to eats see how
we're doing this we're not
looking at using
ground while we're looking at
using water from waste or
treatment plans there is
recycled water.
Once this is in place we're
gonna start seeing the lot of
visitors to question to see what
we've done
there's also
besides that producing hydro
there's a possibility of
somebody starting a.
Ugh for light of business with
among
produced by hydrogen as well
there's other opportunities
there's also oxygen this can be
produced pure oxygen
so it's not just about
replacing the jobs but the
economic development
opportunities are in this for
this project.
Thank you very much mister
next will go to mister res
thank you miss chairman members
of the committee
welcome to telstra in the entire
circle
i'd like to follow up on with
the marriage comments were
related to
energy production in northern
mexico first electors start with
a little bit about kaycars and
electric in the fort the cop was
formed in nineteen thirty seven
a today were a diversified co op
carson besides its electric
infrastructure we have almost
thirty one thousand members and
where the second largest coop
in the state behind the good
friends at hemmers amounts are
we own a proping company we have
about thirty four hundred are
proping customers and we own a
broadband company where we have
about fifteen thousand
subscribers and the corp offer
is gig service and we own in
operate to about three thousand
miles if I were optic through
our territory
we're also working with him as
balance on extending our fiber
network into the abeque in a
cold area
hopefully this summer
since our separation from our
power supplier in two thousand
and sixteen
and we signed a long term
contract with goosemine energy
some of the primary reasons
where we wanted more rate
stability
with our membership when we were
tray state starting two thousand
two we had twelve rate increases
in fourteen years or twelve
years actually
that's just an unsustainable
foreign members
we also wanted or membership
wanted a more access to
renewable energy or basically
choice and so as a result of
trying to work within that
process we are unsuccessful in
gain gaining those goals so we
moved for and two.
Good one energy which is allowed
us to
build enough solar energy around
our system for a hundred percent
daytime solar and we currently
have another
nine mb facility under
construction as we speak with
some battery storage
so we have currently about forty
four megawaters of solar and we
have sixteen megawats of battery
storage and we've operated
battery storage
for about three years now we use
a testline megapack every new
and sold facility will have
batteries that has become
extremely important in our
overall strategy for welfare
mitigation as we need to be able
to create a microgrades around
the area so we can address
extreme weather bence and
potential while fire
verse what's happening in the
industry the day which is power
safety power shut us where you
just shut off the power and
basically shift the risk from
the coop to the member in that
move we're also looking for a a
long duration storage option so
is the mare mentioned in twenty
twenty two
we start working with enrail are
we also we're trying to be part
of the wish team that new mexico
I guess a four states had
created again unsuccessful and
being part of that so we move
forward with her own study about
how could we make a quaestar and
energy hub I and at the end of
the day we did a pie conducted
the study of completed study and
then applied to the federal
government for some funding
kickers and was successful in a
two hundred and thirty one
million dollars award to build
three hundred and facilities in
our footprint and the first in
the major one will be when in
question and new mexico on or
adjacent to their tailings
facility which is basically west
of the village requester.
We are currently negotiating
with chevron on the property
the property needed for that the
silty o
the second and that is in the
partnership with the village of
question the second plant is a
plant in tous partnership with
the the town hotels in telstra
problem to build a soon and half
megaway facility adjacent to our
was while treatment facility in
thousand and the third is a
partnership with peakeries
problem and build a one and a
half mb facility
there at pictures to also enable
their goal of self determination
when it comes to energy all
these will be the start of
a longer recent storage to start
will have twenty four hour
batteries
or enough hydrogen to create
twenty four hours of battery
storage i'll most importantly
we will also be able to sep to
isolate these up microgrades
you know we learn from what
happened in a red also learned
what happened fires in mora that
when you do shut out the
powerless service you lose
everything you this
communication water pumping
first responders we think the
best way to approach that is to
be able to isolate with longer
recent battery
devices or installations I
require power communications
cell towers water pumping
electricity for
if if most communities that you
come from or like our community
we have estimated about a six of
our membership or medical
devices that require electricity
that you have at home so what do
you do with those people when
you lose electricity and so are
our goal is with the creation of
these microgrades through
hydrogen we can I start
isolating just not for energy.
But also for the other
where I would say quality life
benefits that you get from
having
I diverse
kind of resource we have solar
we have batteries then we have
hired
the whole idea with that is this
is basky and economic
development project using energy
it's it's really to assist a
request done in this surrounding
communities that were impacted
by the closer chevron and you
know i've i've lived here all my
life so we've seen kind of the
even flower of a mine when it
closed there was always that
expectation is going to come
back and then come back and then
close and when they if you ever
sought there is a big elevator
shaft for the underground
person when they demolish that I
think that send a signal to the
community that minimum was not
going to be in our community
anymore and so from the three
hundred jobs you know when I
start at the coop there was a
thousand people working at that
line
it was twenty percent of our
load so just imagine in your
business if you lose twenty
percent of your load in a
chevron was a good customer we
made a margin on them you know
they paid on time all those all
things that you want in the
business when you lose that you
just again put the burden back
on the residential small
commercial and so we feel that
making it an energy helped you
how did you is important for us
I think it also compliments our
environment there's this
discussion are both in the state
and nationally you know green
houses in your green products
for his spots of fuel we think
that all of those can be used
just green energy fits more with
our economic profile we're not
directoration of community a
hunting scheme fishing by
clean energy fits with our
economic.
Base it's also wildly accepted
by our membership and so moving
down that a path the whole
concept is
we got the funding is used
reclaimed or industrial water
used so if you're not taken away
from the residential small
commercial or from the air
community you know where the
american from years ago that
whole family spelling was a big
army community
we think this can compliment in
hopefully bring some of that
back and as as a mere mentioned
and I think most real
communities are seen this so we
think this is a great
opportunity we're losing our
young young kids to the cities
they're they're leaving rural
areas and they're not coming
back and so what type of
opportunities are we going to
create
to keep them in rural parts of
our state and so the whole idea
is taking a reclaimed a fluence
waste water we're working with
new mexico state to help us with
the science of how do you clean
that to
an election isa unlectualizer
just imagine kind of a big
bucket with two leads
and boils in the steam one one
of the steam streams is hydrogen
and the others
we capture the hydrogen in a big
tank and just stored there until
we need it it could be extreme
weather it could be a will fire
situation we have to de
energized powerlines it could be
a market opportunity where we
could sell this on the market
two places like alba kirki
once that decision is made to
release the power is you release
this gas through a fuel cell and
then if your sell through its
magic increase electricity and
then that is put into the grid I
were also looking at ways that
we can not just make this a
battery or a peaking unit that
can we make it in the future
some type of baselone unit.
So that weekend address
kind of lack of generation in
our system and I think most of
you have read that we just do
not have enough power in the
western states and so as we we
mentioned a whereas the mirrors
mentioned
this could be a model for other
communities whether it's a green
hydrogen or blue hydrogen or
whatever resource works I think
getting energy on the on the
great that is localised and that
seventy transmission issues I
think is talking to senator
woods new transmission has
become a big issue in the state
of remaining the lack of it and
so how do you transfer power
back and forth if you don't have
transmission which you do is you
build it locally and if you can
build it locally with local
people and employee then local
citizens I think that's the best
equation to address our issues
facing us that are not energy
related where do we do about the
medical
device issue what do we do about
the economic development where
job creation issue and then we
have local power to support that
so at a high level mischairman
members of committee that's the
the project does have me made a
many many partners as a
mentioned just to reiterate that
the two problems that we serve
task problem is going to supply
some of the solar to the tows
facility pickeries is going to
supply
the solar and batteries to the
to the picture is telstra to the
taste project and the town it
house is a partner in that
project and tells the village a
quaestor in the question site
and in the final thing we're
looking as we talk about energy
across the the the northern part
of the state is where this
solar facility world is hydrogen
facility sits in quaestor a
where we've started about six
months six months ago a
geothermost study there is a lot
of your thermal that runs from.
At least here in south atous up
along the west side of the rift
the real grand
so we are also looking at that
as a potential option for
baseline generation and we think
the potential for geothermal in
this area is hi and so that
would then complete the co op's
kind of mission in making sure
our energy is renewable but also
put you rest the myth that
renewed energy cannot be
baseline due thermal can be
based load and will be renewable
we should know
in about three three to six
months based on the analysis
where the potential is
of geotherman and then i've
finally this project is moving
forward we are watching what's
happening at the federal level
with the tax credits that has
not the swayed our board for
moving forward you know we have
two options we can complain
about what's happening and we
can just do it locally and we
decided
take too much energy to complain
right I rather use that energy
in building some opportunities
we've hired to consultants went
to the environmental assessment
when the start
electrical design of the
electric infrastructure we need
and want to do the environmental
start the safety study for the
hydrogen a once that is down
then we'll start the design of
the hydrogen facility our goal
is to break round december one
of the two thousand and twenty
five
to put in context if we can
break round by december one
of two thousand five k cars and
would be eligible for about a
hundred and fifty million
dollars in hydrogen and solar
credits and that's a lot of
money to live to basically leave
on the table that currently
isn't play and so with their
term is the chairman and the
members passes over to
my good friend from new mexico
state.
Hi good morning mr chairman and
also members over the committee
it is really a great honor to
have this opportunity to uh if
you could turn off the
microphone
and to a present ways at mister
meir and the mr race about the
water research and the green
hydrogen production to support
the economic development in new
mexico and my name is pays you
animal professor environmental
engineering at a new mexico
state university I also serve as
the research director of from
your mexico produce water
research consultion so to begin
with I want to start ways a
brief introduction about the
hydrogen why hydrogen is
impotent for our states so the
first slide of my presentation
started the ways that I agree
this background comes from the
us department of energy it shows
that hydrogen is a worse at how
energy carrier and the industry
of feedstark in many sectors the
first to ease the when we
generate to the hydrogen handed
headache and can be used as a
long term storage energy storage
if we have access renewable
energy and then the hydrogen can
also be used to generate
electricity using the fuel
source or it can be combined
always natural gas and the
propane to generate to the
electricity of example in a
increased her where we use this
as the and it is storage as the
feed stock better for example if
in the premium basin ordinary
that sound home basin if we have
the headache and production we
can bland up to twenty percent
was the natural gas so this can
be distributed the two the
nation
and also the headache can be
used to ing a few cell
electrical vehicles for example
amazon.
And the warming and even in los
angeles there is a few cell
electric vehicles they use the
hydrogen to a power the passes
the tracks and others and also
as the mayor mentioned hydrogen
can be used to generate amonia
and the messenger those are the
technical products so
hydrogen is very important and
the
it's also are estimated by the
to in the nation if we have this
hydrogen industry to all
potentially generate over a
hundred forty period revenue and
it will create it over a seven
hundred the southern the jobs it
will reduce the green house gas
emergency sixteen percent so we
talk about job of creation and
if we have the hadget and plans
it will have the construction
will have the process in june
years we will have the hydrogen
a fielding stations and what you
have the manual factors to
manual factory electronicalizers
a few thousand and materials
membranes are catalyst so will
have a you know new jobs create
the ways this
industry and that we also talk
about I didn't color you know we
have a green hydrogen blue
headache and
you know what does it mean so he
didn't can be generated using
the faster fields for example
that natural gas and in this
process that we carry it so on
the steam messing reforming its
generator later for c o two and
this is now the environmental
stable a sustainable so we could
it's a great haggagent but if we
can capture this carbon and the
for storage reform utilization
and then it enhance the
environmental sustainabilities
to weak how it's a blue headache
but in kid carson increased her
case we have in though the hedge
and produce this through the.
Though process basically it is a
water spreading and the
electoral chemical process we
use a hundred percent renewable
energy then we generate a green
hagagen so green hydrogen is a
very environmental sustainable
and uh it does not immediate any
green house
I guess is and that is that keep
topic a four hour and your
mexico but there are challenges
and the opportunities to relate
here to the green hydrogen
production the first one is we
talk about electrolicists it
requires how to appeal water as
the
race talk about where do we get
the ultra appeal water and that
are we don't want to compete the
ways our residential uses
drinking water or agricultural
water so we can use the
alternative water such as
building support waste water
bracking water our state has
allowed to bracket water we can
also use produce water from the
on the case industry to generate
to the ultra appeal watcher
so how much water do we need and
the arm for electronics it's
because we generate to the
hydrogen hydrogen is a number
one in the periodic table and
the the atomic wait is one so
had it in marikille is too if we
want to generate so are one
kilogram of hydrogen we will
need the eighteen litres of
water so
but sorry it will be nine
leaders of water and then think
about we still need to purify
the water of water for cooling
in general to january the one
kilogram move for headache and
we need about ten two fifteen
beaters off water and there are
if we want to have one make a
while to offer a hydrogen
production plant and the the
water knee that will be about to
two thousand two three thousand
balance per date and if we want
to have a twenty five meet that
way to overhead item.
Plant that means that we will
neither about the seventy three
thousand balance per date of
water that easy equivalence
about two hundred two three
hundred fifty household water
dement per so that is how much
water we will need
so first is in the where do we
get to the water and then we can
use alternative water the second
one is the power requirements
and the in general if we want to
generate one kilogram of
hydrogen we will need about a
fifty two fifty five pillar
water hour of electricity that
is under slide for and the in
your mexico we have allowed to
solar energy will have the wind
energy potentially we can't even
have punk haggle so we can use
renewable energy to power the
hydrogen production process
so I also want to give you some
updates about the research and
the development activities at
new mexico state university and
water research and the green
high digit so I still remember
two years ago I I remember that
date very well it is a june
twenty eighth when the lfc came
to visit and mess you and it was
leaded by send the attempt on
that at that time and the entire
lfc committee come to visit us
and we also basically that the
cabinet hutchinson designation
plans because and the message
has a pilot a demonstration
project and the two trees are
the bracket water and the
convert as a brying into the
chemicals to achieve zero
equipment this chat so two years
ago I really want to hope there
would be a not opportunity and I
want to show you the progress of
the research at the mess you
know we have done substantial
research hydrogen production and
the we continue to the bands the
technologies and practice water
desalination and the produce
water treatment.
And that are I just cannot
express enough for my gratitude
for the strong support from the
nfc and our water research and I
want to show you that we did not
feel your trust within that feel
yesterday support and that I
also heard that in august you
may have a meeting in las
crucials so I would who hardly
invite you to visit and miss you
again or we can also visit him
at sorry the burdened off the
brackish one water national
design and national research
facility we have our testiber
that unproduced water treatment
and also we use the renewal
energy to the sound and they
took the brackets water for
agricultural your occasion so
I would be very happy to close
to that tour a day
so for the
great headache production
project we are owner to be part
of the the kid the carson
hydrogen production project we
have already collected the the
water simples alternative water
simples for analysis and then we
estimate either the treatment
trains to treat this water to
the out you out for pute water
level so we will continue to
contribute to and the mess you
expertise to support this
project so in addition we also
are clab rates that ways the
place power only evaluating the
alternative water supplies to a
supporters that you actualizer
and
the slide the five you will see
a cabinet the
it is the assistance it has the
water purification system we can
feed the water and then then
generate the ultra pure water
fault you'll actualize there if
you come to a msu and then that
I would be very happy to show
the ultra few water for action
system for electronics
so either the two work on these
commercially available hydrogen
production technologies.
And the mess you is also working
on the green hydrogen production
using the waste our system so
doctor we are one is here and
he's a professor in
environmental engineering and
that he is leading to patented
technologies first one is to use
waste of plastic we have a loud
have waste a plastic and a lot
of them went to the environment
or in the landfield then we can
use the solar energy and then
use a catalyst to decompose as a
plastic to generate that had so
that research is
that was treated and that we
also work away as another
company called the global impact
of ventures so this is how the
gave project and the web very
grateful that the new mexico uh
economic development at
department suggests to award a
funding to have a demonstration
project at the end of miss you
so we work aways the company and
the new maxical local companies
who are going to build a very
big solar system and then we use
the solar energy to power the
reactor the reactor has the
catalyst inside of it and the
then that has the catalyst to
cancel the bleed to the water so
electricaliser is a use
electricity to spread to the
water but for this technology we
use a solar energy directly to
split to the water and the dent
to generate the hydrogen and the
oxygen so for the water and for
electronizer we need to use the
ultra pure water but for this
technology we use the
alternative water without
pretrietment so we can use
minister for waste water we can
use brackish water uk we can use
produce water so this payleads
have project we just had the key
cuff meeting a early june and
then we are going to build the
solder panel of system and their
reactor was a categories to for
demonstration.
At end miss you and it is unsly
the six you can see are a catern
a diagram of this project
and at the same time we also
generate to the other catalyst
you know for water spleeting and
it is still a ongoing and this
are at animals you so we
estimate it how much cost it
would be to generate to the
hydrogen so ray now the current
hedges are protection cast is
between you know two dollars to
maybe five to six dollars per
kilogram of hadredan but with
this new technologies where
developing ads and the most you
will be estimated the cost is
between one point one to one
point five dollars per kilogram
or for hydrogen so that is a
very close to the deal you go so
the due has a goal basic this
year twenty twenty five we will
have the headache and production
cost about two dollars per
kilogram and by the year twenty
thirty it'll be about one dollar
per kilogram so without working
towards our deal equal
and the in addition to this are
the faculty in the electrical
and the computing engine your
department at the enemies you
they are also working with pete
carson integrating the hatter
was a micrograph so in the once
we generate the hedgeagen how do
we use this hedge and we can use
its through the fuel south and
then to generate electricity for
the electrical vehicle for
transportation and then we can
use it for family or you have to
call are support
rural areas and then for a
husband hose and then we can
also you know combined to with
natural gas power and the energy
storage so it will have a very
universal applications
I love this out will be very
happy.
To continue to support this
project since through the kid
carson and the ways the cp of
cristal
attested to summer rise
developing the green hydrogen in
new mexico offers several
strategic environmental and
economic benefits because we
have abandoned renewable energy
a solar and wind and that this
will promote the economic
development and the creates a
new jobs for our state it
provides is a long term storage
you know especially when we're
having the access renewable
energy and the weekend story
it's a four extended period uh
zero emission and the also this
will reduce the reliance and
false or feels and centralized
this is especially important to
forward the rural communities
that we have many in our state
and the the cutting edge on
aren't d at and the mse will
support the water research and
the green hydrogen development
we can use the waste water for
hundred and production the
plastic waste and the also we
can further improve the heat and
the water generation during the
hutchison and the fuel sale
process because it for the
electoraliser we use the water
to generate the hydrogen and
again in the few sale process we
use the headache to generate the
electricity we also generate to
the water can we do a water
cycle in this case we will
improve the efficiency will
won't improve the water
consumption we will reduce the
cost so I believe the innovation
are at the end of my weekend
furthering hands the efficiency
and they were also or addressing
the infrastructure gaps and the
micrograde how do we integrate
that hydrogen was that
distribution system the safety
concerns eventually we also want
to provide the information and
knowledge for the regulation and
the policy.
So we that are I want to estance
you for your attention will be
happy to answer any questions
you have
great thank you to the three of
you were going to go straight to
questions and start with
representative chat field then
go to representatives and and go
from there some chatfield please
thank you mister chair my first
question is for restores
you talked about a lot of
interesting things and and a lot
of our
of our local energy companies
are being bought out by out of
by multinational corporations
and in a we we also just started
appropriate
company with a
coop because
there was a multinational
cooperation came he has bought
our property in all of the
little home grown propane
companies all of our gasoline
suppliers all of our december
suppliers bought by the same
company from our state they
don't care about us so to make
that for we started also a
property in company
the first thing that you had a
face
you guys are doing a lot the
first thing you had to do was
navigate the buyout
of the tray state
which is a huge
can you talk a little bit about
how you
how you did that
oh miss chairman the
representative chat field so
first I think ours was a more
unique than the other costs were
re negotiated at the price so I
basically the initial price was
a hundred and thirty million
dollars to buy out at the end of
the day it could cause the
negotiate to thirty seven and in
that thirty seven million we
also got
but four and a half million
dollars worth of transmission
and substantial assets then what
we do it is.
Through the bordering determined
and with our members how long
does it take to pay we decided
to pay this off in six years and
so what we did is based look in
our low profiles
we waited into the larger
commercials but we kind of
tacked it onto the bill
or so that we could pay this off
in that six year period
so someone's
it was higher and someone says
lord depending on I can win time
were high snow making scary as
they paid most of the bill
residentials and pay that much
so in doing that in in july of
twenty twenty two we paid off
that obligation and immediately
the co op the board reduced its
wholesale rates about about
thirty three percent
today or cost the power is about
forty three percent of the
overall bill it was seventy five
percent will be left with one
issue representative that
is starting to creep up though
in in its challenging us is
transmission the cost have
doubled and so we have
transfisher costs with will pn
and entry states or some of the
savings that we've had have been
in up with transmission
we're trying to build our own
transmission cost and
transmission system but if you
look around sixty six percent of
the territory kickers and serves
is federal lands whether it's
tribal for a service for blm to
it's hard to build in this area
but that's that's how we did a
lot of a lot of member outreach
we talked to members about the
impact where it meant to them in
the long run and a today
we are looking at a reach
stability from gooseman our rate
states the same till twenty
forty sorry is not going to move
on that till twenty forty or
solar rates are all fixed except
for one contract.
And the again the other issue
that's pushing a pushing a rates
of a bit is batteries but then
you're looking at okay what's
the cost of resiliency what's
the cost to make sure if you do
have a wildfire that you can
orderly evacuate people to make
sure people are safe and we
think those battery assets we
are as I mentioned yesterday we
were probably a couple of weeks
away from being able to sell
those batteries into the market
place which it offset our cost
where we're a night time winner
peaker the state in the mexico
peaks in in july
around three to five so when we
are not using the batteries we
can sell those batteries to
someone who needs i'm in the
western states and through
gooseman that can be p and m
that can be arizona and about it
california so at the end of the
day to your initial question
it's paid off also by being able
to sell our excess power into
the marketplace
so
you said transferation is
expensive distribution as
expensive we opposed down last
night my phone was later just
from from my family but the no
elected it was there in the dark
you know
so
so you have transmission costing
her just for tribution causing
looks like you guys are doing a
good job of dealing with thank
you for your presentation thank
you
my next questions are product
assume is that great
so
you answered a little bit of it
right at the last two year
presentation there but
so seventy three thousand
gallons per day for for the
project that you're talking
about in that supplies energy
for how many homes
no a mentioned that it is a how
much water demand.
For homes
I understand that I understand
that's what you said but what
i'm asking you is the other part
of the equation
you you're creating a battery so
you're taking water and you're
making hydrogen in your story in
the hydrogen then the higher
general produce electricity so
if you have seventy three
thousand gallons of water and
you convert that into hydrogen
how many homes will that
hydrogen power for one twenty
four hour period seventy three
thousand gallons of water equals
how much electricity
so we need to do a backward
calculation
I do everything back chris
yeah so um in though that will
be about um if we say a fifty
kid away to our
energy will generate one
kilogram of hydrogen and then in
that case oh we will generate
about
four hundred the southern
catalan of energy so for a
everghousehold that in new
mexico how match your eases are
energy uh electricity that we
need so so miss chairman a
representative
could curse and users have some
the lowest three years about
four hundred and fifty kg hours
a month
this facility in question could
several to fifteen thousand
homes
prouder peak in about twenty
five thousand or non peak we
don't have any air condition
here
most of the homes about fifty
one percent use natural gas and
a twenty five percent I use
propane there is still about
eighteen percent that use a wood
and the balance very little
electric load here.
So this is really designed when
we put in a microphone state to
serve from the hondo
facility all the way up to the
northern two colorabo for that
twenty four hour period so so
almost half of our system can be
covered by this for a twenty
four hour period
very good so.
I've been down to the the decel
plant in in our parcel and they
they pop up salt water
they they cleaned it up and then
they pump
back into the ground the
resident all right more
concentrated form of the water
what will you do with the by
product of your produced water
once you rather to this plan
and rate so a right now as you
sorry representative you mention
that
the interview the huttons in the
salination plans they pung for
the prior twenty two miles two
three injection whilst and the
out what we do are at the macue
is we take this bring and then
to concentrate it to our way
about the fifteen percent over
the sought and then we use the
technology car that the bipolar
membering are actually alices to
generate the asset and the base
so the asset and base could be
reduced and sight for ph
adjustment because when we do
water treatment we also need to
do page adjustment and the the
we will have access among tool
for seed
and the base we can sell it for
example premium basin is not far
from
we have premium business in your
mexico so we can't sell the the
asset the fall the wow treatment
of in this process we also or
even though the demonstration is
at that table hatching some
dissonant nation plant but we
can't also use the same
technology phone new mexico to
support the strategic water
initiatives because if we do the
practice water desalination will
generate the prime what do we do
always this prime and if we
inject it back to the ground
then this is also waste of hour
a water.
Uh what we do is that we can
extract this water
in addition to drinking water we
can also use the the by product
for agricultural irritation and
then at the sodium clarity in
that bride we can generate to
the ascent and base for south so
we expect we can't she would
zero equipment this chat
so mister chair you can extract
several usable things acid
for for us in the all field uh
you can
i've heard some
minerals that are used in
batteries and that sort of thing
come out of it what is done with
what
what's left goes back in the
ground is that true the unusual
portion of that goes back in the
great
so a rain now
and our approach is to not put
anything back to the ground
because it in the brackish water
we have out different types of
minerals for example chromeride
will generate the asset and the
sodium will be used to generate
the costic solder that is a
chemical and we also have kausea
maganisium and a citicar range
now what we do for the cost on a
southeast we can generate the
chipson for example gipsum could
be a sore amendment and the
cause young carbonates will be
used for the cement industry and
so we want to recover all the
minerals from the bracks water
so we will not you know use it
as the waste or in the foreign
disposal last question
mister chair
whenever
you create you take electricity
and create hydrogen you use
water right yes I assume that
whenever you barnet hydrogen.
Burn is the only word I can take
to when you use that hydrogen
you tell me what the word this
is for it I assume that you
create water
do you create the same
seventy three thousand gallons
of water do you lose water in
that process
do you save that water and reuse
it to make hire general locker
recyclable battery or do you is
it clean enough to dreak
calculate as that water that you
produce mister chair
mr chair and the representative
that's really a great question
that is our goal you know to
have the circular water system
so we were now to waste any
water for this amount of water I
already counted a for example if
we use the municipal waste
walker from the treatment of
plant and the data is a
secondary affect we still need
to treat that water to generate
the ultra appeal water so the
municipal was water is different
because it has again in it so we
may need to generate some aren't
waster stream up currently
with either the
no economic assessment we look
at the mass balance at this
amount of water we use for
hedgeton production is very
smart for the waste of water
stream and it is about to just a
six percent off with the waste
water stream generated and that
are even though we still
generate some are waste when we
generate the ultra appeal water
this waste could be branded ways
of the secondary affect to get
to the return credit for of
course irrigation and the may be
for other applications and there
are during the electronics this
process and we will use water to
generate the hydrogen and it
also generates his oxygen.
And the in the fuel sale process
this hydrogen will be a used to
generate electricity hydrogen
and oxygen will be you know
combined to generated this water
in this case I I think you not
we can make a the full utilized
oath with the water so our goal
is to minimise the loss of the
water in the entire process so
mister chairman my question is
do you lose water during the
process or do you come out with
the same amount of water that
you started with we do lose
sample water in this process
so in sorry I should obviously
see you that we still
so we do lose some water because
we also have the water used to
fall cooling and then we have
the water generated as a vapor
at higher temperature eighty
percent so in this process in
this new study we're doing at
animals you is to capture the
entire water for example
we have the water loss in the
paper but to then we can use the
compensation process because
this is a pure other it is the
water then we can generate his
we can contends this water to
generate to the pure water even
though we continue to use it or
a we can use it to generate that
drinking water because it's
water he's very clean
thank you mr chair thank you
very much I have chatfield next
week and representative
thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation I was
really looking forward to this
and and I think you you all have
exceeded my expectations and I
just want to apply to you for
the incredible work that you're
all doing in this area
quick question mr chair mr rays
you mention geo thermal and i'm
just wondering if there's a
specific joe thermal company
that you guys are working with
right now
is charge a representative there
there is.
It is most cases we have
executed and the aids on that
but we are
actually doing some studies as
we speak
thank you thank you mister chair
that's wonderful to here and
then you know i'm interested in
the
use of different waters for the
hydrogen production and so I
appreciate the discussion that
you're having on the different
types of water and how you can
utilize all of the minerals and
um
you know by products that result
so
really quickly um doctorship
would you would you agree that
hydrogen technology and produced
water treatment those areas are
evolving extremely rapidly right
now
and
err mr chair and the
representative yes so right now
this area is progressing very
very well especially related to
user on the green hydrogen and
the but related to using
alternative water for had
production and the that is a
steel
very innovative that's why we
are very excited to receive the
found the from the evd you know
to do a pitlet to demonstration
at animals you
think you must return and thank
you and that was a follow up
question that I had which was
how much was the award for for
the pilot project and who are
some of your other partners
the entire award is one point
six million dollars and that
it's the involved in the
construction of with the solar
system and the the ground the
work and there are then also
include the house of
characterization work and the
water quality analysis and the
tea analysis thank you mister
chair thank you and
am I correct you're working with
pesco
is that one of your partners
have been.
This in one region
yes okay excellent that's great
it's it's really nice to see the
uh partnerships across
industries supply change and all
of that and then
last question mister chair
forward the the technologies
that that miss you is working on
I noticed that there's have been
some patterns awarded and i'm
wondering are you working or do
you know
is you aerohead who is working
to commercialize some of these
additional packs
mr chairman and representative
error head is how ping the
researchers at and the massive
to file the patterns and the it
is a joint effort between the
arrowhead and the researchers
because a researchers are also
very familiar with the
technologies and we already have
the you know industrial partners
are full collaboration I think
of that is a joint effort for
commercialized those
technologies thank you so much
thank you all thank you mister
chair thank you very much and
next we're gonna go to
representative dow and then
representative editor or stem
down thank you mister chairman
and thank you for the
presentation i'm looking at the
slight but at a six and just
trying to understand um
so you're creating
the you're creating the water
is to chairman and there are
representative so we are not
we have not a creating water but
we use the the alternative water
as because a water edge to has a
hydrogen so under the photo
catalogic oxidation process and
the the water will be split and
then generate the hydrogen.
Thank you thank you mister and
thank you for that and is is
this are these closed container
processors there and evaporation
rate
the reactor is a close the
system and so basically we have
a solar pen and then the solar
energy will be concentrated and
to the reactor that the reactor
has catalyst in it but is a
temporary tree is high because
we have a solar energy and it's
generate it will evaporate to
the water as the vapor and the
dad his way this is a
simultaneous hydrogen production
project weighs the water
recovery system as well because
we have alternative water and
then it has a vapor this vehicle
where we'll
capture it and then compensate
so it'll become a distillate
thinking mister terror and so
then what is the last
evaporation rate
through there has been some
through the
through the heating process but
you're capturing the emails
what's that evaporation
so right now the evaperation
rate we expect it is about a
seventy percent seven zero
percent and the budget was a
compensation our system we can
capture almost all these water
because this is kind of like a
ceremone evaporation and the
condensation so we can capture
compensation is quote the water
because it is a water vapor if
we can have lead to the water
could down we will get us at
this to eight so they had to use
the purify the water thank you
thank you mister chair and thank
you for that what are the the
regulatory barriers that are
currently in place for doing
this
that it is mister chair and the
auto representative at that is a
great question
for this project to the arm it
involves using the alternative
water we can use the for example
municip.
Water up racial water I think
that there is a limitate area
and the as long as that we can
get to the permits for
construction and then we
generate the headache working
with customers to use that
hydrogen
if we use the the produce water
but you know we we all need the
the permits process and then for
the permitting of the produce
water right now we need to go
through ways new mexico
environmental department and the
produce water is now to allowed
for the this chatch in those
surface water discharge not land
application but we english
states where encouraged to use
the water for interest show are
uses close the loop system so
there is now this charge in this
process had to do production and
that are we do not discharge the
water so we have though either
municipal waste water bracks
water or produce water we use in
this close loop system and then
the distillate generate we can
use for other purposes for
example maybe electronics is
processed where we can purify
this water to ultra pure what
because it's this delayed we can
further purify it er for example
we can use it for at least have
sent her as a cooling water
system and that we pay use it
for send me conductor industry
we all need that the ultra
appeal water just to one example
are incentive to resat area and
the one there is a company
border
border place digital it want to
build a digital campus so they
will need the water for the
internship uses and the
eventually I think that we can
maybe do a combined energy water
system you know we use
alternatively water to generate
energy and then this alternative
water counts will be purified.
To use for internship uses thank
you miss chair and thank you for
that and so now i'm on slight
nine and they starts with a
bunded renewable resources
when you're talking about
abundant renewable resources
you're talking about rackish and
produced water and or or what
are you talking about when you
talk about abundant renewable
sources
and talking about a solar energy
and wind energy
thank you so in addition to a
renewable energy oh we also have
the practical water and that we
can use for produce water it is
a more focused on the premium
basin and also in the same
compassion that water could also
be utilized to generate energy
thank you mister and the reason
why I ask manager the reason why
i'm asking this is because
waters not in a bundle source in
new mexico so if in this
particular project are you using
fresh water here
you mean for the keeps cars and
project yes for this project
maybe mr race can also help to
answer and we are using
alternative water this is a plan
chairman representative
are our goal is to use
wastewater out of the charon
plant so from question you think
five or six miles
east is there an abandoned mind
that is full of water they pump
up pump it out every day they
pump out about a million gallons
a day and treat it and they've
indicated to us they have forty
years of water so for our
project you know less than a
month that we have enough water
for our for electricity on an
annual basis
in close broke similarly
facility questions was while
treatment plants and so we're
looking at that water antenna
tells us adjacent to waste what
a treatment plans.
Right now that a fluent goes to
a golf course of talking to the
town about carving some of that
for us and then a peak
responsible to have lagoons and
as a as a doctor pays said
they've already taken water
samples so we now know where
it's going to take to and a
clean em but but argo is to use
that water industrial water uses
that doesn't take away from
residential or again community
and there so when you add those
in there's a lot of water just
cat you can't use it for me and
you to drink so to speak
they give us fair and thank you
for that
it also says on a summary that
it's zero missions but when you
clean power generation but wind
and solar it's it's pretty dirty
to make wouldn't you agree
mr chairman and the reference in
the tip
if we take the life cycle stand
points in though when we talk
about using the solar penalty to
make as a solar penalty it's a
request to resources as well but
as compared to the farcel fuels
if we use false or feels to
generate that are the hydrogen
in this case where will use a
hundred the percent through
renewable energy from the solar
that will reduce the the green
house gas emissions and the
reduces of pollution
and thank you mister chair and
thank you for that but you're
talking about as we generate the
energy that it's clean but
you're certainly not saying that
creating the mechanisms for
solar and wend and the life
cycle and storage of the solar
and went is
clean
I don't think you would say that
mr chair and the representative
yes from the life cycle send
points you know out of materials
it's that requires the resources
they can think it was true and
so when you talk about using
alternative water supplies I
think.
That's what you're referencing
is the way streams that's what
the waste dreams are and then
are you are you guys for me are
you familiar anyone with the
similar the produce water
research at new mexico tack it's
more with the permian basin
or even the highlight program
that was funded for the premium
base and I think it was for lee
county those dollars have been
reverted or well even though
they're doing they're doing the
work at new mexico tech they're
not allowed to use the water
even for industrial purposes and
in lee county I believe those
dollars are now being reverted
because they never did get the
permits to put it into practice
those I believe and at least in
lee county they wanted to use it
in agriculture production so I
think what i'm hearing you say
or hope is that the permitting
process with the environment
department you wouldn't face the
same barriers because it's not
it's going to be used to
generally energy in a close
container and not used for ag or
any sort of practice it's not
going to water it golf course at
any point right mr chairman and
the representative yes so
for this particular project it
will be a close loop system and
then then produce water or will
not be released into the
environment so
the permitting process that will
be much simpler so right now
even in texas texas tc
is advancing permitting that
pilot projects for agriculture
irrigation but in new mexico
since to a few weeks ago cc
passed the the reduced rules and
then the new mexico environment
department will are implemented
those rules so those permitting
or regulation process is uh
improgress but in new mexico now
surface water discharge.
Now land the application agree
country regation currently is
allowed but it's a new mexico
state university and the new
mexico produce water research
consulting where do we
substantial amount of work
unproviding the information and
that data and is a knowledge to
how put the state regulator
agencies to make the deceiver
about to a if we treat the
produce water to this level
through the treatment trains you
know multiple treatment
processes can we make this water
safe and the one we talk about
safe over this water eighteen
mouse the safety related to the
quatic life fish water fleas and
that bacteria ouchi related to
the human house human sound
minds were doing all those
analysis we're also doing the
are anymore toxicity study using
the mice so how these research
are in progress and the
if you have the time opportunity
to visit animats you I would
lave to show you our the
research that we're doing
attendance you because our goal
is to make this water safe for
what we use to protect our
environment and the public house
thank you mister chairman think
it sounds really exciting and
we've got to find a solution so
I appreciate your efforts thank
you excellent thank you very
much next free and go to reps
then representative lohan and
keep going from their reps have
edit thank you mister chair
thank you panel
discussions for louise because
sometimes we have these
conversations at the house about
the cost of renewable energy and
can you just tell me I don't
know if you can give me this
number what is the monthly cost
for kid cars and
participants like for a family
of four would it what are they
paying on a monthly basis could
you have a number like that.
Mr chairman representative in a
foreign residential use it's
about between sixty five and
seventy dollars a month
in a kick arson has and raise
its retail rates since two
thousand fourteen so we have in
reason for twelve years
comes out about you know twelve
to thirteen cents a kilo hour
thank you for that thank you
mister chair because I think the
other thing in for all co ops
is we have low density we're not
competing against p and m or xl
in a kitchen at seven thousand
members I think the car that
really chat field has is maybe a
couple thousand so they have
half half a customer promise so
you're you're cost of energy
just gonna be hiring the rural
areas because you just don't
have other people to pay for the
amount of infrastructure that we
have to build so I think our
rates are very competitive
that our competition is in the
pin members of the world because
we don't have that top of
density and and we don't want
that
no and i'm mister cherry totally
understand that but I just I
just want the record to show
that that that's a pretty
reasonable
rate for for residential
customer i'm i'm just saying
compared to my rate it's it's
remarkable
and a fermero take a mister
chair III
need to understand you you're
requesting fifty million what is
the relationship of that many to
the to the hydrogen project to
the kit cars and hydrogen
project I I don't I don't
understand the relationship
between that request and your
work with the green hydrogen
project mr chairman no
representative editor the fifty
million dollars that we're
requesting as the village
request I will build out the
solar facility that will then
produce.
The power that will be sold to
kick or some electric for the
green hydrant facility
that's what I needed to
understand so think you would
did you and add something to
them and louise mister chairman
and representative as a
it was mentioned
the electrolicist process
requires the power to create the
hydrogen that's the purpose is
this facility that the village
requested with a build four k
cars will be used to create
their hydrogen for the facility
I think it also goes along the
lines of about when when
we're doing the same thing with
telstra problem they were going
to sell us leave its ten mb
electricity to create the
hydrogen at the task facility
and a peaker is going to sell us
when and half megawater solar to
create the hygiene at a pictures
problem so big becomes more a
community so everyone wins so
they'll request I get some
recurrent revenue in the tanner
towers tells probably pick a
same model except this is the
biggest this is the biggest
facility that we were operate
for them and I thank you very
much for their answer because I
need to understand so what
you're saying is that these
projects are closely inner
twined and without without all
these other
without these other funds you
won't be able to really complete
this project as designed is that
correct
okay thank you mister chair
thank you very much for that
reps and blue hundred and
represent little
thank you sir chair for the time
to speak I just want to say this
is you know the innovation that
we have a new mexico where we've
come and it's it's been a long
mile if you will and where we
started mr charles to the
the legislation that you started
here twenty nineteen with
produced water and then you know
it's it's let us have these.
Very uhm amazing conversation
around energy and the state of
energy for new mexico so I want
to thank you for all your work
doctor um
these mayor you are
showing woods how we bring the
set the self you know and mse or
whenever premium university is
coming into the north and really
working together in our other
universities I and I see others
represented here how we are we
are solving the problems
for the arturent issues and for
the future is to change my my
questions are going to go along
the line of where are we in the
energy need for us I know we're
specifically talking about
carson region of
service but you're well where
and we have the panel nose what
is the energy need that we have
in the state and bringing on
hydrogen aren't you the
degreed so to speak of being
energy source and combining that
into what we're talking about
the uh microgrades because my
group gives from the
infrastructure if you want to
start from the infrastructure
where we need to be for the
state and what might how micro
goods get us there especially in
our rural areas and the
investment we need to make there
and how are investment into
green hydrogen right now is
what's in front of us where we
are
in bringing there on how much of
that is going to actually help
us with the entire need a energy
need for her state there is my
question thank you mister chair.
Chairman representative you know
that's really a tough question
for kick hours and cause i'm
just looking at what kick ****
needs in potentially any market
opportunities for excess
the place that that really is is
the answer is really with the
prc all all utilities have to
file in a great resource
planning documents or at least
plans of what kind of resources
they are gonna have to serve the
the future needs of their
respect of areas
appear we're an outdoor
recordation community are are
you know tourism and skin is our
biggest industry so that's what
we track but as it was mentioned
around the service area with the
with meta and some data centers
that's going to require a lot of
energy I think the labs although
samsung sending car allowed
energy as they go into a I
computer
but I think that those answers
probably reside better with the
invest on utilities
tray station in western farmers
thank you mister chair and i'm
bringing that up because this is
going to this conversation just
around hydrogen and doctor see
you shaking your head if you
wanted to add to any of that
and yes mr chair and the
representative
i'm i'm thinking about four hour
states our state is the
the cop of you and the gas
producer in the united states
the second email you I think of
the six in natural gas and we
rely heavily and the farcel
feels I think up but and the
other hand our state also has
abundant solar energy and the
wind energy was the green
hydrogen this is opportunity for
us to develop the clean energy
source because hydrogen is not
only the clean energy for
storage but also this is
industrial feed stock for
chemicos production as well.
In the even though
we talk about the produce water
I think could the produce water
right now it's considered as the
waste the string if we can't
convert the produce water into
hydrogen and then simultaneously
to purify the water for other
beneficial feet for purpose
applications I think these will
really bring the on energy
sustainability and the water
system to our state am also
thinking that one we go to the
premium basin premium basic it's
so try we have so much solar
energy and that we also have
ourselves pipes ready to to the
natural gas and if we can use
the solar energy to power the
electronics system and then if
we can trurify that to produce
water for industrial use close
root system then we generate to
the hydrogen our state it will
become a renewable energy
leading state so I do think that
the hydrogen brings are the
opportunity to support our state
related to environmental
sustainability and the security
water security and the strategic
position thank you mister and
that's what i'm gathering from
here right now i'm looking at
your mister chair the page eight
and
where are we at scale to having
to creating
this model
or are we where are we in the
prices in in advouting to create
a scalable model and right now
you said it's a hundred one
point five million dollars that
you have to do this is that
correct
mr chair and the representative
a tester for a clarification
when your talk about that one
point of five million dollars is
add to for the gave project fund
either bay that.
Economic development department
is a chat I am trying to get
clarification for me because you
mentioned you had one point five
million dollars and I
was towards trading this system
no so clarification on that and
then where we how far are we out
to having something like this in
place yes so for the one point
six million dollars it is for
the photo catalogie called
project to generate hydrogen
using the catalyst and the
alternative water so that is a
pilot of demonstration project
um and to generate this green
hydrogen based on micrograde and
the asting cook that keep carson
projects that will be a great
project as a demonstration as a
model for us to start to
demonstrate that we can do it in
our states and there are then we
can use this as the example and
then we can skill it up to the
entire state and maybe into the
nation as well thank you mister
sir what is the timeline do we
have one or any kind of planning
around a timeline for this
message
maybe mr race can also answer
this question
miss chairman representative to
your question that that's really
what the question
tell some peak resistance
creating a model that will not
just generate electricity but I
was created micrograde our goal
is to have this in service by
middle late twenty twenty eight
thank you that's what that's the
but answers my question I think
that this is something we really
making the investment in our
state we see that we're along
with the federal dollars that
regranted to you and I think
this is we're we're
on our way so I want to commend
you off for all the work you've
done here I just again as we're
looking at I think i'll have
some other questions offline
mister chair just regards to the
different some other.
Elements of hydrogen what it
means for us but as far as
produce water and the things we
don't have in place what is
legislation we're hoping to get
in closer you're hoping that we
need to get into place so that
we can move things long faster
to turn that's my last question.
Mr chair and the representative
from the researchers perspective
and very very grateful for the
support of our states from the
left sea the higher education
department are
so this the funding that we
received it will really expend
our research I and then it's a
generates that work for us
developments that we train our
students and the it also
encourage us to collaborate with
industry like keep the carson to
move forward the end they do
water nexus are to the state so
um
yeah I I just a feel you know
the right now the water policy
energy policy and the the
funding support from the states
will help us to move forward
with demonstration project.
Thank you mister chair right
again thank you for all your
work and and for your
presentation excellent thank you
very much representative on we
are a little bit behind schedule
but there's a lot of interest in
this so we're going to keep
going through the questions
we'll go to representative
little chairman yos and then a
conclude with our senator heal
and represent
reps and little please thank you
chair thank you so much for the
presentation and I am so glad
that I was able to get to the
site visit out in question thank
you very much the conversations
that we had following that
session
that segment were very important
to me especially as we were
talking about the impact of
uhm economic development
opportunities taking place
outside the rural areas and what
we might do to the state might
do this enterprises that might
keep our young people in our
communities so along that line
is to chair i'm curious at the
very outset during the
presentation
and hit one the potential for
the jar the revenue and jobs and
so on
was a presented and so in
keeping with that idea than of
the general generational
opportunities how many need jobs
and what types of jobs are
anticipated that this
industry well established and a
follow up question to that one
will be i'm curious about the
short term because I i'm aware
that there are going to be
highly skilled positions a
skills that are going to be
needed that may not already
exist in the state so how many
short term and long term
and i'll stop there for a moment
this return.
And and then uh continue thank
you.
Um so
the the data front page one are
came from the department of
energy so there is a long term
job creation but in the short
term uh i'm thinking about for
the keep cars and projects that
we need a training of the
engineers process in junior's
construction and even including
electrical engineers all water
engineers and the the
distribution electrical
engineers so we need a the also
the operators
so we have on the internal
discussions at a new mexico
state university and also ways
the industry and the state that
so we need to develop put the
work force that work force can
come from the undergraduate
students gradual students and
also it include maybe operators
training and their sup-
certification um and the mess
you will be very happy to work
with the state and the household
industry to develop put that
work force for the hedgeton
production field and the water
operation
so will be happy to work on
that.
Mr chairman representative
little as a followed to that
based off of our economic
announces report done by their
owherton
during construction the direct
draws will be thirteen hundred
and forty nine jobs.
Long term it will be twenty
seven direct jobs and seventy
seven total jobs as I mentioned
the learn if we do get that
revenue streamed to the views of
question.
The fourteen jobs I mentioned
that the village could expand
aren't included in this economic
analysis so those are
good pingo local government
charge with the period.
Thank you very much that's very
helpful
secondly in a move shift after
off other than is
I understand i'm understanding
more clearly now mister chairman
the that this is a a cycle kind
of a sort of a close cycle to
the best of my understanding but
i'm curious to start up
the water that's going to be
needed in this facility i'm just
curious is there going to be an
impact on the downstream users
and if so what that might that
be if any.
Mr chairman the representative
little
mr raise mentioned that we're
looking at the possibility of
using the chevron which wanted
which they're putting about a
million gallons into the river
every day of ten over
of treated water issues is the
correct room at the village
request we're putting about
hundred and seventy five
thousand gallons of danger
ground which isn't
isn't going into the stream so
I don't know that answers your
question correctly but
those are the waters that we're
looking at using so we're not
it's not affecting any of our
rivers it's not affecting any of
our apple for or
feels request a water wells
thank you mister chair I again
german mr mirror I think that's
partially answers my question
but I am trying to think i'm
also trying to
more clearly for my question for
you so maybe we can talk offline
and after this session and uh I
appreciate that finally you
there is a in the summary on
page nine
in the third bullet regard
regarding the long duration
storage i'm curious mister
chairman
what
might be am trendy read my notes
here are the consideration for
long long term storage where
will that actually where will
that be at located and
um are there any any challenges
to that type of storage whatever
that might be
is chair representative so the
the storage itself is going to
be the hydrogen gas that's at
the location
so it's in it's gonna be based
on how many tons of hundred and
we can produce.
So for this for the quest
project you'll be twenty nine
thousand tons though we can
produce but that's a functional
water so we wanted a forty eight
hours of storage then use kind
of double that that water using
that cycle
the long term goal you know is
look at whether weather patterns
appear in other mexico is you
could have five days without
sunshine and so if you want to
address those cold days accord
nights at the end of the day you
want almost a week worth of
storage to today's technology is
four to six hour batteries I
think the batteries at posters
in the mexico's putting are four
hour batteries this actually is
a the factor of six times that
we can do but it'll be located
at the
look at with the location we saw
yesterday and then the gas will
be released with a few cell and
then put on the existing
electric ready and so then it
goes kind of like any and
electricity i'll go out to the
homes on the same infrastructure
that we have today so there'll
be no upgrade to the
infrastructure because we'll be
using it in lou of
baseline generation or
generation we get from solar
because it's used non solar
times
thank you very much and when
final question mr chair was we
had a question back there about
the
comparing if you might be able
to uh compare the cost of this
type of energy
as opposed to the natural guys
and solar and um other types
I did here mr chairman that a
cast about seventy eighty
dollars a month typically in a
household how might be compared
to the other forms of of
power
so much chairman representative
so a battery is is not really
energy that's really it that's.
It's capacity and so capacity
and hard to explain but you have
to compare to inside their
battery so the bratters that we
have cost us about ten dollars a
kw per month
and so that means we have that
power so that we can put on the
grid
the what comes out of the
batteries energy so gets pretty
complicated
we're not really competing
against natural gas if it's a
battery because natural gas is
more a baseloader picking unit
it's probably a couple dollars
hire them then battery storage
today where it gives us twenty
four hours first four hours so
you have to look at the whole
life cycle of how much battery
stored you need and in for what
the circumstances read as I
mentioned earlier my
discussion or testimony is
anyone here who has been through
an extreme event a wildfire when
it's the welfare you're trying
to keep critical infrastructures
are going no one's really
concerned about the cost of what
it takes to do that the word
that you have the technology to
make sure that you have the
water pumping
the communication
communication first responders
so you really have to look it
when you talk about energy
prices I think you have to look
at the use case this use cases
are going to also be used for
microgrades were cost is
important but it's not the
driving factor of why you'd have
a microgrades to enable critical
infrastructure during an extreme
event whether it's weather
wildfire of flooding.
Thank you very much i'd love to
continue this conversation will
do that afterwards thank you
mister chair that the end of my
questions thank you very much
representative little vice chair
thank you mister chairman i'll
try some softball questions and
see how that works out this
morning earn dr pay let me ask
you some questions on on your
research and development and
arrow ahead helps you pattern
that I are you allowed in
ownership of that pattern since
you develop
that is a good question I think
in the message owns the patterns
that serve researchers will help
to commercialize those
technologies and in but you
aren't allowed to to participate
in any that development and the
patent is on by the state and
then then they they sell that
pattern
to outside companies to develop
that pattern in in in the issue
is not exploring that
that development after its
patent at all or you continue to
explore the the technology after
it's pattern
mr chair and the senator that's
really a good question I think
animals you are ahead is also
developing the policies about
who owns the patterns and the
hotel commercial those
technologies and the up to I
know based on that people work
we signed sounds like an assume
on those patents better
the
researchers can't get to the
license and the
to have maybe turn their
partnership to develop those
technologies for
commercialization I don't know
if I fully you know answer that
question because it's the
question we may need to have
more detailed the discussion
with arrowheads yeah I I think
that's where it's got to go
because I mean new mexico and in
reach our searchers can develop
patterns.
And then the patterns are are
either sold or offset in in
their developed somewhere else
and that's where the money comes
in and we want that stand new
mexico so it's gonna be very
critical especially we're going
to develop this technology
like you're developing it in it
today
you could say by what day you
could have technology ready to
to fire up this hours in plant
new mexico what date would you
give me.
Will not complete this this is
your research rate and this is
your technology so on
have you just shoot in the dark
and say you'd have the
technology ready by this day
so
I know it's hard to say
it is harder to say
because there are for these
technologies
these are very rate in the way
to ideas and the weight
demonstrate those in the lab and
the hour next to step is to have
the pilot at the trution so that
is why the projects are we get
to the funding from the ed is
critical for us to demonstrate
that those projects and I would
think that you know after
reserve pillar to demonstration
and there are the technology
shoot the people to
develop maybe ing one or two
years
and so what time dream would you
give me to say if it takes two
years developed in and then you
got a pattern it and then you
get that you're going to market
it I mean you're looking at
twenty thirty
twenty twenty eight
I hope for it will be twenty
twenty eight
I know the mr chair and the
senator I know this is a great
question it is very hard to
answer that question you can
answer I mean just to say you
know it's hard it's hard to give
me a date but but I mean they're
wanting fifty million dollars
more in the stained put fifty
million dollars in this based
upon your plan that's going to
come to for wishing and in
twenty twenty eight in for that
to make it work the timelines
have to fall in the same
category in in the same time
frame to get that completed in
order to get this process and
then
i'll ask most question maybe
they're not reliant on your
research and element program
they're relying on something
else but but I think.
For you for us as a state if
you're your developing new
technology and in an issue as
pattern and then they're
marketing that i'm I personally
that that the person develops
that should be included in the
pattern in the development we
seen that happened before and
you and then why they developed
keys and that it tapen in then
the guy left new mexico and in
that was making a lot of money
and that's what lives about but
we need to develop that in new
mexico and develop that with our
students and you guys is
professors and keep your new
mexico keep the technology and
the economy driven as you
develop these patterns and I
think that's very critical in
these are deep projects and in
the state in that university I
believe in what you're doing I
believe what you're going to do
I believe what you're trying to
do it produce water and in the
time frame for us to get there
and people to calm down about
the technology and what it
really does and and how
environmentally safe you're
trying to develop that is
critical for us to to continue
that research
and so
me mr chair and the senator I
highly appreciate your comment
and the you have our researchers
here doctor wheel one is as a
primary pattern to you venture
and we have
all these researchers at the
mexical state university and
we will promote the economic
developments of our states new
mexico so we'll wall work ways
our local communities and the
industry to make these new
technologies to be implemented
in new mexico thank you for your
comments that he picked up and
and and I think it's very
important to no matter who's
developing those in in research
and new mexico whatever it is
that we get this trail of
researchers built up and get
patterns and get the get the
firms in the marketing done so
we can build this technology
inside.
Mexico so I believe in that
thank you lewis let me ask you
guys are asking for fifty
million dollars or are you going
to use any machines technology
or is it tough technology
certain currently existing and
and what is the cost for the
technology today to knew this
so mischairman senator so we're
using existing technology I mean
how did you production has been
in use in the oil and gas
industry for a refining natural
gas it's never really been used
for electric with some of the
companies that are
doctors he met a pay mentioned
plug power they have electrizers
and they have fuel cells feel
sounds a bit how have been used
around a bit around a long time
and they've been using the error
space industry
so it's it's it's proven
technology
this scale is a little larger in
the united states of many of the
hydrogen hubs that were funded
by do we're using some of this
technology a lot of this
technology's been used in europe
your europe has embraced
hydrogen much more faster than
the united states so basically
the technology that were
proposing is is in us we do
think there's some
opportunities speaker some of
these hydrogen hub scott
canceled or delayed there is
already a supply chain of
as equipment in the queue that
another company's not going to
purchase story talking to those
vendors about getting though
that that equipment are for our
project I think with new mexico
states stoon is looking at other
waste enhance our project and
make the creation hygiene a more
efficient but with other uses um
as she mentioned plastics as a
big issue recycling the big
issue in the state if we could
take plastics and make hundreds
of out of that they were just
enhanced what we're doing here
at a at kickerson and quaestor.
In your comment she said that
the hasn't been used in this way
to produce electricities that
correct
correct not the united states
and and so you'll be the first
and so of the state where to
fund the fifty million what were
the fifty million dollars be
used for and then my next
question you're going to get a
hundred fifty million dollars
tax credit why would we not just
loan you the fifty million
dollars against tax credit to
develop that and get the state
repayments for further color
so on the mischairman center and
so on the first question
the the solar would be used
basically for the literally
process to base to do the water
splitting to create the hydrogen
gas to be stored and then the
october that's the so purpose of
the of the solar
as where is a tax credit if the
of the village of quaestor is
the owner a generally not for
profits and municipalities are
eligible for tax credit sets
that's basically on the private
side of the tax credits that
we're looking at I really
tighter hydrogen production
by kilogram so under the current
if you look either if the house
version or they sent version of
what's going on in washington
the hygiene credits are phased
out were limited in twenty six
but if you start the project in
twenty five star construction
and finish in twenty eight then
you're eligible for the full
weight of three dollars per kg
for the how did your production
that's a tax rate that we would
we would go after is really the
hydrogen protected hydro
protouch and tax credit but it's
also based on the best
information we have coming out
of washington today we we we
think that there'll be some
elements of both those bills
when they recan tell them that
there's still be credits but
they'll be compressed and
they'll be.
They'll be eliminated after a
short time period that's that's
our strategy tied to the tax
credits which then drives down
the course of power as as a
represent little cost the last
what's the cost power really
depends on how much tax credit
we can get on this project and
if you can get the full weight
then your overall cost met
capacity's lower if if you
capped at a tire
in in but the technology hasn't
been proven in this area yet so
what time frame is that still
going to take to prove the
technology in the scenario so
miss chairman center that so the
technology been proven more in
in europe
europe has different rules and
effects
technologies technology I think
the rules may be the permitting
uh the rules maybe how to
deliver it but as far as
technology
you know electrosis is a
charcest whether it's here or
near its its water splitting a
storing how to do in real has
had been doing stays for years
on hunters in storage and that
it stored in the united states a
lot of hygiene are restored so
that's a proving technology and
then fuel cells
back in in two thousand two when
when kick arsen separated from
plains to order there was a
merger we actually bought into a
fuel cell company through
general electric so fuel cells
at least for kick arsen have
been around since
two thousand the purpose of that
senator was we're gonna use
propane to render through a feel
selling celebrate the hydrogen
out of the proping stream so
fuel cells is also a proving
technology they just it just
hasn't been a deployed in the
united states
for electricity for electricity
generous and that's the question
is is if the US again we're
going to do this in the us
what is the process to get that
approved in what's the time
frame and administrati.
We can talk about tax credits
and where they're going to go
and how that's going to all
going to work in and everything
and then then my next question
under wrapped us up because I
know we're reading laters we can
generate this but then you still
have a higher rate to get it on
on the grid from pn and try stay
mentioned earlier on you know
that you're thirty percent
savings or costs is only thirty
five percent then they were
thirty five more percent to get
them on the great and then
they're going to charge you on
the grid so how are we really
going to get those those those
car savings to the consumer when
we have to tie on the other
grids that I know you're trying
to develop you know what that's
a long haul to in in so this
process is not going to be
really quick so maybe you can
answer those two questions for
me and then all yield mister so
so mr chairman centers so the
the last question is far as ee
the grid cars are transmission
costs that are regardless of the
technology third new piano
tracer just looking to kill what
ours it is a matter where it
comes from so those prices are
going to increase a solution to
that is in in my opinion posters
in mexico and tracy joining a
transmission markets were they
basically a joint like an spp so
that you can get the benefits of
lower transmission and then the
swp will match the load with the
resource
the technology is proven so
I think like any any project
whether it's a call plants with
natural gas planner sort of plan
they do rely on september
subsidy whether it's a tax
credit at the front end where
there's a tax and credit when
you fire taxes any fuel source
that serves the masses and is is
almost required gets some type
of subsidy
pretty we've started the design
we've already started the design
of the facility interest is the
contractor that we've retained
and as we speak
by november they'll have a
thirty percent design.
Of the system so so the cost
aren't going to increase because
of hydrogen or solar or gas
transmission costs are just
increasing because the new
mexico does not have enough
transmission in the state and
and so one is to join join
artiothe others to build it and
if you call the probably the
single biggest project in new
mexico the
the power line is taking all the
wind
you know that took twenty five
years they just tells you how
hard it is to build in mexico
senator
pretty confident we've had or
we retain tax consultants
financial forecast consultants
so we already have a team that's
moving this project forward so
any technology enhancements just
make the project better but the
only impediment I really see
with the state in the mexico is
having a permitting process of
how do you permit a hundred and
plants but outside of that all
the key elements are in place
that technology is proven and
we're just moving forward
you brought up one quick
question to me and in you
already gonna be in thirty
percent design state but you
don't have any federal approval
or you don't have any approval
of this you don't have all the
other key elements in place I
mean this is like a capital
outlay project all over again
where where built we're
designing something before where
we even got eligibility and
approvals to build it and
produce and those time frames
get hung up
i'm a little cautious as we move
forward to me if you're thirty
percent designed on it on the
building and construction and
and we don't know what the feds
are going to do
who knows they could approve it
in the day they could approve it
in ten years and we're spending
your spending months your call
up to money seeing spend it how
are you
in in designing this but the
approvals are not there the
permitting systems not there we
don't know what it's gonna look
like.
These are all bigger questions
that you know putting the car
before the horse a little bit
before me I don't disagree with
doing hydrogen power I don't
disagree with you guys have tons
of water to do that that's your
choice you guys see a vision
that you want to fall through
and in that's good but the
process seems to be you're a
little bit ahead of the process
and and that's what worries me
when you come to us looking for
for money is is make sure your
process in the development is
there so we can fund it and then
you can just go build it and
instead of saying we still go to
build all these processes to get
this completed smell that don't
believe in it it's just the
price it so thank you mister
chairman
is the chairman just III think
it's important to clarify
that the process with russ with
other courts were using the same
process for this hydrant project
that we would do just for a
appalling so all that is is in
place
this project got paused and then
i'm passed so we we've we've got
the documentation that the
funding is in place I think the
uncertainty at least with this
administration it does change
but
there was sixty co ops that got
funding from this program we
don't we don't think that
they're going to pick one
project could not do it and
allow the other fifty nine a two
move forward we have been to dc
a couple of times to make sure
that the money's intact
one of our consultants has a
direct high with our us to make
sure I think is is working so
it's a it's a check the box so I
don't want anyone to leave that
we are making these processes on
a on the fly there we're
following a standard that we
have to
and this this is if we were just
building a substation this is
the process we do you have to do
some design you get the
environmental clearance once you
get the environmental clearance
the money is then actually start
flowing so in my mind in the
documentation we have with the
usda.
The the project is is a funded
project we've sent the documents
saying here's our contractors
we've had very little
communication back that there's
any issues with the project
but this is just kind of normal
so or not ahead we're kind of
right where we need to be I
think the only thing that's
really changed is when we
applied for the funding there
was there was a set of rules
based under the iran what tax
credits were available and you
you you put the application
based on that financial forecast
those changed and we really
didn't know you know when they
pause the project week we got
our first notification that the
funding was passed for review at
the end of march and at the end
of april we got notification
that the project was allowed to
move forward so from the usda
standpoint they've already
checked the boxes and now we're
in the process of only do the
environmental we submit that
they review it and then they
send us notice proceed or they
send us any issues that they
think is efficient but we're
moving forward so I don't want
any legislator to think that
this is
a pile the sky or the car before
the horse is exactly where these
type of projects are are a
regardless of the of
it whether it's hydrogen or or
solar or if you get finding from
for a call plant it it's right
where it needs to be I think
that the change here is just
adapting to the new rules of new
administration set and I don't
think there's anything wrong
with that I think a coop is in a
better position to be more
nimble to make sure that we have
access to those tax credits
during the application process
our project was well better I
mean we we it was we had a team
of usda assigned to hard how did
just to make for the exact same
questions.
That you're asking so this was
this was a competitive process
it was well better and so we're
now on that next step of doing
the design while the village
requests as looking for the
funding and
you know that I just want to
make sure it's not the car
before the horse I I was just
trying to address one of the
questions as and we had talked
to the environment up department
probably a year though
before we made application we
asked if in fact we were able to
get this award what are the
rules for hydrogen in the state
in the mexican just you know if
there's a roammaking a what is
it going to take to permit that
we've already visited with the
village question task kind of
for planning and zoning
visit with the state engineer
about the water issues so so
this project has been kind of
well set out it just hears now
and I I think the I think that
that occurred is when we applied
for two hundred and forty
million I think they're in and I
think there was few people that
that that could person was going
to get the work
and then also when you get the
award is like okay now what do
we do so it's not a kick
harson's been kind of behind my
my perception to spend everyone
else has been behind cause there
was not a thought that we would
be able to I make this reality
so I just want to share your
senator every everything's where
it should be in the US d a r US
program and we're ready to go
and I think the request from the
village questions something that
we made last session even before
we got the award just to make
sure that we were right on track
and if we didn't get the award
then we need any the the the
funding for the solar but now
that we have the award and we're
moving forward
I think everything is right on
track which should be and the
request from the village
requested is a is also time to
remind the legislature that we
made this request about a year I
think we're going to.
And and that's the federal
guidelines not the states and
you're asking fifty million from
the city so thank you mister
chairman thank you very much
okay we're going to go to
represent the banking
thank you mister chairman
I appreciate the the
presentation today i'm from a
coal fire power plant family we
had the have the cleanest
call fire power plants and gas
paraplants in the world
and it's cheap
and we chose to stick her heads
in the sand and say that we're
gonna go out into green
I think one of the
representatives said the list
less don't let still pretend
that it's green because it's not
green get a nine year old kid
mining them minerals that we
need out of a mind somewhere in
the world
and then we take those blades
and then we have to put him
somewhere in storm after they go
out of service
so my question and I hate going
after centered munios because he
asked all the good questions so
I have one question only and and
I want to drill down on it and I
want an answer how long will it
take this technology to become
cheap.
I don't care who answers it is
only three of you
missing chairman represented I I
think the first thing is kind of
identify what cheap means I mean
if you're talking about the
market price of power the cost
of power that rule folks and
just a quick reminder of some
done we do try to do one
microphone in at a time it will
get sent
so under under this under this
plan based on what I just
explained to ceremonials and the
tax credits in twenty eight when
this plan comes on there is
about a sixty million dollars
long that the cooptics and it's
a two hundred and forty million
dollars project at the end we
take about a sixty million
dollars loan or the rates go up
about eight percent and that
would be the same as when we are
in in eighty four when I started
a pegs came on the plain system
so the call fire parking set
escalate came on our rates a
went up thirty three percent so
any time you put on a major
asset the rates are just going
to go ours goes up eight percent
and then it's fixed over that
time cause if we can fix it the
cost of
of water
and in the land is is ours all
those variable costs become
fixed so you see the side
increase if you if you plot that
against a three percent let's
say cpi of costs living then it
becomes cheaper than what we
have today so that's how we'd
modeled and that's how most
model it is you look at the
level ice cost of energy over
the over the life of that plate
oh because there's not a lot of
moving parts and it's a twenty
five meg what verse you know for
corners in in san one where you
have four hundred megawatch
that's always going to be
cheaper because of economies are
scale you know we're not gonna
be able to compete a twenty five
meg was not going to be able to
compete against the four hundred
mb before our use.
You will increase by eight
percent and then me flat for the
life of the plate
thank you turn thank you for the
answer to that
I have one and inform for
counties that have water this is
going to be a great thing
eventually
but for those who don't have
water they're never going to be
able to achieve this or even do
it because when we talk about
the usage of water that's a huge
amount of water that's going to
be used on theirs and so
I think technology is going to
be rate twenty years down the
road I just don't think we're
there yet and it's going to be
very expensive for those who are
going to be using it right now
thank you
thank you very much okay members
thank you first palace thank you
very much for a great
presentation and a really great
discussion members thanks for
really wonderful questions
what we're going to do now we're
going to take about ten or
fifteen minutes lunch is ready
we are running behind but we'll
be able to get right back on
track basically just keeping
going with our schedule diving
in the lunch and then hearing
about ten or fifteen minutes
we'll begin our yazi martinez
senator got sellers oh mr
chairman of its one of tell the
member settlements of patient
right here you go through the
outside have some tables and
then there's also a conference
from that's available
excellent thank you so ten or
fifteen minutes feel free to
grab lunch figured out we we are
going to start back up in here
or we were at eleven we'll say
at twelve fifteen so to give us
a little bit close to thirty
minutes and then we'll get gone
thanks very much.
