If I could, Mr. Chair, uh, if I
could take just a a quick minute
or two,
personal privilege, I guess, to
thank the committee. I didn't
get a chance yesterday after the
announcement to thank you all. I
wanted to say how um
honored I am to be selected to
to direct your staff and to work
for you and the legislature, um,
I left journalism about 15 years
ago, after writing about
schools.
For 5 years, but this really
intense desire to to serve and
and work in the education field.
And so, and, and since then I've
been really lucky.
To learn about and experience
education from all these various
perspectives as a as a teacher
and principal and and all the
things I've done.
Um
So, this has been sort of a
combination. This is a
culminating effort for me that I
feel really honored to be a part
of. I wanted to, to, to say
thank you to the staff and how
fortunate I am to work with such
a brilliant and capable staff.
Um
And and the last thing I I
wanted to say is uh I know staff
feels this way sometimes, and
maybe you do too that seems like
it can be flippant about, you
know, I try to bring levity and
humor to the work that we do,
but how, how seriously I take
the work, um, and wanted to just
express my gratitude for um the
ability to keep working for you
in this capacity. So I just
wanted to say that before we got
started. I didn't get a chance
to thank you publicly yesterday.
So thank you for the, for the
chance.
Um, we'll move on to the
presentation, uh, today, uh,
we're joined by Nathan Driscoll,
the chief policy officer for the
National Center on Education and
the Economy, going to talk to us
a little bit about state trends
and long term long term
strategic planning.
And then Jessica and I will talk
to you a little bit about how we
think, uh, some of the models
that are out there can actually
be applied to New Mexico and how
it might help the legislature
and sort of the the larger
education environment, um,
undertake some of that long term
planning. And so with that, I'll
turn it over to Nathan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee and
thank you, John, for the
introduction. Um, it's a real uh
pleasure to be back in Santa Fe
with all of you, um, have done
work with a number of members of
this committee, um, several
times over the years, uh, both
in committee and as members of
national coalitions and want to
thank you all for the continued
interest and engagement in our
work have always been really
appreciative of this committee's
willingness to step back, um,
take
time to study the evidence and
ask really bold future leaning
questions, um, have also been
really appreciative of the warm
welcome every time I've come. So
thank you.
As John said, I represent, um, a
national, uh, global actually
nonprofit known as the National
Center on Education and the
Economy, um, for those who may
not be familiar, I just indulge
me in a very brief introduction
to our work.
Um, we have a research arm
that's really focused around
discovery, helping to look at
states, districts, um, and even
other countries all over the
world at what they're doing with
their education and workforce
development systems, how they're
adapting to the changing future
and we use that research, um, to
help state policymakers,
practitioners, um, community
members and others come together
in coalitions, uh, to help
design.
future facing strategic plans,
while also working with system
leaders, um, and school leaders
to help bring those plans into
action. So understand you are on
the um
In facing a real opportunity to
be thinking about that kind of
planning and want today to just
share some insights with you
about the other states that
we're working with, not to
suggest that the work you
already have going on in New
Mexico, isn't great in many
ways, um, but I think there are
some real lessons learned both
from what's worked well and some
challenges, uh, that other
states have faced and want to
just offer those up in the
spirit of learning and
continuous. Um, this slide is
just a quick link.
To the synthesis of our research
base, uh, around how other
systems are education and
workforce development systems
are building cohesive and future
ready systems, um, it summarizes
all of the research we've done,
do not have time, uh, to bore
you with all of that today, nor
would I want to, um, but invite
you to take a look online if
you're interested later.
So why are we talking about
long-term strategic planning
systems redesign, these big um
kind of transformative buzzwords
in education right now. One to
quickly um take you through a
brief thought exercise about the
many ways that today's students
experience the world in ways
that are fundamentally
different. Um, then me as a
millennial or those of us who
are of different generation,
really, really see the world and
understand the world.
So think about students who are
in university today, um,
students who were born at the
turn of the new century. These
are students who never knew a
world at all without the ability
to access information on
Wikipedia.
So their brains are wired to
expect that information in flow
to be constantly available to
them.
And they're required to be able
to navigate.
Truth from fiction, fact from
opinion, um, in that context.
Today's students in high school
have never known a world in
which they cannot constantly
communicate with their peers at
all times through things like
Gmail, YouTube, um, X and other
devices. Today's middle school
students.
often see the world entirely
through pictures.
And are wired according to
technologies that encourage them
to think about the world in that
way.
Today's elementary school
students, um, a number of my
colleagues are about my age who
have young ones joke that they
expect that they can say a
command into the air.
And a robot will make it happen
for them.
That has implications for the
way that they engage in
collaborative learning, the way
that they engage with their
peers, the way that they may,
um,
Boss their parents around a
little bit or have some
expectations there. And, and
just fundamentally shapes the
way they see the world.
Today's today's young ones who
are not in school today, but
soon will be.
have never known a world.
Without AI technologies.
Such as chat GPT but also
others.
Why am I sharing all of this?
Well, one implication of all of
this is that when you survey,
um, the leading companies and
employers around the, the globe.
The skills that they say they
value today.
Are the fundamentally different
order of than the skills that
they said they most valued 20 or
30 years ago.
Reading and mathematics, and
even technological literacy are
important, but they're important
in the context of skills like
analytical thinking, creativity,
resilience and flexibility and
self-awareness and curiosity.
Um, and so what the, the goal of
school systems and lifelong
learning systems and workforce
development systems.
Should increasingly be to um
impart those skills while still
while still focusing on the
fundamentals. We need to be able
to do both. This slide really
sums that up, but it also
introduces a new idea, which is,
I don't want to imply for a
second that the only role of
school should be to prepare
students for jobs.
Our students are also our future
citizens. There are future civic
leaders, there are future
parents and community members
and and siblings and neighbors
and schools need to be able to
teach students to relate to the
world interpersonally even as
they're dealing with all of
these new technologies that we
may not fully understand yet.
And so that's an additional.
burden but also opportunity
that's being placed on our
school system in the current
moment.
So what are systems in the
United States and all over the
world doing to face this moment.
This moment for them has become
a clarion call, a real
opportunity to take a step back
without losing urgency.
But ask some fundamental
questions about how we can build
our own capacity to think 35, 10
years out into the future and
build policy and practice.
That cannot only help our
students today.
And solve problems for today,
but also help the system as the
future changes.
That means that a
jurisdiction-wide vision is
necessary.
That means that systems that
link education with economy, but
also other systems like um
health and human services and
social services and all of those
supports that are fundamental to
education are increasingly
important.
It means that we have to focus
not only on what we do well as
systems, but what other
innovators are doing, so we are
learning from everywhere.
It means we cannot afford to be
in silos, whether those are
partisan silos or silos about
different levers of governance
or government. We all have to
work together to get this done.
Um, and it means that the, the
process must be fundamentally
inclusive and intentionally
engaged, um, not only
policymakers at different levels
of the system, but educators,
students, community members,
taxpayers, other partners in
decision making.
And again, this is all really in
the service of making sure that
we not only
Help the system that we have
today.
But push the boundaries to think
about tomorrow.
That all sounds
Kind of
Big picture, uh, I, I understand
maybe a lot of buzzwords, but I
want to assure you there are
other states around the country
that are doing this, they're at
different places in this
process, but there are things
really tangible things that
policymakers can learn from
these different approaches. Um,
a number of you have probably
heard about the commission on
innovation and excellence in
Maryland, which is probably the
state that's furthest along from
a policymaking perspective at
this, in this kind of strategic.
planning, but other states much
closer to you all in New Mexico,
um, including Nevada and
Montana, um, and, and diverse
states like Michigan,
Pennsylvania, and Mississippi
are also thinking about this
approach and on different stages
of their trajectory. I don't
have time to go through
everything that they've done,
but want to just share some
quick examples and then some
insights and happy to follow up
with more detail if you all have
any questions or or want.
Follow up separately. So,
Maryland is a state that
completed the policy development
phase of this work in 2020, um,
through an omnibus bill known as
the Blueprint for Maryland's
Future, um, that addressed
efforts to elevate teachers and
school leaders, dramatically
expand access to early childhood
education and care, revamped the
offerings of the instructional
system to future proof it, um,
provide comprehensive supports
at all levels.
of the system to those who need
it most and really establish a
mechanism for measuring the
health of the whole system
overall, um, to ensure that all
of those additional investments
were being well spent and that
they're um we're leading to the
intended outcomes. They're now
in a phase of really translating
policy into implementation, um,
which I think Maryland would be
the first to tell you is, is a
really exciting opportunity and
also one that's fraught with
challenges.
And so, in other states where
we're seeing
Nevada and Pennsylvania in
particular, learning from that
approach and really thinking
proactively about how they can
embed, implementation pilots
into the policymaking process
before the policy is fully
baked.
So what are opportunities to
engage district superintendents,
educators, individual
classrooms, networks of
students, school board members
to test on and try out new
approaches, um, so that that can
level up and inform the long
term policy that's being built.
Um, so we're seeing that in
Nevada through um
An authorizing future focused
group, no, no, also as uh as the
commission on innovation and
excellence in Education, which
was established, um, a year and
a half ago by Senate Bill 425 to
establish a future ready long
term state vision and
implementation plan.
But that commission is building
on the work of all of these
groups and bringing all of them
in from superintendents,
administrators, teachers, uh,
the unions, the youth
legislature, which is a unique
structure that they have, um, to
inform that visioning and
implementation plan.
And then in Pennsylvania, um,
we've seen a similar commission
structure but one focused
explicitly not on innovation,
but on economic competitiveness,
um, thinking through how they
can address persistent
population declines in their
states, um, and businesses who
are no longer um.
Finding the Commonwealth, uh, as
rich of a place in which to
invest their resources or or
build new businesses. So how can
they reverse that through that
those trends through robust, um,
employer workforce development
and education system
partnerships, um, and then build
uh long term visioning and
policy making through a, quite
frankly, enormously inclusive
group of members represent.
not only some of the quote
unquote usual players in
education, um, but a number of
different government agencies,
um, and community-based
nonprofits who sit adjacent to
education but have real impact
on education outcomes.
So, why am I sharing all of this
with you, and what do I hope you
take away from the last 15
minutes. Um, I am not an expert
in your context. It is never my
um intention to parachute in
from somewhere else and offer
kind of
Arrogant observations and, you
know, recommendations, you guys
are the experts on your state,
um, but I would just offer at a
very high level, um, my initial
impressions, um, which is that
this is a state that I think a
number of folks would agree, has
had some persistent challenges,
um, with findings that the state
has underserved, um, many
populations and culturally and
linguistically responsive ways,
a state that has struggled
with, with leadership continuity
and retention, um, and a state
that has struggled with a lack
of shared vision, um, and a
clear path forward I mean amidst
MIDI competing priorities from
where you all should go.
Um, in the midst of those
challenges, though, I'm, I'm an
optimist and I see real
opportunity, um, and assets on
which you all can build, um,
just a real window to step back,
um.
Including by leveraging the
expertise and capacity of this
committee who has real
experience in stepping back and
asking the tough questions. Um,
to reconsider how and why the
education system is working the
way it is, who it's working for,
and what are ways that could be
fundamentally different to
better serve all learners in the
wake of this changing future.
You've got a great population
that's diverse and vibrant and
brings really strong assets to
the table, enormous economic
opportunity in your state.
Um, and LASD and committee staff
with real-time capacity and
expertise in policy analysis to
help support this work.
At the same time, my
recommendation is not that this
committee or any legislative
committee.
Take on this work alone. I
don't, I don't think that's
feasible or viable given the
scope of the challenge and the
rich diversity within your
state, um, based on what we see
in other states, I would
strongly recommend uh this
committee look into creating a
broad diverse, authentic and
inclusive planning group,
including the players listed
here, but by no means
necessarily limited to them. You
all know your stakeholders, your
constituents in your
communities.
Um, that, that group he
authorized and encouraged to
really think about both time
horizons that I've spoken about
today, not only to focus on the
challenges right in front of
your face, although not to
neglect those challenges because
they are crucially important,
but also to try and think 5
years out, as difficult as that
might sound.
Um, to rethink assumptions and,
and really ask tough questions
about how education is
functioning, to plan cohesively,
to make systemic
recommendations.
To engage communities in the
power of storytelling and
recognize the real possibilities
that this can bring for
communities and the ways that
communities can be engaged in
telling those stories
themselves, um, and to think
about the common good of the
state.
And then finally, um, my final
observation would be that
If you were to embark on this
process, it is absolutely
crucial to think about the role
of data and measurement, um, and
metrics in asking the question
of if you are going to invest in
this, how will we know?
That we are successful and how
will we know when it's necessary
to pivot as the future changes
in ways we maybe haven't
anticipated.
Um, there are new systems and
structures and capacities um in
the fields of data management,
but also in the field of systems
evaluation that allow us to
measure a much more
authentically broad set of
future ready skills and
outcomes, and also engage in
system level planning.
Um, in more nimble ways, um,
that may require new investments
and new structures though, um,
I, I offer that just on the
basis of other states not
knowing what investments and
structures you may already have,
but want to recognize that
sometimes states have found this
does require new development and
new ways of thinking about data
measurement and accountability.
Um,
No time to go through all of
this slide, but um, it, it is
offered here as a resource for
all of you and thinking about
some of those questions. We're
building out long-term systems
evaluation and really thinking
about it at a high level, the
structures and processes, um,
that folks within your state
would need to be thinking about
for building um theories of
change about long term
evaluation questions, new
metrics, um, and, um, mechanisms
for stakeholder engagement.
an ongoing discussion.
Um, so with that, Mr. Chairman,
I believe I'm at time and at the
end of my presentation, so my
contact information is there and
we'll turn it back over to you.
Thank you very much.
All right, Mr. Chair. Um, so,
As we said yesterday, as I said
yesterday, um, you know, it's, I
think it's important that we as
staff bring you these national
perspectives to, so that you,
that you see other states
undergoing similar processes or
or processes that you might want
to undertake, but also make sure
that we provide you some local
context.
how that, how that could be done
in New Mexico and how that might
be similar or different to how
other states are doing that.
So, um, we'll walk, walk you
through this presentation.
Jessica and I will talk to you a
little bit about um some initial
ideas that we have about how
this might connect to where we
are right now and where you
might want to go, uh, in the
near future.
So the first thing we're going
to talk a little bit about is
obviously our Martineziazi
consolidated lawsuit.
And um
I won't go through this whole
list, uh, on, on slide 3.
We, we've talked
Um, very in depth about the
lawsuit and all the things
associated with it. We don't
need to go over the whole thing.
I don't think, again, um.
We went ahead and mentioned
these 5 requests that the
plaintiffs have made as far as
injunctive relief.
A state plan, implementation of
that plan.
sufficient funding in a revised
formula.
Monitoring and measurement of of
implementation, and then that
accountability oversight and
enforcement.
Um, and we've talked about this
before, that despite all these
actions and requests alongside
all your investments and the
programs that have been
implemented, still unclear.
Right?
Not that we haven't made any
progress at all, but whether or
not we're making the kind of
progress that we would expect.
Or would want to see.
So, even though the the the
court's ruling in the in this
particular case has been a, a
huge impetus for the state to
make big investments and
implement a lot of programs.
This isn't the first, uh, call
for improvement, obviously, and
in doing some of the research
for this presentation, I, I went
back, and so the, the, the
quotes that you see in on this
particular slide are actually
from the annual reports.
From this committee 20 years
ago.
So the first one is that in New
Mexico as well as in the rest of
the country, educators and
employers have expressed
concerns about students
graduating from high school
unprepared for college.
I'm thinking about like just
cribbing the 2005 report or the
2025 report that we're going to
present to you in, in a couple
of, in a, in about a month,
right? Because we're still
talking about similar things.
Secondly, the overall quality of
educational administration
programs in the United States is
generally poor, and that the
degrees these programs award are
inappropriate to the needs of
today's schools and school
leaders.
We're gonna bring you a draft
bill in a month.
Revamping
school leader preparation
programs, how we do that,
because this has been a
continued issue.
The central concern was that
given the current state of
participation in mathematics and
science education, and the low
proficiency levels of New Mexico
students, the state will be
required to import more of these
skills and to export more of the
work requiring these skills,
thus excluding many New Mexico
citizens from the opportunities
and rewards of science and
mathematics education.
We're still talking about these
issues. It's not as if you
haven't done anything in the
state as a whole has, has done
nothing.
We've actually invested heavily
in early childhood programs,
literacy training, extended
learning, educators salary and
training.
High school reforms, including
dual credit, career and
technical education and
work-based learning.
And those wraparound services in
the form of things like
community schools and other
social emotional learning
supports.
This has been happening, um,
Not just in the last 5 years,
our early childhood programs,
some of our literacy initiatives
date back.
1020 years.
But again, despite doing this,
we've seen either incremental
improvements or sort of just one
step forward, two step back kind
of thing, where we sort of
oscillate.
So
We've identified, you know, and
then we've talked to you in our
roadmap.
Uh, starting a couple of years
ago about some real barriers to
improvement.
So one
Economic downturns coupled with
a scarcity mindset when
resources are available.
Have met promising practices are
done in half measures or
abandoned altogether.
Again.
We had a very pretty strong
literacy uh program in the early
2000s.
We started pre-K, we've done
K3+. Some of those programs have
either grown or actually been
cut back.
Based on whether or not the
state has had the resources to
do so. And that makes a lot of
sense.
Obviously, we've had changing
political winds.
And that changes in
administrations, the outside
influence of federal changes on
accountability, as well as
private and philanthropic
funding that actually has driven
in in the education field.
A lot of the things that have
happened in schools.
Most of them were probably done
with good intentions about how
do we innovate in schools, but
we've actually used schools as
sort of a, of a lab.
And we've used kids as guinea
pigs.
For various initiatives that
have some of, most of which have
come and gone.
We have decades of underfunding
that have created cracks in New
Mexico's education foundation.
It's important, I think, to
recognize, and we've talked
about the impacts of
concentrated poverty, but also
those compounding impacts when
you, when you underfund a
system.
When a generation of folks
decide that teaching isn't a
viable field because we don't
pay them enough or because the,
the job itself is very
difficult.
You don't solve that problem.
In 1 or 2 or 3 or 5 years.
That's the generational problem
that we've created, and it may
take decades to to deal with
that.
As uh Nathan mentioned, we
sometimes this lack of common
goals is mentioned and metrics
have meant to scattershot
approach to improvement and
confusion about what success
looks like. I mentioned that
yesterday.
It isn't that people aren't
doing good work.
It's that sometimes that good
work is being done by multiple
people.
And sometimes the same ways, and
sometimes different ways.
And we haven't been able to
decide how to align those, make
those more efficient, and then
agree on those metrics to decide
what success should look like,
so that we can actually measure
progress.
And then, of course, leadership
change complicates that process.
OK
It's important to to think about
that. Not only does leadership
change mean that things
sometimes change, literally,
because we change priorities.
But in that vacuum of
leadership,
It means that we have all these
other sort of folks that kind of
step in to fill those gaps.
Sometimes with good intentions
and sometimes to serve their
individual interests.
And so that lack of cohesive and
comprehensive planning actually
creates more fragmentation, um,
Then we would see others.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee again
Jessica Hathaway, senior policy
analyst for all of you.
The part that I'm gonna cover is
actually gonna transition us to
a bit of a, a different view on
another facet of the Martinez
Yazzi lawsuit, and that's the
response um that you all and
that we all as a state have seen
as a way to address the lawsuit
and also plan for New Mexico's
education system.
So turning to slide 8.
OK.
Um,
turning to slide 8, since the
Martinez Yazi ruling, there have
been numerous plans, platforms,
analysis, recommendations, road
maps that have come before you
all, all was really valuable
ideas and good thinking about
how to address the lawsuit and
serve our students as the
ultimate goal.
On this slide, we've highlighted
some of the major ones, of
course, you've heard from us at
the LESC as well as our
legislative colleagues at the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Um, our public education
department is featured on the
top of this slide as well as
they've also produced a draft
action plan to the lawsuit in
2022 that they then incorporated
elements of in their broader
comprehensive strategic plan.
And, um, on the bottom row,
you've also seen platforms and
frameworks from two really
crucial education organizations.
Those include the tribal remedy
framework and transformation New
Mexico, both of which come with
support from numerous
organizations themselves.
Earning the slide 9.
Um, the LESC road map featured
on the previous slide that you
first saw come together from us
as staff to you all in 2022, was
greatly informed by all of that
collective visioning from
in-state organizations and
thinking, um, but in addition,
we've also leveraged many
national and international
frameworks to inform this LESC
road map.
And that roadmap really orients
around key for ideas. The
educator ecosystem, academic
design, whole child education
and overarching systems through
which all of the above managed
to operate.
What all of this movement
towards addressing the lawsuit
shows us is that there is no
debate about addressing the
importance of the Martinezwai
Martinez Yazi lawsuit, and even
more broadly, setting a course
for the future of New Mexico's
education system.
We've found that there's
tremendous compassion effort,
thinking and design that has
gone towards this across the
entire state.
And you all as a legislature
have also invested heavily in
funding to support students
identified in the lawsuit.
And yet, progress may be
minimal, and that's part of what
we're going to explore for you
all today.
Moving the slide 10.
What we're gonna move into next,
um, is we've put together, we're
calling it a crosswalk of sorts
of all these various plans so
that you can see where there's
overlap and where there might
also be nuance or slight
differentiation across all of
the major plans, and that
includes your LESC road map.
Public education departments, um
draft action plan, the tribal
remedy framework, and transform
Education New Mexico's platform.
We'll get into those. There will
be slides for each of these, but
there are 5 themes that we've
actually found. There's a lot of
coalescing around, and those
include academic design, correct
funding, the educator ecosystem
whole child responsiveness and
systems and governance. So
moving to slide 11, um, this is
really just a key for you to see
how the next few slides are
going to work. So, um, as we go
through these in the very center
of each of these diagrams. This
is where we've identified that
there's a lot of overlap or
consistent.
distant mention of priorities,
ideas or themes. And then there
are um little arrows actually
pointing both directions because
what we're going to do on the
outside is talk through those
four plans we mentioned on a
potential points of nuance,
action, context, or divergence
by entity, and it's not always
that they're completely
different thinking, but they're
just maybe an additional element
there.
So we'll walk through those next
slide 12. Thank you.
Uh, the first one that we're
going to talk about is academic
design, and you'll also know
that this is very similar to the
language that we've used in that
LESC road map as it has been
informed by all of these plans.
So in the center, what we found
is that there is a common call
across all of these, um, for
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum that
really respects and incorporates
New Mexico's diverse cultural
heritage.
There's also a shared call for a
focus on on enhancing academic
preparedness, well-being of our
students and ensuring students
are really ready, not just for a
general college and career
readiness, right, but we like to
say college career and civic
readiness in this state towards
their individually determined
paths that they have for their
goals for their lives.
There's also been a common call
for the integration of CTE, um,
you all know that's been a, a
large priority, um, of, of this
committee, but not just this
committee.
Um, and work-based learning,
that's really offering that kind
of hands on experience that
really readies our students um
for success.
There's some nuances though,
right? And I won't read all of
the layers of nuances, please
feel free to look at them, but,
but there is some still across
the different uh plans that have
been put before you. So for
example, the LESC roadmap, um,
the language that has been in
that has focused a little bit
more broadly on academics and
it's called out specific subject
areas like early literacy,
numeracy, stem, um, civics, and
of course you all know the last
few years we've invested heavily
in secondary school redesign
along.
side culturally and
linguistically responsive and
bilingual and multicultural.
education.
The Public education department,
um, uh, draft action plan put
out, um, in their academic
design, remember again,
everyone's coalescing around the
things on the middle, so in no
way are we saying that these are
the only items any of these
groups on the outside are
focusing on, but the way that
they framed it was a little bit
more about targeting academic
supports to specific at-risk
groups with the goal of closing
achievement gaps, which is a
goal, right, that can actually
be measured, you can close
achievement gaps. It doesn't
mean that other folks aren't
talking about that too, but
that's their.
wants.
The tribal remedy framework, for
example, emphasized academic
supports for indigenous
students, specifically, um,
calling out the need for uh
culturally responsive education
that's really controlled and
developed by tribal communities
themselves.
And then transform education and
New Mexico also specifically
calls out more nuance for
bilingual and native students.
Moving to the next slide.
Um, we thought about labeling
this funding, um, but we're
actually harking back to former
director Parea Warrnaman's um
phrase correct funding because
funding alone doesn't
necessarily mean that we're all
agreeing on what that actually
means in terms of correct
funding. So again, in the
middle, um, there is a very
resounding universal call for
increased funding for education
across each of these plans, um,
particularly for programs
targeting those quote unquote at
risk students uh named in the
lawsuit.
Um,
and those are listed there, you
know, all of those student
groups, but the lawsuit
identified those as English
learners students disabilities
economically disadvantaged
students and Native American
students.
And then all of those same
documents also really advocate
for revising and improving the
SCG and other funding streams to
make them more equitable. Your
LESC roadmap, there's some
nuance here where we've actually
taken on at your direction, um,
a study of the SCG with a.
Um, the PED, for example,
nuanced there specific increases
are called out, um, for at-risk
groups and detailed accounting
for how they're being used to
close the achievement gap.
Tribal remedy framework, um,
calls for direct funding
allocations to tribal education
department and then
transformation New Mexico really
advocates for a comprehensive
overhaul of funding structures
again with a focus on bilingual
and multicultural education
funding.
This funding slide is a really
interesting one, to think though
about starting to plant the
seeds, harking back to Director
Senna's comments yesterday
around the different roles that
groups may actually play in
forming these plans, right, so
with you all, um, really again
asking us to lead the study of
the SCG. That is a nod to your
role as funders and policy
makers and setting that stage
and so I mentioned that to just
say that where there's some
difference in nuance.
may actually start to be an
indicator for mapping out the
different roles that all of
these entities really have in
serving the needs of farming uh
plan, um, and we may expect some
nuance, that difference or
divergence may not actually
reflect a lack of shared
priority, but different angles
at which the system is being
looked at.
The next, um, item that folks
really coalesced around is our
educator ecosystem that's gonna
come as no surprise to all of
you. We're all very familiar
with the research, pointing to
the the very, very important
role of our educators and
increasing the quality of them
to improve outcomes for our
students.
So I'm not going to be a
surprise again that there's a
very big call for not just
getting those folks in the
classroom, but really retaining
them and training them in a way
that's ongoing and responsive to
student needs. Um, there's also
a call for initiatives to
develop and support leadership
within schools. Again, we've, we
know we're working on that and
then efforts to competitively
comp.
Some of that nuance, um, I'll
just call out a couple of them,
um, PED and its draft action
plan, um, related to the
educator ecosystem called for a
class size reductions and
additional pay for teachers
participating in extended
learning time programs, which
may reflect a different lens on
how that educator ecosystem
could be supported.
Um, the tribal remedy framework
called of Native American and
culturally competent teachers
and more support for
community-based educational
leadership.
Your LASD roadmap and
transformation New Mexico are on
this slide as well.
We move to whole child
responsiveness.
And this is um whole child,
right? It's kind of this term
that really gets at serving all
the needs of our students, not
just their academics, and this
was actually one that we, I
struggled to find, um,
divergence.
Too, too much, because there's
there's major emphasis in all of
these plans on a on addressing
student wellbeing holistically,
um, by fostering really high
functioning and safe school
environments for all students.
Um, there was also a lot of um
shared support for the idea of
supporting social and emotional
needs of students um through a
comprehensive supports
potentially at the school site.
And this one also is where
there's an attention on equity,
particularly for our students
with disabilities, which are one
of the student groups named in
the lawsuit.
So whole child responsiveness.
A lot of colaing we did find
some minor diver divergence in
terms of how people might do
that. I'll call out the LESC
road map, um, we, for example,
put arts and physical education
as crucial uh to a whole child
approach within this.
Moving to slide 16.
This is our, our last kind of.
big overarching theme that we
found across each of these, and
there was, again, that common
call, um, everyone is is saying
that there's a need for systemic
reforms to really improve
education governance and
accountability with a focus on
better data-driven decision
making and transparency in the
actual ideas and metrics and the
data that we use to understand
our progress towards those.
Um, there was also a call for
enhancing governance structures
to better integrate community
and tribal participation in
education decision making across
each of these.
I'll let you take a look at uh
all the outlying ones there.
So, Mr. Chair, committee
members, we're gonna just sort
of a quick pause because Jesus
talked a lot, she probably needs
to take some, some couple of
breaths. But also, I think it's
a moment here to to to think
about how we
Consider all the sort of
different plans, but how, how
similar they are.
Right? Where is there overlap? I
think when we hear about all the
different kinds of plans that
exist and all the different
entities that have brought
forward ideas about how to
improve education.
Sometimes,
there's a feeling that we're at
a, we're, we're in opposition to
one another, right? And what
we're trying to demonstrate um
is that there's probably more
shared values and and um
And goals, then then we um.
Have, have really identified.
Obviously, we need to identify
what's needed to ensure
continued and and sustained
efforts.
We heard from Nathan about um
specifically this, I'm gonna
point you back to his slide
that includes the need for a
bipartisan bicameral
cross-agency effort.
Right, what are the roles and
responsibilities of everyone
involved.
Because
no one entity can do it alone,
and we'll talk a little bit more
about that as we go.
What's needed
To move beyond visioning and
into cohesive action.
I don't think anybody wants to
be here in 20 years and say
we're still talking about the
same thing that we were talking
about 20 years ago.
How do we move beyond thinking
and talking and envisioning the
future. How do we make that
happen actually happen?
And then what is that structure?
To ensure that resiliency into
the future.
We'll talk a little bit more
about resiliency against
against some of those things I
mentioned at the beginning
around funding a changing
political winds. How do we
provide some safeguards?
Uh, to ensure that these
these common goals, um, and in
the common vision that's
developed actually continues.
And to make this a little bit
more concrete, right? It's one
thing to kind of talk about.
Let's call us around some
metrics, and we've identified
common ground, but we wanted to
actually make that a little bit
more concrete by showing you one
example for you all to consider,
um, and we did choose Maryland
in this example, as Nathan
mentioned earlier, they are
probably the state furthest
along in this planning, but
they're by no means the only
state doing this, so I don't
want to suggest they're the only
ones, but we have concrete work
to show you from them, to make
this again a little bit more um.
in terms of what this might look
like.
So
Uh this slide here, slide 19,
um, this is actually I, I took a
screen grab from their entire
description because these 4
little paragraphs here actually
summarize their work pretty
well, and so you can read all of
them in depth or I will just
talk you through them. Um, but
what we want to show you here is
that this was a major time span,
right? So this work actually
began whenever Marilyn created a
kind of study commission to look
at this, so it was known at the
time as the Kirwan Commission,
named after a member.
Um, in 2016.
That commission actually met for
2 years making a sweeping set of
recommendations to address
education all the way from early
childhood through post-secondary
education and training before
they then started to work on a
set of reforms from 2018 to
2021.
One remarkable note that I've um
reflected on a lot is that these
reforms, even though the
legislation was passed across 3
years. They actually set out a
plan all the way through 2032,
which would extend beyond the
life of many of the folks who
informed that plan.
And it lays out goals all the
way through 2036, so you're
actually seeing a very long time
horizon in terms of um the goals
that are being set out. They
were obviously in a different
starting point whenever they
started their study commission,
um, you all have been working on
many of these items for years
already. And so again, where
it's relevant and where it's not
is worth having a discussion,
but um, the, the future planning
is the part that we want to kind
of leave you all with here.
Moving to slide 20 here. In
addition to that lengthy
timeline, this is also another
uh little screen grab that they
have from their planning,
showing that they coalesced
around 5 pillars. Um, you'll see
some very common themes here,
right? Those 5 pillars are early
childhood, high quality and
diverse teachers and leaders,
college and career readiness,
um, more resources for students
to be successful, which is
similar language to what we're
calling whole child
responsiveness and then
governance and accountability.
In this graphic, though, we also
wanted to show you how
identifying those pillars was
really just the start for each
of these, um, there's also
agreement on expected outcomes,
outcome measures and output
measures, and these have been
formed by a really broad set of
stakeholders to make sure that
there's clear guidance on
exactly what's expected for each
pillar, and no surprises about
what might be needed to work
towards those pillars.
You'll also note, um Maryland
even chose um to create an
independent accountability and
implementation board as a
temporary state agency at all
Sunset in 2032, um, to oversee
its blueprint implementation
indicating how involved that
actual ongoing assessment and
evaluation and actually look.
One item I thought was really
interesting in that uh
accountability and
implementation board is it has a
professional staff, but they've
also created what they're
calling expert review teams
where they're compensating folks
who are educators, school
leaders, community members to
actually um really come in and
take a look at how those
programs are looking and
initiatives are being
implemented to really braid
research with community voice.
In these last two slides,
Truly, I will not read them all
to you, but we wanted to show
you the level of detail for just
one of these pillars, this
happens to be the college and
career readiness pillar, pillar
3, and here you can see the
actual list of the legislative
requirements necessary for that
pillar, the output measures and
the outcome measures for those.
So for example, um, output
measures, they're actually gonna
measure the number of pathways
approved by their CTE committee,
right? Very clear measure and
then moving to the very last
one, in addition to
to identifying the measures
they've also told everyone
exactly what day very clean list
where you can actually see this
is the data to monitor. There
will be no surprises for folks
who are working on all of this
to understand if there's
progress towards it because
they're telling folks exactly
the data that they're going to
be looking at, for example, um,
number of local education agency
and business partnerships in
support of CTE pathways. So this
allows data systems to also be
designed to accommodate all of.
So again, just to, to emphasize
that um what we're trying to
demonstrate here is
Models that states have used.
Um, Maryland being our, our
example today.
Uh, how should that be different
based on the context of New
Mexico, right? Um, again, uh,
referring back to what Nathan
said earlier about, you know,
we, we have specific kinds of
challenges.
In New Mexico, but we also have
very unique assets that we bring
to this conversation.
What should that, what should
this planning process look like
in that particular context.
And
Also recognizing, as Jess said,
that we've made a, we've done a
lot of work here. You all have
done a lot of work, state agency
has done a lot of work. Local
school districts are working
hard every day. No one goes to
school saying we're not gonna
like help kids today.
Everybody's working pretty hard.
Where do, what's the, what's the
right starting point in this
process?
Both acknowledge the progress
that's already been made, but to
keep that momentum up. It's
really important.
So, how do we plan with a
purpose?
Again, the, the lawsuit prompted
a lot of the, the efforts that
were, that we're undertaking
right now. And again, a lot of
those were not necessarily new,
but I think it, it sharpened the
state's focus on the need to
improve funding, to improve
implementation, to offer new
programs, uh, potentially.
This can't be seen as a
compliance effort.
Right, and you all have heard
people talk about the lawsuit
probably as a compliance effort.
I think it's really important to
remember that at the heart.
Both of the lawsuit, but also
just in in terms of our goals as
educators and as folks who
support the education system.
is not to get out of something,
but to improve the lives of
kids.
OK
And so creating those
comprehensive and structured
planning.
Uh, can be valuable in creating
intentional and sustainable
systems that address those
student needs.
OK
But as I said before,
We could talk about it today.
And we could kind of leave it
there, and then we could talk
about it again next year, and
then maybe again in 5 or 10 or
20 years.
And so we're proposing today
that maybe it's time to take
some next steps.
Um, with your guidance and the,
and um the cooperation of other
folks in the education system.
So, we're gonna, we're gonna
walk you through just a couple
of very, very high level
examples of what this could look
like.
Or New Mexico.
Right. And this is using again,
some of those models that we've
already, that we've already
seen.
It
This is not creating a
comprehensive plan for education
and developing goals and
structures and metrics and
outcomes and outputs, all of
those things, that's not gonna
happen.
In 3 months or 6 months, we've
seen uh other states take
multiple years.
Just to create their plan, to
create that solid foundation of
expectations.
And so we, these are all sort of
placeholders for how long it
might take.
Uh, it may take a couple of
years to establish those goals.
Um, what are the actual
structures necessary for
starting to implement.
The tracking progress that
tracking progress that has to um
happen on a regular basis. We
can't wait. If we've set a 5
year goal, we can't wait till 5
till after 5 years to measure.
We have to be measuring and
tracking that progress along the
way.
I'm gonna give you just one
example, and I chose this one,
Because it's a very concrete
example, right? And I think it
it helps us to give some, get
some perspective on the kind of
work and the kind of time it
might take to do some of this
work.
We've talked a lot in our in in
our presentations over about
educators, about the importance
of having
Teachers who look like the kids
that they serve, that research
shows that students tend to
perform better when that's the
case. And we've heard it's very
specifically about the need for
Native American educators in our
state. We have about 10%.
Of um
About 10 to 12% of our students
in New Mexico are Native
American. Only 3% of our
teachers are.
So, in real numbers, that's
about, it would take about 1800
additional Native American
teachers to reach that
representative 10 to 12%, so
that we have as many Native
American teachers as we have uh
Native American students as a
percentage of the overall. So,
I have here a list of
stakeholders.
This is a, this is a condensed
list, but it's important to
recognize that this doesn't mean
That we fund scholarships, and
we call it, or that we tell PED.
Go find more Native American
educators, and we leave it
there.
This has to be a comprehensive
and intentional effort that
includes higher education
institutions, and I want to
make, and I said this a little
bit yesterday, both the
preparation programs and
institutional leadership.
Because it requires support from
the from those leaders.
participation in those funding
processes, intentionality around
recruitment efforts to really do
that well.
Obviously we would include
tribes, pueblos and nations in
this conversation because they
have the most vested interest in
making sure that this happens,
and they probably have a lot of
assets to bring to that
conversation about how we could
actually accomplish this goal.
And then the last one I want to
talk a little bit here is about
the benchmark.
OK.
This is one very like simplistic
example.
But I think it's important that
we think about the time.
We would need 140 more Native
American educators per year for
the next 13 years.
To reach that number.
It may not happen in 13 years
and maybe 140 is unrealistic
given how many completers we
have, um, just in general.
Right, but I think it's
important that when we say we're
going to have a goal of doing
something.
This isn't going to happen in 2
or 3 years. It takes time.
And I would say the same thing
as another couple of high-level
examples. We talk a lot about,
uh,
An asset that New Mexico has in
its bilingualism.
And we offer bilingual literacy
seals and and language seals.
What does it mean to have that
as a goal for students and for
students in our state to
graduate bilingual. We can't
just say we want more.
Of course we do.
What does it actually look like
and how much time should it
take? What are the steps to get
there?
Jessica mentioned career
technical education.
Right. That's another goal that
we can have.
But we have to be very specific.
Obviously, we would also want to
include measures like academic
proficiency and graduation
rates, we can't ignore how
important those things are,
although I, I might argue that
there's sort of secondary to
making sure that students are
engaged and feel valued in
school, those kinds of things
actually lead.
Better academic proficiency, uh,
and higher graduation rate. And
then just as a quick example of
the level of granularity that a
plan like this would have to
have.
I won't go through all of these.
You can read through these
charts on your own, but this is
an example from Maryland.
About how specific
The actions have to be.
In order to get there.
We can't say we want more.
What else, what else does it
take? So there's a couple of
Of examples of how, um, and I'll
highlight on that last page that
this plan actually says that
state budget shall include at
least one, at least $1 million
dollar appropriations to the
teacher quality and diversity
program annually.
I think it's important that that
we recognize that a plan like
this isn't a plan for the state
agency. It isn't a plan only for
the legislature.
This includes the roles and
responsibilities of all folks
involved.
Because if the plan says we need
this, we need a million dollars
to to accomplish the goal that
we've set as a state.
Someone's responsible for that.
We've talked a lot about
reciprocal accountability, and I
think this is a good example of
how that might.
So we have a couple of very, uh,
this, these sound really easy.
Um, but as, as you've seen,
It's gonna take a lot of work.
So we have two policy
considerations for you.
One is actual legislation
creating and authorizing a
structure to develop and oversee
a long term plan.
This is what, this is the step
that some states have actually
taken.
To um to codify this process and
identify it as an as a priority
for the state.
It's not necessary, maybe.
But it certainly sends a signal
that that um
The state wants this to happen.
And this is something that will
bring to you with, with your
guidance, uh, after the session,
which is a 25, 2025 LESC work
plan for your staff.
Really focused on long term
planning.
We, um, we're gonna do this work
for you in some form, one way or
another.
We think it's important, not
necessarily to create a
unilateral plan, but to continue
to provide you with some
valuable goals and metrics, so
that at the very least the
legislature has that to work
from.
OK
We're gonna, we're gonna
continue to do this for you in
one form or another.
Um
So, any structure involving uh a
plan should be representative
and be given the authority to
create a binding plan. It's
important and I, I really
appreciated Nathan's slide when
you showed all the stakeholders
that were involved in creating
some of these plans, it goes way
beyond the usual suspects.
Right
We have a group of very invested
groups, um, in education, but
there are others that we don't
always involve in those
conversations, and they need to
be involved.
And um
I think it's important, as I
said yesterday,
That New Mexico is unique in
having an LESC.
Most states don't have a
structure like this. Most states
don't have devoted staff.
The way that you all do.
And I don't say that as you
know in writing terms.
We feel like we can be uh a
valuable asset to the state, to
the state.
In this process.
Obviously, we do that work for
you and we'll continue to do
that work for you. But I think
um with your guidance, we would
also um happily lend that
capacity to whatever extent
possible to these larger, if
allowed.
And so with that, Mr. Chair,
we'll stand for questions. All
right. Thank you, Representative
Ferrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, panel for your, as usual,
great uh presentations, um.
What I didn't see or I didn't
see anybody talk about was the
role of local school boards.
In this planning.
And you know, as much as we
would like to say we can make
educational policy.
Nothing's gonna happen.
If we somehow don't
Help local school boards.
Um, you know, come to the table
or or figure this out. I mean,
I, I once went to a debate, uh,
for local school board members
and somebody said,
In the course of the debate. So
what are you going to do to help
our school district uh implement
Martinez Yazi.
And he was a young man, and he
said, you know, I heard my
parents talk about that, but.
I'm, I'm just giving everybody a
reality check here. And when
these school board members come
and he was elected.
When the school board members
come.
And they come to the table and
they look at a budget.
Which is really where, where the
rubber meets the road, you know,
as you say, if you don't get the
million dollars for the project
and the goal and you don't
measure how that's being
implemented, you're never gonna
know. So we've got to figure
out, I think it's a legislature
and and as an LESC, how we're
gonna, how we're gonna work with
local school boards and train
them.
So that they understand.
Um, really, uh, the, the
consequences of their actions,
and I just want to say
Representative Garrett and I
went to a.
Um
A um uh training last year on
educational finance led by
Georgetown Egenomics lab.
And it was really interesting
how they taught school board
members to really kind of
ask questions about the budget.
Understand what the budget is,
and, and are you just keep doing
that budget because that's what
it's always been, and again,
these are all volunteers and
they're not necessarily
sophisticated. It's, it's much
like a, a freshman legislature,
legislator thinking they're
gonna have a big impact on the
LFC budget the first year
they're in the, the house.
Not gonna happen. It takes a
long time to understand that
stuff.
And I'm just saying, I think.
I think if we leave, I think
that's a, you know, not
everybody has a suite Cleveland.
And uh uh uh Craig Grant on
their school board.
Um, so I think that somehow as a
state where we need to figure
out
How we're going to involve them
in a meaningful way so that it's
meaningful for those school
board members, and, and
something that works, um, on a
long term basis.
And they have the funding to
make that happen and, and I
would, we did some minor school
board legislation last year
around campaign finance and, you
know, what boards could spend
before and after uh a an
election, so we did some things,
but that took 20 years to pass
too.
Uh, so I'm just saying,
This is, this is uh
where the rubber meets the road
is at the local school board
level, and LSC can you guys can
do the best work in the world.
It really doesn't matter.
We can do the best work in the
world. It really doesn't matter
when you've got to get down to
that local level and figure out
how we're going to
How we're gonna work with them
to um
Make a sustainable change.
That's all I have to say. I
guess it's not a question, but I
would like to, it's, it's more
of a statement, but I guess I
would like your reaction to that
statement. It's not a very good
question.
Um, so Mr. Chairman,
Representative, um, thank you
for what I heard as a question
and observation and a
recommendation all rolled into
one,
to use a technical term, I think
all three are actually spot on,
um, buried very, very deeply and
a number of the very busy slides
that I had about Maryland.
Um, Pennsylvania and Nevada,
there was reference to ongoing
work with school boards
associations and local school
boards. I neglected to really.
hit on those, those ideas, um,
you did hear me make reference
to the idea that one lesson
learned from the Maryland
experience was the need to
really couple long term and
intentional planning with
capacity building and training
and piloting proactively.
And that gets to the heart, um,
Mr. Chair and representative of
what I heard the question to be,
which is that you can't just
build a plan and expect people
to understand the intent,
understand the vision, um, buy
into the execution, have the
capacity to execute or to bring
their own unique capacities and
local assets to bear to really
make that execution as effective
and implementation as effective
as it could be. Um, so, yes, our
research and our, our work with
states strongly supports um
embedded um pro
active training, capacity
building, whatever you want to
call it, um, for school boards,
school districts, school
leaders, and, and teachers
actually along the way. And Mr.
Chairs representative, I think
the um
This may, this may sound naive,
um.
I generally operate with, with
uh the assumption of best
intentions, and given that
school boards, uh, school board
members are all volunteer and,
and spend a lot of hours and
sometimes grueling meetings
talking about the most mundane
of of of issues.
Um
I really think they're there for
kids.
And I think one of the things
that's going to be really
important. One, I, uh, I would,
I would just echo all the things
that Nathan just said that I
think a New Mexico plan would
have to include school boards,
school board representatives, as
well as individual school board
members in a way that maybe
we've not done in the past.
With the acknowledgement that I
would say the vast majority of
them, probably all of them.
are there for kids in some form
or another.
And so how you get buy-in.
And involvement in that process,
I think, is by centering
students in this conversation,
and how a state plan actually
benefits.
Individual students, but also
their local communities. This
can't be about the state wants a
certain percentage of something
done because the state wants it.
It has to be about how that
percentage is actually a
manifestation of progress and
improvement for students. And I,
and I completely agree that they
should be involved in that
process, and I would hope that
that level of um
That approach
would, would help convince them
that this is a worthwhile effort
and that they would actually
want to be active participants.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for bringing this up. It's
actually a very powerful.
Presentation.
And um I'm ready for the Garrett
commission.
No
Um
My pet peeve is people that keep
reiterating we're 50th in
education.
Because actually look at at
school by school, teacher by
teacher, student by student. We
have powerful positive things
happening, and if we were to
look at every single metric.
That we measure educational
outcomes with, we would find in
many cases where number 1 or
number 26 or whatever. So I
think we have to stop that, and
I think this is one of the ways
to stop it.
Um, I keep asking John, I keep
saying, when is the dang judge
gonna rule on the injunctive
relief, but as I said with that,
we don't really need to wait.
For a judge. I think we really
need to do this.
And I think in response to
Representative Herrera,
I really think that um
Absolutely, school boards would
be included, chambers of
commerce, my pet peeves, you
have the Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, now announcing that
charter schools are the answer.
And, and
That's
That's like tangent.
We really need everybody at at
the table.
And as we did even in the middle
school.
Um, study group, we had middle
school students at the table.
And so, and we need um
We need the departments, we need
the
You know, a lot of people who
used to become teachers.
Go into stem now because they
can have their starting
salaries.
In the 6 digits.
And they would have been
teachers in the past.
So, I, I really think this
answers the question of what we
need and it, it can't just be
Martinez Yazi, because, you
know, 75% out of our state act
kids are actually in the
Martinez Yai.
Anyway
And um it's just like the, um,
American with disabilities Act,
we started building bathrooms
and, you know, taking away
curbs, and then we all benefited
when we had our broken leg or
had a baby that we needed to
take him to the bathroom, so I
feel like.
I feel like we should really do
this.
And the fact that Mr. Driscoll
emphasized that it's not an
overnight deal.
And the two of you emphasized
it.
I, I think it's what we really
need to drive education in the
state.
And I feel, um, you know, we
keep hearing about the
diminishing population
personally, our population is
gonna grow.
If we do things right,
economically, educationally.
so many things. So just really
thank you for this.
Um, very provocative, and I
think much needed.
Thing that that transcends LSC.
Um, the judge did, uh, the
injunctive relief called for
Elias C to lead the charge and
coordinate it.
But I think what we actually
need is this, um, sorry,
somebody's calling me. Um,
probably about this.
Um, but thank you. Uh, you've
really given us something to
chew on.
And I think to do, so thank you.
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
I could just, one thing I didn't
point out and I really
appreciate that you brought up
the, uh, this is actually
Jessica's insight about ADA and
and how those changes actually
improve lives for all, for all
citizens.
I've been thinking a lot about
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit, um,
in similar ways, um, there was
this, I think, feeling that if
we sort of
That, that a rising tide raises
all boats. And if we just did
something for the entire state
that those students would also
benefit, sort of shifted
thinking a little bit more in
terms of um
Sheltered instruction, you would
be, you're very familiar with
that and how we serve English
learners, for instance.
Those are really high quality
teaching strategies that we have
focused on English learners.
But when a teacher has those
strategies in mind, every
student in that class benefits.
Right? And so I've been thinking
a lot about Martinez Yazi in
those terms, is that it
shouldn't be a myopic or, or
sort of um
Bound, focused just on those
groups for the sake of it, but
in understanding that when we
serve those students well,
We actually serve all students
well.
Representing me to one more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for your presentation. Um, I
share this sentiment with um
Representative Garrett, that
I'm, I'm frankly tired of
hearing.
Um, that we're last in
everything and we were last in
education. We're last in, and
we're not doing it. What are you
guys doing over there? Um,
you're not doing anything right
because the especially from
people that don't sit in my
classroom that aren't in the
classroom.
That don't know how hard every
single teacher works every
single day, and what they go
through and many of the hours
not paid because I only get paid
until 2:30.
But I'm there until 6, you know,
um, and, um, on most days of the
week because I care. And so to,
to, to constantly slam.
an industry that is charged with
Preparing our youth.
Because you have no idea what is
going on in our classroom. You
really don't.
Um, and, and it's usually those
that that are doing it and
that's what that, what kind of
irritates me, um, um, when, when
I hear it, and believe me, I
hear it often, uh, but my, my
question is um how
Do we really have an accurate
Knowledge of what is success?
How do we know we've done it. Is
it, is it test scores, which I
have an issue with test scores
that don't aren't required for
graduation and there, and we're
measured on that because I, I
know what my kids say. I know, I
know what they do when they're
taking this test, and they're
like, if I don't have to take
it, why do I care?
You know, I, I hear him and,
and, and is it graduation rates?
Is it, you know, we talk about
civic uh readiness. Is it the
fact that we can certify these
kids to go into an employment.
What is that measure of success,
because if we're all shooting
for different measures of
success and doing our own thing
and how we can get there. We
don't have a correct vision of
this is how we know we've
arrived.
Uh, do we know that at this
point?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Mirabal Moya, I, I think
This is exactly why we need the
plan.
To identify those metrics. And
to your point about, about uh
academic proficiency or test
scores, right.
I don't think we're gonna get
away or, or, or be in a place
where we're ever gonna be able
to ignore those. They, they do
give us information about how
students are doing in a
particular content area and that
may have to do with teaching,
and it may also have to do with
engagement, you know, sometimes
academic proficiency is a is a
measure of engagement because
kids may or may not care about
that particular test, right?
But as I said earlier, I think
part of this is intentional
work that has been started, you
know, we have local districts
now required to, to create a
graduate profile as part of the
new graduation requirements.
That's a local district actually
being able to determine.
What they care about.
And it may be academic
proficiency.
In a, in a particular community,
it may, it may mean how many
students are bilingual.
Whether in Spanish or a native
language.
It may mean how many students
are able to
Leave high school either
entering a four-year institution
or a career.
How many of them have earned
certificates or credentials as
part of a high quality career
technical education program.
All of those are possible
metrics.
And I would say a lot of school
districts are actually doing
that work today to decide.
How do we know kids are actually
improving?
At the state level we've not
identified that. And, and one of
the things we didn't talk a lot
about here, but we mentioned
yesterday as part of our teacher
residency, uh, report, is the
need for accurate and timely
data.
Because to some extent we can
set a goal right now.
But not actually be able to
measure whether or not we're
reaching it. And so that's part
of that overarching systems of
support for the system as a
whole, that we also need to get
at. But to your larger, to your,
to your question.
The state gets to decide, and
while we have federal metrics
that we have to adhere to, both
in terms of who takes the tests
and, and then, you know, who
gets identified as needing
improvement.
What does New Mexico decide?
And I think if we were to focus
on those sort of local and state
priorities in a meaningful
intentional way.
You might find that we're, we're
going to meet some of those
other goals that other people
set for us along the way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and,
uh, and John, um, I, I, I agree
with you that there's different,
um, my, my issue and not that I
don't think that they should
have different measurements, um,
like or local school cause I,
uh, I'm one of the uh I I love
local control, but how does the
public, because when you have
that perception out there, we
know it.
But, and we know their measures
and we know what success looks
like and we know and, and maybe
the school boards, but the
general public out there only
hears that national, uh, uh,
that, that, that we're 50th.
That's it. There, there, that's
all, that's the only thing they
see and that's the only thing
they they judge us by. They
don't see the other successes.
So is it, is it a campaign to
get information out? Is it, is
it something to be able to tell
people this is the measure that
your local school district.
Ha, and this is what we're doing
because they don't know, they
don't.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
thank you very much for the
question. Um, I think, you know,
as John said,
Figuring out the right, building
on what other states have done,
figuring out the right
collection of metrics for you
all as a state, um, and then for
individual school districts to
choose among.
And then figuring out how you
help.
As a state body or or how, you
know, a commission or or an
overarching committee would help
as a state body to determine the
storyline that's being told with
those multiple measures, um.
Maryland, Nevada, Pennsylvania
do have examples of systems that
are being built for that kind of
action, so that parents.
You know, the system may show 18
different metrics of CTE
completers and new workforce
readiness credentials and
lowering absenteeism and
stronger well-being and all of
that. But there are ways to then
turn that into something public
facing through um portals,
campaigns, um, and innovative
forms of social media
storytelling that are really
resonating nowadays, um, to help
parents see
This is what the school system
is doing. This is how it's
benefiting our communities and
our state collectively, and this
is what's resulting as um you,
you know, it's coming as a
result for our communities and
our economy.
Um, which I would argue, um,
Paris
Businesses, taxpayers, um, other
policymakers really need to hear
to deeply understand um how
investments are being used, how
the great work of educators in
your state, um, is being
leveraged, um, and what impacts
are resulting.
It is possible.
Mr.
Chairman Representative Minnova
Moya, I want to bring that home
a little bit, um, a couple of
weeks ago I spent the week in
Gallup and they this is
happening in New Mexico already.
They are one of our districts.
It's actually a bit further
along in having a graduate
profile and what they've done is
actually embed this into their
district strategic plan, um, I
believe it's called Elevate.
They've worked with local
publications to actually put
that plan out into the community
and ask the community to help
hold them accountable to their
graduate.
a profile. So that graduate
profile mechanism that you all
have invested in as a
legislative body in those
graduation requirements, um,
we've seen in New Mexico is
resulting in actual different
accountability designs for how
communities work with their
families with their businesses
with folks in their local
community to make that real
intangible and not just a list
of attributes on a piece of
paper.
And so I just wanted you to hear
that there is good work
happening in our state and part
of this work could be better
leveraging folks who are doing
that in New Mexico right now and
learning from their insights. I
think you also know we have a um
we're calling them our CTE
qualitative working group, um,
where we're actually learning
right now from districts across
the state, what they're doing
with graduate profiles among a
bunch of other um CT items that
are pressing for you all around
funding in particular, and we're
going to start asking them about
how
They're designing to measure
progress towards those and so
we're very much thinking about
how um local work can inform the
statewide metric.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you
very much.
and block.
Thank you guys. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I appreciate the
presentation. A couple just
points that I was thinking of
during this presentation, I was
looking up other states like
Pennsylvania, Nevada,
Mississippi, Montana, Maryland,
and from what I saw of these
states, they all kind of have
some form of state school board.
And that school board has some
authority, and I think maybe
that could be part of the
conversation, Mr. Chairman and
panel, and I'm just wondering
maybe Mr. Driscoll has some more
information about what that
plays as well as school board
autonomy and
Funding and other, other metrics
that they can oversee as well,
because I think if we, we take
it away from one tiny.
Or big, very big, uh, part of
the governor's cabinet, put it
into its own exclusive board
that can oversee the school
boards on that way, I think that
could be potentially something
that may be beneficial to the
state, and I'm just wondering if
there may be some insight onto
that, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Driscoll.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
thank you. Um, it's a, it's a
complicated question that I
think we could be here all day
discussing, but I really
appreciate it, um, you know, in,
in Maryland, for example, there
is a state board of education.
There are local boards and as I
think Jess shared, there's also
an additional accountability and
implementation board that was
established with the charge of
overseeing the specific
additional funds that were
passed, um, well
designed, those kinds of
mechanisms with really clearly
defined roles and ways of
supplementing each other's
expertise and work really,
really well.
Um, there are risks inherent in
that, uh, that you wind up
duplicating, establishing
authorizations that duplicate
existing authorizations and then
creating ambiguous power
struggles, uh, which
Uh, if you were to go down the
road of establishing a new
board, you would need to be, my
recommendation would that you
would need to be very, very
careful to avoid, um, but I, I
share your optimism that there
is real power, um, in creating
those kinds of committees.
In part because they can really
lean into the opportunities that
local control provides, but
provide a kind of framework for
quality and a common expectation
for the common good and the,
the, the common economy of the
state, um, while still allowing
for that rich local flexibility.
So I think it's a really
positive idea.
Mr. Chair Representative, it's,
it's a question we've talked a
lot about internally as well.
And obviously there's uh the the
turnover and some of the
leadership change at the agency
has been at least 11 reason that
people are talking about how do
you create more consistency in
leadership, and that's, that's
a, that's a big, a big issue.
The reason we didn't include
that, that sort of
recommendation or or talk too
much about uh governance
structures is that um
In our research,
There hasn't been a unifying
sort of theme of if only you
have this particular structure,
that's going to result in better
outcomes. We've, we've looked at
that and we haven't quite been
able to pin down particular
magic formula, if you will.
I think the other piece of this
is that regardless of the sort
of overarching, and I would call
call it education governance
structure, right, whether you
have that uh in the executive or
in the state board.
No one entity.
can do this work unilaterally.
It still requires the
cooperation of your legislature,
your local school boards, your
superintendents and principals
and teachers, families and
communities. And so one of the
reasons that we didn't talk too
much about governance
structures, is that an
overarching comprehensive and
collaborative plan is actually
the accountability mechanism,
right? So that regardless of
who's in place, um, and I didn't
mention this, like it was
supposed to be like with my
grand finale, and I just
Completely spaced it in my
notes, that most of us won't be
around to see.
The outcomes and the progress
that we make.
If this kind of thing is in
place. If we do it right,
The best outcomes will happen
long after all of us are gone.
And to to to create that level
of sustainability.
It has to, it has to be beyond.
particular governance structure,
for instance, which doesn't mean
that there aren't pros and cons
to those things. I don't mean to
understate how those might
impact the process. But I think
it's important to recognize that
it is a comprehensive effort
that has to go beyond 11
particular, you know, body for.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for those answers, and
I, I, I guess I agree in theory,
with a lot of what you said,
right? I think it's good that
we're talking about
collaboration, we're talking
about not having a unilateral
approach, but really right now,
in my opinion.
We kind of do have a unilateral
approach with the PED kind of
thing.
Pretty much everything. The
governor gives the
recommendation for a budget we
as a legislature really,
honestly have.
Power wise, just budgetary
authority.
Mostly, that's really what we
have, where it comes to
policies, where it comes to
curriculum, that's all at the
PED level, then they give the
curriculum to the school boards
and they can
Vote on pre-approved curriculum,
so I feel like it's very, very
top heavy in my opinion, and I
think that it would be a good
I would love to just jump in,
dive deep on how a state school
board like we used to have.
1520 years ago, could come back
to the state and help us not be
50th in education. And I know
some people say, oh, we, we
shouldn't talk about it being
50th, but objectively, we are.
In some metrics were 51st behind
DOD schools. So I just think
it's a
It's a good conversation to
have, and I will, I'll continue
to, to fight for that, but state
school board all the way,
hopefully, so let's get it done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right, um,
Thank you all for the
presentation and for your
answers. I have a couple more
questions. Um, and Nathan, on,
on page 22 of your slides. Um,
the last bullet point, you have
a represented as a
recommendation based on other
states uh represent the needs
not only of constituencies, but
the common good. I was wondering
if you could elaborate on that
last bullet point a little bit.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. It's a
recommendation based on um
protocols for norming these
kinds of commission structures
that we've seen whereas if
you're bringing
Say the representatives of the
unions and various state
agencies, um, all together in a
room, sometimes 30, 40 of them
together in a room, um.
The purpose of the work.
is to serve the children of New
Mexico.
In this case, it's not to serve.
The needs of that individual
agency and so we've seen those
commissions have great success
in asking and trying to build a
a cultural norm that
commissioners come to the table
in their role as commissioners
for the state, not as the
executive director of the
association of whatever with
their representing their one
side.
Yeah, and I, I appreciate you,
um, elaborating on that, um,
because I think that that fits
nicely with, with, um,
The presentation from our LESC
group is, is, um, how do we find
the, the
The commonalities between um the
different stakeholders in our
Martinez Yazzi lawsuit, um, and
I think it's really helpful. I
will say too that um
I think the work over the past
couple of years for from um
LESC and our staff has really
worked toward, um, bringing
folks in, um,
Stakeholder groups and and we've
been able to pass some pretty um
substantial and good legislation
based off of that. So learning
time as an example from a couple
of years ago, um, um, high
school graduation requirements
that is a tremendously heavy
lift. um, but we had lots of
stakeholder buy-in even prior to
the session, I think, um,
because of that sort of of
meaning and consensus building
around certain ideas, um,
It's really helpful, I think,
um.
It represent Ferreira and
various members brought up the
fact that, you know, I think the
overarching theme is that we're
in a political process as well
in this, where we've had um
legislation such as learning
time, but we also have um uh uh
the executive who is uh
undermining it. Um, and has the
ability to and and it can be
incredibly frustrating when we
have something that I think is,
is
Um
Such um buy in around, um, but
I, I, I use that as an example,
not to like.
jab at the executive, but as us
as policymakers to, to keep in
mind that we're in a political
process as well.
Um, and, and we are hurt by, by
definition, politicians that
that have to make these
decisions and work on, on, um,
Ensuring that they're
implemented and working with the
other stakeholders as well, um,
like the executive on making
sure that these uh uh
initiatives that are worked on
in the interim that we pass as a
body are actually implemented
and that there's buy in and at
the executive level as well. So
that's something that I think,
you know, we also should and
continually keep at the
forefront of the work that we
do.
Um, um,
As part of our job as as as uh
representatives of our district,
but also um of the state and
working on on this sort of
policy. Um,
I guess, um.
That's sort of all I had was the
fact of, of really buying and
getting this sort of some sort
of buy in, which I think has
been great for um.
From us as thee see, one thing
I, I now I'm remembering where I
was gonna go with that was, um,
and I've talked about it a few
times, but the broader
legislature, cause we're a
segment here, um, that's
particularly interested, um, and
many of us are are in have been
in education in various levels,
um, but from our colleagues who
are in the other committees as
well. I use health as an
example.
Those that are involved in the
judiciary because, I mean, our
schools are central to our
communities, but the hell, as we
know, like the health of our
communities in all different
ways and the experiences our
students and their families are
coming in to our schools with
are equally important in the
work that we do at schools is
important, but what they're
experiencing in their broader
communities, um, and how we can
leverage one another, um,
expertise.
in the various fields to to not
place the burden solely on our
school system, and I think
that's one of the stress points
for educators, administrators,
school nurses, counselors, all
that is that we tend to um um
look at them and rightfully so,
because we see our students all
the time. Um, sometimes more
than they are actually at home.
But, but it's also our
responsibility as a broader
legislature to set the
foundation for our families to
prosper and have access to the
various resources that they
need. So, um, as we move forward
in this work, I guess, is
starting for all of us to start
thinking how we can incorporate
the other interim committees
into this process as well, um,
so that they're informed of the
work we're doing, but also
they're informed or we're
informed of the work that
they're doing and vice versa.
I'll say that.
Um
But thank you. I really
appreciate it.
All right.
So we'll go to
School safety.
So item 8.
Here
01 thing I will add to that is
we transition as well is um
And maybe this is something for
those that may be listening in
the media is, you know, we talk
about these different metrics
and narratives and stuff is that
um
I extend an open invitation to
our media folks and covering
education and all that we do,
um, here as the legislative
education Study Committee, um,
for education, education policy
cause, um, certainly it's a
popular topic in all of our
communities, but, um, I mean, I,
I
I would like to see more
coverage of the various things
that we do around the state in
terms of education and all of
the media outlets across the
state, and certainly that's an
open invitation to cover um the
work that we're doing here and
during the session.
Throughout the interim.
So, to put a little bit of a
spotlight on all of us.
All right, Connor, good morning.
There we go, it's green this
time, OK, yeah, OK, perfect.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh, I
hope everyone's doing well this
morning. Uh, a slightly warmer
day that we've had in the last
few days in Santa Fe, so that's
quite nice.
As always, my name is Connor L.
Hicks, and I'm a policy analyst
for the LESC.
As you will likely recall during
this committee's June 2024
hearing in Chama, New Mexico,
uh, myself, Merritt Andrews,
Natasha Davalos and Mark Montoya
presented a landscape analysis
of school safety trends and
challenges facing schools both
here in New Mexico and across
the United States.
Uh, first off, I would like to
thank, uh, all three of them for
their incredible work in
partnership as we've done this
research throughout this interim
and the engagement with
stakeholders across the state.
At the conclusion of that June
presentation, I previewed the
engagement and research work we
would be doing throughout the,
the rest of the interim, prior
to sharing policy and budget
recommendations ahead of the
2025 legislative session.
So today, I'm honored to be
joined by some of those
passionate dedicated
stakeholders and education and
safety professionals to discuss
the bearing approaches to school
safety that we see in our state,
as well as share LESC staff
recommendations to further
support school safety efforts in
New Mexico.
But before we do that, I think
it's really important that when
we talk about school safety, we
should note that the people,
whether on this committee or in
schools across the state who are
tasked with setting policy and
procedures related to safety.
Uh, there's a deeply personal
stake in school safety.
Uh, this people, all of us in
this room and people across the
state are parents, guardians,
aunties, uncles, siblings, and
often educators themselves. And
so it's this personal connection
more so than any desire for
improved attendance or higher
test scores that really drives
this desire to do this work and
make our schools a safer place
for our loved ones.
And so before I speak about the
policy considerations that we
have staff as staff have
prepared for all of you. I want
us to hear from the people who
are doing this difficult and
critical work to ensure the
safety of our schools day in and
day out.
So joining me today are Darren
Walter, safety and security
consultant for the New Mexico
Public Schools Insurance
Authority and Palms and
Associates. Principal Jolene
Star of erone High School in
Raton, New Mexico, and Desi
Garcia, director of Safety and
Security for Los Lunas Schools
in Los Lunas, New Mexico.
As you hear from these
panelists, you're going to see
examples of school safety
schemes that on their face may
appear quite different.
However, what I want to
underscore is that regardless of
the language used to
characterize his approaches or
the titles of the people tasked
with promoting these safe
environments, the bedrock
philosophy that is shared
between these is a commitment to
building positive relationships
between educators and the
students they serve.
So in a word, while all of these
approaches prioritize the safety
of the people in buildings, both
physically and behaviorally.
These approaches center
belonging.
And so without further ado, I'll
turn it over first to Darren
Walter to discuss the work that
Palms and Associates and NIMSA
have done across the state to
support implementation of
restorative practices in our
schools.
Thank you for that introduction,
Connor. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, as he said, my
name's Aaron Walter and I work
with Palms and Associates
through NIMSA, and I was tasked
4 years ago after the pandemic
to try and start a restorative
practices program throughout New
Mexico. Uh, we invested in this
work because NIMSE and Palms
believe that this is an
investment in kids. We want kids
to be successful, it's that
plain and simple.
Um, if we look at restorative
practices, it's kind of a
buzzword. It really means
building relationships with your
students. I heard the chairman
mentioned earlier, a lot of our
students spend more time at
school than they do at home.
And that being said, if we know
our students, and we know their
baseline, we're more likely to
detect when violence may enter
our building. I uh did a
subtitle of increasing student
success and reducing violence
through relational learning.
Again, it's just that, getting
to know our students better. We
have 3 points of contact every
day that we fail to recognize
where we can stop bad things
from coming into our buildings.
The first one is that bus stop,
because bus drivers have great
relationships with kids, very
different than the educators,
yet we rarely meet the bus at
the curb to see how we're.
kids doing today?
That second point of contact is
the front door. If we stand out
front and greet kids, that's
restorative practice, that's
relational learning. We're also
judging their baseline as they
enter our building, and if we
can find out when the kid is
off,
Then maybe we stop them from
getting into a classroom. And
the last point of contact is the
cafeteria.
I trained lunch ladies across
the state all the time, and
they're very passionate, they
love their kids and they know
their kids well. Again, yet we
missed that opportunity to go in
and say, hey, how's our kids
doing today?
So we just start there, maybe we
stop some of this from coming
into our building, but let's say
that uh we don't, and our kids
make the building restorative
practices is not a program. It
is not a philosophy, I'm, I'm
sorry, it's not a program, it's
not an initiative. It's a
philosophy.
So this philosophy will look
very different across the state.
I've got principal star from
Raone with me and her program or
her philosophy will look very
different than it looks in
Socorro and Penasco and Dexter,
other districts I'm working
with.
Um, it's what they choose to
implement and how far they
choose to take this.
So maybe in ratone vaping is
going to be a suspendable event
offense, maybe in another
district they say, hey, we're
gonna keep kids in school, and
we're going to teach them about
the hazards of vaping and try
and work through this because we
don't want to have them out of
the building, we don't want to
have those lost learning days.
What is restorative practices
do? First of all, it gives the
victim a voice. They have some
input as to the outcome after
something has occurred. Um, I
think we can probably agree that
99% of the time, one person may
be more wrong than right, but
the other person probably holds
a little bit of blame, and if we
bring those two individuals
together and let them talk, a
lot of times we'll get to root
causes, and we're really looking
for root causes.
Uh, identifies the motivation
and impact, uh, it teaches
alternative behaviors, and it
really builds empathy, right?
And we try and repair the harm
that was done. We know if we
suspend a student and they go
home for 3 days, when they come
back from that suspension, they
really don't want to talk about
the incident again.
If we can catch him in that
moment and say, hey, what
happened, how did we get here
and how do we fix this? Maybe we
can keep those kids in the
building, and we can also try
and reduce the violence into
the.
What you see here is a
representative of what we have,
uh, expectations of our students
each day. They come to school,
we expect them to have their
backpack loaded with their gear
ready to learn.
I always say we control our
students from 7 to 3. We know
where they are during the school
day.
But they leave us and they go
home from 3 to 7 the next
morning. And we don't really
know what happens during that
time frame.
We refer to that as the second
backpacker, the invisible
backpack, and that's what comes
into your building the next
morning.
It's loaded with those adverse
childhood experiences.
Physical abuse, emotional abuse,
sexual and sexual abuse,
physical neglect, emotional
neglect, they see violence they
have relatives in jail,
substance abuse in the home,
mental health issues, and
divorce.
And I think we look at that
list, each one of us could
probably say something on that
list has affected me. The
difference being we're adults
with a fully developed frontal
lobe, and we can regulate
ourselves.
When our children are up their
ladder and they come through
that front door that comes
through the front door with them
and we've got to deal with that.
That makes it into our
classroom.
Again, if we know that baseline,
maybe at the front door and a
child's coming through the door,
and they're up there ladder, we
can pull them aside and say,
hey, are you OK today?
And that question often listens
a lot of tears, right? because
our kids aren't OK. The other
reason it's important if we find
out through our investigative
process of just talking with our
children, that someone's being
harmed at home. Maybe we save
them from going back into that
harmful environment that
evening.
Um, every time I travel to the
states, somebody adds to my
list. They add homelessness to
this list. It's hard to be a
good student when you're
homeless.
And we're still talking about
the pandemic 3 years later, that
our children are different. And
I always challenge teachers, I
say, hey, during that pandemic,
you taught on Zoom, we now have
a better understanding of where
our children go in the evening
time, right? We've seen all
kinds of things through Zoom
because I know at Palms we got a
lot of phone calls saying, is
the home an extension of the
classroom.
Because they saw all kinds of
things that they didn't think
were appropriate in the home,
um, and that's where our kids
were for a year. So we should
expect they're going to be a
little bit different when they
come back.
So why restorative practices?
Um, my former life, I was a
police officer for almost 30
years. I worked in the tactical
section, I understand lots of
police tactics, and when I
joined Palms and Associates, I
was doing a lot of active
shooter training.
That's response training.
Every time we have a critical
incident, Rob Elementary.
Um, well, you name all the
shootings across the country,
they call and say I need active
shooter training. It's a
response mechanism.
It's a 5-minute event. Most
active shooter events are over
in 5 minutes or less. A lot of
those less time than that and
police aren't even on scene.
So I started looking at how do
we prevent these things from
happening? Why aren't we talking
prevention?
And prevention comes back to
those relationships. We had a
school safety summit last
November in uh Santa Anaar
sponsored by the governor.
And we had a student panel there
that day, and we put 8 different
individuals on the uh on the
stage from 8 different
districts, and we said, how do
we solve this? And they told us,
we don't trust the adults.
We've gone to report things have
been sent away. We've gone to
report things and sat outside of
that counseling office too long,
so we gave up.
If they don't trust us, they
won't tell us. We have to build
those relationships far in
advance of any bad thing
happening to our school. If you
look at any after action report
from from uh school shootings,
every single one of them had
leakage behavior. Rob Elementary
is a glaring example of somebody
should have reported that. He
was reporting on social media
what was coming next, yet nobody
paid attention.
So Dewey Cornell is uh a an
expert in threat assessment for
K through 12. He focuses
specifically on K through 12 out
of the University of Virginia.
Most schools and their safe
school plan have some uh form of
threat assessment, and Dewey
Cornell, who is one of the
founders of threat assessment
who believes that we should be
looking at our kids and seeing
if they were the correct fit for
them in our schools. He says the
same thing that I'm saying that
after every incident, we jump to
ideas like bulletproof
backpacks, arming teachers, all
of the physical protections. We
don't look at the
emotional things.
I taught it head to toe on
Tuesday at 60 counselors and
social workers in my room, down
in Albuquerque, and all of them
said we need more mental health
support. Nobody is saying we
need less mental health support.
Um, if I, I was teaching in Roy
Moscato earlier this year, and I
asked him, I said, if you have a
suicidal student on a Wednesday,
when might they see a counselor?
The answer was next Tuesday.
They've got to try and hold that
child for 6 days and keep them
safe until they can get them to
help. Now there's extreme
circumstances, maybe we take to
Las Cruces to the mental health
facility, but that's very
extreme cases. In most cases
they're managing those crises on
their own.
When we look at physical
security, I am a huge fan of
physical security, so don't hear
me wrong. It's very important,
but physical security is only as
good as the end user. The human
element always beats physical
security.
I go often in survey schools and
do security vulnerability
assessments for them. When I get
there, the challenge many times,
the superintendent will say, I'm
not telling anybody you're
coming. See if you can penetrate
my building, penetrate my
facility.
I can tell you, every school I
have visited every single
district I have gotten into
their buildings.
Because people put prop rocks
outside of doors. Teachers don't
lock their classroom doors. Kids
are very nice. I piggyback in on
them. Fences that slow us down,
we put a prop rock in those.
So the human element always
beats the physical security
measures we put in place unless
we have very diligent security
personnel enforcing those rules.
Um, so I think it comes down to
that relationship piece is what
we need in order to start trying
to prevent some of these things.
I know it's not the end all be
all. Yes, we need security
measures. Yes, we need people in
place that are monitoring these,
um, but at the end of the day,
we look at fences, I look at
ranches, I come from a ranching
family. We had 3 strand barbed
wire on our ranch, that was to
keep the sheep in, not to keep
the wolves out.
A lot of our threats come from
within. We need to remember
that. So when we're saying, how
do we prevent this? We're always
thinking about the intruder, the
bad guy, the guy that lurks in
the corners that sneaks into our
building, when in fact, it's one
of our students in many cases
who comes into our building
because they've been invited
into that building, not only
invited, but expected to be
there. So when we talk talk
about school security, um, I
think we all agree in the, in
the security profession, we just
had a meeting down in Las Cruces
a couple of weeks ago, and the
1st 3 pillars are relationships,
culture, and climate.
And you can feel a healthy
culture and climate when you
walk into a building. When I go
to training school and I walk in
and I see the teachers engaged
in conversation. I see coffee
and donuts. I see laughter, I
go, this is a school that's
investing in their staff and
that trickles down to the
students.
And that's not every district
across the state, that's many of
these.
So, with that, I will close, and
I think you'll see some very
nice data that comes from
principal Star and Rone.
All right. Thank you so much,
Darren. Uh, and next, we're
gonna turn over to principal
star, uh from Raton High School.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. Thank you for
having us here today. I am
speaking about what we're doing
in Raton, specifically the data
I'm going to show is coming from
Raton High School, and we really
focused on including relational
and restorative practices in our
district because we are looking
at that preventative side of
school safety. We began our
journey in 2021 when Miss
Christie Medina became the
superintendent, and we analyze
your data and realized that we
had many issues that needed to
be addressed.
And first and foremost, we
wanted to make sure that when we
were addressing these issues
that we were trying to meet our
students' needs because what was
done in the past was really a
reactive type of disciplinary
measure, and we really wanted to
stop using those punitive
measures. And as you can see
this data comes from our 21, 22
school year from the high school
level, we had 17 fights, 64
instances of disorderly conduct,
and instances of bullying and
harassment, and many infractions
where students were vaping.
using the nicotine or THC based
on campus. We also had
infractions in all of the other
areas, and this comes from our
SARS data from the 21, 22 school
year, and with that being said,
all of these were predominantly
handled by in and out of school
suspensions, which resulted in a
whopping 254 combined school
days of lost learning time for
these students not being in the
building with their teachers.
And um
Our chronic absences were high,
our overall absences were high.
Our students were not coming to
school, not just because they
were in and out of school
suspension, but because they
just were not coming. Our
graduation rate was only at 74%
with that four-year cohort and
we were only having a 63% on
track rate for our freshman,
which, you know, is a make or
break year for students in high
school, um, with that being
said, we really wanted to
change.
this, and we were lucky enough
to meet Mr. Darren Walter with
palms and associates, and we
knew that we had to do things
differently.
So we started on the restorative
and relational practices
journey.
And we as an admin team set our
goals, the number one goal being
building that positive
relationship with um a focus on
the preventative measures of
discipline. It really also
started with we as adults had to
figure out what does that look
like, sound like, feel like. So
how do we have relational and
restorative practices with us as
adults in the building before we
bring it out and start working
on these practices with our
students. The second goal was
improving that culture and
climate.
within our organization, not
just at high school, but the
other buildings as well. And
then we needed to include
families and stakeholders in our
community and then promote
accountability, accountability
with us as adults, and then with
our students and then with
families as well. And then last,
we really wanted to reduce the
suspensions and that loss
learning time. Um.
We really also looked at how do
we mitigate the biases in our,
for our own selves and in our
disciplinary measures.
So here what you see is our road
map. It, it's our journey of
where we started and where we
are going now and we are
continuing this journey. We are
not stopping because we've seen
some great progress and are we
really want to make sure that
we're creating that safe and
supportive learning environment
where students feel valued and
respected. We've observed how
that positive culture and
climate in the building
encourages students to actively
um take ownership in their
learning and to
have more positive interactions
doing those relational and
restorative practices where we
have our circles, they're taking
ownership for their mistakes,
making a plan to repair the harm
that might have been caused it
when, when they have
disagreements and then going on,
and we've made some progress in
the last 3 years. I just want to
give a little bit of context
about Red To High School, our
building does house grades 7
through 12, um, our infractions
and from our freshmen to to
seniors have decreased quite
What we've gone from in 21, 22
school year to that 254 days of
lost instructional time to last
year in the 2324 school year, we
got it down to 52.
Um, our chronic absence rate.
is at 28%.
Our, um, overall absence rate
has decreased by 8% are on track
graduation rate of that 4-year
cohort has increased to 82%, and
our freshmen on track rate is at
91%. Um, I just want to give
some context as of today, our,
our 24, 25 school year, um, are
instances of battery, and I
don't, I'm saying battery
because it wasn't an actual two
human beings fighting. It was
another individual struck
another individual and
99 to 12, that's, we've had 3.
Um, and our 7th through 8th
grade, which we see in our
building 7th, 8th grade has the
most disciplinary data, um,
they, we've had 4 physical
altercations with those littles,
uh, our biggest thing that we're
seeing is now um vaping, whether
it's nicotine or THC. We've had
31 days of in school suspension,
because there are times when it
still needs to happen, right?
Um, we can't solve everything
with relation on restorative.
Sometimes there has to be
A little bit more severe
disciplinary practices, and
we've had 11 days of out of
school, and those 11 days were a
result of the same students
doing the same infraction even
after going through relational
restorative and alternative to
suspension things. So we still
have to do the hard things.
Um, overall, we have found that
implementing these restorative
and relational practices, um,
Creates that overall school
environment where um
We emphasize respect,
collaboration and personal
growth, we've done a better job.
I'm not saying we're perfect,
right? We're still learning, but
we've done a better job of now
incorporating student voice.
Students were involved in the
revision of our disciplinary
matrix, we had students from all
walks of life come in and work
with teachers for 3 days.
On looking at our disciplinary
matrix that had not been updated
or revised since 2016. They, the
students came in, they gave
voice, they gave opinion, they
helped us rewrite things. We've
included families, our
partnerships have expanded now
to where we are including
juvenile probation, children,
youth and families, local law
enforcement, emergency services,
families are restorative circles
where we have to come in and
we've had a fight. Your parent
comes in and the other student's
parent come in, the kids come
and we come up with a plan, so
it's, it's a whole community
and we come up with a plan, so
it's, it's a whole communitywide
uh pro uh program. Well, program
might not be the right word.
Philosophy might be the better
word, and it's, we're taking
accountability for our actions,
students to take accountability
for theirs and we come together
to make a plan to restore that
harm and our data shows that
it's working and we're not
perfect, we're still learning,
we're still growing every day,
but what we're seeing is amazing
progress and we want to keep on
that path. So thank you for
that.
Uh, this is talking about the
preventative measures at Raton
High School. Now I'm going to
turn it over to Mr. Des Garcia.
Thank you. All right, thank you,
Principal Star and uh as
Principal Star said, next will
be Dezzy Garcia, director of
safety and security at Los Lunas
Schools.
I'll let you control it.
Hi, my name is Des Garcia. Thank
you for the opportunity to talk
about what we're doing in Los in
the schools. Who am I to have
this ability and this
opportunity to talk to you guys.
First of all, I'm a retired
Albuquerque cop. I ran the
homicide unit, the gang unit,
the organized crime unit, the
narcotics unit, vice unit, and I
closed out my career as the
first school resource officer,
sergeant at APD, uh, upon my
retirement at APD, I went to
work at APS Police, um, and was
able to have the opportunity to
create a school resource officer
start
real bad high school and
eventually going to every school
in the Albuquerque Public
Schools district. I was given
the opportunity and hired at L
in the schools as the director,
um, about 15 years ago, when I
started, I was a one-man
operation. Uh, we've since grown
to 22 police officers. Um, I
wanna say that I'm proud to say
that we are the only school
district in the state and as a
cop in every school, I heard the
representative um we talked
about being last in education.
Well, I can assure you that
Launa schools is first in school
security. We do at lots of the
schools is unique to what
anybody else is doing in the in
the entire state, um, on top
talk briefly about our recent
award. We were named by the uh
National Association of School
Resource Officers as a model
department. Uh, that award is
given to agencies who follow the
triad model. Uh, triad is um
It's a triangle, teacher,
mentor, police officer, and we
are proud of the fact that we do
all of those 3, we have to be
able to provide that, uh,
ability to, uh, our kids, our
staff and our parents in order
to be able to acquire this award
that was given to us by the Na
Nat Association of School
Policing. Again, um,
Here's our, our modification
from the news bulletin. We're
proud of that award and uh
again, I don't know that any
other school district in the
state received that award or
agencies within the state of New
Mexico.
I want to talk briefly about our
relationships with our local
first responders. There are
approximately 7
law enforcement agencies in the
county of Valencia.
Um, we have a program that we
call Protecting and preserving
our Future.
We meet once a month. We get
every police agency to show up
at the school site, and we talk
about current events, things
that are going on within their
district, uh, within their
school, within their, uh police
agencies, but most importantly,
we, they get the opportunity to
talk to kids about what's going
on in their campuses. We talk to
kids about if they feel safe,
and what can we do differently
to, to make those kids feel safe
on those campuses. Also, it
provides those officers an
opportunity to look at our
school sites to get a layout
there is a situation where.
First responders are required to
respond. They know what it looks
like and they're not going in
there blind.
Again, uh, photographs of, um,
Some of our first responders and
our community partners, um, the
fire department that are part of
our uh
Community Resource program, the
uh the Valencia County Sheriff's
Department. What's important to
the engagement that we have with
our kids is that you won't see
gang issues or gang, uh
person gang graffiti on any of
our campuses in Las Tunas.
Um, when the kids leave our
schools, you won't see graffiti
in Valencia County. You don't
ever see or should I say seldom
see.
Uh, areas tagged because I think
what we're doing to make an
impact there of the 150 years
that we've been there has made
an impact on what these kids are
doing off campus.
We are a law enforcement agency.
We provide our first responders
full access to our school sites.
Uh, we encourage them to come on
our school sites and, and, uh,
engage in our children daily.
Um, we are, uh, and we do have
the ability to make arrests if
we need to do so, but because of
the relationship that we have
with our first responders, um,
it's just having that resource
available to us provides us a
sense of security, not only for
my department, but for the
entire school community. Parents
have included, um,
When they drive up to a school
site and they see that school
resource officer police car out
front. It provides a sense of
security to all of those people
that are coming onto our
campuses.
Talk a little bit about
Rocket. Now, we have school
resource officers in the
elementary schools. It's
difficult for a school resource
officer to stay busy checking
doors and, and, and opening up
uh uh milk cartons and ketchup,
uh, at lunch. So we make, uh, or
we expect these officers to
teach the program that we call
Rock and Rolls. It's a live
avatar that uh engages these
kids uh at the elementary school
site, and they have a
requirement of
A monthly topic, um, most
recently was the Red Ribbon Week
talking about drugs, but it's,
it's a unique opportunity for
our kids to see this avatar,
talk about what their school is
because it's a big picture of
the school in front of the, one
of the kids, Rocket is actually
an actual live character.
An animated character with the
kids could talk to rocket. It's
a cool thing because um they
they get to engage this guy,
this, this guy Rocket in school
topics, especially the topic of
the day. Um, there's a quote
from the, uh,
Chief of police from Los Lunas
me from uh Los Angeles Police
Department. I will read the
quote, but primarily it
strengthens and out reaches the
resources that we have with our
network and our our school
community.
But my mentoring program, I like
to talk about the high school
and what they do with their um
annual uh citizenship award.
They, uh, get together with our
kids and they provide awards to
these kids on a regular basis. I
like the second picture with the
Officer Padilla, 6'5 monster,
tying the tie of a of a kid. I
guarantee you down the road,
these kids will come and talk to
you. The, the, the biggest
impact I've seen from kids is
that I may not get that
interaction with those kids that
are never in trouble. The
cheerleaders and the kids that
are good, good, uh.
Good, good, um, academics that
don't have direct contact with
law enforcement, you won't see
them at the mall or at Walmart.
They won't engage in you, but
those kids that have been in
trouble, they will come up and
talk to you and tell you about
what they're doing now, how
they're doing well in uh with
their kids, with their families,
with their, with their lives.
That's a positive thing for us
because we know that we made an
impact for them and their and
their families.
Um, briefly, uh, more of what we
do at the, uh, school sites, we
have uh one of our local law
enforcement lieutenants uh
providing a class safety class
to our officers or to our kids
at one of our school sites. Um,
I'd like to show this picture
because it shows how these kids
engage. They're all wearing
their police uniforms. They
believe in what we believe in.
We, we have the philosophy that
we don't want our kids running
from the cops. We want our kids
running to the cops, and we
believe in that. Um, I heard um
Mr. Walker talked about uh
suicide prevention and those
kinds of things. Well,
We have an application called
Stop it, and if we get
information about a, a suicidal
situation, that child is
addressed immediately. OK,
they're, they're, they're
provided a resource that same
day, if we get the call after
hours, we send myself officers
from our department or officers
from local agencies out to those
sites to make sure that they're
provided that resource. We
believe from within our agency
that we've saved lives because
of the things that we do with
our um stop the app and the
things that we do with our
police department.
Um, again, there is a cop in
every school. I like to show
this picture because we, this is
how we engage our kids primarily
at the elementary schools. You
see officer Torres, he's a
robust individual doing hula
hoop. How cool is that to see
that that officer playing with
these kids and engaging these
kids on a regular basis, um, the
lower left picture, we have a
Officer at the one of the school
sites, he has a school safety
patrol program where he is
actually um making these kids
become little police officers,
junior police officers. He gives
them a badge, he gives them a
vest, and they're ambassadors to
that school when there's an
event where parents have to come
on, they provide an escort to
these parents, but they also
every day uh put the flag up and
take the flag down. They know
how to fold the flag, and they
know how to unfold the flag.
It's a pretty cool thing that we
do for this school, for these
kids, but it gives them an
opportunity to get to know what
these school resources are
resource officers are.
We are a law enforcement agency.
But I can tell you this much,
we, over the course of the last
two years have made one arrest,
OK? One arrest from within an
agency that is required to take
enforcement for things that may
or may not be occurring on the
cap, and that was the 18 year
old man that had a good.
Student that had a gun on our
campus. We don't
Arrest primarily our objective
is to provide referrals to
juvenile probation for
interventions, no counseling,
drug court, those kinds of
things are, are.
Our goal is to keep these kids
out of trouble when they become
adults, but we have to
understand their kids and kids
make mistakes and we're not the
the the the hammer, we're not
the bad guy, we're not the cop
that's gonna.
Go to get you in trouble, take
you to jail. That's not what we
are. We're about engagement.
We're about resources and
providing those kinds of
positive things for our
children.
Um
Again, we have a cop in every
school. We have a partnership
with our local agencies. We have
a partnership with the Valencia
County Dispatch.
You won't ever hear of La Thuna
schools locking down.
Accounts.
We have, we call emergency
response team. It's very
traumatic for the little kids to
be locked down in a classroom,
lights out hiding under a desk.
These kids know what that means.
They know that there could be an
active shooter or in certain
cases, my officers will say the
big bad wolf's gonna come and
get you. It's traumatic for
them. So what we try to do
before we get a call from an
agency or through dispatch, we
will take every opportunity to
secure the campus and shelter it
in place. We have those
resources available to us
because of the number of options
that we have working for our
school sites.
Uh, but again, it provides a
sense of security and a sense of
wellness for these kids knowing
that they're not going to have
to be locked down in the school
for an extended period of time.
We hear often in the news about
certain, certain districts
around the state and
municipalities easily picking up
the phone and say lock it down.
Why are you locking it down?
Well, there's a er to be 5
blocks away. No, that's not what
we do in in the schools. We get
the information, we sort the
information out, and we shelter
the the school in place until we
get the OK from the municipality
that went to that decision.
primarily, I finally like to
say, um,
We, we spend a lot of money at
Los Angeles because they ask
about how we're doing this. Do
we get grants? No, we don't.
It's all funded by our, by our
administrators, by our
superintendents and by our
school board, and I asked
All of you and everybody that
has that same question, what's
the cost of one child? We, we,
we know what the cost of one
child is.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, A Gray. I
appreciate it.
Uh, and so, having heard from
these panelists, now I'll turn
to my brief here, uh, and this
brief is structured a little bit
differently than uh a lot of
ours have been in the past and
that when it's pretty short, um,
and it also just kind of gets
straight to the recommendations,
uh, you know, we wrote a lengthy
report about the uh during our
landscape analysis in June and
so rather than rehash all of
that, we wanted to one highlight
some of the incredible work
already happening in New Mexico,
and then just get straight to
the recommendations. So, I want
to thank my panelists for this
and uh we had uh as a school
safety team with LESC staff, we
had the pleasure of visiting
both Los Lunas and Raton to see
these practices at work, uh, and
it was truly inspiring and it
was really integral to our
understanding of school safety
needs in our state. So thank you
for all of their cooperation in
both those districts.
And so we've now heard 3
perspectives on how to promote
safe learning environments for
our students, but the question
we haven't quite addressed yet
is how the legislature can
further support school safety
efforts in local contexts.
Uh, I think people are aware and
that ultimately the most
impactful figures in determining
whether a school is safe,
whether it's inclusive, and what
the climate is a positive one,
are the adults that are working
in that school.
We can, uh, legislators can make
decisions and set policies and
set expectations of the
legislative level, but
ultimately the success of those
initiatives will be determined
by the people in the buildings
themselves.
And so, when we're thinking
about what the role of the
legislature is in this
conversation. I think it's best
to understand it as uh primarily
one rooted in financial support
and expectation setting.
And establishing a multi-faceted
school safety approach that
balances physical security
measures with preventative and
efforts and student well-being
and emotional support requires
significant financial
investments, especially in the
early stages and often beyond
the capacity existing capacity,
I should say, of districts and
charter schools. And
additionally, the state has an
important role to play in
protecting the rights of our
students to bring their
authentic selves into
educational settings, because
for a school to truly be a self
and
a safe and welcoming place, all
students must be able to honor
their culture and heritage
without discrimination.
To wrap up this presentation,
let me take a few minutes to
offer some policy
recommendations for your
consideration. These ideas which
are found on page 6 of the brief
are designed to provide greater
flexibility for schools to
address the needs of their
unique local contexts, ensure
that local school districts and
charter schools have the
resources necessary to implement
both physical and preventative
safety measures and further
safeguard the rights of students
in educational settings.
First up, in our conversation
with local education officials
across the state, the need for
greater funding for behavioral
health was a common theme.
To that end, Eliasy's staff
recommend the legislature
consider $5 million in fiscal
year 2026 to support behavioral
health initiatives through PED.
This funding could be used by
PED's Office of Safe and Healthy
Schools and not only developing
new social emotional learning
standards, which would be
integrated with health
standards.
But also with the creation of a
peer to peer behavioral health
liaison network in the state, as
well as wellness-based
implementation in local school
districts and charter schools,
in addition to myriad
initiatives they've uh discussed
with us.
I'll now turn briefly to
restraint and seclusion, which,
as I'm sure many of you are
aware, Senate Memorial 68,
passed by the legislature during
the 2023 session, created a
working group to study this
issue in K-12 settings.
Based on the recommendations of
that working group, federal
guidance and feedback from
members of this committee, LESC
staff are drafting a bill for
the 2025 legis legislative
session that would clearly
define restraint and seclusion,
because schools need to know
what actions they can take to
ensure school safety, finding
what constitutes restraint, what
constitutes seclusion. What is
not either of those things, and
what actions are allowed in
school settings, will provide
that necessary guidance for
schools.
That need to take decisive
action in dangerous situations
will also helping to avoid the
uh harmful effects of improper
use of both of those measures uh
methods. For further information
on that topic, I'd direct you to
the red box that you'll find on
page 2 of the brief, shifting
now to our 3rd recommendation,
we've heard from local education
leaders that there is a
continued need for safety and
security funding from the state.
Schools need the financial
resources to invest in physical
security measures, whether it's
fencing or more high tech
things,
uh, technology and other tools
to effectively implement their
specific safety approaches.
And for fiscal year 2025, the
legislature did appropriate $35
million from the public school
capital outlay fund for schools
to use for safety and security
purposes.
FY 26, the legislature could
consider appropriating 50
million, again from the public
school capital outlay fund.
To ensure schools have the
financial resources to continue
investing in their safety and
security efforts.
And thinking about an ideal
distribution method for these
funds, uh, provisions allowing
for charter schools that are
housed in publicly owned
facilities, who were unable to
access the prior round of
funding would allow for a
broader reach for these safety
dollars.
Now at the same time, we've also
heard from local leaders about
the need for flexibility and how
that safety funding from the
public school capital outlay
fund can be spent.
And so, and that's why 25, that
$35 million allocation was
restricted to physical security
infrastructure and technology.
FY 26, LESC staff are
recommending the legislature
consider allowing the use of the
proposed 50 million capital
outlay appropriation, not only
for physical security
infrastructure, but also for the
purchasing of furniture and
other infrastructure needs to
support the operation of student
wellness and behavioral health
support spaces in school
buildings. I want to be clear
with this that uh this
recommendation is not telling a
district to choose one or the
other, they can pursue both if
that is their preference.
The idea here is to give schools
the flexibility to determine
what fits their unique safety
needs and they're unique. Our
final recommendation goes more
towards the expectation setting
role of the legislature, and it
offers additional steps to
safeguard the rights of New
Mexico students in expressing
their identities.
I think we all know that
fostering an atmosphere where
students feel safe to express
their identities without fear of
punitive action or
marginalization is integral to
their psychological well-being
and their sense of belonging,
which we know has become a major
concern for folks in our state.
Under current New Mexico law,
students are explicitly
protected from disciplinary
action related to hairstyles and
cultural headdresses commonly
associated with their racial or
cultural identities. However,
current statute does not
explicitly protect the right of
tribally enrolled students,
where traditional tribal regalia
and culturally significant items
at school ceremonies.
So LASC staff recommend the
legislature consider amending
the public school code to
include specific language
speaking to this, protecting
tribally enrolled students from
that disciplinary action for
wearing traditional tribal
regalia and culturally
significant items at school
ceremonies. And this
recommendation is based on
similar legislation passed by
the Arizona legislature in 2021.
Now the policy and budget
recommendations outlined in this
brief are intended to offer the
legislature substantive options
to better support districts and
charter schools in their varied
school safety efforts, while
also solidifying our state's
commitment to a culturally
responsive education system.
Effective school safety
approaches require
multidisciplinary, multifaceted
responses to the challenges
facing our students.
And ultimately comprehensive
school safety schemes strike
that balance between longer term
preventative efforts grounded in
welcoming school culture,
student belonging and
relationship building. And in
the physical uh security
measures designed to detect and
mitigate potential threats.
Today's presentation is, of
course, not the end of this
conversation about making our
school safer, but in offering
these recommendations, our
intent is to provide you all
with a clear path forward to
support the critical work of
local education officials on
this topic.
Thank you for listening to all
of us today, and we now stand
for questions, Mr. Chair.
All right, thank you all for
being here and presenting your
experiences. Before we get
started with questioning, I just
want to recognize our lieutenant
governor, Howie Morales.
has been working on school
safety. Thank you for joining
us, Lieutenant Governor.
All right. Represent Baca,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, panel, and, and I too
want to thank Lieutenant
Governor for his support. Um,
honored to call him both a
colleague and a friend because
of his champion the um issue of
school safety. It is not, it is
a bipartisan issue. It is not
About the Democrat and
Republican thing, it is our
thing as a community, as our
state, because our students as
we have said.
For our future and our greatest
resource. So we have the
responsibility to do everything
that we can.
To make sure that our kids are
safe and they can focus on.
The task at hand, which is
learning.
And not
uh worried about school safety.
Um, Mr. Chairman and uh
panel, I, I do have a couple
questions and uh
Please just as far as your
answers, you know, be brief. I'm
not asking for this long because
this as Connor said, it's uh
it's, it's a continuing
conversation, so please don't
feel that you have to give this
long conversation because quite
honestly, I can talk school
safety all day, but I won't. Um,
Um
Um, Mr. Chairman and panel, who
is the responsibility? Who would
you say is the primary
responsibility or whose
responsibility is school safety.
And any of you guys can jump in
on that.
Whose responsibility is it?
I
see everybody's, it's the
superintendents, it would be
everybody in the community
involved with schools with the
school in general, parents,
children, staff,
superintendents, local law
enforcement, emergency managers.
This is a multi-pronged effort.
Every time we get together and
talk school safety, we try and
bring leadership from every
agency to the table to talk
about their role.
Um, Mr. Chairman and um and
panel, the one thing I've sat in
on several different.
Committees and the number one
issue for students of today is
school safety.
And when we spend and again, I
support the spending that we
have, the investment we've made
into public education.
You know, because it it's, it's,
it's necessary, but when we look
at, you know, as a, as a 32 year
administrator and educator. I
said we have 22 primary jobs. We
educate kids and we take care of
kids, we keep them safe.
But our funding doesn't reflect
that.
So we have $3.5 billion or $4
billion.
And again, I'm very
I'm happy that we did put $35
million in there.
But as you can see if, if we're
saying that that is a priority.
That we need to start making the
investment as appropriators in
the state.
To make sure that it's, it's not
a lottery system for just some
school districts can afford it,
or some, you know, that the
lucky ones, it should be that
every school district has an
opportunity to get the safety
measures in place as well as
personnel.
In school sites, and for school
districts.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and
One of the other recommendations
that I, I, I think that the
committee, I'd like the
committee to consider.
Is that more than just
Talking about it.
I, I think Mr. Chairman, that
maybe the recommendation or
maybe LSC is to actually
establish a department at PED.
Uh, a person or a group of
people that actually
Can help with the monitoring.
With the support of the schools
because it goes beyond just
school safety plans as I'm
looking at Kathy.
It goes to helping with the
recommendations, resources, and
all those types of things and
that, that recommendation came
from people that I respect very
much in the field of school
safety of former rep Pat Rilobo,
Kurt Carpenter that set out
here, and I think that, you
know, we really need to take a
look at.
And we, we have the departments
to monitor all aspects of
school.
But I also think along with the
instruction, along with the
learning time, it's also about
the safety.
Measures, including
social-emotional learning is a
big piece of that as well. So I
recognize and the restorative
practices that we want our kids,
good kids make sometimes make
bad decisions, and we want them
as quick as we can coming back
into our situation. So, um,
The, the other
piece that I'd want to um
talk about it just briefly, and
this is actually for
Officer Garcia, um,
is what role beyond just
providing school safety does
school resource officers and
safety personnel.
Play or what, what, what action
do they perform in school sites
rather than just being police
officers.
Um, I would have to say that the
school resource officers in Los
Luas are diplomats of that
community of that individual
community. I like to say that
the principle is the mayor of
that little.
Community, OK, and the
Schools research officer is
their chief, but their objective
is primarily to keep everybody,
students, faculty, and family
safe, but to to provide
resources and know that there is
a a person that they can talk to
about anything, whether it be uh
uh a minor thing that's going on
at home or, or uh just day to
day stuff, so my officers engage
these kids regularly and they're
in the hallways, they're locking
doors, they're checking to make
sure that the camps are safe,
but primarily just the, the
networking that we have with
our, our, our kids and our
staff.
our school resource officers, I
think that's the most, most
important part of being a school
resource officer in the schools.
Thank you. And my final question
is actually the loaded question,
right?
And this is one that we need to
ask.
What is the school districts
need?
What is it that they need? This
is your opportunity.
To come and again, I, I commend
Connor to bring this
conversation. I, uh, commend
Chairman for bringing it here.
Often we think that we know what
we need from the legislature.
We, we, we talk about policy, we
talk about budget.
Often we forget about the people
that are at the end user of it.
So what is it that we need for
our school districts.
To ensure the safety of our
students and our staff.
Mr. Chair and committee, can I
respond, please?
So, um, Redone Public Schools
started our journey with
basically no funding. Um,
luckily we met Mr. Darren and
his services fall under our
insurance for the school.
And then, um, I wrote for a
grant through the Children's
Hospital of Los Angeles, and
received a little grant, um, we
were lucky enough that we were
able to use some of our American
rescue plan funds, which we know
now those are gone, and then
there were 3 grants that had had
put out, we did, we applied and
received a mini grant to map out
our five-year implementation
plan for our relational and SEO
practices, and then there was a
mini grant for SEL and for a
wellness.
room.
The funding was amazing. It was
very helpful. It helped us get
facilitators in what we call our
zendin. It's a resource room
where students go when we need
to have relation on restorative
practice cir circles, or they
are disregulated when they come
to school and they need a quiet
space to gather themselves,
maybe have some food, maybe get
some clothes, maybe speak with
one of our facilitators that is
not a licensed counselor but can
do layer one,
Relational restorative practices
if we need to refer them to our
school counselor or our, our
wellness den counselor or
outside counseling services, it
happens in that room.
So that's what we use that those
funds for, um, but right now
those funds are gone and um
The two biggest grants that we
received came from PE, the the
$25,000 wellness room, uh,
grant, uh.
SCL grant and then the $125,000.
Wellness room, grant.
Those funds came late.
Um, we, we didn't get those
funds until April when we were
awarded the funds.
Earlier in the year, and that
impacted how we could utilize
those funds and what we had put
in the grant, we weren't able to
use those funds for what was in
the grant. So that was very
detrimental, and luckily now,
our district also has
participated in the Ed Fellows
program, which we've been um
participating in for 3 years,
and right now my facilitator
that's in the Zenen is in that
educator fellows program trying
to get her social work degree.
So she is working as a
facilitator in that room.
which hopefully when she
graduates, we can hire her and
get her full time.
Funding is is one thing.
That would be helpful in a
timely manner, but secondly,
people.
We need people. We're still down
as two special ed teachers were
down of a social worker and
People, people and funding. Oh.
To help answer a little bit of
what we need. Um, I don't know
if you want to add that. Yeah,
I, I, I do, um, we're very
fortunate that we have a lot in
the schools, um, working closely
with the Albuquerque Public
schools, but some of these
smaller districts, they don't
have the resources and I want to
stay a liaison to be able to
work with local law enforcement
because I hear of schools that
are uh
Getting locked down for really
minor situations at a discussion
the other day with an attorney
that was doing some work for the
school district.
Talked about how they called the
local municipality and to
investigate a, a first grader
with possession of a vape, and
they referred that kid to
juvenile probation. It made no
sense to me at all. We need
those kinds of liaisons, those
kinds of communications with
local municipalities so we can
keep those things out of the,
the judicial system and have
them at the lowest level of the
school sites.
Oh, thank you, and I, I do agree
like the radio I'm looking at
right now is about $8000 a year,
but that is improving
communication with the local law
enforcement, so I don't know
lieutenant Governor, if there's
anything cause again, I, I will
say that we're gonna be having
our 3rd annual.
Statewide safety conference or
we've had over 450 attendees.
That would actually not have
happened without the support of
our lieutenant governor. So I, I
don't know, Lieutenant Governor,
if you want to say something and
address the committee because
you're by your presence here,
you basically put a, an accent
by it saying this is important
for us, so I, I lieutenant
governor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative Baca, uh, members
of the legislature, it's an
honor to be here with you. I, I
sat for many years on this
committee and I really
appreciate and respect the
amount of work that goes into an
amount of thought of what we can
do to continually improve our
education system, but we talk a
lot about reading, writing,
arithmetic, other approaches for
student achievement. This is an
effort that uh being able to
work with you as a legislative
body to really look and see how
we can have the best possible
outcomes.
For students, and it begins with
safety. It begins with that
suited feeling right at home
within the school setting, and
regardless of what we do from an
academic standpoint, if we don't
address the issues from this
perspective.
Then we're not gonna get to the
ultimate goal of educating our
children in that safe
environment, so grateful that we
did have the, the summit that
took place last year, uh,
wonderful presentation that was
given to us in the summit there,
and the attendance of school
districts, so, and collaboration
with the FBI. Um, this was
something that was inspired to
me in my office from former
superintendent to former
baseball coach, colleague of
mine, um, uh, Carpenter from um
from Aztec.
And the experiences that he
shared and what he learned uh
through the incident that took
place there in Essex several
years ago that many of us as
LESC members toured.
School. It was a passion of his
to bring it statewide to ensure
that we can have this
discussion, and I thought that
the presenters did an amazing
job to really highlight the
showcase that there's a
different approach that we can
take to keeping our children
safe and so as we look and see
some of the ideas and I like the
recommendations that are given.
I think that when we look at
mental health and behavioral
health. There's things that the
legislature can do as well when
it comes to licensing and some
of the challenges that our
social workers face and even
attracting social workers into
our
schools and some of the barriers
there, um, when you're, when
you're talking about those
areas, you can look at other
areas of looking at the
possibility of what we do with
our SCG and how the SCG can be
uh a component that utilizes the
opportunity for funding, I can
go to school districts from the
smallest of our school districts
to the largest, that we can have
that recurrent funding that's in
there that keeps in mind that
our jobs to educate our
children. We cannot educate our
children if they're not safe,
and they do not feel safe. So
those are some, some
recommendations that
um, that I would also uh um
introduce and would like to have
more discussion with the
legislature again, anything that
we do, uh, whether it's
executive, judicial, or
legislative branches. We do it
for the betterment of the people
of the state of New Mexico and
uh grateful that I had this
opportunity to share a little
bit of my thoughts and the
appreciation to you as a
legislature for the $200,000
appropriation you gave two years
ago and last year, uh for the
school safety summit, which is
definitely utilized in.
in a, in a very productive way,
and look for more productive
results. So thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to
come in uh to uh be part of the
legislative process, even though
I may be an executive at the end
of the day, we're all New
Mexicans.
Thank you.
The term.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a
question, um, in Colorado, they
have the statewide program Safe
to Tell it's an anonymous
reporting system for gum
threats, and I think New Mexico
public schoolsurance Authority
with Palms does it stop its
solutions. Can you give us
update?
And if any of you use it, how
effective it is in identifying
um.
harmful.
it, um,
Of schools has been on this, on
the application to stop it for,
since, since the beginning.
And
We have received calls from
Minor things from bullying to
mental health cases, suicide
threats, uh, weapons on campus,
and the ability for us to
monitor that program 24/7, um,
is essential because some of the
stuff that comes in after hours.
They they get reported from Stop
if it actually gets the
information and we'll relay it
to a law enforcement agency.
We're on that network. They call
us directly. So it's important
that that that access access to
actual stop it application is
available to us. It, we believe
that stop and have saved lives.
And, um, we use it daily, we
have every school site in our
district on the stop of
application, and some of those,
some of the things you hear from
the elementary school, it's very
trivial, very minor, uh, but
stuff that comes in from the
middle schools and the high
schools, it's, it's big, um, and
Uh, we take every tip as a uh
valuable and important and we
address every tip.
We allow the site administrator
and or the school resource
officer to respond to that tip
within the first couple of
minutes. If they don't respond,
myself or one of my assistants
will respond immediately. We
want the, the reporter to know
that we take that stuff serious
and that there's somebody
listening and watching.
We also use it in Ratton uh for
the very, the very same reasons,
but we've taken it one step
further and utilize some of our
Title II funding. Stop it, um,
partnered with mental health
providers licensed in the state
of New Mexico, so all the
students at high school can get
free telehealth. We purchased
that service using Title II
funds and um
When if you're familiar with the
app, there's um on the app you
report a tip or there's an
immediate crisis line. So if I'm
in crisis, I can push that red
button and and text a mental
health person or um I can log in
and have regularly scheduled
appointments with a mental
health provider via teletherapy.
So, but we also utilize that for
the same reason. And as you
mentioned, it's, it's direct
interaction. It puts reporter
calls to report something, the
receiver gets to interact with
that.
immediately, it's anonymous for
in our particular cases was
mental health, but there's a
direct interaction with that
reporter so that they know that
they're, they're talking to
somebody right then and there,
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, uh, it is sponsored by
MMCSta it is, and I have a
pretty close working
relationship with them, uh, a
couple of key points, key
takeaways would be that they're
in many schools across the
country. We just had them in Las
Cruces two weeks ago to present,
um, disheartening to is the fact
that New Mexico leads the entire
nation in mental health calls.
That
screams of the need for
restorative practices, where the
smallest user, but we have the
most calls. The other thing I
can tell you with, with
certainty is that the
representative that came in,
Matthew Toth, he said he knows
with certainty that there's 3
lives that have been saved, kids
that were suicidal in the in the
act of harming themselves when
police got to them because of
the after-hours reporting. So if
we say one child has paid for
itself for a lifetime. So we
know of 3 that have been saved
and we also know that we have a
mental health crisis here that
we need to address.
Thank you and and just to follow
up and so it's a phone app.
That every student is told about
at the beginning of the school
year.
That's correct. Um, all of our
school electronic devices are
set up with the stop it
application. So they just, they
hit the button and they're able
to submit a tip based on their
concern with that need.
It can also be on cell phones
and it can come from anyone,
teachers, students, the family
members, um, again, it's
anonymous, but when you get a
report and it
reads, My son was at football
practice and so I'm making an
assumption it's coming from a
parent, um, so it can be from
anyone and we do advertise as
well on all of our parent, uh,
communication tools, we put it
on our, uh, Facebook page,
things like that, so people are
aware when we have our
jumpstarts, open house, we also
advertise at the high school, we
have posters that advertise. So,
yes, ma'am.
And, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Garrett, I do
just wanna quickly add, uh,
you'll see on page 4 of the
brief here that there is a red
box, uh, prepared by my
colleague Mark that speaks to
some of the data around uh
uptake in New Mexico, uh, so 36
school districts and 11 charter
and community schools have been
onboarded, so it's about
119.5,000 students in our state,
uh, but, and that doesn't mean
that the other districts in the
state are not using an anonymous
report.
system is just not stop it, uh,
but stop it is a tool that is
available to schools across New
Mexico. It is uh covered by
NIMSA, uh, and I will also just
add that in addition to being an
application based, you can also
access it via the web.
Thank you so much.
And
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all for being here to talk
about this important topic. Um,
the question I have, you didn't
specifically, um, addressing the
presentation. I want to talk a
little bit about hazing.
And just want to really get your
perspective on that, um.
brought a bill last session.
I'll bring another one and
really focused on higher
education, but we know what's
happening.
in K through 12 as well. Um, so
I want to get your perspective
because I want to look at how do
we change the culture, how do we
prevent it? How do we have
Restorative practices and also
telling folks that they don't
have to submit themselves to
hazing. I think that's one of
the keys as well. Um, but since
you're here, just want to get a
perspective, um, from Mr.
Garcia, Mr. Walter on um ways
that we can address uh hazing in
our K through 12.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Several years ago, La Una school
was involved in the.
very ugly hating situation, um.
And I think that we we've
changed our uh
Our Handbook procedures and are
sanctions as a result of that.
Moving forward, uh, we're very
aggressive in addressing those
kinds of situations.
But I think that I'm a coach as
well, and from the coach's
perspective, I think that
information needs to get out
from them moving down, uh, and,
um, they didn't know that it's
not acceptable. They're going to
get thrown out the team that
they could get arrested. Um,
it's, it's complex that um
sometimes you're right, uh.
Kids don't want to talk. I had
victims that were, we know they
were violated, but refused to
give us a statement because they
were afraid that they were
embarrassed or they were
ashamed, um.
But again, getting back to stop
it, that's another form of a
process that is available to
them that they can report it
anonymously. Um, uh.
From the school's perspective,
um, educating them uh from the
highest level. I know that the
uh
Um
And they have a topic on hazing
and it's it's addressed before
the kid can start playing every
year, um.
But I think what we're doing
here is what you what you're
doing here at the state level,
um, it's, it's making a
significant difference, um.
Educate
And providing those resources
available to them so they can,
they can report.
Because it is complex by uh
these younger kids that are the
ones that are the the victims in
all of this that are afraid to
make that, uh, give that
statement.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, our work with Rone
was very intentional.
We targeted students that were
high flyers, students that
didn't have a mentor.
So one of our activities is to
put every student's name on the
wall, and to have every teacher
in the building there go and
say, if you have a relationship
with this child, put a star on
there, so we know they've got
somebody in the building that
supports them.
Um, when I did it in my own
building, we had over 850 kids,
we had 300 names left on that
wall. They did not have a
trusted adult in that building,
so we made an intentional effort
to go out and target those kids,
and we told them, hey, we want,
we want to get to know you
better. We know you don't have a
voice in this building right
now. We just want to know you.
Ratone did the same thing. I
think if every kid has a trusted
adult in the building, they're
more likely to report when bad
things are happening, and that's
also preventing violence. That's
part of that initiative to
prevent the violence. Um, so I
think that becomes very
critical. I think that's one way
to stop. The other thing I heard
director Garcia say is when he's
at Walmart
His high flyers, his troubled
kids, they run up and say hello.
There's a lot of kids, we assume
they're valedictorians or our
best kids that we don't know. If
we look at the profile of an
active shooter, they're bullied.
They're usually not mainstream,
we don't know they're in our
building until bad things
happen.
And by targeting kids and
getting to know every kid, we
might identify the person who's
going to do harm. So that's
another great reason for doing
this work because it's always
after the fact, you go, gosh, we
missed that. We didn't know that
kid was even here. I mean that
kid may be the kid that's being
bullied and he's quiet and
recluse because he doesn't have
a trusted adult to report to, so
I, I really emphasize the
relationship piece being key to
reporting these hazing incidents
as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the responses and, you
know, I agree with a lot of
that. I think it starts with
that leadership at the top with
coaches and letting them know
they're not going to tolerate it
and, you know,
Um, I think what's happened for
so long in the culture that it's
happened to me. This is what you
should go through, and that's
just not the case, and it was
wrong for them to go through
that as well.
Um, so, um, thank you for the
insights and um
I just think this is another
issue that we've just got to
make sure that we're taking care
of our students. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
It resent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for your presentation.
I just have a question on Colin
school threats. How do you deal
with those and do you support
felony um charges to anyone
who's causing the skull threat.
Just because of
Everything it entails, and it's
not just one day, it's weeks,
the kids won't come to school.
talk about
I'm anxious to talk about school
threats, um, it causes chaos on
the campus.
Or
That day and multi, multiple
days afterwards. Right now, um,
the only
Laws in the book are uh
interfering with the educational
process.
I'm a big proponent by
discussion with Mr. Baca about
making it.
Uh, a felony crime to let them
know that it is not OK. I, I
call these types of threats, the
modern day bomb threat. Back in
the day when you, we were all
going to school, you call a bump
it, we take the day off and we
don't have to do a test that
day. Now, kids can go on social
media and, and anonymously
report a threat on campus and it
causes chaos from the the staff,
the parents, the kids half the
kids don't show up when they
hear that kind of a social media
threat. Every, every case that
We get, we investigate it. Most
recently, we were able to
identify one of the actual
A threat makers and through the
assistance of the FBI were able,
able to identify the subscriber
and we found who that person
was, and they were addressed
aggressively, um, but it, it
takes a lot of work.
It's a lot of work and, and
again, um, they know that if, if
we address it seriously and up
that.
A penalty to something more than
just a slap in the wrist,
because that's all that's going
to happen in juvenile probation.
Uh, once they know that we're
going to be, be more aggressive
with it. I think that we'll see
a reduction in those kinds of
cases.
Thank you. Um.
I, I had a couple of questions
in this probably for uh
principal star and and Mr.
Walter primarily is um
Restorative practices, how do
you all go about educating.
teachers
And getting buy-in from
educators on restorative
practices.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I see that. I look at
you and I smile as I say that
because when I started this
journey with the school where
about 35% approval rating. I
remember my first day in Raton
staring out at 172 teachers and
and administrators looking at
me. I said, here's the new
flavor of the month, and I had a
lot of resistance. I will tell
you now, I just uh taught it
head to toe with Superintendent
Medina and we're about 87%
approval rate in the building,
one of my biggest, um, naysayers
is now the dean of students in
Raton. He actually spoke to.
the LESC and said, you know,
when they first came here, I
didn't believe in this. I was
the hammer, they were the nail,
cause I had built great
relationships with kids, and
they come to me all day long
when we're solving problems
together. So same thing Penasco,
I trained them. We're in the low
30s on a uh surveyMonkey on the
way out, we're at 92% approval.
Dexter the same thing. I just
talked to Socorro school board,
we're going in there next. And
so it's, it's what it really
does for the teacher, there's a
stop gap between the classroom
and the office, because we know
when a student goes to the
office, they sit outside of that
door for 2 to 3 hours.
And the principal comes out and
says, get back to class and
don't do it again.
Now we have a wellness room, a
restorative coordinator,
somewhere we can send that
kiddo, and we find out the root
cause. If a kid's sleeping in
class, we take that personally.
If we send them to the
restorative room and the
coordinator goes, hey, guess
what? Mom and dad had a fight
last night, you know, didn't get
any sleep, he's just tired. It
has nothing to do with you. Or
maybe we identify like we did in
my building. I was sending the
kid to class every day and he
went because he respected me, he
couldn't read.
We didn't find that out till we
send to the restorative room.
Why have I been sending the kid
to class that doesn't know how
to read, it was a big mess. So I
think the buy-in becomes that we
don't deal with administration
as much. We have a place to send
kids, and we get answers back,
because when we send a child to
the office, a lot of times the
principal doesn't report back
what happened, so now we're part
of that solution.
Mr. Chair, if I can add to that,
um, thank you for the question
because
That's where we had to start. We
had to start with the adults in
the building and um
One of the things we did is we
modeled what those practices
look like, sound like, feel
like.
And um we had a very dedicated
group of individuals that um
jumped on the train very
quickly. Yes, I believe in this.
I know working and getting to
know the students and their
families' works, and it just
took that.
Dental pressure applied
relentlessly to um spread it out
and when we started referring
students to our Zenden to have
those relational restorative
practices, and it started going
to, well, I'm having a
disagreement with this teacher.
Asking the teacher, would you be
willing to have a restorative
circle with the student, the
students said they would have a
restarted circle. Would you be
willing? And then those teachers
started participating and then
it started to, oh, I'm having a
disagreement with my colleague.
Can we go have a circle and it's
an adult circle.
So it was really just.
The teaching is good teaching is
good teaching, and it doesn't
matter how old you are and who
you're teaching, if you're
modeling those practices and
doing those practice practices,
it, it will eventually spread
and um
I can agree with Mr. Walters
saying one of our biggest
holdouts, um.
was a coach, no disrespect to
coaches, but um it was he, I'm
already doing this. I don't need
to continue doing this, but he
didn't realize what he was doing
was relational restorative
practice to begin with, right?
And so it was really just
Ensuring that adults knew what
it looked like, sound like, felt
like, and then really
participating and bringing in um
outside members and family as
well.
I don't know if I answered your
question, but that was the
perspective.
So thank you. Yeah, definitely
because I think it was, it was.
Mr. Walter that brought up that
it's seems like because I think
in in education we're used to,
you know, this strategy is
emphasized for a year and then
it goes away and do this, and
you have training on this, and
it happens. Um.
And you refer to it as the
flavor of the month and it's, I,
I
I mean, as, as somebody that's
in a school that has emphasized
restorative practices and kind
of seeing, you know, the, the
range of responses amongst um
those that are to implemented us
in the classroom that see our
students, everybody in the
school setting, um, in, in the
reactions to it, it's, it's,
it's.
Difficult sometimes to to get
over that and to be able to to
share what the outcomes are with
the possibilities are with, with
being able to build those
relationships with students and
to have them be able to freely
associate with their teachers
that they see about if they're
sleeping in class and it's
nothing, you know, it's not a
comment on my teaching or my
lesson that day. It's just, you
know, external factors that that
are are are contributing to it,
um.
I think it's, it's really
helpful. Um, I guess I had one
last question um for, for
Connor, um, was, it was
mentioned amongst the panelists
about suspension rates. Um and
so to tie it in with the
discussion on attendance, um, is
there a way or, or have you
looked into um suspension rates
across school districts perhaps,
and is there any information
that we could pull from
s pe n sion rates, perhaps. It's
a bit of a.
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Uh, we've looked at that a
little bit. I think that to get
the information you're looking
for, I have to look into it a
little bit more, but I can get
back to you on that.
Yeah, no, I, I would, I would
certainly appreciate that, um.
I think it might be interesting
to to start delving into
suspension rates and, you know,
like principal star had
demonstrated to us about what,
what suspensions are utilized
for in the examples in, in, in
schools because I think that's
been um, I, I mean, I, I hate
to, to
Be so broad in this, but like I
think that's typically like the,
you know, if there's an action
at a school, a student does a
reaction tends to be like, well,
what happened to the student?
Did they get suspended? Um,
right, and, and we can start
evaluating the effectiveness or
or not being effective at um
solving issues, um, based on
suspension.
Um, but cool. Certainly this is
something like Connor mentioned
that will continue to look into
and uh thank you all for being
willing to participate in coming
up here today to talk with us
about your all's experiences.
Thank you. Thank you, Connor.
All right, folks, we have lunch.
Now at noon? Oh, right on time,
look at that, dang. Awesome. So
we'll be back at one o'clock.
See you all.
