I'm giving the way time already
we're on thank you so much good
morning folks I hope you all are
doing well it's great to be here
in las vegas
i'm glad you all had a safe trip
over so i'm going to be
playing chair acting chair while
senator sours has a tough gig of
welcoming back teachers at
damage in damning
so I couldn't imagine a more
rough crowd than a bunch of
teachers coming back after some
break cause i'll be one next
week but we'll start off with
senator figure our
introductions good morning
senator
good morning mister chair
happy to be here nationally
figure out senate district
eighteen in the north these
tights of albuquerque and just
enjoyed a beautiful drive up to
the city this morning
right representative saudi near
negative morning morning
thinking mr chairman and i'm
debi saranian I represent how
sister twenty one and bernald
county also
former matt teacher from
reteacher and it's great to be
back just my third time here and
I think it a month so i'd know
this town very well now so it's
beautiful think thank you
to frequent visitor her rivers
and buck
good morning mister tere good to
be back in your committee err
john block house district fifty
one and beautiful alamo gordo I
am not a teacher but I was
raised by one and so I know
exactly what they go through and
it's really good to be back on
this committee be back for the
beautiful drive I have a lot of
family from the area so good to
see some familiar facing
represent me to one way a good
morning
morning mr chair representative
tiny development of lense county
district seven uh which is most
of believe and all of the east
side of of the county or most of
these size of the county I
should say um I am a bill in
high school teachers so like the
chair I will be starting next
wednesday which I don't know if
my brains ready for it but here
we come.
But and this year I get to teach
not only just not only physics
but also chemistry so I get to
do a little bit
not right by everything back
morning good morning mischairman
thank you my name is brian
baca I represent house district
eight involvency accounting
I so much appreciate seeing my
my colleagues on this committee
and thank you for hosting his
herit highland
right representative robot
career portfolio.
Good assessor is the manner is
there when aussie s l come with.
A lot then see a lot skis done
being though for dealing
definitemen will be three seat
royal bill cabator
representative than the three
three given a send or lost it
there better not leopard
albuquerque grass yes.
Her representative calling
thank you mister share a
representative of capital and
representatives and it will
district fifty seven the
northern part of rear rancher
thank you
all right morning
morning mister chair cinder
anthorton from district nineteen
east mountains of our curriculum
represents burning outstand send
a ball center and towards county
and this is my second time and
two weeks I see mister brown
over there a second time in two
weeks that i've been here and so
i'm strained to learn os they
guess a lot better than i've
ever had my wife so thank you
for the proud to be
a representative of gerry good
morning thank you mister chair
buenos I just came back from a I
was a conference here two weeks
ago but i've been at the border
so I want to remind people that
i'm joy allegedly a garage and I
represent a northwest leo county
home of its thirty fifth
anniversary petrol glift
national money it's great to be
here
all right number representative
on the rest or metal I represent
the far south valley and burning
your county and parts of
southeast album
high school teacher like i'd
mentioned when going back next
week so looking forward to that
i'm teaching same glasses
government economics and a
philosophy class
some very excited about that but
director center if you an
introduced self introduced staff
please
thank you mister chair good
morning everybody john center
staff director for your less
behind me you'll see our
illustrious staff uh evan
charges timberdo policy analysts
so fear gonzalez whose are
legislative internet for this
summer this will be her I think
her last meeting so the summer
just flew by for everybody
counter hicks el hicks sorry
honor.
Uh alanzo daniel stupiniana
fiscal analyst attached
to go to west the at the end who
is our teacher on special
assignments again his time is
running short with us we've been
glad to have him as well just
got halfway our deputy director
I saved the empty chair for oh
i'm sorry are though in the back
he's
committee services and research
assistant as well as mark winter
who's the empty chair and
unfortunately he's not here
because he's in another meeting
online reference uhm marks mean
especially helpful he's the
president of the alumni
association here and uh
highlands to mexico highlands
and so whenever we needed
something for this meeting mark
just got on the phone and talked
to all the people because he
knows all the folks and so he's
been really instrumental in
helping us
very quickly mister chair just
wanted to say my dad is a west
last biggest alumni and so i've
got las vegas roots and plenty
of family in the area so I was
glad to be back to las vegas as
well thank you.
Operate so we don't have a
chorum probably hold off on
business toll tomorrow to take
official action but if we could
have our superintendence come up
we have a provost here doctor
brown good morning
I don't know how you are decided
to start off but doctor brown
your microphones on to go ahead
and get started for a school
morning well good morning and I
first one want to thank you for
being with us this is the fifth
uh steady at committee meeting
that's been held on our campus
this summer and were very
pleased and proud that we can be
here to help you with your work
at and it's great to hear people
just enjoying their time in las
vegas good morning charametro
senators and representatives as
well as legislative in committee
staff and those who have joined
us in person and be as soon this
morning i'm damn brown provised
in vice president for acting
make affairs new mexico highland
university on the behalf of
president new wolf and our
students faculty staff in a
london I welcome you to our
campus and the city of las vegas
I hope you enjoyed the beautiful
green landscape the welcome due
to campus as we pinch ourselves
daily with the blessings
rainfall has brought to our
forests watersheds planes and
communities in and around san
bega county at the same time I
would be remiss not to mention
and acknowledge the tragedies
and struggles of so many in road
also in lincoln county and where
i've near for i've been from the
texas hill country and where
everyone is experienced as
devastating flooding.
Well this is my fourth week on
campus I began my career though
in new mexico at eastern new
mexico university nearly thirty
years ago and i'm proud I think
I heard someone representing a
terror county i'm not sure have
you ever met the teacher to the
rosa.
Chase montes one of my former
students his sister is the
principle at haggerman and what
I really like about being back
in new mexico is being able to
reconnect with these really
important relationships so I
taught egg teachers when I was
decent and mexico university
um i've kept in touch with many
of them through social media now
I took a side step to texas for
a number of years but I could
not be happier with having
joined the highlands community
at a time of great promise an
opportunity and hope to provide
you with a sense of why now is
the time las vegas is the place
and highlands is the university
that were promoted community
engagement economic development
and the success of our students
who are striving to achieve
dreams of college degrees and
the future opportunities that
will result from their hard work
and effort within an outside of
our classrooms and laboratories
i'm gonna begin by discussing a
few highlights of our academic
enterprise here at highlands and
our commitment to graduating
career ready professionals and
candidates for professional
schools we are committed to
developing career readiness
among our students and
strengthening their sense of
preparedness for the rapidly
changing workforce that they
will enter upon graduation it is
our goal that they be ready on
day one after completing their
degrees to enter their career
field and get to work at the
same time we know that many of
our students are going to want
to pursue graduate degrees and
we want them to do so with
confidence and an understanding
that their highlands degree has
prepared them well for their
academic futures
what example of our progress in
action to make affairs is a new
program for graduate students in
computer sites called sandbox
our students will have
opportunities to compete
complete about one year of
traditional studies here in las
vegas before being immersed in
the world of new product and
company company development they
will have access to mintorship
and learn how to navigate the
world a venture capital in
preparation for their futures is
entrepreneurs our country has
the silicon valley the silicon
slopes.
And the silicon hills we hope
and believe the sandbox could
contribute to a thriving
computing and technology economy
in texas as it has in california
utah and texas in new mexico
also in our college of business
we are launching new
undergraduate graduate
certificate programs in supply
change management and offering
our students opportunities to
expand the credentials they will
take into the work force and to
further support our health care
community we are launching a new
doctor of nursing practice in
spring twenty twenty six and we
are preparing nurses for
advanced practice and leadership
roles i've no doubt that their
presence in our rural hospitals
of northern new mexico will
promote healthier communities
and respond to their needs for
critical services.
Now speaking of community and
pertinent to our committee today
especially our school of
education faculty are partnering
with the university of new
mexico and others on many ways
but I want to focus on one a toy
lending center that will open
this fall supporting our local
families with small children.
I don't believe there is a
simpler yet more impactful
program we could launch that kid
more clearly demonstrate our
commitment to our las vegas
neighbors.
At the same time we are making
significant progress toward our
second professional doctor
degree in education.
And finally enjoying the
landscape around us let's talk
about forestry
highlands is a leader in new
mexico and beyond with respect
to forestry and we have
mountains and forest surrounding
our community.
The service are classrooms our
forestry for a print includes
our department of forestry on
campus grant funded programs
under the umbrella of
reforestation operations and the
new mexico forest and watershed
restoration institute our
students have opportunities to
participate in both traditional
classroom and laboratory
exercise but as well applied
research projects.
And contribute to the
development of knowledge that
will inform for future forest
reabilitation and fire recovery
operations being regionally
responsive is very important to
us and our forestry initiatives
once again demonstrate our
commitment to serving the region
and strengthening the economic
recovery of northern new mexico
mospecifically.
And finally I want to discuss
what we're calling a culture of
opportunity at namesco highlands
where we will infuse an
entrepreneurial spirit
throughout campus focused on
developing innovative responses
to challenges today and in the
future we are committed to
developing a campus wide
entrepreneurial spirit across
campus a good example is the
same box initiative the
discussed earlier but i'd also
like to discuss energy that is
at highlands we have set a goal
to become energy independent.
We are committed to promoting a
healthy environment and reducing
our carbon footprint at the same
time reducing the direct cost
for energy understanding that it
is doubtful that energy cost
will ever decline over time will
provide us with additional
financial resources that we can
reinvest to achieve our primary
goals student success in
academic accidents.
So where do we go from here.
I'm proud to say that our summer
enrollment has risen five
percent over where it was last
year and we are going to we are
preparing to welcome students to
campus on august eighteenth.
We anticipate a modest
enrollment increase for fall i'm
not going to share numbers but
i'm smiling.
And we are especially a proud as
contributing to that as having
dramatically improved
financially processing and
packaging the lalless to provide
financially award information to
our students earlier within in
the past our residentials with
just under six hundred beds
available for housing or on
track to be for.
In fact i'm meeting later today
to make sure we are ready for
what should be the largest movie
day at new mexico highlands in
many years.
Over the past year we've
established dual enrollment in
early college partnerships and
degree pathways cooperative
degree pathways with central new
mexico and the university of new
mexico now as an example i'm
very proud of the fact that our
team developed six new dual
enrollment agreements over the
past two years and we're looking
forward to work with our public
school partners in spring or
pinosco cuba question center and
an east mountain high school.
In addition to our local schools
that we've worked with so
successfully in the past now as
we enrolled these students at
highlands we are also committed
to promoting and encouraging
their success we are
participating in a complete
college america accelerator
initiative with over one hundred
colleges in universities across
the nation with the goal of
improving students success as we
close the gaps in college access
and completion.
Our new mexico cohort includes
university of new mexico and its
campuses in towns alamos and
valencia as well as in mse
grants and several two year
colleges I look forward to
bringing future updates to you
regarding our student success
achievements as a result of this
work.
Finally and as a leader among
hispanic serving institutions in
the nation we are committed to
becoming a native american
serving non tribal institution
this goal lies at the heart of
our mission to serve northern
new mexico we are working on
admission enrollment and
enrollment agreements with the
number of two of us.
Had dedicated native american
recruitment staff and have
created a native american
advisory council on campus to
provide council and guides to
our efforts i'm going to
farmington in two weeks my first
trip further northwest i've been
in the state is bandalier so
this will be I first trip to
northwestern new mexico for i'm
going to learn more about
operations that are sister at
our center campus in that space
and how we can better serve the
citizens other denied community
community we look forward to
further demonstrating our
commitment to our native
american communities and to
receive US department of
education designation as a
native american serving
nontribal institution hopefully
within two to three to four
years now my family is in the
process I will fly to houston
texas and then arrive in bomb on
friday night of moving from
bombard texas thirty miles from
louisiana to las vegas new
mexico next week.
So I can't really forecast the
future clearly because my
crystal ball is obviously packed
back in southeast texas here's
what I can promise to you.
Highlands university will
continue to focus on the success
of our students in las vegas
albert farmington rear rancher
on saturday.
We will connect with our
communities and learn from their
resilience in the face of
natural disaster recovery.
We will be good stewarts of
fiscal and physical resources
and we look forward to working
with you in the future on
opportunities that present
themselves thank you again for
being with us here in new mexico
highlands university and I would
be happy to respond to question
when time in the house thank you
all right thank you and before
we get a two super our
superintendence I just want to
point out to members that behind
our agenda behind your agenda in
your booklet we have an less sea
school district fact sheet for
each of the school districts
that we're going to be hearing
from
now and then after lunch as well
so take a look at that what we
have our presentations but
please superintendence that are
no few all had worked out who is
going to go first.
Alright superintendent good
morning morning mister chair
members of committing my name is
christopher superintendent with
the sweetest schools like to
welcome you to last vegas.
I'm in the superintendent for
west as bigger schools this is
my tenth year with west last
week as their superintendent
longest for any superintendent
for west last vegas
i've been with west last biggest
for twenty one years I was a
high school math and science
teacher for alternative school
for nine and a half years and a
middle school principle for a
year and a half.
And then I was asked to be the
superintendent and then later
i'm higher throughout that year
of two thousand and sixteen.
Throughout my ten year with less
than figures
are in roment has gone up when I
first started we were in the low
high fourteen hundred low
fifteen hundred.
And within the past few years
we've raised our enrollment.
About three hundred students.
I know here are no sheet it says
stayed around the fifteen
hundreds but you do have a head
start we also have a pre k so if
we include all those different
programs are romentous increased
tremendously
last year we ended with about
fifteen hundred and eighty eight
students sixteen hundred and
fifty students including the
other programs.
This year so far we have about.
Thirty new students as of
yesterday coming from
surrounding districts.
Yeah.
West last vegas what we've done
differently lately at west last
figure so focused on.
I noticed working an alternative
school that the majority of
students that are supported by
their families are going to go
to a for your college to
highlands or other different
colleges.
But there was a big percentage
of my students that didn't know
what they wanted to do in life
so we decided to go back to cte
started off.
Cdl classes.
Welding classes are a mode of
classes we started plumbing this
year
culinary arts graphic designing.
As of this plus past graduating
class we had a hundred and
thirteen students graduate spin
the highest we've had in the
past five years.
Eighty eight of them graduated
with dual credit honors.
We had five cdl licensed
graduates.
We had seven welding certificate
students that graduated or first
female this year.
And then automotive we had about
eight
so we we've tried to go back to
what we used to in the past and
we're looking at different ct
programs we're looking at
different ct fundings.
We're building our facilities to
accommodate these students
looking at moving towards more
of a community school type of
campus
and we're trying to move
education forward so students
can learn and be successful in
two days society and again thank
you
thank you superintendent
sandwich good morning
good morning mister president
members of the committee
my name is malicious and above
and has to bring sending more
last bigger city.
I am starting my second year
here must be intended
beginning my twenty eighth year
in education the majority of my
work has been a in
administration district
administration.
Are for fifteen of those years a
served as associates printed it
for task minister schools for
seven and a half years.
As you're intended in pinyasco
for three
and principle at bignasco
schools and middle school math
teacher in question and in pin
school both.
So with the data that are you
have before you are upon my
interview and higher one of the
charges that are my board gave
to me is how how do you think
you can assist our district and
reversing our enrollment lasts
are improving our instructional
programs and improving our
facilities so some of the work
that he did this past year was
at to kind of sit back and
observed a understand the wide
behind the decisions that were
made how the district is
operating and looking at a
really for component so those
are view in or many educators in
the room today are I was avid
trained off those who are are
familiar with that I know that
there are four stretchers in
that systems leadership
instruction and culture
so that is the winds the rate
that I take when you know
doing my analysis of the
district and and visiting
classrooms in and talking to
individuals packing too
or our partners and a some of
the things that I I did this
this this last year
was understand that why behind
our are finances are because of
our enrollment lasts and we have
obviously faced a reduction in
our operational
budget.
But with that we also did not
have
any type of competitive grants
coming into the district we
really rely just upon are what
we were getting from seg so some
of the work that we've done this
year I has been to apply for
numerous grants are so far
we have received the
comprehensive literacy grant are
we received ran off funding for
about a hundred thousand dollars
to support a career technical
education specifically worse
work based learning we've
partnered up with future focused
education are to support the
mental health first aid and sell
partnered with self for new
mexico
and.
Many others you know highlands
and partnership and what we can
do to support our are
instructions so when when I talk
about
instruction and leadership ads
me a leadership isn't about
titles but about those
individuals who have.
Um
the
the day to day operation and I
think everyone has a circle of
influence and how do we empower
our staff are in the schools and
in our departments to support
the the growth and the the shift
in our in our system.
So was or what we've done is
we've engaged our staff in are a
hiring process they see in our
in our committees and the they
talk to engine individuals
they're helping us recruit for
positions are they're sitting in
our programmatic committees and
analyzing our programs and
trying to understand in or why
are our math scores why are our
english scores do not work out
where they should be I and a lot
of that resulted in a inadequate
training for her staff or lack
of training altogether.
As what we did was we shifted
our school calendar from
early release wednesdays at and
where we only had a couple of
hours of training
to a full day training over the
course of of the school year to
maximise the time and the
quality of training that we were
bringing into art are district.
So what we for c r and are
planning for the this term of
course and in the future is that
have a more strategic training
on long side rm
comprehensive literacy grant to
support language development and
and literacy across our great
levels and all departments are
so establishing school goals are
to support a literacy whether
it's in our cte classroom or
science classroom
reading and and writing is
across the curriculum and it's
everyone's responsibility to not
just start english departments
the other the other piece that
we saw where that are math
programs
are more still being
supplemented rather than being a
primary resources with our you
think are huge investment that
they're all districts have with
regards to instruction of
materials adaptions isn't really
being adequately utilized
so when we we talk about
leadership
I have a seven new
administrators in my district
that are supporting a either our
literacy approach a new
associate superintendent who
will be supporting me
in and not only the federal
program so what i've done
because of our loss of funding
has as a been to a reduced the.
The infrastructure in this
spending that room we have
across
the board but really really
merging positions together
so part of that leadership is
really to focus on classroom
observations and crash from
coaching.
And you know that
in in constant with training
that supports training and
coaching over the course of the
year we we do entice a patiency
higher scores are in our
educator twelve we have
fortunately two spot like
schools and to have my
elementary schools are spatlet
schools so we know what needs to
be done but we need to be more
strategic and ensure that we're
doing that across our great
levels and you know so so
without you know what we're what
we're doing is over the next few
months in few years we vamp also
he forgot to mention that we did
apply for some wellness room
funding that we were able to
receive a hundred thousand
dollars so will be establishing
well in this room's at our
memorial middle school and
robertson high school
again when we're looking at
education at the well rounded
are education and and those wrap
around services for our students
you know we we do see.
Err tramma from the fires from
the flooding first first for
students who have been diswasted
and as students you know what we
are upset of last biggest west
last vegas and where we are
losing students are in some of
those are to them or two west
last biggest so i'm a bit
competitor and
we what we will stop in and
reverse at reverse that somewhat
we anticipate in the future if
you think is
we want to focus on our big
linguist education program
we do see
I would say like many
communities across northern new
mexico is the last of the
language and what we want to do
is incorporate project based
learning are in addition to our
waiting will education program
animals the language
developments are and hopefully
partner with our elders are
within the community to support
that language development
through project based loaning
and bringing them into the
classroom and sending our kids
out at it to work with them we
do partner with your mexico
state university are we to have
a two green houses that are run
through new mexico state we
partner up with luna
community to college in new
mexico how things university so
are our goal is to also become
interview college high school
are in strengthen our
partnerships with these
institutions along with a
establishing
more strategic pathways within
art within our setting but also
establishing exploratory
programs at our middle school
and starting that college and
career readiness conversation
since the elementary school
so what we have done this year
are with our funding has been to
establish tunia programs and
that's agree business.
Are through our ct and perkins
funding as well as our digital
and film pathway
so it and what we already have
in place similar to to west ad
is a construction construction
trades pathway are health
sciences pathway and.
Our what I miss in when a week
we did establish a new cdl
program so are we had that for
one semester and had two
graduates.
But but again what we're trying
to do is establish AAA system in
where all students can make a
choice of congratulation are to
determine where it is that they
want to go whether it's a two
year institution a four year
institution or be ready and the
work force rm be the best
employee the day that they can
be
so you know or are going again
is to
create a more rigorous and
robust curriculum for a students
I ensuring that we provide
adequate training for our staff.
To the get our funding sources
and are be more biscularly
responsible with regards to what
we are spending money on and
looking at long term versus
maybe one day trainings and
someone but really really
looking at the long term and
looking at it as at at a school
wider proach.
So so those are that's what kind
of captures are instructional
program but we also never get a
down the road is to start to eat
three and four year old program
a pre school and and pre k
and we we do have one but I
would say that what I have
observed as far it has been is
were not doing anything or
everything great so really
focusing on what we have and
making those stronger
one of the things that are we
have been fortunate to to
recently are receive is approval
from the public school capital
out the commission are for a new
combined campus for through
eighth grade so we will be able
to emerging two of our schools
you don't be selementary and our
memorial middle school into our
old memorial middle school
campus up north that has either
thirteen acres of.
Land that has a second and
farmland so that's where you
know we want to really establish
our agricultural and our ffe
programs and in someone
so you know we're really looking
at you being mindful of the
dollars that we have.
Going out and are competing for
dollars to create a more robust
program a and really preparing
the students
and las vegas for for careers
whether they decide to stay
locally or whether they decide
to go out in new mexico compete
globally but they need to be
competitive individuals and
that that's that's been my
charge in those are you know
those are some of the areas that
were going into so there's a lot
of work to do but we're excited
a and are up for the challenge
and you know I think you guys or
advocating for us and and are
being being revoiced in the
committee so thank you so much
but
all right thank you all so much
for welcoming us welcoming us
here this morning members will
go to questions as members on
the list which is awesome but
please keep questions concise as
always and on have to chair to
bring back his clock and shot
clock on everybody but trust you
are.
Represent place good morning
thank you mister thank you very
much and doctor brown it was I
was really
delighted to hear your
presentation and to hear about
the originative american
communities thank you i'm my
question and probably people in
here already know the answer but
why are there two districts each
like with about fifteen hundred
people is that a historical
thing that will never change
other ever talks about making
one district.
Mr chair members of committee
thank you for the question that
that's a question we are all the
time honestly.
The.
So lost the vague sex used to be
too towns at one time in point
there was west last vegas and
east last biggest when the train
came through eventually under
seventies they combined the two
cities together.
And stipulated that they were
going to combine the districts
but then that never came.
It never came around they never
they never did it right now with
the our older community the
the people that i've always been
from westpac speakers and the
ones from east last vegas.
They don't want to combine
consolidation I really don't
feel consolidation would be the
answer
and in my answer to that would
be due to the fact that west
last vegas is probably more your
economically disadvantaged
people you're already they could
only afford so much on their
property taxes those different
types of things compared to on
the eside town property taxes
it's more of the business site
so property taxes are about
three times as much as property
taxes are in this site some of
the elderly people that live on
the west side of town probably p
five hundred dollars a year on
taxes compared to close to two
thousand.
If we would combine districts
more than likely there are
property texas would have to
raise to match what's on the
east side of town so I feel
consolidation of the districts
isn't the direction to go.
And honestly I know she said
she's competitive so i've asked
them i've asked them just to
give it to me the
their budget lately hasn't been
where it's been and I asked her
in the board president well just
give it to us last week and will
call it west last vegas public
schools and will leave it at
that
thank you.
Represent block
thank you mr chair just couple
questions for both of you and I
i'm an eastern new mexico grad
so i'm a greyhound myself but I
love isle of highlands by the
way but i'm just wondering when
it comes to the public schools
here west and las vegas can you
tell me how many of the high
school kids are doing dual
credit
in your programs I know you're
not you're starting a new year
so i'm guessing just previously
how many have done door credit
in the past.
So so from our graduate this
past year
okay said we had a hundred and
thirteen graduate eighty six of
them that graduated with
certificates of dual credit.
So when it comes to do credit we
we should go with wishing for
eighty six percent of our
students to be able to graduate
with some type of up dual credit
from either highlands or or like
no community college where what
we're very grateful to have two
different colleges here in our
town and students could either
go the pathway of some type of
locational or the for your
college path
we're trying to raise that this
year about another five percent
sort of goal is to at least hit
ninety percent of our graduates
to graduate with some type of
door credit.
I missed her chair members of
the committee for las vegas city
schools I would say our numbers
is significantly less all of our
students do
and have taken a dual credit
course but when we talk about a
stacking courses probably not as
many as I would say that maybe
about thirty thirty five percent
of our students are coming out
with more than
the six credit hours of door
credit as so that thus the the
path that we are are looking at
taking for
interview college high school
and establishing some corporate
so that they can come out with
the an associates within those
pathways or certificates
thank you so much mister chair
and I I guess I asked that
question because in all these
committee hearings we always
talk about our pipeline and we
want more people in the pipeline
and the way I I think is if we
get kids or students who are in
high school getting these
certificates in getting these
courses early on that's less
time in college afterward and
then quicker to the work force
and actually doing the job so I
think it's just it's great that
you guys are working on that and
thank you and also think
highlands for everything that
they're doing providing that and
we can also do a little work
here in the legislature to
increase those reimbursements to
our colleges to make it a little
more effective for them to get
these programs so I think it's
it's a huge thing that we can
look at but thank you both and
thank you so much doctor brown
thank you mister chair
right representative saturday.
Thank you mister chairman
and thank you for your
presentation
first of all I would like to say
I love this these graphs in our
low data is either
this yeah mister chair
representative that you think
you don't are the these are
actually a lot of data that live
on our LESC dashboard and so you
can access these for any school
district anytime but we wanted
to have these printed out copies
for you what what what we're
doing this is probably the best
i've seen because you have xy
access label that everything
looks just
just want to let you know that
that's them and it's so readable
it's it's great
so uh um
when you referenced avid I have
eleven schools in my district
and I don't see it anymore at
our schools and I thought it was
the greatest tool for teaching
especially mouth but do you are
you still using it at your
schools
no unfortunately not again
because of budget restraints
but I feel that with my
experience you know i've been
pushing out a little bit at a
time so you know we the goal is.
To bring that in kate twelve you
know my two former districts we
did run it at reded run a key
twelve can we are readiness
program
and we saw a huge benefits to
that so that that is our
intention in time
those are great skills
misdetermined that they they
learn from just the
curriculum I guess um mass
square is both of you so how can
we help you with mascors
mascourse all over the state or
not doing well and we're looking
at it this year but what kind of
help do you think you need in
that area.
Human
mr chair.
The.
Members I I believe as a former
math teacher
the work that we are need to
look at is of course beginning
at the elementary level I
believe that there is.
Necessary to have a the
conceptual or the abstract type
of link side some of the work
with that you know the of the
traditional math that we had to
know the in as a former math
teacher are at the middle school
that students were coming up
without those basic skills.
And it's difficult to turn that
around at the the middle school
or high school level
so what I believe that it needs
to be done is
really looking at the
vorces that are tight at the
college level for a teacher
preparation.
And also the emphasis that ped
has placed on literacy
as similar to the structure
literacy programs in the
trainings that have been going
on for it for many years
I have not seen the same for for
math instruction.
Ah so I think that those two are
components that would be would
be necessary to to build the
teachers that we have right now
and you prepare those that are
that are coming in what I have
found.
Um
more so in my former districts
is that while we were training
we were not only training a
strategy but we were also at
training on content and getting
teachers to be
math ready themselves
so but I think that's that's
necessary to you know for us to
eventually turn that.
With everything you said
everything that's great that you
think then we are looking at
that and in the legislature we
are too so hopefully maybe we
can use you as as a help in
getting to where we need to be
absolutely thank you.
Mister chair members of the
committee to answer that
question also I think there's a
couple of factors that come into
play when it comes to math and
actually like I was a former
method teacher as well.
What I signed my ultimate
classes with my freshman
I think to start with and we've
kind of started it at west last
vegas it's vertical and
horizontal alignment.
What I sight the elementaries
back then they were doing every
day math and they would come to
my ultra broad classes and
didn't know basic math so I
would pretty much have to have
an intervention class before
lunch with those same students
that I had an algebra just to
basic concepts and then be able
to teach him what I needed a
teacher at a higher level in
algebra so first I would say
people need a vertically align
what i've started to do is
my schools were separate and
elementary schools were
separated and they had second
through fifth grade in each
school site.
I talked to the teachers I made
it gave it to their decision
they wanted to go.
Great level schools because they
felt we had this school was a
spat late school this school
wasn't doing too good and they
felt these teachers were talking
at these teachers why can't we
all be on the same level.
So we brought them together they
decided to agree level now they
work together to to reach the
same concepts and those protocol
alignments.
Another thing I would say back
when I first started in two
thousand and five.
There was funding for math
interventionists and then math
interventionists went away and
we focused strictly on reading
so you saw reading scores go out
tremendously within the
districts across the state.
And matt pretty much either
state stagnant or wet down and I
think it's there's some funding
purposes there may be we could
get funding to maybe bring some
of those maths.
People back to help that those
interventions in and focus on
those kids that are right there
just needing to move to that
next.
Thank you thank you mister
chairman I agree I had a male
strategies and then also for one
or honors and when I had the
mast strategies class I had so I
saw the kids every day we were
blocks i'd saw every day but
their skills were just if they
grew so much but then funding
took it away also ever
everything we did in math the
good stuff everything funding
took it away so I agree I think
funding and I spoke on and here
in this committee is will help
hopefully within the next couple
years we will see mass course
move up in our teachers
qualified and well tight in this
areas thank you thank you mister
chairman you represent about
carrier
thank you mr chair I think
you're going to have to catch me
every once in a while I had
think the best view I am the
committee room and I may get a
little site tracked here but
anyway thank you for your
presentation to all of you
doctor brown and really
impressed with your presentation
in particularly on the doctor of
nursing practice as you know mr
chairman and doctor brown we
have a huge
problem in the medical field
with providers and as well as
nursing and nursing and the
nurses especially the nurse
practitioners are probably.
Providing the most stabilization
in our medical uh field in in
the state right now because of
the lack of provider so thank
you for that that's a very
necessary i'm also arm I like
your culture of opportunity I
think that arm.
If we could promote that more
and more around the state I
think that would be very
effective and also mrperiod
chair and the energy arm
independence I think that the
one thing that I would suggest
for planning purposes in the
future
as as all institutions are
building out.
Um and planning growth for the
future that you incorporate as
much as possible are renewable
energy into.
That construction and growth.
Um in the reason I see that is
because.
As volume goes up prices go down
especially in this industry and
we really need to pay attention
to our climate crisis that we
have right now so in particular
mister chair solar energy and
geothermal energy are very
natural and went to our state so
I would really strongly
recommend that and um mr chair
the other thank you for the to
the superintendence for your
presentation I would like to ask
in particular miss under
violence she could if you could
arm describer give some examples
of the project based learning
that's in place right now or
what your plans are to build
upon the project bees learning.
I miss chair representative
carrier
what we wanted you is a first of
all train our staff in looking
at their standards and really a
taking primary sources and of
their surroundings to support
those project baseline learning
activities are because I believe
that teachers went they don't
have that that textbook in front
of them are sometimes fearful of
up exploring and offering those
opportunities to students
so right now we do have a like a
ff programs that support
agriculture
and
we have cooking with kids that
support some of that work we do
have as as they mentioned a
little earlier we have green
houses that are supported
through new mexico state
university and these individuals
work with our students in
you know.
Continued in the soil and in
planting and in someone I had so
those are some of our excuse me
some of our.
Some other activities that are
high school what we've done as
we've converted one of our
school vehicles and have
purchased a equipment welding
equipment so our students can go
out and support our maintenance
department and help me find
citizen and work on the
internally
within that support
what our goal is is to work with
the centers for
a cestp and I always get the the
determined
off but the centers for.
Educating diverse and are
populations are that our house
you're at homes you support us
with some of the curriculum are
development they do have many
lessons already developed as or
are intention is to work at some
of these are project based on
inactivities and connects with
ranchers within the community
connect with arm
the the amount almost at the
asset yes in someone to to
integrate at those aspects into
our curriculum.
Umm highlands has also
developed.
Some credit recovery courses
that all already in bed asked
some of that those project based
learning activities into their
outer broke courses
so what we wanted you is as a
mentioned before be a little bit
more strategic and go school
wide vs independence we are also
partnering with a new mexico
film price junior are to come in
and hopefully document some of
the work that we're doing.
Um and.
The the the biggest thing
for me are in doing some of this
work are being from northern new
mexico is at really trying to
embedd the bank which
developments are the heritage
language
approach in and time that back
into the classroom and making it
may be more applicable to the
students and where they're you
know having conversations and
that through emergency for says
you're not being in the
classroom so really having some
valued conversations with are
with with the other so are the
intention will be to start off
small and may be having a
qualitative project based
learning activities are maybe
two to three per year and then
making that more strategic but
scaffelty in that end of a time
so my teachers become our
comfortable with that versus
really forcing that upon th.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you very much and I I would add
that
because of the focus on
highlands university in the
realm of in the area of social
work.
Um nursing.
Connecting the students at an
early age with those that are at
the university level and those
that are already in the work
working in that area for example
we have an aging population
mister chair and panel and so
there's going to be quite a need
for sort of fight nursing
assistance all every everything
they have to do with um
assisting our
are aging population and that's
growing more and I really like
the year conversation with the
olders and that because that
then give some that are
connection as well and it helps
promote career not just jobs we
want to career out create career
pathways so that.
They have futures and not just
short term
job opportunities so I I
appreciate that.
I am.
I think that was gonna look
through my questions real quick
I think we touched on everything
and think you are mister with
the
giving us that little background
on the on the two districts them
where that came from and heard
that before and in just in
closing
this is I think our third I
can't remember third committee.
In las vegas just this there's
some interest and what i've
noticed is that we really need
to have arm.
Some way of rebuilding.
Our small business communities I
from the very first.
Visit that we had to this week
there we've already seen several
businesses close up and so
I think if we could be more
intentional about how we're
going to work with our small
business community to try to see
how we can invigorate because
you're both arm all three of you
are in a wonderful position on
to be able to offer those kinds
of connections and traini.
Immersing our students into the
business community and to see
how we can't the business
community can.
First articulate why it is that
they're having issues and
problems and what can.
The institutions educational
institutions too to assist
them in continuing but also in
reinforcing the partnerships
that should naturally exist with
our small sbc isn't all the
other of our chambers and all
the other business related
entities somehow there's got to
be.
Assistance without and finally
mister charit just for the
record i'd just like to learn
every reminder that it's a
double last name for a bad
compatible not just coming at
thank you mister chair that's it
represent buck.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I'll be very brief interact so
appreciated the same so would be
respectful that my colleagues.
Looking at the data from the
school districts
there are some common trends in
the
areas of attendance proficiency
and graduation okay so rather
than get into the specifics of
each district.
By mr chairman I would like from
the superintendents two or three
big ideas that would help to
address this because
we can't graduate kids if
they're not there we can't teach
them if there were not there and
once we get him there we want to
make sure that they're learning.
So mr chairman a view the
superintendence and if the
college must jump it as well I
would appreciate his how can we
address those with three.
Three areas.
Mr chair members of the media
thank you for that question yes
attendance is a a very big issue
across our state actually.
Um we are working with PED to
come up with different policies
and procedures that are are
needed a lot of the times though
it sometimes out of our control
as some kids that don't show up
to school have parents that
aren't being responsible parents
as well to get them to school.
I I fill there needs to be a
little more.
Maybe stringent laws or
something to hold these parents
accountable as well they they
always point the finger at as a
says the educators but if the
parents aren't getting them
their how are we supposed to
educate them are we supposed to
get them to learn.
When it comes to our graduation
rates.
Some of the issues with us with
graduation rates is the two
districts here in our town they
jump back and forth so if they
hadn't started in our district
but yet they graduated from our
district.
In the end it hurts our
graduation rates so yes i'm up
students.
I had the most graduated in the
past six years of of a hundred
and thirteen.
And but yet my graduation rate
was low because a lot of those
students didn't start with west
las vegas.
Uhm.
What was the other one sorry
yeah the the years that I was
talking about were
professionally yeah graduation
attendance and will you call
proficiencies to an outcomes
yes and into our proficiencies
we need attendance I think a
tendence rate now is is the big.
The big idea within our state
and within all our school
districts and were were working
on policies to get students to
school.
And get them interested in
staying in school.
I've missed her chair
representative back on a members
of the committee but we are
doing adds as bigger city
schools
is to provide some wrap around
service system as they mentioned
a letter earlier or well in this
room's getting students to
re integrate and to be able to
be mentally present are in our
classrooms and we're also
starting or bring him back
and is a program so instead of
sending students home is keeping
him in school and keeping them
under our supervision
and engaging they're keeping
them in an environment where
there's more structure
the other piece as they
mentioned a little earlier is
really to provide.
Stronger staff development for
our teachers are so that we can
provide a more rigorous and
robust program that engages
students I think we have a
different type of student now I
and are teaching practices need
to change a little bit not that
our teachers are are bad
teachers but it think it's just
really adding something else to
their total backs to to keep our
students engaged are thus are
the the shift add to your
project based learning and
something that are is maybe more
hands on and more
at their level you know
incorporating the technology
big concern of mine also and i'm
sure that many other
superintendents and ender staff
is in a witness look at our
graduation rates and we look at
our proficiency scores you know
telling us there's a
regraduating students who are
not literate and who are not are
proficient in math and the the
gall in the hope are from my
district right now again is is
with a better training and
better
than stronger instructions in
the classroom is is to reverse
that in and hopefully build that
up over over a time and you know
with with
more engaging classrooms you
know we hope that our attendance
improves you know the students
need or want to be either and we
need to do something too get
them there anything gets by
changing are what we're doing as
adults and in our districts are
to create programs that that
they that they hope to come to
in and get something out of
first is just setting behind a
desk so that that's what will be
doing.
Mr german thank you
really what you know you're
going to hear me say this
through the interim and probably
through the session we need to
give our kids a reason to come
to school or want to come to
school by providing the
opportunities I don't care for
its band choir if it's at the
leading super auto with cte.
Mister chairman laws aren't
going to necessarily help that
it's that kid that wants to be
there I I give the example and I
won't say his name for my own
son right i've got to have two
high schools.
He complains about class but
he'll get up at six thirty in
the morning to go to football
practice that's as current
so I I think that as we as we
move forward
we need to make sure that we are
supporting the whole student you
get them to school once we get
them in their through that
whatever it is a draws of these
clubs he's out of school time
then we have to provide
engaging and meaningful and
relevant instructions was the
chairman that goes to
are dr brown.
Dr brown the the question i'm
and ask you is what types of
activities has highlands
university done to increase
outreached to these two school
districts into your neighboring
school districts
or first of all I have to I can
get that information to you but
having been here such a short
period of time I can't speak
much about our relationships I
know our primary relationship
and do enrollment has always
been my friends to the left
we've not reached out much
beyond semi help county
them in recent time with dual
enrollment so I can't speak much
to what those previous
relationships have been like I
can get that information to you.
Thank you mister chairman cause
I I think it's important.
Not only in the.
Articulation but in the
certificate programs and also
utilizing space that's one of
the things that we all across
the state we hear about cte and
we see about lack of funding and
lack of facilities.
Well that's for the highlands
and and other university of
same.
How how are we open in that up
to provide those opportunities
for our high school students.
Mr chairman of the committee.
The more that we get our
students engaged in colleges and
provide them opportunities for
off campus in in school college
level classes called doesn't
begin or isn't so scary because
it's not the beginning of a new
chapter as high school is in
college begins it's a
continuation of that so i'm
gonna be at really focusing on
how
kay through twelve or pre k
through twelve we have both
alignment we have collaboration
communication and we provide the
necessary resources to give you
guys your opportunity to be
successful as determined thank
you.
Other questions folks.
Or eight so I did have a at
least a question for
superintendence.
What's competition like for
teachers here in las vegas.
Is there any.
Mister chair
good question currently right
now i'm fully staffed.
The.
In the past it used to be
probably a back in fourth
depending on the funding.
West las vegas was usually the
lower end of the funding when I
was a teacher there I think.
For my first ten years I saw was
a dollar raise every single year
once I became super intended we
started utilizing the funding
and trying to match video city
schools.
Are currently right now I
believe were a little over what
they're salary is and.
And and and I do get a lot of
teachers and students.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I was fully staffed up until
yesterday are so I I had a
couple of resignations but
one of the fortunate things for
some reason here it last vegas
that I have seen is that those
positions don't state open very
long so we've been fortunate are
to feel positions as as they
open
and the the competition
as mr which add us as mentioned
date you think that maybe
there's a history of employees
going back and forth between
districts are so you know
they've pulled a few from as as
from them but what it what I
have seen this year's that we
have last them of our teachers
to our virtual academies to what
is it key twelve k twelve for
those that are wishing to work
from home so that has been a
struggle but
you know I think it's about
recruitment and again like our
students is getting people that
want to work in our districts
are in giving them purpose and
voices
in do you all have an idea of
how many of your level one
teachers are
alternative license teachers.
I would see right now
I think I have
seven
and I probably have about the
same
and do you have an idea of where
they're at high school middle
school elementary school or mix
of each
mister chair for las vegas
schools that's etc amex at our
levels.
Yes mr it's a mix at all levels
as well I currently just hired
two at the high school and I
think I have the rest are
elementary
I appreciate sure answers to
that thank you all so much for
playing hose to us over the next
few days while we look forward
to it thank you all.
So ready for
call will go ahead then with r
artificial intelligence group
at a moment for everybody to
change the position.
Oh actually we're a headed
schedule and we're waiting on a
present her so why don't we take
a ten minute break and we'll
come back well eleven minute
we'll come back at ten thirty or
schedule then more reconvenience
so get up stretch a little bit
touch center results here.
Are a folks will come back
no now
so we'll
will go to tim
for a group good morning tim
good morning mr chair and thank
you thank you members of elia
see for being here i'm pleased
to be joined by some folks that
are way smarter than me and
using a on a daily basis to
uh impact students lives in to
transform schools across new
mexico I am here to present to
you on something that you are
put together during session
new excuse less ca I working
group
grounding or a conversation just
a little bit in the working
group itself your recall that
there were a number of a I
related bills that were
introduced last session and some
of those bills had direct
impacts on public education and
public educators a lot of those
bills didn't move and part of
the reason behind that is
because there were a lot of
questions on how a I was being
used in schools what that meant
for schools if if I bill pass
that had a lot of disclosure
requirements for example uh what
that would mean for schools as
they had to fill out new
disclosure requirements in order
to use a new tool
what you are did during session
is put together house memorial
to less see endorsed house
memorial to and it passed
through the house of
representatives very quickly and
this was really it had had two
pieces to it the first piece is
this artificial intelligence
conversation that we're going to
have today and the second piece
is the data governance
conversation that will happen a
little bit later this interim
talking a little bit more about
how the public education
department is collecting data
and establishing some some sort
of policies so that that uh the
data that you all get is clean
and reliable and can be used on
a daily basis so that's coming
that's down the road but we made
a very conscious decision to
split the work into two separate
working groups so that this
working group could rely on
educators.
To provide a lot of the
recommendations so we leveraged
the summer break of our
educators to
really dive in to some of these
issues get them all in the room
and get them talking about a I
tools and what they might mean
as you all start to think
through the next steps for state
policy
in in addition to educators we
also had superintendents
nonprofit organizations and
students themselves were
represented on the working group
sell it just a huge shot out to
the work i'm going to turn it
over to our panel to briefly
give us an introduction and to
talk a little bit about their
experience watching a I tools
expand and grow in public
schools and what they've seen
happening in classroom so we'll
turn it over to francine.
Mr chair and committee I am for
instant binners I am the
librarian and diversity equity
and inclusion and belonging
coordinator cotton classical
preparatory school in
albuquerque new mexico we are a
six through twelve charter
school that has the
international back lower program
I really became interested in a
I out of professional
responsibility so as a library
and a lot of what I do is teach
research skills I teach
intellectual property I teach
academic integrity in ai heavily
impacts all of those areas
especially so I really wanted to
to dive in and then we started
to see a I use kind of you know
proliferate and in the student
body is some positive use cases
some not so positive use cases
so you know we've really
attempted to try to get ahead of
it you know i've gone into
classrooms to talk to students
about ethical use of a I we've
talked about ways that they can
use it when in conducting
research and how to say things
effectively
get in and also providing
support to teachers right
because they are also need
confidence that they can
implement these was in their
classroom and there are ethical
ways to do that that as well and
honestly I just find a I really
interesting it's very exciting
it's like writing a roller
coaster right so sometimes i'm
like all this is so amazing and
then sometimes I feel a little
bit nauseous and overwhelmed
with the potential up you know
implications of it but you know
it's it's nice to be discovering
something new like a student
would
good morning director.
My name is jc homer I am a sixth
grade career and technical
education teacher in lovington I
also serve as a teacher plus new
mexico advocacy fellow and
leading edge fellow a national
cohort which focuses on
artificial intelligence and
education
and as someone who uses a guy
tools daily and my classroom
like magic school a eye for
lesson planning and
accommodations deficit for a
differentiating reading levels
and grade scope for streamlining
grading i've seen first hand how
thoughtful integration of a I
tools can improve the equality
of instruction and improve a
pine professional practices as
well as the valuable time it
allows me to focus on my
students particular needs as
well as free up time for me to
focus on what I think matters
most which is my relationship
with my students so i'm a big
advocate for the the effective
implementation of a I and I am
proud to be part of this
opportunity and this committee
to be able to give you guys
those recommendations to do so
in new mexico thank you.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is page press card I am
coffounder and executive
director of the computer science
alliance which is an education
nonprofit that works statewide
with our k twelve educators to
provide computer science
education professional
development as well as working
and policy level and also
thinking about how our
students are going to be ready
for this digital future of
theirs I am particularly
interested in a I because
there's a lot of narrative
around computer science and the
impacts it has on computer
science education
and so I have been tracking that
very closely since
century twenty nineteen and then
have been involved in deploying
a curriculum in new mexico
called every day a I this was
through
intense professional development
we've had three cohorts of
educators in new mexico go
through that as well as running
student summer camps for a I
literacy and uh so i've been
seeing the changes in our
landscape I have hope and I have
concerns.
And move this good morning
mister chair and members of the
committee my name is andrew
procter I am a high school
student at east mountain public
charter school where a charter
school at sandia park I am on
this committee for a couple
reasons I was approach about it
because I do some stem work at
mountain doing programming
computer science electrical
engineering but also I am a
student and i've seen a lot of
the wide ranges of chat gbt and
perplexity and german I and
different ways that me and my
friends have used it from
actually wholesale and
benevolent applications like hey
I don't understand the way this
teacher teaches let me go ask
charge you bt and get better
information to the other side of
that spectrum which is just
calling will smith to try to
fight the robot overloads so i'm
kind of echoing the sentiments
of there is concern there is
incredible possibility for the
use of these tools and I have
tried to bring some of that on
the ground experience seeing how
these tools have been used and
seeing how they could be used so
i'm very excited to see the ways
the policies can be shaped and
the ways that we can adapt to
new ay tools moving forward.
Thank you mister chair so so as
you can see we have a very
diverse group of uh folks across
the educational spectrum here to
talk to you a little bit about
uh the use cases for a I tools I
also want to recognize a couple
folks in the audience were on
the a I working group tony if
you'll stand tony executive
director of future focused
education was integral in the
working group as well and
chaired it here as well jet dug
in with the public education
department who helped put
together p these guidance which
what will dive into a little bit
today so i've got a behind tab
three a report for you all
summarizing the the work of the
working group first that's my
portion of the presentation and
then i'm going to hand it over
to the working group members
themselves to talk about the
recommendations that they have
for you as you start to develop
a statewide a I an education
policy
on page two of the report you'll
start to dig into a little bit
of what the working group
covered there was a really
intentional design here are
trying to get from what is
happening to how are those tools
being used to what are the
things that other states are
doing that maybe we should start
thinking about doing and then
finally culminating with okay so
what do we deal and and that
intentional design was sort of
the scaffolding to try and build
understand that we are sort of
coming into this conversation in
media as these tools already
exist p d is already put
together guidance our future
focused education has already
put together a policy brave fund
on recommendations for you all
so all this is is to sort of
underscore that that the work
has been happening but there
there needs to be sort of a
stronger hand from the state in
in determining a few aspects of
how a I technologies should be
used so at that first meeting we
dived into
documents that i've summarized
for you in the report on page
two uh first there's the future
focused education a I policy
brief you'll all recall some of
these recommendations as
language from house memorial to
you uh some of those things
about equity inclusion and
tribal sovereignty in the use of
a I tools if a call and cultural
protection in education sort of
a unified statewide approach.
Two ai implementation
and providing an implementation
roadmap for new mexico's school
districts and charter schools
and then finally are tieing that
a I work to the work force
itself and understanding that as
we're moving into a a new sort
of era that work force has
certain demands of our students
to understand a I tools and to
be able to use those tools
because they're being used in
the work force
shortly before our working group
convened pd also put together
some ai guidance and you i've
got a link to it there you can
find it online on pd's website
the new mexico a guidance for ca
twelve education that's a very
comprehensive document as very
long but i've done my best to
summarise it here in four big
bullet points for you my big
takeaways from the document
first human centric a I work
everything that educators do
with ai should not be done to
replace humans but be but rather
to enhance the capability of
humans and build a meaningful
human relationships between
teachers and students
second a I literacy I want to
call special attention to a
illiteracy it's a little bit of
a buzzword and I think you're
going to hear it a lot today but
what a I literacy means is
basically an understanding of
what the tools are capable of
doing and what they cannot deal
and ped has put together some
guidance uh that that scaffels a
I literacy across all gave great
levels beginning at early grades
where students are starting to
interact with tools and teachers
are sort of modeling that
appropriate use of the items and
asking critical questions huh
this is what the a I said uh
what do you think about that
rate those types of modeling
exercises help
train students to be a little
bit critical of what the ais
outputting and then that
scaffles over time into middle
school and high school where
students can begin to dive into
the technical aspects of a I
what is the model doing here
what is the data that it's
relying on to to come up with
this this answer and so all of
that is is this this idea of a I
literacy i'd say it's going to
be a common recurring theme
throughout our presentation
today.
I'm paid three the third ballet
point this idea about
integrating ai and classrooms pd
guidance has some ideas on how
teachers can start to use a I
tools and one example tools can
quickly identify learning gaps
right you can have an a I tool
immediately identify what
students are falling behind or
they can tailor lessons to
individual students needs or
they can provide real time
feedback to students as they
work if a student is working
through an alger per problem
you've got con migo and
classrooms that can say it looks
like this is what you're trying
to do let's remember this
formula how does that work into
this right so though those are
sort of the use cases and and
pedi's got some guidance on how
teachers can start to do that in
their classrooms I finally some
considerations about academic
integrity so I think a lot of
you have heard as these ar tools
have been become more wide
spread students are relying on
them to write their essies for
them or to complete school work
so the accurate academic
integrity uh guidance within PED
is
getting document will help
educators set clear expectations
for how a I can be used
understanding that a is is a
tool that should be used for
some circumstances and students
will need to learn how to
understand the outputs that a
eyes are generating pds
developed an assessment scale so
you can see at the bottom of
page three
this nice little chart that is
included in the pda I guidance
this is something that an anegic
educator can put on any
assignment that they deal they
can put AAA number from one to
five that says uh uh a one means
you are expected to not use a I
at all as you're completing this
assessment right and that ranges
all the way up to gradually
increasing the use of a I all
the way up to five where it's a
free a I exploration where
students can uh freely integrate
and collaborate with an ai to
complete an assignment even just
setting that base expectation is
an important step for students
to understand how that they're
they're able to rely on the
tools.
What their expectations are and
it provides some sort of
accountability for districts
when they decide uh that a I was
used to complete an assignment
that it was not supposed to be
used for they can sort of step
in and handle it like they would
any sort of pleasure isn't right
i'm page for it
a summarise a little bit about
what happened at the second
meeting of the at working group
uh we brought everybody in the
working group to the state
capital for an imperson meeting
and we went when over some
common use cases for a I and
education I reached out to a I
developers and implementers
across new mexico and nationally
uh to try and bring them to the
room to talk to us about aa
tools and ask them three
questions what is your tool deal
how does it use a I and what
might be necessary at the school
or the district level to
implement the tour and so these
short presentations sort of gave
this groundwork for the working
group on these common use cases
which i've summarized in table
one there for you are sell the
first tool that they died into
as a tool that's used for lesson
planning colleague dot a I
that's a tool that was developed
by your amplify learn at the
university of washington it's a
really comprehensive tool has
all sorts of functionalities for
one of those main
functionalities as you teacher
can ask yet hey i've got to
teach a lesson tomorrow on this
specific algebra standard and it
will spit out a lesson plan that
is developed with that and then
using that chat interface the
teacher can say I need a little
bit more differentiation i've
got a few students who are
behind and the the lesson plan
will update and theoretically
it's better than asking chat gpt
to do it because there was a
tool design specifically for
lesson plans
so we asked the working group to
look at the tool and developed
some of the strengths and
weaknesses of using a tool like
that they the working group
rightly identified you know some
of the strengths it would really
streamline the lesson planning
process and save educators a lot
of time if their school adopted
it and it allows for
customisation and allows for a
greater autonomy over the
curriculum.
But that some of the weaknesses
were there's a lot of questions
about the efficacy of the tool
rate and the bias that might be
existed in the tool and whether
it would be culturally relevant
for a new mexico context rate if
it's trained on data that was
generated outside of new mexico
so a lot of questions about that
and some some policy
considerations that will follow
from that uh in a moment
the second tool was idiot it was
it's an attendance tool that's
being implemented and a number
of new mexico school districts
right now the tool essentially
is an ai chat but interface that
will send text messages that are
a I generated two families and
then families can respond to the
chat but in real time on their
phones uh and it automatically
records an absence or an excused
absence if if you know the
student had a doctor's
appointment or something like
that there were some some
interesting considerations there
about sort of automating these
routine monday and practices
that normally you would have to
have a staff member at your
district to send a text messages
or to called call families and
say why isn't your kid here
today that's all automatic
within the tour but then there
were some other concerns about
whether that might
harm relationships with families
right we understand that
relationships with families are
key to improving attendance in
in some cases with students and
if that's all automated you're
not building those relationships
with families some other
concerns that families might not
want to share that sensitive
data with with the ai chat both
a lot of the times when students
are absent it might be for very
intensely personal reasons and
that might not want they might
not want that data going into an
ai model somewhere
the third use case we looked at
is a personalized teacher
feedback we looked at a really
cool tool i'm a little biased on
this one cause i'm a researcher
but it's one of my favorite
tools that i've seen is this
tool that will take a classroom
recording turn it into a
transcript and then identify
instances within that classroom
recording.
When uh high impact teaching
practice was used and so
teachers will get an automatic
report at the end of their
lesson that says you use this
teaching practice eighteen times
through the course of an hour
lesson and I all time step
within that recording when that
happened it'll show the
distribution of how much time
the teacher spent talking versus
how much time the student can
spend talking so it's really
actionable usable data that
teachers can perceive
currently it's only a tool for a
research use cases and you can
imagine some of the weaknesses
associated with that tool you
have to put a microphone in
every classroom that you're
going to use it in and that
microphone is going to freely
capture everything that every
student says so a lot of privacy
concerns a lot of safety
concerns with that student data
going out and luckily that was
not sort of a widespread
implementation use case right
now
the final use case that we
looked into as tutoring and
individualized instruction to
tools that the working group
looked at here first as a mirror
which is designed for early
reading and con migo which is
designed for secondary students
so a mirror is a tool that a
student can sit with and read to
and the airbar within the tool
will listen to that student and
say although he didn't get that
quite right and sort of
individualized that fonix
instructions through structured
literacy principles and help
that student get on grade level
with their reading economy goes
very similar I accept it does
the same thing for our less ends
or uh social studies or language
arts lessons at the secondary
level coming of designed to not
provide the students the answer
but to provide them an interface
where they're allowed to ask
questions and the the tool was
sort of scaffed for them well
here here's what you need to
think through as your trying to
answer this question here's the
first step here's the second
step the student is encouraged
to do that work the tool is
providing the steps to get there
so again individualized
instruction uh and the teacher
themselves are not designing
that individualization which
saves them a lot of time.
But there are some concerns
there that the the tools might
not have great enough access
rate that uh if some school
districts are using con migo and
others aren't some scores might
have access to to higher level
of education than other schools
so there's some equity concerns
there nd
a real underscore there is that
the district wide implementation
of the tool add up that we saw
from santa fe public schools
required a really in depth
implementation plan from the
district the district sat down
they got stakeholders together
they talked through how they
were going to roll out the plan
are the steps in doing that and
and it was really end up the
process
i'm running out of time so i'm
just going to briefly go through
are consolidated a I system map
on the next page
we asked the members of the
working group to define for us
what is what is the system look
like if your ai tool was going
to be used in the most effective
way possible they walked through
the individual actors within our
education system and they talked
through what the roles and needs
of each of those actors are all
that is summarized summarized
for you in table to you and but
I will briefly highlight uh the
the legislative responsibility
for you all since that's what
we're doing today those four
considerations would and
recommendations that came out of
the working grill a first you'll
need to promote an evaluate
access to aa tools second you'll
need to create policies to drive
effective implementation third
you'll need to create an
enforced laws to protect student
safety data privacy security and
sovereignty and then forth
you'll need to consider system
why changes that might be
necessary in a world where a I
is common place
those are the four
recommendations that you're
working group developed for you
I I will turn it over now to the
working group of note that there
are some other deep dives within
the report
on pages six through.
Eight are talking a little bit
more about some of the
considerations from other states
some of the things that
you'll need to think about when
it comes to tribal sovereignty
in education data sovereignty
all of those are replete
throughout the recommendations
so it's sort of integrated into
everything that that you're
working group is put together
for you and if you have any
specific questions about those
two topics in particular i'm
happy to to deal with so there's
a little bit deeper but with
that I will turn it over to
france seen for our first
recommendation which is on page
nine of your report
okay thank you mr chair and
committee members so glad to be
here i've got my my technical
librarian car to get on today
i'm ready to go here eight so
i'm gonna be talking about
access today something near and
dear to my heart something that
we talk about a lot in new
mexico
and as we go through this I do
want to say
my aim here is to talk a little
bit more about that the logic
like what we were thinking when
we decided to put it on the
paper right you're capable of
reading what's there and if you
have any questions i'd be happy
to address them afterwards so
aston said we know that access
is important especially
equitable access to ensure that
all of our students would be
prepared to use ai in the
classroom and beyond the
classroom because a I is clearly
not going anywhere right there
going to be using and in their
future workplace so they need to
be prepared
was fast and that aan regards to
access to is not only do we do
we require access to use a I but
ai actually kind of levels the
playing field a little bit right
a I can give you access to
information that you might not
have had before so ai demands
access but ai also promotes
access which is really
fascinating so we're gonna keep
those things in our mind as we
move forward so starting at the
legislative level.
You know we started our
conversation about what what do
new mexico students need in
order to really have an use a I
in the classroom and of course
we spare our ideas like oh they
need to have access to a
computer oh they need access to
high speed internet they need
access to screen reading
services and all of these things
and all of that's true and all
of it should sound familiar
because it's already in the in
the digital equity act rate and
so the digital likely to equity
act requires that every learner
has the information support and
skills to equitably access
affordable reliable and high
speed internet adequate internet
enabled devices digital literacy
training quality technical
support and evidence based
applications and content
designed to facilitate both self
sufficient and collaborative
learning this is my intexatation
for the digital equity act
because of the library librarian
i'm going to cite those sources
as I walk through
further supporting this idea
and equity in the implementation
of a I is the martin is as a
consolidated law suit which
affirms that it is the state's
responsibility to provide all
students with the resources they
need to succeed so our
recommendation is that we had
here to the structures that we
have established and adhere to
them with fidelity to do them to
the best of our ability
and then in addition to access
access requires like quality
access to requires adequate
funding so when we talk about a
I there are a lot of different
use cases and time and mentioned
a few of them before so there's
a I as a tool to help schools
and districts handle student
data and then there is ai as an
instructional tool in the
classroom those use cases would
have different needs for
fundings with them for funding
but the mechanisms largely
already exist within the
functions of a schools
operational budget right to
whether that student support
educational technology
instruction materials putting
additional funding in already
existing channels may be helpful
this approach validates the idea
that ai is not an entity unto
itself it's a tool that can be
used used in multiple ways in
the school environment.
So that being said we also need
a clear permission structure of
knowing whom to contact how to
contact where to go regarding
funding
and and all those different use
cases that would be incredibly
helpful moving forward so moving
on to the ped level they are
also intended to be a part of
that structure that permission
structure but also connect
schools and communicate funding
possibilities to those scores be
a grants or other opportunities
it's just nice to have somebody
they can actually you know build
bridges between organizations
are funding and organizations
and then it has been continued
our conversation you know we
felt we felt a little bit
stalled and then we recognized
that there was another silent
aspect to access that we hadn't
talked about but we talk about
it all the time with students
and that was the social
emotional aspect rate
students find a very difficult
learn if they're afraid in this
in the classroom environment
teachers find it very hard to
teach if they're afraid that
they're going to make a mistake
right so what we would like for
ped to do is in still some
confidence well how do you make
a teacher feel confident in what
they're doing right
so
we determine that ped should
create an evaluative tool to vet
some ai software according to
that tool and then allow schools
to adopt those those a I tools
that they had further more it
would be wise to have pd
actually distribute that
rubbrick two scores so so that
scores could vet ai tools on
their own
if we waited for pede vet every
possible ai too we would never
get through them all it's just
not possible right so we have to
allow schools to innovate and
address the problems that are
near end here to there to their
sites and their students so by
creating a tool and then
allowing
scores to use it it would help
innovate we don't want to be
behind we want to be in front of
ai as much as possible.
And again that does inspire a
lot of confidence so schools
teachers we want to be handed a
paddle to our boat we want to be
able to direct where we want to
go right we want the tools that
we need we don't want just like
a push off the dark like hey
you're doing a I know good luck
right give us the tools that we
need we want the same positive
student outcomes that you deal
so then moving on to the school
and district level
you know we then the the quick
summary is we just want them to
keep doing what they're doing
but with a mind rate a school
administrator should know the
problems at their school is
facing they should be
communicating with families they
should be obtaining permission
for technology whenever it's
required they should have an
open door to facilitate
communication but to do those
recognizing that ai
may demand that as as it's
adopted but also that a I can
help streamline some of those
processes so air is a tool to
help them and what they're doing
additionally administrators can
support teacher implementation
of aai and the learning
environment they should obtain
and allocate funding and
assistant choosing a tools
provide ongoing support through
professional development ensure
students and families have what
they need to succeed to a
valuate effectiveness of those
tools and always again provide
an open door for communication
and lastly again with modeling
and creating confidence in
others to use a I
we encourage that schools and
districts use a I think model
positive ethical use that will
encourage their teachers to use
it as well
and then moving on to the
teacher level the same applies
to teacher levels teacher the
teacher level teachers should be
using ai model bottling positive
use to encourage their students
to use it effectively so for
example if I write an email at
work to a student using ai I
will quote the entire thing I
will write the entire citation
for that entry in mla format and
send it all off.
To the student in a single email
right so they can see I didn't
write it they could see what was
impacted by the fact that I
didn't write it and sometimes
it's okay I didn't write it
right and i'm forced coming
about it and sighting it
appropriately because they're
going to have to do that
sometime in the future as well
you should laugh at a I together
evaluate the mistakes to
demestify and he stigmatised the
black box that is ai we want to
be installing confidence we want
to install creativity we want
them to
to to really just embrace it
right because they're going to
go places that we didn't even
imagine that they would.
To that and those students also
need guidelines through clear
expectations and rubrics which
can provide a jumping off point
for ethical use.
Ultimately and time you said
this service is singly a nicely
in the document so I took it
whom citing my source a I should
be used to enhance and not
replace instruction and whenever
implementing a I is important to
be reflective practitioners to
evaluate the effectiveness of
the tools and our own practice
so and closing at the end of the
day a I really ask that we all
just become students ourselves
to courageously try no things to
be creative and innovative
reflective and grown or
understanding an awareness of
ourselves and others through
funding a value of tools
effective implementation and
positive modeling this is how we
promote access we should be
working to ensure that a I use a
new mexico dismantles existing
barriers not creates new ones
and with that I will.
Send it online.
Thank you my name is jesse homer
again for you guys that just
focked in today i'm speaking and
support a recommendation too
from our policy brief which
focuses on driving effective and
equitable implementation of a I
tools and scores while also
protecting against rushed or
harmful use where at a moment
where a I is moving faster than
our systems can keep up and
without that for leadership some
educators will thrive like
myself while others will fall
behind not because of effort but
because of access training and
guidance recommendation two
offers of proactive path forward
and i'd like to walk through
it's key components with you
while sharing what this looks
like in my classroom the first
component involves professional
learning for educators this
recommendation begins with
something that every teacher
understands we need time and
support to learn new things well
every one ai to be used
effectively and ethically we
need ongoing professional
development not just a one and
done webnar or one day support
like I reference before in my
classroom I use tools like magic
school a eye to generate less
than plans I e p aligned
accommodations and even parent
communication I use deficit to
differentiate content by reading
level or language and greed
scope to speed upgrading while
offering clear feedback but I
didn't learn these tools over
night I took time trial in error
and a lot of self directed
learning most teachers haven't
been given that space yet this
recommendation emphasizes the
need for state white
professional learning
opportunities that are practical
inclusive and sustained long
term that's how we empowered
teachers to use ai not just
efficiently but equitably
the second component of
recommendation to involves
oversight and tool vetting
it's a call to create a state
level oversight body.
To evaluate and provide guidance
on aid tools which I feel is
critical to implementing this
right now teachers and districts
are often left to figure out
what safe what's the line and
what meets privacy standards all
on their own I believe a formal
oversight group could help
answer questions like is this
tool for but compliant does it
generate equitable contact can
it be used in sped or by
linguist settings national
organizations like ed safe
alliance and common sense
education are starting to build
frameworks for responsible I a I
vetting a new mexico can lead
the way and adapting these for
our unique context here in our
state that their component of
the recommendation would be
district level a I
implementation plans.
A line with ped guidance in my
own district i've seen how
interest is growing in a I but
without consistent messaging our
structure many teachers aren't
sure where to begin some don't
know what tools are approved or
how to use them responsibly a
district plan supported by clear
state guidance can give teachers
this green light to innovate
while protecting students and
keen being family is informed
so and closing I believe
recommendation to is about
ensuring a I doesn't just become
another adequate trend but
rather a long term support
system that helps teachers meet
the diverse needs of our
students i've experienced what's
possible when teachers are
trained trusted and supported to
use a I well and I want that
opportunity for every educator
in new mexico
so thank you for your time and
consideration with this
important recommendation it does
have the recommendations broken
down by legislation ped school
and district leaders and
educators
so if you have any questions
about recommendation to at the
conclusion of this presentation
I would be happy to answer those
for you thank you i'll pass it
over to peach.
Thank you so i'll be talking
about the
recommendation three that starts
in page eleven create an
enforced laws to protect student
safety data privacy security and
sovereignty
these there was a our group had
many lively discussions about
this and a lot of it was
scenario based so let me give
you some scenarios to think
about as legislators
a teacher pace a class roster
student appears and greed
reports into a chap but to
generate summaries and emails
without proper consent or data
anonymous
so that would be that so there
would be personally identifiable
information in uh in that
scenario.
Another scenario would be using
a chat but
a teacher is uh asking the chat
but to write a parent email
about a specific student's
behavior
in an incident that happened in
their classroom and in
advertisingly adds information
from their notes that includes
the student's name and other
information about that
another scenario that that
prompted our discussions was the
potential use of like let's take
these internal lesson plans
assessments and
different kinds of curriculum
and we're going to load it into
a chat back and chat but to
perform to basically train it
and come up with tutoring for
our students.
However this is
proprietary information that was
uploaded to this chap at an it
has some violations in terms of
licensing agreements and
district data governance
policies.
Another scenario would be that a
teacher student doesn't realize
that you chat but interactions
are saved and possibly reviewed
by third party vendors after
entering names medical
accommodations like five oh four
information or mental health
notes
so this could be something where
these free or low cost ai tools
don't meet the k twelve data
retention standards and store
inputs in depth indefinitely.
More scenarios on the student
side would be a student uses the
chat back to generate violent
sexual or otherwise
inappropriate content during
class and the group of students
promised the chat but to rate
explicit stories as a joke
violating school digital use
policies.
Another scenario could be that a
student uses the chat but to
help them craft mean spirited
messages for cyber bullinging
and social media post targeting
appear.
Another scenario could be that a
student uses a chat box to get
around school internet filters
by axi- asking it for proxy
sites.
And gets into the gaming and
things like that
perhaps a student another
scenario a student could talk to
a chat bar about self harm or
something that happened at home
that was dangerous to them or
their siblings how does this
comply with mandatory reporting
rules.
More scenarios
and this was actually in a an
article I read yesterday
they had a diserve texting so
what happens when a student is
exposed to inappropriate content
so they engage and this happened
with that google germany they
engaged in they had an account
at thirteen since young this is
a thirteen they presented
themselves as a thirteen year
old
and they engaged in a
conversation and had the chat
but
talking about a various
paragraphs of different texts
that lead to some very
inappropriate language from the
chap but
and that therefore the student
is exposed to some inappropriate
contact who is responsible in
that case for that exposure.
Other scenarios could be that
teachers and students have
no excuse me students developer
friendship with a chat but but
shuns friendships with peers and
families so this could be
scenario and i'd like to point
out on page eight of the
at summary that tim was at that
you all have a copy of his that
on p j and table three the
indigenous perspective on this
is that the are specifically
considering banning a a tools
that mimic human companionship.
Relationships identity and
cultural integrity are quarter
student well being so this is
kind of getting in that larger
perspective on the laws to
enforce and protect our students
in our teachers and our schools
given the these scenarios
we do know that companies that
are representing these a I
products are really prioritising
profit over safety and that we
have scenarios like google in
class action lawsuits with our
attorney's generals that they
were using student data
inappropriately and they paid a
fine but that data was out there
right you know they get fined
and their handslapped but really
there's some significant um
issues especially with these ai
tools I do want to point out
that there are some as
jace mentioned some
organizations are really
thinking about this so we don't
have to do this alone in our own
void common sense media does
have an a I compliance checklist
I printed out a copy that
specifically looks at data
collection and use data sharing
and vendor agreements security
practices student and parent
rates and oversight and
accountability
and while I do believe in an
colleagues here they had
beautiful scenarios of how a I
and i'm sure andrew will as well
how a I can be used to promote
and deep in educational
experiences but we do have to
have a lot of caution in the
space because it is moving so
fast and data privacy is
definitely there's lots of
lawsuits that are happening from
organizations big and small that
feel that they're
their information was used in
appropriately by these are tools
and what's to say that that
won't happen with our student
experiences as well.
And with that I will pass it to
andrew.
The.
Thank you so much mister
chairman members of the
committee thank you so much
again my name is andrew
protermine student he's not in
high school I will be speaking
on recommendation number four
system wide changes that may be
necessary in a world where a I
is common place this starts on
page thirteen does this feel
like being back in school
anybody everyone turn your
textbooks to page thirteen
system wide changes they matter
because of relevancy if you're
driving a boat you have to
constantly be watching for other
boaters for how the sea is
moving you'll have to change
your speed and your course if
you were to just set a heading
and set a speed and then close
your eyes the day would not end
too well so system wide changes
matter because we need to stay
relevant with a I
and so starting at the
legislative standpoint temporal
relevancy and relevancy as new a
I tools in merch our system from
the united states level to new
mexico level it's designed
intentionally I think to move
slowly to violently paraphrase
from the report artificial
intelligence is transforming
every fast of education yet new
mexico's educational systems
remain largely stack
staying still is the enemy here
of moving progress because if
the system that is supposed to
regulate these tools stay static
while the tools move then all of
the policies become out of date
and they're useless at that so
recommendations in point a about
the legislature about building a
formal a I oversight body that
will keep updated on the new
tools the new technology the new
things that have to be changed
it means that at no point is the
legislature ever blind of what's
happening there in the schools
and in the districts it means
that there is a committee that
knows what they're doing that is
vetting a I tools and is
providing resources to those
districts and schools so system
white changes for this
legislature in building a formal
a oversight body and improving
testing standards means that the
legislature is staying updated.
On what happened on neu tools on
new ways people are using those
tools and ensuring that policies
never become static when it
comes to ai
then for the ped professional
relevancy the whole point of
education is to prepare people
for their futures to prepare
everybody from elementary school
to high school
but if education treats the
future as if it's eighteen forty
seven then it means people young
people are going to enter the
real world without the tools
they really need every job in
some way is beginning to
incorporate a I and so if the
public education apartment
doesn't if they fail to provide
students with the tools they
need to learn to use a eye with
integrity with safety and with
knowledge about the natural
biases of these machines it
means they will be woefully
under prepared for entering a
career so we have recommended
that they change content and
education standards to include a
illiteracy this is unintentional
move to make sure that tools are
provided to students so that
when they enter the work force
they know how to use these tools
they know the dangers of them
and what can be helpful then for
schools and district leaders on
the third point it's cultural
relevancy every region is
different every state is
different every school is
different heck every classroom
is different and so one a I
policy that is just all
encompassing that goes to
everybody that doesn't actually
care about each individual
student and their culture is not
going to be very effective so
the couple recommendations there
of creating diverse a I steering
committees for every district
means that we are hearing
numerous voices from every
background from every group of
people so that we ensure
cultural relevance you that it
stays these a I tools and the
policies stay relevant to the
people they're serving then
designating a trained a I leader
to each school means that there
is a person now who knows the
school.
Knowing the student body and the
people running the school and
the needs of each individual
student.
Finally with educators this
matters because of capability
relevancy knowing the tools and
knowing the abilities that the
aids a eyes have means that
educators will be far more
prepared to deal with how their
students will be dealing with a.
That's where the system wide
changes matter making sure that
the system doesn't become
irrelevant and that the policies
don't become irrelevant we're on
the boat of a I and sometimes it
seems like the waves are getting
too high to handle but by
staying relevant and keeping an
eye on the c we can make sure
that the policies still adjust a
i.
I quite honestly I guess i'm
gonna have it off to tim.
Thank you.
Great thank you mister chair I
just want to spend more minutes
to tie it all together for you
get through those
recommendations and talk about
how they might work in some sort
of aligned system and then give
you a final few policy
considerations as you will start
to think about what you'd like
to do next for our state why
they policy so i'm the final
page of the report before the
pennancies on page fourteen we
had a little diagram for you
that sort of maps those
recommendations into you sort of
a diagram context showing the
roles and responsibilities as I
love to say of the individual
actors within the system what
are working group has envisioned
for you is a truly systemic
approach to a I policy where the
legislation that you are pass
sets up some minimum standard
some minimum requirements for a
items in classrooms but that
oversight is is handled by an
oversight body that looks very
similar to the experts that you
have with you today who are
educators who are implementers
who are folks on the ground that
are using tools and folks from
ped who are are experts in that
implementation side of things
that oversight body would be
responsible for some of the
things that you heard about
today a veteran list of tools
that I I that ah schools can
feel comfortable accessing a I
and using it on a daily basis
some updates to regular updates
to a I guidance so that we're
always keeping track of this
technology that's moving way
faster than our sessions will
allow us to pass policy
some model district policy for
school districts so that they
can feel comfortable uh starting
to adopt district wide tools
some responsible use policy is
to govern how students uh should
be using tools and classrooms a
model procurement contracts for
school districts potentially
outlining those minimum security
requirements that you all put in
law make it easy for school
districts to pull something down
off the website and say okay if
you want to sell us your tool
you gotta use this contract.
Because this is what our losses
so i'm sort of a I reserve
resource clearing house for
school districts so that they
are have access to the same
level of fidelity when they're
beginning to sort it sort of
implement these tools and then
constitute ai summons and
professional development for
providing opportunities for
educators to to begin using some
of these tools
if that responsibility is housed
with an independent oversight
body that has representation
from the legislature from ped
from educators themselves a pd's
roll becomes more of an
administrative rule sort of raw
where they're exploring those
technical a requirements that
might need to be an
administrative role that you
wouldn't want to put in in your
state law but the pd could put
some technical aspects of ai
tools into administrative rule
because that seems to be a
little bit easier and more
technical at you to amend
quickly and and
uh establish enforcement
mechanisms
and then school district policy
again becomes that that that uh
resource for school districts to
collaborate within themselves to
identify those local solutions
that might work best to to solve
the problems that they have
identified at the school
district level and then to guide
very closely student use
educator use because they are
the ones that are closest to
students and educators as long
as state loss that's up those
minimum standards district
policy will follow that state
lot so some final policy
considerations down for you at
the very bottom of your page
once once again you'll need to
think about your mainness for
our third our thirty day session
thirty day session is a budget
session and so early engagement
with the governor's office for
example might be a good idea for
those of you who are interested
in cares and carrying
legislation this year might be a
good idea to see if that's
something that would be possible
to get on the governor's call
this year if not this might be a
sixty day sort of an issue
on ongoing consultation with the
air working groups of the folks
here at the table.
Ah and everybody on the working
group was very interested in
continuing this work they are
very passionate as i'm sure
you've saw today about the worst
that that you are have in front
of you and want to continue to
provide that guidance to you uh
so they they would like to be
engaged in a in a ongoing basis
on on whatever you all decide to
do next and then finally some
specific consultation with new
mexico trieds nations and
plablers I know I didn't go over
it in depth today but there is a
very specific need highlighted
in the report that anything that
you do uh put together needs to
be done in consultation with
those tried to implement us to
respect the sovereignty of those
communities and that the data
that those communities are are
starting to put into a I systems
without being said mister chair
we will stand for any questions
that you are have for any
questions members represent
minimum while.
Thank you mister chair thank you
so much for your presentation I
myself use either was it magic
school and n or district as it
has used that I it is freeze up
a lot of my time it really does
it is not very good
so so I have to check it and
that a lot of the times some of
the things that they get I was
like there's no way you can get
that you know so so I do have to
you know you can't trust it all
the time but it does free up
even with proficiency scales and
stuff like that that that were
required to do in in our
classrooms
there's a certain thing I can
just put in the standard and
they can and it and and then you
you work with that instead of me
having to completely write this
by myself which saves at least
for each proficiency again
standard probably an hour of my
time so in since I only have a
few minutes of a peace and quiet
then it it it helps umm so I
really I really like that we're
looking into it and seeing how
we can implement it but I do
understand like I am very tech
savvy so I can I can fiddle with
it I can I can work with it I
can get it to do what I wanted
to do
now there's many of the teachers
in mind in my school that are
not um and and they are very
afraid of it and and they are
and and they would you know like
I think one of you guys
mentioned think that they could
break it back and the stuff so I
really like the recommendation
of like an a leader at schools
aren't because there if there is
someone that they can go to that
can then help them a pdas is
great but when you're sitting
there and pedy and you see how
easy it is for someone else to
use this you're like hey this is
awesome but then coming back and
implementing it in your
classroom is the whole different
story like I said for me it's
never it's it's usually not an
issue so I end up having to help
the other ones that are that are
um
afraid of it can it sort of
speak but which I which i'm glad
to do because it really does
free up their time too.
Umm now what I worry about is
and and
my other thing is
so a I leave leaders would be a
great thing but I do like I
what was that on page it was
your
yeah assessment scale um on page
three um I do like starting to
implement those kind of things
then that one is something um
where
if we have that number one on
there they that the students are
beginning to understand doesn't
mean that they're going to
follow it but if they don't
follow it now you have that
recourse of okay you this was
the expectation and this is
where you cross the line as far
as you know no way I should be
used in this that which is a lot
of my you know i'm again i'm
physics so a lot of my math
problems that's usually where
where they use it
and I can always tell it's
pretty easy with math to tell
that they've used aai to answer
my questions because they they
solve it in a way I have never
tough them or they give me more
information in and and students
I mean that they don't they
don't realize that they give me
more information than what I ask
for and they explain the whole
thing and i'm like most kids are
not going to do this ends unlike
you used a I to do this again
but i'm also I like this because
if they don't if they're not
confirmed that that was the
expectation it could be implied
but if this is the expectation
now there's recourse to okay the
expectation was this we do this
or or there's these are the
consequences so um
so so I really like these tools
and it's and i'm glad that we're
having these conversations
because I really think that even
if it's if it's a teacher that's
not so tech savvy and and been
in for them to be able to use it
to to the ability to that they
can.
Will definitely free up time in
an already very jam packed d
for for teachers so so thank you
senator result.
Thank you mister chairman
appreciate the presentation but
my concern is
we've discussed it said our less
meaning that we held in russell
how crucial it is that unless
they are proficiently reading by
the third grade they're going to
this is going to blow their
minds they will not remain in
school and in the list we're
just personal down the line but
if we accomplish folks we have
it
if they cannot read they need to
remain in the third grade it's a
simple as that until they become
proficient and reading
therefore if we do implement
this
why are we doing it if they
can read that's where i'm going
with this
the academic integrity part of a
team was very important to me
because I can see lots of
problems that potentially
that potentially might become an
issue
and I hope that these other
areas that you have
that the rest of the panel has
talked about and here will make
a make it
important that these students
don't play drives that's my
opinion
i'm going on down the list
because I was doing every one of
them let's see friends seen
let's see you had the.
Uh
you were talking about under
recommendation one this
how do you say your last night
the nurth binner okay you're
talking that these are.
Access to personal devices and
high speed internet are
prerequisite well we have a
problem here don't we.
Because there's so steel
summaries of our state that
still have no cell phone service
and that's quite offered the
case out in our more rural areas
so that that's a problem right
there in it says the air tools
and classrooms to enhance not
replaced teaching
and
who my question there is.
Who will assist these teachers
and learning these tools that
they're going to now be teaching
in their classroom
it's going to cause her school
districts more money to hire
somebody to be able to implement
aa into our classroom and we all
know what does pay for education
in our state and I hope you'll
are aware of it that it is well
and guess industry in
agriculture
and I want to stress th.
So I can see it being.
Necessary maybe but it's also
going to be a detriment to each
school district especially or
smaller school districts because
sometimes they do not have the
means to come up with hiring
somebody else other than may be
sending a certain person from
their school to learn this.
There are the call you survey
we've already discussed that the
training how long does it take
mister chairman and anybody on
the panel may answer this how
long does it take to train
somebody.
I think it's debit their service
to chair senator so in terms of
using a tool I would say that it
would be tool specific it could
be an hour to have a day
but if we're talking about a
literacy where it's not just
teaching with ai which is that
scenario of here's a tool and
how you effectively use it.
If you are talking about
teaching about ai then that's a
much longer commitment and
when you teach about ai and so
how are works you get to both
the ethical the safety and then
the good use implementations and
you get to
the teachers understanding sort
of the variety of these tools in
ways that are different so I
would say a literacy would be
the optimum goal
but that is a higher
in terms of
um investment of time and
resources but just tool specific
it can be quite short
and often times you have
somebody like a colleague like j
c that just does a quick
sort of one i'm winer that e I
specialist at a school district
that could come in interview or
help that teacher understand
that tool
thank you very much miss
chairman and mispressed cut for
that explanation there because
that is that's also a concern
that I would have for it
with this take place to ring I
know that a lot of school still
have in service training with
this be able to be accomplished
during that time fra.
Yes a chairman I do believe it
could we do have time set aside
it as specifically in my just
direct loving ten four pd school
releases early every wednesday
and my district for example at
one fifty and that time every
wednesday is dedicated to a pd
time
and that could be used up like
you said for a training during
that time I am specifically ama
expert in my district so what my
district is kind of they sent
you know there's organizations
like the international society
for a technology in education
where they host a I explorations
for educators where you can send
a representative they could then
come back and be the umbrella
for their entire school district
to make it more cost effective
for those rural school districts
where like I teach down and
lovington where I know the oil
and gas industry is huge for I
teach it's a little bit
different up north here but I do
think it is tool specific to be
able to discern how long it
takes to train and be able to
vet at all right now there is no
universal tool that is used to
vet ai
it's they are working on it but
like I said add safe alliance if
we were to work with them or
common sense education we could
essentially read those tools and
provide like a nutrition label
for them so it's not just the
wild west of a I am tool then
what what would be appropriate
for gictors to use in the
classroom because like you said
time you like sometimes it
doesn't work for math or there's
a tool better for this topic but
like for instance with the the
reading and the literacy what I
love about some tools that are
able to help with that like we
do get passed on students like I
get students that are still
reading at six grade and
kindergarten level but that the
good thing about a I tools like
for example definite is a
differentiates the reading like
style levels of the assignments
i'm getting to the students to
where their app so i'm able to.
Gather data to show that growth
faster than I would if I would
have you know to go in there and
and look specifically like at
each students like sell level
myself and adapt the text to it
on my own
I believe first and foremost for
teachers it saves a lot of that
burn out for teachers doing
those administrative tasks and
allows us to focus more on our
individual students in
classrooms and building those
relationships ships with them so
we can show that growth faster
than we would if we weren't
using tools like I so I hope
that helps answer your questions
mr chairman thank you very much
for that explanation.
My next question and jason you
might be the one that I need to
direct this to but i'd like
freedom body to jump in if they
would like to how can a teacher
other than what a
representative where about more
year talked about how can a
teacher
be sure that there is going to
be an ethical use of a I by her
statements by their students.
Yeah.
Yeah sure mister chair represent
senator result
III think the the difficult
thing there is that it it's one
of those things that are teacher
has to make sort of a a got
decision about the air guidances
very particular there are tools
developed that are designed to
identify whether or not a
student has used a I and the
pd's a I guidance is a very
hesitant for a wholesale
adoption of those tools because
they make mistakes so it is one
of those things where if a
teacher suspects that an air
tool has been used for an
assignment there should be a uh
first clear expectations on the
front end as represent me about
noise pointed out of how the air
I told was supposed to be used
for an assignment and then
second and a clear path forward
within their school policy or
within their district policy for
if that if that teacher suspects
that a may I told us years that
that sort of leads them down a
pathway of ice how we sit with a
student so with the family talk
about the a I use figure out you
know if a I was actually used
for the for a particular
assignment i'm very similar to
how you would
intervene if a student were
accused of pleasurizing in the
same way I don't know if there
are any educators who have who
have dealt with that are
particularly yet it's it's one
of those new things that
educators will tell you
I can just tell I know
and and that's a very difficult
thing for to legislate for
example
mr chairman team thank you for
their explanation but the
repercursions should they be
left up to the individual school
district should they be left up
to pet to determine what the
final outcome would be
mister chair I think you're
working group recommends that
that is a district level
decession okay yeah okay.
You mentioned word and there
that I wish did have more often
set down with the student and
their families
and as we all know is sitting on
this commercial
having served on both the house
and now the sinner education
committees
we hear quite often that parents
aren't involved with their kids
and that's a shame it really is
I say this every term
but how are you going to enforce
that parents be part of this if
there is an infraction.
Mr share center is out I I think
that is a an open question for
you off and and
after that to pass the book yeah
the the it's a very tenuous and
difficult situation there's a
lot of issues around a I tools
as as I sort of highlighted as I
was talking through the a I
tools and their potential to
actually replace that
relationship with with parents
and I think that relationship
with parents needs to come first
right and that that the tools
are used in a way to enhance
that relationship to provide
data so that that that when that
that went up i'm meeting with a
parent happens for example you
have data that you can bring
that meeting that says like oh
well here's what what you said
that why the student was absent
right or here's an instance
where student appears to have
used chat gpt to write their
essay for them and talking
talking through those
conversations it's a very deep
complex issue that gets because
way passed the use of a tools
that parent engagement but but I
guess that's my two cents on it
would anybody else like to wait
and on there
mr chair senator I would say
that scenarios that you mention
are not just ai specific they
are educational technology
specific or it like they they're
under that broad and berla so we
would hope that the
school districts have policies
that are about appropriate use
of all of these technologies and
that there are clear
consequences
that would.
Address both student
inappropriate using and if there
is some sort of uhm safety issue
and then also teachers using it
appropriate really as well
to do their jobs and to be
communicating with um their
students their peers and their
parents
thank you very much mister
chairman i'd like to ask mr
property this question in your
recommendation here you were
talking about i've lived at my
eyes back hosting an annual ai
conference talked to me about
that.
Absolutely I mister chair
senator the idea behind an
annual a I conference is simply
to keep people connected and
updated
there it's so easy especially
with new tools and with new
evolution of culture with a I
and the way it's being used for
people the kind of just and her
a bubble of what they're doing
and of how they're operating so
an annual a I conference would
mean that professionals and
educators and even potentially
students and policy makers and
analysts can all me and work
together it the whole idea of
systemic changes is to keep
communication open and to make
sure that channels of
communication between people
doing different jobs at the a I
world remains together so that
was the I think core point of ai
conferences is making sure we
can still communicate with all
of each other making sure
opinions and knowledge and
professionals can still have
meaningful discourse in this
ever changing field
okay i'll miss chairman I guess
there for I might have a little
problem with that because most
of the time these conferences
are held in our current you was
held in south and that really
sex for people that live you
know five six seven hours a way
to get to those plus even going
and out of kirki anymore is a
scary thought but yeah put that
out their mayor killer.
This is what was the other
thing.
Senator a minimum that you have
one more question because there
are several other folks on my
list that we need to have to I
have already talked mister
practer about the extra money
that it's going to take to have
at least one a I leader at each
school that's going to be a
problem that mister chairman I
can also see where this.
Where we are talking about
we'd need to keep the ped
apprail priced of what all is
taking place there is probably
going to be another interim
committee meeting set up that is
regarding aa oversight so anyway
I do appreciate the information
here there's some others that
still doubt can't use our
smartphones because they are
smarter than we are in some ways
but this is going to be
interesting to see what does
transparent thank you very much
thank you represent from a
barcarian
thank you mister chairman thank
you all this is very exciting to
me my son are who is a social
enterprise sole per prior to
resume business for years has
been telling me that as a policy
maker I should be on top of this
and so this is
very exciting and I think the
the entire working group for all
of the effort.
I also a doctoral student
hopefully some finishing out and
so i'm faced with the realities
of research and research
approvals and so one question I
have is how were the or how the
university has been consulted as
part of the working group
process and how are they already
incorporating approval of
here we go research validity our
research citation how to
appropriately fight use of ai as
it will apply in
across the board and well that's
one question I have whoever
would like to go for it yeah
i'll take that
mister chair representative
about how they are the so and
recoup and tell you from new
mexico state university was a
member of our working group he
was a phenomenal force of
bringing that university
perspective i'm i'm also
cognizing of less statutory role
as k twelve education and sell
we we were fairly limited to our
scope on studying just the
public education system so so
that being said i'm not an
expert in and how they're
developing it but I know uh
doctor pantelli has put together
a an a I program a bachelor's
degree bachelors of science in a
I that will begin in fall twenty
twenty six four students
interested in going to new
mexico state for for a I and
that that's a very interesting
program and I think we're we're
talking to him about in terms of
academic citations and all that
stuff I I would have to get back
to you on on some of the
specifics of that thank you well
it's good to know that we had
him I have him in the working
group and that this is rolling
out and it's even more exciting.
Degree in this because I think
that will continue to be
key to our constant council and
in what we have policy makers
need to be doing in terms of
enqu.
So thank you for that I have
um
another another point I wanted
to bring out and I was that
eight someone made this
statement ai demands and
promotes access and I would say
that that equals opportunities
so we're no longer.
Are in the position to
be either accepting they're not
accepting because it's here and
so we need to be fine being ways
in which to are provide that
access so that it leads to
opportunities for our children
and i'm concerned i'm i'm
concerned about how it bounced
we should be in the state of new
mexico I follow my
grandchildren's older
grandchildren's arm schooling
education in the los angeles
unified school district and in
doing that I was doing some
research and saw that they had
some bumps usually we look at
states like colorado and in
california wisconsin and other
states for their advances in
areas as we compare it to hours
and so one of the things that I
note it was that and that they
noted is a start at very
vigorously and enthusiastically
and had an involved policy
makers had the same similar
setups however
what it did mister chairs that
opened up the world to and
there's no way to get out of it
commercialization and
corporation of our education and
this was chai another way to
explain that and so it
d
different businesses that were
associated with a I just flood
it the california the los
angeles unified school district
with all these products and it
got so out of control that they
had to put a pause they
literally paused a I are
instituting it across the board
in their educational system
because they were flood with arm
just you know the marketization
of so I want us to caution.
As well and if you as a working
group keep that egged or red
flagged are because we lean on
we will lean mister chair on the
working group and others assist
us in identify and our public
school system and identifying
what works best and so I just
wanted to caution us final
question I have is and it
relates to
the
tribal consultation and arm
and the
the whole area that you talked
about in terms of equity and the
reference to martin and chalsi
and that's really important
because of as you know we're
already trying to address and
marketing as the azi last suit
so much of what has not happened
in terms of a fourteen or
students equity and education
and so this is yet another area
that we don't want to fall
behind on so how are was any of
where any of the stakeholders
directly and working with
remediating or reforming our
transf.
That consultation of martin is
yazi involved in this that you
get any input or how is it that
we're going to get them involved
in this process
yeah mister chair representative
robot cabinet so we had a a
number of so i'll step back to
the
impetus of house memorial to you
I I think a lot of the problem
that we sell a session is we
didn't have a strong enough
understanding of how ai tools
were being rolled out in
classrooms and and a lot of the
potentials for a house memorial
to was to build that
understanding to grow how we
understand how ai tools are
being implemented in schools and
so for that reason I my primary
focus on assembling the working
group was educators themselves a
we we had a couple of educators
on the working group one from
the mask miscollara patchy
nation and one from the knacker
native american community
academy
that
that was the extent of the the
tribal perspective in in our
working group the reason that I
included it in your report as an
ongoing consideration is that
this is really just the first
step in putting together
recommendations for you the
policy comes next and the
development of that policy is is
where I think the tribal
consultation could play a very
big role in building something
that works well for those
communities give mr chairman
it's not just the tribal
consultation we have the
hispanic education we have the
black education knock we have
indian education action
in whatever others that were are
on our in place that we need to
honor so that with that with all
of those acts already in our
statutes we have to
intentionally
make sure that we're including
all these populations educators
everything that impacts that
finally to arm.
I get andrew
andrew I am very very
enthused and proud and honored
to have you the table today
I think that you made a
statement and answer to senator
cells question and you said that
the
conferences could potentially
have students I don't want them
to be potentially the absolutely
must be at the table in deciding
determining in being part of
rolling out what is best for
your education moving forward
because that's what we're
we're obligated to do as
legislators is acknowledge that
this is everything we do is for
the future of our students and
their futures and helping the
structure without so I would say
keep along the lines of
organizing the conference
insurer that students are
crossed the state are involved
and
intentionally asked to design
their own education for their
future so thank you so much
mister chair thank you
senator thorton
thank you mister chair I have a
several questions first one I
think the the working group you
guys did an excellent job of
putting together this
the set of recommendations and I
appreciate the work that you've
put into it it's it's query you
guys did a lot of work to get to
where you are and I also
appreciate the fact that andrew
practice from my east mountain
district your representing as
well right now so I would do
appreciate that thank you very
much
so I have several questions then
I guess.
The first one is is i'm not so
concerned about students using a
I
they're going to use it no
matter how we say they're not
they're going to use it but I am
concerned about ensuring that
the students are developing
critical thinking skills so how
are we insuring that does anyone
want to take that take that
money on how are we going to
insure that they are getting the
critical thing skills are going
to need to make the right to say
is it's a to know whether not a
I is giving them the the full
story or not.
I will take that line vice share
reversing I personally think
that we should have some sort of
just be like we have digital
citizen share boring media
literacy like an a I literacy
course that needs to be standard
and schools just like when you
enter college and you have
freshman one or one it's just
getting to the point where
certain programs may be like
microsoft offers keyboarding are
becoming obsolete and technology
whenever kids and kindergarten
first thing at their greater
already using chromebooks are
computers so I think maybe like
a long look at no could regular
the standards for that those
specifics could we could create
a set of standards for a I
literacy that could be developed
and tart may be even in just a
semester course
so that students are really
understanding at a young age and
inveloping that this is not to
replace your own thinking that
it is a tool to help guide you
and the direction that you are
going with whatever you're
working on that's the literacy
component that I believe
definitely needs to be developed
before any kind of tool is
introduced so it would just be
the question of how early do we
introduce that to students
winner is going to register that
that literacy components so that
we build those fundamentals
before we introduce them to the
tools so we don't lose that
critical thinking component
because I feel like that's where
it's getting away from us now is
that we we let it expand and now
they're replacing it so we need
to develop that framework on up
so that's why I had this
suggestion of you know even
developing those standards to
include a I literacy and that
those be taught end specifically
at a certain age so I hope that
answers your question there
is that does anyone else have
any other comments about the
critical skills i'll jump in
mister chair and center thorton
I I think the
united.
A page of the
working group is this is page
thirteen on on recommendation
for its the second bullet point
there where we're talking a
little bit about our state
assessments and the types of
things that those assessments
measure in the types of things
that they clearly do not measure
right you have put together a
system of assessments in new
mexico that measures math
proficiency reading proficiency
and science proficiency
there is currently not a
statewide mandate to your
assessed critical thinking right
and so that's not that is a
policy lever that you will have
that if you all believe that
that is something that that we
need to start measuring I think
that is something that that the
department is very excited about
that stake holders throughout
new mexico are excited about
those different methods that
might exist to start start
getting us toward this
competency based mastery based
critical thinking skills that
these students are developing
over time it's a it's a
difficult thing to do to
standardize an assessment for a
critical thinking but it is
necessary in the world where a I
is is everywhere miss mister
chaired and I
have a hard time not saying
something here i'm sorry that
special permission from the
chair to be able to add to this
only and I wasn't an active
participant in the working group
I really want to think tim and
and the other members of our
staff around this process they
did a great job as you mentioned
I
as a former teacher right I
think
what we're talking about here
from an instructional standpoint
is more about a tool that's
available to both teachers and
students and we've gone through
these kinds of changes in the
past and then someone I think
joked maybe at some point about
like what was the transition
from an abilities to a slide
rule to a calculator to you know
like we've we've made huge
transitions and we've all
worried that when people started
using calculators no one would
be able to do math rate and and
calculators are too and how
I would teacher uses those
tools.
Is to go to depend on what what
am I actually asking kids to
learn today right that that
I don't I can't see it the
colours up there right
that takes intentionality on the
part of a teacher to say today I
want students to actually learn
how to write an essay and i'm
going to walk them through the
structure of an essay eight if I
say go home and write an essay
guess what they'll do use a
if I say today we're going to
write an sa and class and i'm
going to evaluate each of your
paragraphs as you write them I
don't have to worry about
whether or not a student is
using a I am right there
watching them do it in the
moment
if I say let's do some research
and you're going to show me
where you found these sources in
class i'm going to monitor how
that works if I say go home in
write off ten page paper and
make sure you do research
insight your paper site your
sources i'm sorry I kip might
use a I
so I think a lot of this comes
down to instructions it's much
more complex than that I don't I
don't want to make over simplify
it but some of this to your
point about critical thinking is
are you having conversations
with students and class about
the things that you're doing in
the pieces that you're reading
and and what you're actually
learning or you saying turn in
an assignment i'll grade it
using a eye and then i'll give
it back to you
so some of this is about
instruction of practice as much
as it is about the tools
available then to educators in
assisting them in that
instruction or practice
thank you for that director
appreciate that that was
actually very helpful
explanation and I and I think if
teachers apply dost techniques
then we'll be a much better set
going going forward with ai
make my next question was an
insort of gets back to the
tutoring and individualized
instructions as I think either
can probably be able to take
benefit going forward that it
can assess each of the students
in a classroom and then
determine where they are and
then help the teacher who's
trying to teach an entire class
to know where each of their
students are so.
The teacher becomes more of a
coach mentor as opposed to just
being a teacher for everybody
it's like where are you and then
you know working with them
through there through their
issues
we do not and I I noticed that
in this and and I think it was
page three dollars you actually
looked at maybe two assessment
tools for individualized
instruction I support a mira
near the
kitty would pronounce a word
coming go
and so
are those the only ones
available right now that are
nationwide available then why
did you select those two as
under consideration
mister chair center thorough.
With all the things that you all
have mentioned here to me that
the biggest issue with is
developing this ai oversight
body it seems to me that's going
to be critical to go forward and
so what you really truly asking
for from legislature is is
either in additional agency or
some kind of maybe solid
department level but you're
looking for some kind of an
oversight body that has
authority if you will to say
here are the ways these are
governments that have been
veteran
here is way we're going to
procure them and sort of giving
stuff some general direction to
all the school districts in the
state
absolute that's a heavy load to
take on himself that's going to
require a lot more discussion I
think on the legislatures in
order to be able to do something
like that because we're creating
a new agency to do a I and and
that's something that's at a big
deal that's not something we
should take lightly
but if we're going to go forward
it I I don't see any other way
of doing this and and even with
that the idea of having to go
back to this credit steering
committee that each of the
districts themselves again
another way of government
oversight
I have a problem with that as a
I just don't like government
period and i'm in it so I don't
like it
but but it's all but I also
don't see any other way around
this if we're going to do aid
correctly and sell so despite my
lack of of wanting to do this
and from a from an adding
government bureaucracy to the
system I also ensure whether way
of getting around if we're going
to do a I properly so
so I had something I think we're
gonna have to get in depth
tomorrow what is a I oversight
body looks like what agency are
what department is is under
how do how do we select a
membership all that kind of
stuff that goes with that so
so I appreciate the fact that
you are at least identified
that's an issue and it needs to
be addressed.
I have a lot of other questions
that I know I know what take a
lot of time here and I think the
only other
issue on it to bring up was
yeah I think teachers are
already overworked and underpaid
and I think a lot of teachers
would agree with that and now
we're going to be asking them to
corporate a I into the classroom
and I only incorporate it to do
it in the proper matter.
So that's another
professional development
activity that we're going to
throw up there's no thing you
have to go do now
I just see the word where we
expect a lot of our teachers and
and that's that's a tough
somewhere tech savvy like
yourself others are not and and
the ones that are not are going
to fill i've got enough on my
plate now you can ask me to do
this one other thing in
incorporate this into the
question and in fact they're
going to have to do it anyway
because they're gonna be faced
with a I and so
I I just I just worry about
overstressing our teachers as we
go forward with this process and
down
there are there things that we
can take off their plate and one
of things I thought about as
we're looking at the
confidential student information
that you mentioned I miss press
cut
that one of the issues that we
could probably train a I to do
in itself it's at the a I itself
could tell you when you start
entering information that's
proprietary of confidential
liquid poppy raiser red flag
before either gets sent out
anything like that so you can
train it to say if there's any
kind of proprietary information
you could train it with the
safety rules are with security
was are with the data
information rules are and
therefore it would flag you
before even if you're in your
information annoyingly and
unwittingly are a good thing
flag and set this can't be
submitted until you correct that
so I think the eye can be
trained on those kinds of things
going forward to prevent those
kinds of mistakes so so the data
security of something that
I it's an issue but I think it
can be it can be worked around
i'm worrying a I myself I try to
keep up on what's happening on
all different fronts and what
i'm finding out is I can't keep
up and what's happening and all
the difference it's happening so
quickly so fast.
And I consider myself pretexably
but I I just do things are
moving weekly something else new
comes out and it's almost
impossible for any money
individual to keep up on and
track all the things that are
happening so this a I oversight
body is going to have a big task
because it's things are
continuing to be changing the
they can have to monitor that
and at some point you're going
to want some stability specific
specs hole state to take
something on and we're gonna
have to figure out how to do
that as well just throwing up
some more issues not the thread
any solutions at this point
thank you very much mister chair
or blue care
thank you so much mister chair
thank you everybody here I
participated in a representative
it and myself and representative
grow I think we're sponsors so
my first question chairman's
house memorial to
originally was for a data
governance and then we added a I
is there going to be similar
meetings on data governance
yeah mister chair represent
gerrit that very important point
so we recognize that the
challenges that are associated
with both of those topics were
very distinct and wanted to
focus our a I work primarily as
I said before on on educators
and their use cases for a I are
the data governance conversation
it's private is primarily going
to be a state state agency
conversation where we're
collaborating with PED h e d uh
ecd to talk through sort of how
do we build those data systems
in a way that allows for quick
and easy transfer of data and
allows the systems to talk to
each other so so very different
audiences and very different
work that needed to be done in
in both of the topics
great thank you for that blue
station and then
mrperiod chair and this actually
goes to what senator thorton
said every district that I know
of already has a team.
Convened to work on a I every
school I know already has it
it's not it
it's like when we start using
computers and school you know
suddenly everybody had ever
technology plans so it it's not
new and a situation I would say
that every school is not going
to hire someone some of the
regional education
organizations may have someone
who specializes in it and the
way we learn as a teacher I
learned all about computer
because we had in service
trainings where teachers
delivered to their appears
training because my experience
and I think experience of lot of
you on the panel is that
somebody grabs on to it it's
like there are techno there are
a I nerd and they become that
point per sin for the school
committee or and the district
like too so I don't think it's
so much as money as
finally now who's going to lead
it within any given community
and then my final thing which
mister senator thought and were
thinking a like today on on the
oversight body I think it's
complicated because I know that
a representative of sarnon is
going to have a presentation on
a I at
science technology and tele
communications community next
week other committees are
dealing with that I believe lfc
probably mister lou knows
something they're already doing
that there we have many
committees working on it and so
I think how we do that is going
to be a question because and I
know ped is already doing it
people across the state are
already doing it and nationally
many people in our state are on
these national bodies so because
there are so many implications
not just for education but the
data governance
it's it's the thing that's
happening yesterday I had a
meeting on careers so a bit
concerned of mine is.
How these emerging a I related
careers whether it's at jeana
centers or you know my pep he
was presbyterians a I answering
system which you know i'd
probably many of you have had
the same experience it's like
would you get your act together
you know your customer you don't
know if you're talking to a
person or a machine so there's
just so many implications that
go beyond education and I think
that's what we'll have to talk
about too with the education
peace we part of a greater
oversight committee
anyway that lots of questions
that senator you brought up that
we do have to figure out anyway
thank you I just could use to
everybody
yet students there there are the
future they find out things
often in a classroom is a
teacher your student comes to
you and says hey what about this
bulling you know that's a big it
should look at the national add
things that are coming out
federally let alone what happens
in a school that can really
tragically affect our students
so thank you for everybody both
on our committee and for the
five of you for bringing up all
this issues really appreciated
previous in sardina
thank you mister chairman and
thank you for your presentations
it's wonderful
center thought joint story said
he he asked a lot of my
questions critical thinking was
one major one but in signs
ticked and technology on july
twenty ninth if you're
interested in we're talking
about a benefits and risks so we
will continue this but we have
talked about buyers we've
trucked about transparency job
displacement we actually had our
martin come and tell us how it's
hurting the film industry and
actor
but the biggest thing I think is
that that a privacy in this
point in time
I was watching a uh assume with
four of probably the most smart
people on aa.
And data and they were thinking
the federal government forgiving
them data all this data so our
dad is out there and it's being
used who knows how with some of
the stores stuff that's
happening but
that's what I worry about are
data and how often we are hacked
these huge databases we have all
over the country of our kids
information that have been
happened and our kids are little
everything's out there it it's a
little bit scary but one
question do we are we're getting
a support from the federal
government does anybody know
that in any way she perform
money
training.
Mr chair representatives having
I can say that the
through senator hynrick and the
department of educate us
department of education there
was money that was given to new
mexico state university to
provide a I literacy training
professional development for
teachers and we've had two
cohorts of about forty total of
forty educators in new mexico go
through that and that also
helped to run summer camps that
were in raton in farmington
albuquerque last crucial santa
fe and a few other sites that
i'm not remembering right now so
that is one instance that I can
definitely affirm my
organization was recently
awarded a national science
foundation grant in order to
bring data science professional
development and that's going to
happen at new mexico state june
twenty second of the twenty
sixth so that's AP d week it's
actually national and but we
will be able to invite some of
our new mexico educators to
participate that as well and I
do want to emphasize that data
science is a really key
component to this
and in terms of a I literacy and
and just our work force
development data science is an
area that we should really start
to think about in our k twelve
and how that we can leverage
sort of the math needs that we
have with something really
contemporary like a i.
Um
thank you mrperiod chair
represents there any one I I
think front scene just lean over
and whispered to me III would be
remissed not to mention e rate
funding here obay does a very
good job of brading are steep
finding for broadband
infrastructure with the federal
erate funding to build out
connectivity
that's the limit of the program
very hard very infrastructure
related projects related to
internet access nothing
specifically for a I and there.
Thank you mister chairman I and
I this isn't going away suddenly
getting faster like center thorn
that said there's so much out
there in every every area so
hopefully we can try to keep up
at least in education so.
Representatives will ask us.
Thank you mister chair
and apologies for being late I
was i'm i'm also on the health
committee and health and human
services and I spent some time
there this morning um
of what I wonderful discussion
and are committee um thank you
all for this excellent
presentation and for the
document that you have put
together I can see that a lot of
thought has come into this
document and you all have
considered and consulted money
important pieces
important resources sorry about
that um.
Just as an antique doubt I was a
senior in high school when bill
gates lived in albuquerque
and I got to see the very first
laptop because I was taking a
computer programming course and
then the computers were like you
know the size of this room and
we use cards and so we were
learning to punch cards and all
of that and we see this laptop
and so i'm excited that you are
taking this to and you are
guiding us cause it is in public
education and it is there now
and keep twelve in one way or
another but i'm excited that you
are
thinking very responsibly about
how we want to expose our
students to aid and mister
charles so how we want to
potentially prepare our students
in terms of a career I have many
friends whose children are
actually developing a I programs
my son as packard
administrator in taxes is
actually selling a I product
he's really excited and wants to
show me and I am no expert in a
so i'm glad that you are looking
at how to share this with
students I do have a couple of
suggestions or questions
one is that
it's really important that we
look at mistakes that a I can
make and we all know the air I
can make mistakes so my son is
currently telling me how are you
sitting lives in hospitals and
various things that a I can do
but also no one I appreciate the
comments of representative or
about a year or in relation to
the martinis and yazi lawsuits
also know that if I were to do
an a high search.
On martinez versus stated new
mexico I would find all the
myths that have been published
by the media I would not find
the truth on some of my
colleagues in it so I was
university professor and um in
looking at the legal aspects of
the etcetera at a conference for
a new group that we developed
some of my
colleagues and other parts of
the country
have looked at experimenting
with ia and one of them knowing
that his students use a I to
create reports he had his
students use aid to create their
paper intentionally everybody
had to use a
two create a paper about the
topic of the class and so he got
them back and right away he
started working with the
students to develop a scale
on how to use a I because they
could all see where the mistakes
were if they knew the topic and
so he used that to help them
assess their own knowledge of
the topic as compared to what ai
had done and a I was making a
lot of mistakes and still does
in a lot of the content so that
was used as a tool so when we
look at the government over
sight that's something we need
to consider along with the trans
right now in our country to
control the media there's at me
least just saw the firing of
steven cober in terms of a
comedy show and the media has
been
not always on spot with facts
and so I would say that needs to
be part of the plan in terms of
looking at accuracy with ai
and in my head I think mister
chair what I think we're doing
is with this document where
developing a culture of.
Practice because our culture is
changing and we are going now
into realms of knowledge and
information that we have never
experienced before and looking
at what to do with that is
really important so I very much
like on page seven the aspects
that you brought up and terms of
non academic users of ai those
are very very important and when
I hear experience talking about
a I these are the very things
they're talking about you don't
want to go to a I for behavioral
health because you might get
work representative garrett gets
on the phone with presbyterian
hospital lats the frustration
and behavioral health is a
serious
serious need
I also very much like the
recommendations for tribal and
indigenous data sovereignty
mister chair and I appreciate
very much appreciate because the
martinez last suit took into
account the declarations from
united nations and the
declaration of rights of
indigenous peoples and we felt
those were very important and
our country does not sign on to
any of the us declarations of
rates so if we can do that as a
state I think that would be very
very important
taking that into account I have
a suggestion for you and let me
see and mark the page but it
goes back and forth so if we
look at um.
You've got a couple of tables
here that I really wanted to
point out and I thought I had
more but one of them is on o o o
n just a moment i'm still sorry
why did I
oh here it's not a table on page
nine
arm you discuss recommendation
one promote and evaluate access
to ai tools
and you are looking at it seems
because of the words should and
i'm not sure that I would use
that word but you're looking at
the responsibilities of
legislators the ped score
district leaders and educators
and
I think something is missing
from there but I see it on the
map that you provided on page
six five on page five table two
consolidated new mexico
assistant amount
this goes in line with the model
that i've seen used by the
alaskan native knowledge network
in where every
role has its responsibilities
and needs an on this page you've
got one of the actors a rolls
that is missing from page nine
so you've got legislators ped
school district leaders
educators and here you have
students and families and I also
am so proud of you mister
procter you are so eloquent in
presenting your information and
so I also think it's important
to involve students and families
in every aspect including the
responsibilities and then beyond
that I would add businesses in
enterprise
because the reality is this is a
new career for many people and
so to to communicate with.
That level of
involvement could greatly inform
this committee
and so those are my questions on
actually my recommendations
in terms of a question
gosh I I just like to see more
of what you're developing I
think this is really important
and I think you very much
listen thank you
so he didn't have
one question on recommendation
three and it's under the
legislature should in the third
bullet point
enforcement mechanism with teeth
what do we have in terms of
tools to enforce their sign
potential company is obviously
with school districts might be a
little bit easier maybe buy it
but with some of these companies
that that school districts might
contract with
certainly mr chairman and i'll
turn it over to the rest of the
panel they have suggestions as
well
so I I envision your primary
mechanism as the legislature
here is going to be
the procurement contracts with
school district with that a I
vendors are I think violations
of very clear terms are grounds
for a nominated contract I think
that is probably the clearest
example for you
to to
i'll repeat something that I
said a little bit earlier but
this is really step one in a uh
multi step long process where we
start to look at some of the
specific things based on your
wishes as the committee to what
you'd like to formally dive into
your uh those teeth are sort of
weird and anomalist rate now
because there's there's any
number of ways that we could do
it.
And it's sort of comes up comes
to you to decide what do you
think is appropriate to put in
state la what do we think needs
to be impedes administrative
role and then what what are
those teeth and what do they
look like and but i'm not sure
if the panel has anything they
like to have mister chair
some of that came from the
experience that the state had
with google and the class action
last year that was settled with
multiple states and the large
fines and so if we had
privacy laws and we in the
school districts
could see that function at a
state level and then the
and data compliance laws if we
had some sort of law in place
than the school districts would
have a mechanism to
to at litigate with a vendor
because of some violation of
that so that's kind of a holding
to account these companies in
ways
how effective that would be I
don't know but I think that that
would be something that the
attorney general's office would
also have a say over as well.
Now if I have bankered I would
just like to jump in I think it
may be as a precursor would have
been important to make the
distinction before we started
this conversation that a I has
been around since the nineteen
fifties originally a I was
invented to replace human
thinking specifically we're now
talking about generative a I
which is a substantive aa that
is creating new ideas based on
whatever data but tool has been
trained on so I think that's why
it's getting so out of control
is because you know there are
currently no nutrition labels
put on these tools to know where
they are training their tools
and what subset of data they are
using to train their tools so
and there are organizations I
don't want you guys to think we
are like on a loan island here
because they're already thirty
one states that have a I
policies in place and I think
it's important that we research
what worked and why didn't work
in those other states as well
that already have them in place
like representative cabinet it
was saying in california and the
issues that they face there but
you know if we were to work in
partnerships with for instance
and safe alliance there are
cross sector initiative working
to develop standards already for
the safe accountable fair and
effective use of a I in
education and they already
provide these emerging
frameworks for house states and
districts convert tools
responsibly as well as common
sense educate education but
offers like reviews of ad tech
tools that are being pitched as
a tech tools and they recently
expanded into reviewing
classroom redia platforms that
claim to be classroom ready
so they're already this company
is known for a prioritising
student data privacy and
instructional quality already
like I said as well as
international society for
technology in education and then
the state educational technology
directors association which
publishes state level guidance
on technology and innovation
so those are all great places to
start building our framework
which I think.
You know we can we learn we
should learn and we should poor
from what works and what doesn't
work and I don't think we're
leading to the game by getting
into it now I think maybe it's a
good thing that we have this
learning opportunity to take
what worked on why didn't work
and build it into our framework
for new mexico which I really
think could help level the
playing field for some of our
students that haven't had that
equitable access like maybe some
other states have you know we
may be lost in education but
what they flew also and include
in that data as we're the six
most diversity in the nation so
I think that plays a huge role
when it comes to those ratings
and I
I really use this as a tool for
equitable access for my students
and I think if teachers were
also just to address your
comments and concerns earlier
senator thorton two be able to
use some a I like educational
vetered tools to take away those
administrative burn out tasks
which it already has for me I
feel like I enjoy my career that
i've been in for eleven years so
much more now because a I has
i've learned how to use it as a
tool to take away those burn out
tasks so that now more than ever
I have time to actually build
those relationships with my
students so I think it's just
changing the narrative of
fearing it and training teachers
and and other bodies and and
disease and organizations to
teach it as you know an
instructional tool that can help
actually enhance education
rather than you know it to take
away from what that we as
teachers already do sell thank
you
thank you for that
I mean we talked a little bit
about the figure one the air
assessment scale um part of the
way I look at that too as a
teacher is that
is working embedding that into
my instruction to work with
students on what that would look
like for pre planning what it
would look like for them to use
a I exploration
in in ways that you're informing
them how to use this tool.
In a lot of ways they're
informing you about how they're
utilizing it
I don't see necessarily as
imbedding artificial
intelligence and how we work
with it in the classroom as
necessarily something added
certainly it is something new
but we do that all the time as
teachers is and at the one thing
I will say is that we're
surprised also as teachers like
how much time there is in a
school year sometimes we feel
that there's not enough but then
we have to fulfill a day and how
do I fill my hour forty five
minutes with my students and
part of it might be integrating
best practices for a usage into
whatever i'm teaching them
economics government concepts
are for last fee whatever it is
one but really embedding that
and I think that's why a lot of
us become teachers is because we
can have that creative
flexibility to work with
something that's new and
relevant and engaging for
students because they can very
much
see the relevance in it and we
can make that case for them
by I certainly appreciate you
are thank you all for your time
on that you've put in to the
work group I know it's a bit of
a commitment as i'm seeing your
have worked over the past couple
months every other week
seemingly but thank you offer
your commitment something that
obviously we're going to be
continuing to discuss how we can
leverage your expertise in your
services in the future with this
so thank you all very much
already folks arms so we're a
little past time which is good
cause we budgeted an hour and a
half lunch so now we have an
hour and will come back at one
thirty I believe lynch has been
provided out in the whole way as
their rate.
Oh cool there's also a room
you've come here go there but
we'll be back here at one
thirty.
