They're
Well if the Senate lounge group
would uh
reassembled now.
We'll, we're, we're ready to
resume the afternoons calendar.
No, but there would be a nurse.
So we have this afternoon we
have a report from the
Children's Code Reform Task
Force.
And uh Tony Ortiz, the
Children's Code Reform Task
Force staff person is here. Good
to see you, Tony. Uh, Kristen
Conley, the director of the Corn
Wolf.
Could we please let the the
presenters come to the table.
Senator Hickey, can we please
let them and please pick up your
trash, whoever left trash.
make sure.
Yeah.
Why some people are entitled.
The the wait staff will pick up
our dishes.
Now this is a long one. So then,
and then um uh Leslie Jones.
I thought it was a, sorry, thank
you. The Office of Family
Advocacy and Representation.
Um, and she is the chair of
improving responses to poverty
and substance misuse
subcommittee of the Children's
Children's code reform task
force. So we, we, we have a, a
progress report here and we'll
turn it over to you. Who's gonna
go first?
Uh,
Ms. Carley, good. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, and
And we also prepared a 10 page
prey as it were, but I don't
know that I'm seeing copies of
those, but the reports is really
what this is based on.
Um,
your mouth.
Thank you.
And only 11 mic at a time on or
we get feedback and Leo looks at
me.
Thank you for the hot tip.
All right, uh, as was mentioned,
I'm Kristen Connelly. I'm, uh,
the director of the Corn Wolf
Center for Child and Family
Justice at the law school and I
represented parents or children
in CYFD cases with kids in
foster care for more than 2
decades. Um, and as you heard,
we have Tony Ortiz, who is with
us, uh, on a staff and Leslie
Jones, who also has a
A couple of decades of
experience representing children
and parents in the field as
well.
So, um
And I don't know if you all
received the 10 page document
that we sent in. I don't know.
Oh.
We, we did not
we have the regular report, but
OK, well, I, I'm sorry, we'll
just move forward.
OK, OK. OK, it is. All right,
thank you. That's useful. So I'm
informed that this is posted
online, so it is available
electronically to you, and I'm
very sorry that I don't have
these, but they're very brief
slides anyway, um, so, um, we'll
start with the history of the
task force just very briefly.
Tony will guide us through that.
Thanks, Kristen.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
Um, big thank you to Senator
Lopez.
Who is the sponsor of the
funding for this task force, as
you, um, um,
We'll be able to see if you go
online and look at the little 10
pager um we received
appropriations in 2022 and 2023
to get this task force together
and look at recommended changes
to the Children's code. Um, I'm
really pleased to tell you I've
worked.
For about 35 years with
commissions, task forces,
councils serving on them,
staffing them. This is one of
the most hardworking groups I've
ever been around and.
Then let me amplify those
remarks by saying these are
folks that are already busy.
They're on the ground working
with the Office of Family
Representation and advocacy, uh,
working in the courts, um.
As Kristen does, working at the
law school and being a subject
matter expert on these, on these
issues.
Um,
We had 2 bursts of activity in
2023, we had 5 months under the
leadership of the courts, then
we took a brief hiatus, and we
came back and now we have a wise
leader in Ms. Conley at um at
the Corinne Wolf Center. And
she's done a really good job at
keeping us on track.
And I want to close this portion
by saying we took it very
seriously that our our work be
very open and transparent.
And so we crafted a resolution
at the beginning of our effort
to ensure that our meetings were
open to the public. All
documents were posted online.
You can see our membership, you
can see our meeting notes, you
can see the legislation that
we've, we've crafted. That was
very important to us to make
sure there was a very
transparent undertaking.
Um, finally,
We have some future work between
now and January when you're all
gonna, or most of you are gonna
gather up for um for the 2025
legislative session. Um, again,
thanks to Senator Lopez. She's
helped to secure a small grant
from the Annie E. Casey
Foundation.
And some of the recommendations
that you see in our report,
we're going to tackle those over
the next 4 months to see if we
can bring you some other ideas
to uh to consider as part of
this really important
conversation.
Thank you, Tony. We have
several, uh, committees and
subcommittees that were
operating and we'll turn to
Leslie Jones now to talk about
uh some of the most important
work we think we did, which was
to talk about disentangling
child and family welfare from
poverty.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Um, it was, um, actually a
project that, that, um, we had
such a, um, we had a wide range
of stakeholders, um,
and I say this is uh uh that is
important to the input that we
had. So we had people from, we
had members of CASA, we had uh
attorneys and staff from CYFD.
We had attorneys who represented
children. We had attorneys who
represented respondents, uh,
adoptive parents, um, and we
also
Also had people with lived
expertise, um, as part of our
group and so their input was
incredibly valuable, and the
idea of disentangling poverty,
um, from abuse from what is
considered neglect, um, under
our law. I a very high
percentage of our cases are
neglect cases, not abuse, a very
small percentage of the children
who come into care, come in for
actual uh types of abuse. It's
mostly neglect and much of that
is connected to poverty. So
we're really looking at
The statutory language changing
definitions and adding
definitions to remove poverty
alone as a reason for removal.
So basically what we're looking
at is requiring the department
to make efforts upon removal to
really determine, is it just
poverty that is the reason why
the the children's needs are not
being met and what can be done
upon removal or prior to
removal, um, to assist the
family to connect with whatever
services and other supports may
be of.
available to them so that they
can provide for their children's
needs. And then after removal,
having that be part of the
reassessment at every stage to
to look at and be present to the
court.
What efforts are being made to
assist the family what's being
offered to the family so that
they can reunify and the
children's needs can be safely
met at home with the family, um,
when the, when the issue is
removal and to assure that, that
the, it's that poverty isn't the
only thing that's preventing
reunification. In other words,
that the family has done what
they can to address the reasons
for being in care, but that
poverty isn't keeping the
children from being reunified.
Um, that also
Really critical piece is the
department not being able to use
the children's assets to pay for
foster care or for CYFD. So for
example, when a child comes in,
um, that is receiving SSI Social
Security benefits, either
survivors benefits or disability
benefits, that those funds don't
get removed from the child and
used to pay for foster care. the
CYFD and the state have, they
have the
um, money of from the federal
government to pay for that, uh,
those expenses. And so there's
that provision as well, so that
to to also reduce the impact of
having been in care, um, we
don't want them to lose that
those funds that are available
to provide for them. It just
because they've been in care.
One of the
One of the other pieces that we
looked at um is the challenge
that New Mexico has had in
drawing down funds from the
federal government and we want
to make sure that as many funds
as are available to us are fully
utilized and to that one of the
pieces that we picked up was
making sure that we modify or
recommend modifications to the
time limitations to get to
adjudication and moving a case
through the legal system,
Leslie.
Thank you. Again, I do want to
point out that that there was
department um input into this um
into these proposed changes, um,
about making sure that we're
moving the families through the
system, um, as quickly as can be
safely done. Um, so nobody wants
dismissals where the children
are at risk, but there was a
strong feeling that there are
too many children spending too
much time, even with now we have
the um.
As for American safe Families
and Adoption Act. We have those
timelines, but because of some
quirks about how our statutes
were set up for review, um, and
the ability to, for example,
begin an adjudicatory hearing,
so an adjudicatory hearing,
which is the hearing at which
the state has to prove the
allegations of, of neglect or
abuse that those would start and
then they could continue for a
year. Um, meanwhile, the
children are in custody, but
There's not a court-ordered case
plan that's requiring
participation on the part of the
respondents to address the
reasons for custody. So wanting
to make sure that we're moving
those cases along, um.
And so, uh, some changes to the
statutes that adjudications not
just be commenced within the
time period, but completed
within 90 days, um, uh, and
that, uh, but still allowing for
things like um continuances that
are caused by circumstances.
What we said is beyond the
control of the parties or the
courts. We all know things
happen. There's weather
emergencies, there's illnesses,
there's, you know, things happen
that we have
No control over, so we need to
make allowance for that, but
just having a full docket for
the court or people having full
caseloads should not mean that
families, um, stay stay in
system involved for many, many
months longer than they need to
be because our system has has
not moved forward as it should,
um, to, to have review. It also
there's um we're
making these changes so that our
timelines.
Correspond more appropriately to
the federal timeline, uh,
guidelines. Um, one is that when
a child has been in custody for
15 out of the previous 22 months
that the court needs to then,
unless there's there's um
compelling reason not to needs
to require that the plan be
changed from reunification to
another permanency plan for the
children, and we had kind of a
disconnect where our initial
permanency hearings are
happening earlier.
And so a lot of times what we're
ending up with this case plans
that got changed and then had to
be changed back again because in
fact, the, the family was making
progress, and so it was kind of
a premature change so things
like that that we're hopeful can
get things moving along and
adding more review hearings
upfront in the case, um, so that
the family is in front of the
court more frequently up front
to to really be looking at the
issues um earlier in the case.
Um, that, that are preventing um
a reunification.
Thanks Leslie. um, I wanna make
sure that you all know the
report that's been handed to you
is something that we distributed
June 30th as directed by the
legislature under our original
funding, um, but we realized
that not everybody has the time
to read a 74 page document, uh,
the index is or this table of
contents is pretty useful there.
There is a handful of
legislation that we're uh
suggesting be considered by this
body and then there are.
Recommendations for things that
we were not able to get to yet,
and then there's a section at
the very end which was public
comment that came up and uh
things that were brought to our
attention that we had not
necessarily thought of, um, so
one of the pieces that we
thought is building on the Binny
Hargrove Gun Safety Act. We
thought it was important to add
uh a definition that modified a
definition of neglected child to
add that if there was negligence
Unsupervised access to firearms
or another deadly weapon that
that would be something that
could be considered in the
removal of a child. We are not
talking about the 13 year old
who's had their Eddie Eagle
training, going out to take out
the predators that are killing
the lambs on their property.
We're talking about the family
where the unsecured weapon is
left out on the table where.
The kid, the kids all know how
to get to the gun in the closet
and it's and it is loaded, um,
and so we thought that it was
important to bring us up to date
to include that language and to
track that Benny Hargrove act,
um, there are wonderful
exceptions listed under the
Benny Hargrove Act that could
certainly be the sort of thing
that was brought forward as CYFD
decides if it is a negligent
Supervised access.
Oh, Tony, how about crossover
you?
Yeah, I, I believe we have 6
separate legislative proposals
that you'll find in your report.
Uh, one of them deals with the
proposed new act, the crossover
Youth Act.
Um, just a little context. A lot
of you may know that the uh New
Mexico Children's Code was
originally enacted in 1993.
So here we are 31 years later,
guess what happens in the course
of 31 years, values change.
Our society evolves.
Um, new insights, new research
becomes available. It's
something that a lot of states
are picking up on.
are finding ways to better
support young people who have
contact with both the child
welfare system and the juvenile
justice system.
And
I'd like to be able to tell you
how many children that is, uh,
we've asked the judiciary that
we've asked CYFD. No one seems
to have a real good handle, but,
uh, we know it's more than a
few, and we know this part which
is really important, um, when
those two systems are both
providing services to a child,
and if they're not communicating
with each other, that child and
their family is not getting the
benefit of everything that they
should, and it's also very cost
To the taxpayers of the state of
New Mexico. So our task force
members thought it would be wise
to take up this issue of how
best to support crossover youth
and in the piece of legislation
we put together, I, I would
characterize it as being a
pretty modest beginning, because
really what we're asking is,
let's find a better way to
identify them. Let's collect
data. Let's encourage
intra-agency collaboration so
that
The juvenile justice division
and the Child Welfare Division
and CYFD are communicating with
one another.
Also, let's encourage
interagency collaboration so
that the public um uh education
department, Health and Human
Services, the Department of
Health, other agencies that
offer programs that could be of
use. So we can start talking to
each other and and hold these
people up and hopefully get them
out of those systems sooner
rather than later. Really
important component of that
piece of legislation, ongoing
training for
judges
Line staff at CYFD Public
defenders, district attorneys.
Um, you don't change a culture
overnight that requires
training, that requires
education, and so we're asking
that that be considered as well.
And then, um.
One section which deals with an
amendment to existing law, which
asks that the juvenile justice
division, the CYFD make
reasonable efforts when a child
is under uh under probation,
that they make reasonable
efforts to help that child
actually successfully complete
probation and clear that system.
So that's the uh that's the
essence of that, that proposal.
Thank you. I do want to be clear
that one of the reasons that
CYFD right now has not been
tracking crossover youth is
because in the juvenile justice
system once you reach a
disposition, which is the
equivalent of a sentence, then
naturally the case is closed.
That's what the problem is, is
that these cases close they are
even though the kid may be on
probation, but there's no way to
track which of those kids are in
foster care, so that was one of
the reasons. It's not.
And a
nefarious thing, it's just a
fluke of how we were tracking
cases.
Um, Leslie.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. So one of the
other recommendations, um, is,
uh a a statute permitting for
the reinstatement of parental
rights. So this is specifically
to address those situations
they're they're rare, but they
happen where the system, for
whatever reason, has created
essentially a legal orphan. I,
I, a youth who has not found
permanency, um, has been
languishing in custody.
There's not a current permanent
situation for them, either there
was one and it's disrupted, um,
and, and it's very sad and
unfortunate, but we do have
those cases where there's been
an adoption and it becomes a
failed adoption, um, or failed
guardianship or where they've
never been able to find
permanency for whatever reason,
and in the meantime, the parent
has adequately addressed the
reasons for the initial custody,
and, and is willing and
A, um, to provide the adequate
care and control for the child.
So there's been a significant
change in circumstances, the the
an assessment that the parent is
able to provide safety for the
for the child.
And the parent wants this and
the child wants this. What I can
tell you is, um, that
anecdotally, um, that the
department has been very
creative with workarounds. We've
had guardianships with, with uh
former parents, um, and other
situ situation play they call it
placement with a fit and willing
relative, um, but because we're
not able to reinstate parental
rights, um, then these youth
emancipate out of the system,
um.
With no legal family, they, they
emancipate out of the system
with their parents' rights
having been terminated, but no
new family, um, that has that
has stepped forward, um, for
them. And we also know that a
lot of these youth returned to
that family, uh, their family of
origin, as soon as they can when
they turn 18. In the meantime,
there's been no opportunity for
intervention for helping that
relationship, um, and this uh
statute also provides for the
department to work a transition
plan between the youth and the
parent, um, to do address things
like the fact that the child was
10 when they came into care and
now they're a teenager who's
acting out and the parent may
need some additional support
around that. So allows the
department to pro to provide for
that. So we're talking about
rare circumstances, but very
real circumstances where, um,
uh, uh, rather than having the
youth emancipate out of the
system as a legal orphan,
they're
to be reunified with their
family.
Thank you, Leslie. Um, one of
the things to add to that is
that um many people do not
understand that when parental
rights are terminated, the child
not only loses their parent,
they lose their cousins, they
lose their tears. They lose
their grandparents. They lose
everyone in the family. It's not
just their own parents because
that's how we're tied to our
extended families and so that's
part of what we're trying to
prevent.
So, um, if you've got the
massive 74 page report, I'm sure
you all have seen worse in your
lives, but I'm sorry to be
adding to that burden, um,
again, as I suggested using the
table of contents can be useful.
I'm going to talk a little bit
now about very briefly about
some of the recommendations for
the task force, uh, Senator
Lopez, you will be glad to know
that today, just before we got
in the car, we got word from
Annie E. Casey Foundation that
they.
have approved the small grant on
their end. I'll be working it
through UNM next, uh, so we're
hoping that that's going to be
moving a pace and in fact, we're
anticipating that that would be
successful and so we will start
meeting with the task force
again either this week or next
week depending on uh which votes
or who is able to vote on the
different areas that are times
that they can meet. So we
divided our recommendations to
move
Forward and the things we would
like to look at next into
elements that were
recommendations for the
executive to include state
agencies that's on page 41 in
the report for the legislature,
that's on page 42 for the
judiciary on page 45 and for
multiple branches of government
collaborating with each other,
uh, that is on page 47, um, we
also went on to page 49 to.
Talk about future activities
that would allow for assessment
and recommendation and changes
to the code. So here I'm going
to just pick out some of the
higher points for the executive
support and create ways to
collaborate with other groups
and develop policies to provide
funds to a family in lieu of
foster care, um, and of course
we're not talking about a family
where all the caretakers are
completely strung out on
something. We're talking about
families that
have fallen behind because there
was a horrible death in the
family or because they're just
uh suffering from intense
poverty in their household, uh,
for the legislature, we are
asking that the legislative body
receive annual training about
child and family welfare. We
know it's a very complex area of
the law that has, I don't know.
40 different state and federal
laws that apply in any single
case, and I'm not talking about
just everything that's under the
children's code. I'm talking
about 40 separate bodies of law
that affect us. So it's very
complicated. Um, we're asking
the legislator to legislature to
consider modifying definitions
and language. I'm not sure that
it is useful for children to
hear that they have been um
abused
or neglected when they know
their families are terribly
impoverished and we're doing the
best job that they can, so we're
thinking about maybe modifying
the language to call it child
and family welfare law. Uh, we
have had input from legislators,
um, that perhaps modification to
Finko's family in need of
court-ordered services might be
a way to fast track some support
to families for the.
Judiciary, primarily through the
Children's Court Rules
Committee. Um, we need to
develop rules that are in
alignment with any law that gets
passed, we would like judges to
consult with each other when
there's a conflict as to time,
we would like to better clarify
uh processes for notice by
publication as well as for
service. So if a parent shows up
at the first hearing but hasn't
been formally served, guess
what, they don't get to say.
Well, I was never served. You
came to the hearing, you're
here, you're served. Um.
We would also like to improve
notice of change of placement
that go to attorneys who
represent the children, um.
We'd also like to add a
definition of dependent child.
So a child whose family has no
fault in them having to become a
ward of the state, such as uh a
parent who is in in-stage cancer
or a parent who's been in a
horrible wreck and is now in a
coma and can no longer parent.
We want those kids to not have
to be adjudicated as abused or
neglected, but perhaps just
dependent. This would also
protect children who are brought
in.
To care under the uh Safe Haven
Act for uh kids that are put
into baby boxes, for example,
uh, whose parents were doing the
best job in untenable
circumstances to provide safety
for them.
Um,
But
And then finally, um, for the
collaborative work between the
different branches of
government. We think it's
important that we have further
study on confidentiality and
protective services cases right
now these are all sequestered
and it's um a misdemeanor to
talk about these cases, uh, with
anyone outside of the legal
process and uh there are some
carefully carved out exceptions,
media if they're not providing
identifying.
Information, but we also know
that abuse happens in secret and
abuse could be systemic abuse as
well. And so we want to make
sure that we're looking at what
needs to happen to keep this.
Operating properly. We'd like to
explore there is no way we're
gonna be getting to all of this
this fall. We know this, so this
is part of what our next meeting
will be about is which one of
these rise to the top.
Um, well, can we, uh, see if the
kinship guardianship Act funding
can be provided to guardians
without a family having to be
involved in the abuse neglect
system. Can that happen, uh, as
a way to prevent foster care,
um, what are changes that may be
need to be made to the safe
haven for infants Act, um.
Here's a wild idea. Can New
Mexico start to look at a
guaranteed minimum income for
the lowest income families, we
called it universal basic
income, but one of our uh uh
members of the public that was
watching the uh uh CCJ
commission hearing a couple of
weeks ago, contacted me and said
it's not universal, uh, and so
the better term we've discovered
is guaranteed minimum income.
Uh, we think having that three
branch of approach with robust
participation by the executive,
the judiciary, and the
legislative is extremely
important and we can't be
successful if we don't have
that, um, how do we use state
and federal funds for concrete
supports for families. How do we
collect and analyze the robust
data that we need to inform this
work, and finally, we would
request that the legislature.
continue to fund SM 5 as well as
the Children's Code Reform Task
Force and support the
collaboration between the groups
and make sure that we are using
individuals who have lived
expertise.
Thank you so much, uh Mr. Chair
and members of the committee and
um if we have questions, uh,
we're certainly willing and
prepared to answer. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you so much. I
think we, Senator Lopez, we'll
start with you because you, you,
you, you, you, uh, in many ways
are the, the parent of this
organization.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
and committee. I first would
like to say thank you to those
who are sitting here in front of
us and also to the other team
members who participated over
the last couple of years. I've
had an opportunity to sit in,
not through all the meetings,
but through quite a few. And Mr.
Chair, as you know, it, it's an
education in itself.
Uh, when we learn more about the
um intricacies, the insides of
what is really happening within
our child welfare system and
When you have time to go through
this, it's just a highlight, but
if you actually go through and
read what's done, what has been
put here in black and white.
There's a lot I think of some
positives that can help to
strengthen the system, and it's
not so much a system for
bureaucracy, but it's more for
the kids, it's more for our
families. Um, we've tried to get
through this legislation um for
several years, Mr. Chair, but
thank goodness for the junior
bill. Sometimes we're able to
get things moving before we
to this other process grow that
we're in now. But um
I've been honored Mister Chair
to serve on the Children's Court
Improvement Commission for a
number of years, and as you
know, legislation has emanated
from that group, we were
commission established by the
Mexico Supreme Court, but we too
deal with a lot of different
issues of what we even have here
within this report. Uh, we also
have Mr. Chair of the Senate
Memorial 5 Task Force that the
Senate did pass this last
session.
And in there, and Representative
Chavez is um the appointee from
the house
of and Rachel um has been, she's
working hard. Thank you, Rachel.
In giving us different
perspectives as we look as to
how a possible reorg of CYFD
could look.
It could maybe still be the
commission, Mr. Chair, that was
proposed, um, but we haven't had
that discussion yet, yet in that
task force. We're still getting
more info. And the reason why I
mentioned all this, Mr. Chair,
is because this task force,
Senate Memorial 5, the
Children's Court Improvement
Commission. There's like an
overlap of so many of these.
Very important issues. Um, and I
think the recommendations, we
may not be able to get through
many of them this session, but I
think this is something that we
can begin to work towards. Um,
and one I know, Mr. Chair, that
we've done a few years back is I
think the legislature, as we
progress forward in educating
ourselves. We need to have
information shared with all of
us. Um, and it's not, we don't,
we don't have CLEs, you know,
all those other things that we
have, but Mr. Chair,
Still something that we should
be engaging in, especially when
our budget affects.
Many different instances,
whether it's in our public
education system within our
healthcare system, what we're
talking about here within our
courts and such about what
affects our children.
Um,
there's so much for us to learn
and it's not just the sound bite
that we hear on the news or
whatever gives somebody
different ratings um throughout
whatever we do in politics
because every change and every
decision we make affects our
children. It has over the years,
and many of you know with my
little one who's not so little
anymore. I personally learned
through the system a lot about
what goes on in CYFD and I have
stories, but I've never really
shared, except I think this
would really help any.
future generations that come.
Um,
And to help families because
sometimes our families um.
And I'll just keep I'll shorten
it because I could keep going
on, Mr. Chair, but I will tell
you that in the Senate Memorial
Five Task Force, we've also
heard testimony from different
organizations and entities
around the country and other
states who have also told about
neglect. They too have talked
about how we need to, you know,
stop criminalizing poverty and
many states have moved forward
with this, but if we begin to
change that, Mr. Chair, we also
have to make sure that whoever's
in charge, whatever department
is actually providing services.
For those families, if it's been
brought to our attention, what
do we do about it, right?
Housing, food, whatever the
issue is, but that's also on,
Mr. Cheer falls on us as a state
too. So there's many more things
that come in on this report. Um,
Again, I want to say thank you.
We're nowhere near done, and I
know Mr. Chair, I'll give it one
plug, is that I know that coming
up this session, there's going
to be a push to change the
delinquency statute in
Children's Code.
We have to be very careful in
any changes that we make just
because it's a.
Um, a ratings issue and I'm all
I can say that because I'm going
to say it. We have to be very
careful because you make changes
in one spot for a certain group
of kids, it has an after
rippling effect for years to
come. And I'm hoping that if we
get some more funding this
coming.
Uh, session that this particular
group can continue to operate
and work and really study the
delinquency statute and see
again what if any changes need
to be made. So that's my plug
and thank you, Mr. Chair for the
opportunity.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Chasey, we'll
start with you and then just go
right around the table.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for all
your work. I'm so impressed.
And, um, I, I just wanted to
endorse a few of their concepts
that they, the juvenile
probation issue when you have a
child in CYFD custody. I
represented an Indian child,
Indian youth.
who is also um tied up with
juvenile justice and uh it was a
really difficult situation, but
her CYMD caseworker wanted them
to revoke her probation and
because the DYFD worker just
didn't know what else to do with
her because she kept running
away.
And the probation officer and
I'm sitting there listening to
this is like, but she hasn't
done anything for us to do, you
know, we don't do that. It's
like imposing a sentence on
someone wanting to deserved. And
um it was just a.
The
it was such a complex and
difficult case, but I think that
that is a very good idea to try
to figure out how to approach
those cases better, cause those
are, those are cases where kids
really could really use some
additional support.
Um, I had, um, another case
where the reinstatement of
parental rights makes sense, and
you know, some of these children
are in custody for so many years
because of
initial, you know, some of it is
circumstantial, some of it is
also um
The needs of the child and then
also the inability of some of
the family members to work up a
court-ordered treatment plan,
but I had a um a child I
represented who became a youth
and then was
Literally getting close to aging
out and
The thing is that when he was
taken into custody, he was
His father wasn't the offending
parent. His father was in
California. He was the custodial
parent, but his mother wasn't
well and he had to take care of
her for a time, and he sent the
sign to be with his mother, and
she was the offending parent.
And so the dad could never get
it into his head that he really
had to do anything except come
get him. Well, and in fact, if
he had come and gotten him
quick.
He could have
But he didn't come quick because
of his mother's needs and so he
ended up, and just as I came
onto the case because these
attorneys, these contract
attorneys come and go.
He was in a termination of
criminal rights situation. And
um
I, I didn't know what to do. I
mean, I really didn't.
As is his attorney and he was,
he had very complex needs and um
in the end,
CYD was looking to try to put
him back with his father because
there wasn't anywhere else and
he'd been in residential
treatment.
In more than one facility.
And he was somewhat of a risk.
To others, so, um, and then also
on the Safe Haven Act, I was
actually a co-sponsor on that
originally with the Republican
whip, um, Pauline Gobles, and
Somehow it never dawned on me
that it would end up over in the
child.
Um, welfare system, and I don't
know what I thought, but I ended
up in my last couple of years in
that doing that court appointed
work representing a mom who in
the hospital said, I'm, I'm
giving this baby up. And so we
had to go through a termination
of paral rights, and it, it, it
just, I never had that in mind
because she was doing what she
knew the child needed.
And now we're going to go have
to prove something by um, you
know, a certain standard of
proof and um and it just seemed
kind of cruel to be doing it, so
anyway, um, I, I really like the
suggestion so far and I thank
you so much for your work.
Hi.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Hickey.
Thank you for all the work
you're doing. I thought health
care was complicated, yeah, um,
just, uh,
a spaghetti of
Trying to straighten stuff out
and I know it's really complex,
um, not an area of my particular
expertise, but certainly the,
the values you're working from
and the goals you're trying to
achieve. So thank you for
getting this done for all of us
and, uh, please carry on. Let us
know what we can do to help.
Thank you.
Thanks, Senator. Representative
Jones.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you all. Thanks for your work.
This is, um, um, gonna be good
reading material here. I'm
sorry, I missed I missed the
very first part of your
presentation. So I see that, uh,
you've got history of the task
force. I'm curious about how was
the task force, um, selected.
And, and how, and just an
overview of that really quick.
How, how long have you been in
existence? How is it selected?
For instance, uh, is there a
nurse on your task force? Is
there, um, a foster parent on
your task force and that sort of
thing. Mr. Chairman and
Representative Jones, uh, the
task force began its work in
early 2023. At that point it was
under the leadership of the
judiciary.
We operated for about 5 months.
And the outreach um.
was to
Folks we thought could
contribute to the effort that
we're trying to uh to to work
on. And so as people that work
in that system, uh, whether it
be, um, um, child advocates,
whether it be members of the
judiciary, folks from CYFD
Office of Family Representation
and advocacy, um, my
recollection is that we had a
couple of young people who had
lived experience, come in and
share their experiences with us.
So we tried to cast a very broad
net.
So we could get as many voices
as possible to come in and, um,
and participate. And then one of
the things I'm most proud of is
that um we had very good public
participation. We made sure
there was public comment
available at every meeting and
folks took us up on that and
you'll find that there's a
section towards the end of the
report that includes all the
public comment that the task
force received.
And if I, if I may add to that,
um, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Jones, um, when
we realized that there was a
hole in our subject matter
experts, we specifically reached
out, uh, if someone withdrew
from the task force, we asked
them to recommend a successor.
It was personally important to
me. I, I agreed to take on the
chair after the task force had
been on a hiatus for several
months and so I personally am
not fully
Where of how exactly it was
formed to begin with, but I know
that there was a notice sent out
and people submitted letters of
interest. Uh, unfortunately we
did not get a whole lot of
letters of interest from outside
of the center of the state. So
that was one of the things that
was personally very important to
me to make sure that I was
reaching out to people from the
corners of the state. I wanted
to, when I recognized that we
didn't have anybody from the
Four Corners region. I made sure
we had a a.
Public defender on juvenile
justice issues, uh, to come in,
uh, out of Farmington. I asked,
uh, we asked for a
recommendation out of the
southern part of the state, uh,
for the juvenile justice side of
CYFD and got a recommendation
for someone to serve that way. I
don't have a nurse yet. I had
not thought of a nurse, um, I,
we have certainly thought about
having a foster parent, no
foster parent had previously
asked to serve on this.
But I think that's one of the
things that we see as important
to adding to this. Um, we also,
uh, recognize that there may be
some additional juvenile justice
work that's important, so we
want to make sure I've I've been
trying to find somebody from law
enforcement for as long as I've
been working on the task force,
and we've just not found anybody
that said that they had the
ability to stand up and do this
work. It's very intensive. We
meet, uh, an hour and a half
once a month, but our
subcommittees.
And I personally attended almost
every subcommittee hearing, uh,
meeting, but our subcommittees
meet at least twice a month for
an hour and a half, and that's
not including all the drafting
work that happened outside of
the subcommittees. So it's a
very stiff ask. It's about 10
hours a month, uh, for an
individuals who already have
full-time jobs where they're
working 50 and 60 hours a week
if my experience is anything to
hold
Up there. So thank you for that
additional inquiry. Yes, and I
do thank you for for the amount
of work you've had to put in
that to this. I, I appreciate
that, but I would really see the
benefit of having, um, a little
more diversity, maybe, well
nursing a little and uh by the
way, I mean, I, I, I, I guess
you could argue whether or not
this should be political, but
I'd love to see a Republican on,
on your task force, and I don't
know if there is one, but it
would be great to know.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Uh, Representative Jones, I have
no idea what anyone's political
parties are. I truly would never
asked. I mean, I, and I, I
understand, but it would be nice
to know. I think that's
important because we do have a,
a difference of opinion when it
comes to this, and it seems to
fall along conservative, uh,
lines at times,
Republican Democrat lines. I
know that, I know this for a
fact. So, um, that would be, um,
good to know as well.
Anyway, I just wanted to make
sure that the task force was,
was looking at, uh, from
different perspectives, I think
that's important no matter what
we do. It truly is. I've
discovered that more and more in
the last two years of serving.
And, and I would like to point
out that the report talks about
who are the members of the task
force in their roles. Uh, we did
try to draw from all sorts of
people who have input and
experience, but, but thank you.
And just a reminder, I actually
have the mic that can turn off
your mics. So if you don't res I
mean I'll give you ending the
question, but don't start
another one and I'd appreciate
if the panel, and I know there's
so much here, but there's no way
we're going to get through all
of it ever. Um, so I have to be
the tough one to stay on task. I
haven't turned off any mics yet,
but I'm telling you I can't.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. I
wish that we could go back and I
could take advantage of.
The many minutes that I didn't
say anything because most of the
time I don't. I think I need an
assistant to keep track of who's
used what minutes.
Some people would use up their
entire day, the first go round.
Representative Harlan Vincent
here next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, uh,
if you wouldn't mind turning
over to page 43 on
recommendation 7.
And while you're turning to
that.
I know that this committee I've,
I've, well, I've been on it for
2 years now, and I know there's
been a lot of people that's been
on it for a lot longer than I
have. And after hearing, you
know what, uh, Mr. Cagle I just
had to say this morning.
It's disheartening that we're in
such a mess.
And that we've been in such a
mess for so long.
And you know, to Penny and
Jeremy and Tim and Danny and
Glenn and Gayle and the people
that, those people that lost
their lives while we're trying
to get our business in order,
um.
That's, that's a real problem,
but.
I was wanting to know on
recommendation 7 under the
notes.
Could you explain that to me?
So it it talked about a stigma
that parents are carrying and
abuse and neglect is a very,
those are very powerful words
abuse.
And neglect. And if you get
those on your record.
You should be held accountable
for abuse and neglect and it
sounds like in that right in
that recommendation that you
wanna maybe take abuse and
neglect away from that.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator, I'm, I'm sorry, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Vincent, thank you very much.
Um, I will briefly address this
and I know Ms. Jones would like
to address this as well. So
frankly, the stigma is about
what the kids are carrying.
It's horrible. These are kids
that are in foster care. They go
to school. They're oh, you know,
the, the kids get wind of
things. We're talking about what
are the labels these kids are
carrying into the future and
what happens when a family has
hit the lowest point. I
personally represented a woman.
Who lost her mind and her
ability to care for her child
when her own father raped her.
Yes, she neglected her child
when she literally lost her
mind. She also worked harder
than any woman I have ever
represented and successfully got
her child back. I
am brokenhearted that she has to
carry forward into the future
that she was adjudicated to have
abused and neglected her child
when what happened was something
untenable that we, I mean, the
woman.
Required reconstructive surgery,
it was so bad. And so why are we
punishing her with an additional
label? It's like putting a
scarlet letter on someone for
something that they may not have
had any control over. Now, there
are certainly people that, uh,
are in these cases that fully
deserve to be there and fully
deserve every label we throw at
them, but primarily these are
people hitting the most
horrifying circumstances in
their lives.
Lives. No one wants to abuse in
the, well, OK.
I've represented two people in
20 years who were evil.
But the rest are just beaten
down, grown up abused and
neglected kids themselves, and
I, I personally think it's
important to give them a path
that's cleaner, as, as possible.
How far are you
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Did you at Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Representative Vincent, I, I
did just want to say that um
again, I've been doing this for
close to 30 years now. I've
represented a lot of children.
I've represented a lot of
parents, um, I guess what I
would say is really looking at
what is the purpose of the, of
the abuse, neglect, and what we
would say the child welfare
system. We have a criminal
system. The criminal system is
about is is is about.
Consequences, punishment for
crimes, right, that are
committed. So if, if somebody
commits child abuse to that
degree, and even neglect, right,
to that degree, they face the
criminal charges and face the
criminal consequences, but this
system is really about.
Trying to fix families, right?
And so that's why I think part
of the concern about the stigma
is that if what we're really
trying to do here is address the
welfare of children, right?
That, that, that, that's what
this system is for, and we have
the criminal justice system for
punishment. This part is
To address their needs and the
needs of the families as best we
can preserve families when we
can, and then when we can't find
alternatives that keep the
children safe and well. And I
will tell you that after
representing lots of parents and
children that, um, any parent
will tell you that the, any of
the parents that I've
represented that the thought of
losing their child permanently
was worse than any jail
sentence.
Um, so I, there, there is, there
are consequences if they don't
follow through, but the
terminology that we use, um, if,
if what we're about is about
supporting and helping families
that, that better to use.
That language in this system and
keep the punishment for the
criminal justice system. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and for your, I
appreciate your scenario based
explanation on that and I
appreciate your explanation on
that. So I, I understand there's
a balance there, but.
If abuse and neglect is there,
then punishment if abuse and
neglect on your scenario, I can
appreciate that as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you panelists for the
information you presented. I
didn't hear what you were saying
about Benny Hargrove, but we'll
have to talk about that later.
But, um, there are 3 things that
I wanted to bring up. Number one
is under your recommendation
number 24, where you talk about
uh giving funds to, uh, to
families, and when children have
gone, Well, what I want to bring
out to you is that there are so
many kids who are, who are aging
out of the system and our
orphans. And so one of the
things that happened
And the Affordable Care Act,
they get to remain on um on
healthcare until they're 26,
regardless of how much money
they make. So what I would ask
you to think about how do you
give those kids rent and
clothing and and universal
support when they do stay in the
system and they need and they uh
age out and there is not a
family connection, so that's
one. The second thing that I
would ask you to think about is
under universal basic
healthcare, I mean universal
basic income. Right now
Now in the international
district, exactly what you
described in your, um, I think
it's 22, is what is happening in
terms of getting families
universal basic income that
program is a pilot program. It
would be nice to support it
because I think it would have to
help with your recommendation.
And the third thing is with
respect to loans that are being
made to children when they are
uh aging out or have aged out,
we have such a complicated
process right now.
It needs to be looked at that
even when people are willing to
give loans, nonprofits with no
interest to pay it back. They
have a hard time doing so
because of the way we have these
statutes written. So I would
just say to you to put that on
your list to add to the things
that you're looking at. So with
respect to that, that's it, Mr.
Chair. I am under 3 minutes and
I have uh mentioned the three
things that I would like for
them to consider.
Thank you, uh, uh, Mr.
Chairperson, Representative
Hern, just really quickly want
to talk about the fostering
connections program, which, um,
is a program that is available
to youth who, uh, age out of the
system, um, and it, there are
all kinds of benefits. It's
actually a wonderful, wonderful
program has provided a lot of
support to youth, um, but it is
exactly to provide that kind of
support, the transition to
adulthood where they um can
qualify for, um,
Startup funds, things like for,
you know, down payment on an
apartment, furniture, a
computer, um,
they have access to help for
tuition expenses, um, even, um,
I think even for room and board,
um, but they can, so there,
there are a lot of, of, um, uh,
Tools that fostering connections
has, including educational
tools. So they do things like
they, they um have a classes in
budgeting, money management, how
to sign a lease for a, a house,
you know, for an apartment,
those kinds of things, um, bank
accounts, budgeting, grocery
shopping, all of that kind of
stuff, the kinds of things that,
you know, families provide for,
for young people as they
transition to adulthood. But
this is for those youth who.
and it's through age 21 or to
age to age 21.
Not, not for this part of the
program, no, not for fostering
connections.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Pinto, welcome. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee, and thank you for
your report and, um, I think
this is probably one of, since
I've been in office.
Probably one of the few reports
that was probably this thick.
But I appreciate it, but I will
pass your information on and
we'll probably get back but, um,
the advice back from, from the
people and on my end, but thank
you very much for the work you
do. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Rodriguez, any questions,
Mr. Chairman. I just want to
thank the panel to everyone for
all your hard work and this, you
know, for a long time, uh, we've
known that we need to make some
changes to the Children's code
and, uh, we knew it was going to
be an arduous task, but I'm
happy that you're delving into
this and thanks to Sandra Lopez
and to each one of you for all
your work. Thank you.
Uh, Representative.
Patricia Royal Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you very much. This is an
extensive report and one that's
very helpful. I want to, um,
bring up just a couple of things
and thank Representative Herndon
for covering, um, what I was
going to do on 24. So back to
22.
Closer.
Oh, sorry. OK, hold on.
OK.
Let's see if that's better. OK.
So, um, recommendation number 22
and particularly um interested
in the comment made about, uh,
we need to stop criminalizing
poverty. We know that we're in a
state that's faced with extreme
poverty. So, um, one of the ways
to do that is with guaranteed
basic income, raising the
minimum wage to living wages,
cost of living, no, no, uh, way,
uh, exemptions and things that
Our structural systemic that
remove um impediments to being
able to receive opportunities
and access to opportunities
versus being criminalized
because you live in poverty. So
that's very important to me. I,
I sponsored GBI and I've
sponsored the, the living wage
bills and I intend to continue
doing it until we pass them. So,
um, but my 11 of the comments
that I wanted to make is that we
oftentimes forget when we're
trying
Mr. Chair, to recruit members to
be part of our task forces and
otherwise, um, is we forget the
retiree community. We have a
wealth and valuable retirees,
retired social workers.
Retired social workers know the
system inside and out. They also
know how to address poverty.
They also know how to recommend,
uh, the correlations between
poverty and the problems that
we're facing uh within our
institutions and so they would
be very valuable to recruit and
there are, there is a social
work, um, various social work
organizations that you can tap
into that would provide you, uh,
uh, a way to,
Recruit from there. There are
also a lot of retirees and a lot
of other sectors, but this one
is particularly so and it's not
just, um, social workers as
caseworkers. That's what I've
been sort of, I'm, I'm a
caseworker, social worker, but
it takes that intense
understanding of the
correlations that, that, well, I
think, be an asset to the task
force. And finally, I just
wanted to bring up, um, just in
reference to something that
Representative Jen, Jennifer
Jones mentioned about
The partisanship. It's not so
much about the partisanship.
It's about, um, when you have
different mindsets, you have
different approaches. And when
you have different lived
experiences. You have different
ways in which to be able to
express and and and address
issues and so you know, I, I
think that when we start from
points of commonality, uh,
points of common interest, and
in this case, another point that
was made that was very important
is that if we look at it.
In the standpoint of the welfare
of the children.
That's a point of commonality.
There's no way we can dispute
that. There's no way we can have
political divides. There's no
way we can in any way have
arguments over this. So, um,
that, those are the, the points
that I really wanted to bring up
that I think were important
because ultimately we want to
preserve families as what was
said before. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Tollman.
Oh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair and
I don't have any questions for
allocate my time to someone
who's already spoken and wants
to speak again.
Anybody wanna?
So I do wanna, uh, thank the
panel for their time and effort,
dedication to improving the
welfare of children. Thank you
for all your work. Thank you for
being here.
Representative Thompson, we're
up to you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you so much for your
presentation and your work. I
love the idea of having
legislators learn about, but I
love the idea about having us
learn about everything. I mean,
you, you have to know about
prison rape, and you have to
know about taxes and you have
to, and so, you know, I'm just
throwing it out there that we
should probably have the whole
time that we're not in session,
we should probably be in school
learning about all the things
that we're supposed to know. I
know that's not real.
But there's so, I mean, like the
DE waiver, we need to know about
the DD waiver. We need to know
about PBMs, all these things,
uh, so good luck on that. If you
get it, I'll be following your
lead.
So again, thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Yes,
Senator Lopez.
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted, I
was going back on history, um,
back in, uh, and I did this a
couple of years, so you can go
back and look it up, um, but in
2022 I did sponsor Senate
Memorial 20 Senator Serio Lopez,
who's over at the water
committee right now. She did
co-sponsor it with me. If you
will look at the, the extensive
list of recommendations that
were on the original task force
Memorial. And as for anybody who
wishes to look at suggested
membership, it was expansive,
um, but I couldn't get the
memorial passed.
In the legislature. So I just
want you to know that there was
thought talking to many
different stakeholders, and the
list is extensive, um, as to who
could participate. And it did
also ask leadership from both
chambers, both sides of the
aisle to, um, appoint
legislative members, but again,
I just want to point out, um,
We couldn't pass it.
And we did it the year before
and stuff, so it just takes a
while for our bodies to.
You know, get in line. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and I had a
I had a couple of representative
case, did you?
No, no, go ahead.
I'll go left.
All right, thank you. He, he is
the final word. You are correct.
Um, thank you so much. I
apologize. I'm I'm going back
and forth between the water and,
and this committee. Um, on
recommendation 2, and I forgive,
have you, we already addressed
that in the many questions.
OK, so, um, it, it talks about
the kinship guardianship.
Um,
So let me make sure I
understand. You, you're stating
that, um,
you're concerned because of
kinship is fostering, they'll
have to go through the licensing
program and their scrutiny and
the licensing program. So you're
recommending they just stay the
same federal subsidies for
whether or not they're adoption
or guardianship and and the
kinship.
I think Chairman Chairman,
uh, and, uh, and Representative
Kates, um, so I think the
concern is that that for
families, it's a, a very
intrusive process and having the
department involved in the
family's life, um,
it can be uh just that very
intrusive. The issue is not
being licensed though.
Obviously, there would have the
federal law.
Requires that they would have to
be licensed, but they could be
licensed through private
agencies as well. There are
plenty of private, like, for
example, adoption agencies that
do home studies. And so they
would have that level of, um,
whatever you would want to call
it, review and scrutiny, but,
um, I think, is that because
we're talking about not having
it under the under the under
the.
Having CYFD be the gatekeeper
for the funding for subsidized
kinship guardianships.
OK, yeah, if, if I may, and, and
I, you know, Leslie, all the,
the strength of our committee is
that all of us have a different
view of things. I have the
fortunate role of being sort of
an.
An overarching view of the
entire system and the entire
state because of the work I do
through the Corinne Wolf Center.
So, um, the idea behind this is
that good intact families that
are wealthy either in social
connections or in cash.
Frequently have other resources
that they can draw on when
someone falls down. So, my
brother-in-law, and I can say
that because I don't have any
brothers-in-laws. My
brother-in-law, uh, has become
an alcoholic and is no longer
able to take care of my, of his
kids. My husband and I could
step up and say, hey, we'll take
the kids while you get your life
straightened out and it never
has to come to CYFD.
Not at all.
Because we're coming in, we're
not, these are not abused and
neglected kids. We're preventing
it within our family, within our
family culture because we know
what's best for our family. This
is what we're talking about. And
yes, if, if you, the only way to
get kinship guardianship funds
is if a case is already involved
in CYFD, then we've already lost
the advantage of our own family.
Culture our own family
knowledge, our own family
supports. So that's what we're
asking for is to consider
figuring out a way that kinship
guardianship, supportive funds
can go to grandparents who are
raising grandkids to aunts and
uncles who step in when they see
a brother or sister is failing.
That's what we're talking about.
I
Senator Lopez, you wanted to
follow up on that, Mr. Chair,
thank you for indulging me on
that point, Representative
Cates, we have tried over a few
years, um, I, and, and a few
others in our bodies, um, to try
and find a stream of funding for
grandparents or kin raising
grandchildren. And actually
working with Secretary Groginski
and a few others we are having
and the Lanel Foundation and
others, there has been a way and
is a way where they provide
stipends, small stipends.
School starts or just before the
holiday.
I introduced a bill. You can go
back and look in 2016-ish or
something that was based on the
Washington DC model of where
they actually provide funds,
funding for kin, grandparents,
and other family members who are
caregivers to children.
We are currently working on a
process that hopefully we can
come forward for session, uh, to
have a discussion and I know
there's been concerns raised
because you can't because of our
anti-donation clause, but I have
said this before. I sponsored in
2006 the New Mexico Education
Works program, which is a model
that mirrored the TANF program.
We are currently a line item
currently in the healthcare
Authority, um, budget, we still
have a line item in there that
provides our general fund
dollars that go to mostly women
who are wanting to finish their
education system, a certificate
degree, and they don't have to
get into the federal program. So
we're already doing this. We
already have a system that's set
up to do this. So if we can find
a way to work this and make it
happen again, I believe we can
be successful in using some of
these at least to start in a
small project and figure out
what tweaks we can make so it
actually
This is what's here and kind of
your question, um, I think we
can do it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and I had a
just a couple of things to
raise. I noticed, um, your
recommendation to not use the
child's own assets.
To pay for CYFD or foster care
expenses to pursue such assets
for eligible youth and children
and to set up stable accounts
for them. I think the
department's doing that, you
would just put it into law so
that it couldn't change with the
whims of administration. Is that
the point of that? or is there
some other change involved?
Uh, thank you, uh, Chair, and
Senator or TCP now, um, yes,
that, that, yes, CYFD is already
moving that direction. They
started a couple of years ago,
not using kids' money, uh, it
used to be that if a child had
Social Security SSI benefits or
had survivor benefits that that
money was taken up by the state
requiring kids who had suffered
loss in their lives or who were
disabled to pay for their own
foster.
Care whereas kids who didn't
have that benefit, were not
having to pay for their own
foster care. And we saw that as
hugely unfair, um, but yes, we
think and, and I will tell you
I'm not an expert on A or New
Mexico stable accounts, uh,
that's why we have a broad base
in our task force, uh, that yes,
it would be useful to have law
or at least some other policy
rules.
Procedure for CYFD, something
that is more formalized to make
sure that that's moving forward.
Good. Um, then I had a question
in the public comments, you, you
included public comment here,
which I thought was very
interesting, but there were a
whole bunch. It looks like a, a,
uh, orchestrated effort at
dealing with the issue of kids
over 14 who are permitted to
refuse medical treatment and
their parents can't overrule
them. And did you all consider
that? I thought the rationale
given was, was pretty, pretty
significant. Is that something
you considered and rejected or
still thinking about it? Well,
um, changing that I should say,
changing that, that's current
law and these people were urging
us to change that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and Senator
Ortizipino. So, um,
Frankly, when we picked up when
I picked up the, the task force,
we already had so much work in
place that we couldn't even
begin to get to that, but here's
the other piece is that, um,
There's already a mechanism in
place that if a child is
refusing care and the family
knows the child needs care that
they can use a process to have
that child's judgment overruled.
It is possible to file a case
just like any involuntary
commitment proceeding, it
already exists and so we're
frankly, right now a little
confused why people have brought
this to us because we think it's
already there.
And we did not understand why
people were saying it wasn't
there. Now, if they're talking
about being able to, uh,
OK, I'm gonna use strong
language here, bulldoze a kid's
judgment on whether or not they
need services, um,
we have seen horrendous abuses
through the years of kids in
foster care being drugged into
zombie-like states or being
forced into particular kinds of
therapies or heaven forbid if
something happened where, uh,
some family wanted to force some
other kind of therapy on a
child.
Uh,
and we want to make, you know,
we, I'll just stop because all
I'm doing is sputtering, and we
already think the mechanism
exists there just stop and the
mechanism is for the family to
go to court and filed for
overruling the child's judgment.
That's correct. Just like you
have an involuntary commitment
for an adult. You can, you can
also, thank you, Leslie reminds
me that there are treatment
guardians that can also be put
in place
Where someone has the ability to
control what sort of treatment
is received. So, so, yes, there
were several requests about that
and we didn't have the bandwidth
to deal with it at that point,
but we think it exists. Another
issue that that
In the last couple of years has
come up repeatedly as people
talk about changes needed in the
children's code that if you
dealt with, I missed it. The
whole issue of confidentiality
and people's concern that the
department uses that.
Statutory prohibition against
releasing information to protect
itself, not the kids. Is there
some, did you consider that? Is
there some wording change that
would preserve the child's
Protection from unnecessary
public information about their
situation while at the same time
not permitting the department to
just kind of say, well, we can't
talk about that. It's, it's
confidential, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, we did
talk about that, but it was in
that last little blast, uh,
before we started the question
and answer period uh where we
agree that, uh, abuse and
neglect happen in secret.
Regardless of the actor.
And yes, we do think it is
important to be looking at
confidentiality and adjusting
that and making sure that, uh,
the wrong people are not
protected, shall we say.
Good, so that's something you,
you might be picking up and
working on
that that is something we will
be carrying forward to, to
consider, yes. And then the last
thing that I wanted to ask about
was, um,
Is your definition of neglected
child consistent with the
The Kara law that we have in
place now, is there, is there
any discrepancy between how the
children exposed to
Substance in utero, you know, we
say that can't be used in and of
itself as a basis for removing a
child. Is your definition
consistent with that or, or is
there some possible discrepancy
in the two
so.
Mr. Chair, we did not take that
up specifically, and I am not an
expert on the Kara law. I will
tell you that. So I don't know
that I can clearly answer that.
However, we already have a
pretty robust definition of
neglect in the children's code,
um, I do.
What, what I, OK, so this is
from an uninformed position, I
will say this first, but my
impression with the Kara law is
a parent just.
Being addicted to a substance or
a child just and please note I'm
using quotation marks because I
realize it can be a huge deal
that affects a child's
development, etc. and a
relationship between a parent
and a child alone is not enough
for removal of a child. There
has to be a specific nexus of
connection between the substance
use and something that
unfortunate that has happened in
the child.
Life. And does that address your
questions? Yeah, I think so. Um,
I, I just read through your
neglect definition and I
wondered, I wonder if that is
consistent with the way the Kara
law defines it, but if, if
you're taking a look at it,
that's great.
Anybody else, any last lingering
concerns? Oh, you didn't get a
chance. Did you want to ask
something,
Representative? Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I'm sorry that I
had to step out, uh, for what I
thought was gonna be a quick
phone call and it wasn't, um, I,
I guess the only thing, I mean,
there's a lot of information
here. Thank you so much. um, I'm
gonna definitely take it and
read it, but one of the things
that that kind of sparked my
interest was
Your message, your, your, um,
mention of guaranteed income.
And I think that one of the
pieces that we, I mean, we sort
of, you know, we talk about
poverty, we know New Mexico is
like down there with the last
and you know, we always, you
know, avoid the question of how
do we raise people's income so
that.
We're lifting them out of
poverty. One way is wages.
That's always been a a big
struggle, um, but I really like
the idea of uh the guaranteed
income because I think that
that's shown in other states
across the country or in other
places where it's been tried to
be successful. Um, and I would
really like for us to
Take a serious look at that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
just a final thought if there's
um such a thing as a North Star.
The work that we've done here.
It's that with
Notable exceptions when there is
real risk of abuse or neglect.
That um the research is very
clear that children do better
when they stay with their
families. It just really is not
in dispute anymore. We're, we're
mammals.
Hm
Anything else for you?
Uh
No, I don't want to repeat stuff
that's probably already been
said. Thank you Mr. Chair, may I
address her your 0.1 more time,
Representative Chavez, so the,
the other pieces that, um, on my
website, Chilaw.unm.edu um where
this report is found, there is
also a very detailed report
written by Kathleen Sabo, who is
our task force facilitator, and
I personally was
startled to find some of the
national research that she found
that shows as little as $100
incremental raise in income per
per month per family makes a
huge difference in how
frequently a family is brought
to the attention of child
protective services in states
across the nation. It was quite
shocking that something is a
100 bucks a month reduces and
I'm making this number up, but
it was something like 16% fewer
referrals and, and so the next
100 did the same thing. So then
you've got 30% fewer referrals
and ideally referrals are based
on actual observed things that
have gone wrong, not just some
mean neighbor.
Thank you.
And, and it's always struck me
as
I don't know if ironic or
hypocritical is the word, but uh
we remove a child from a family
where giving them a couple $100
a month might have made a
difference, made it possible for
the child to stay with them, and
then we'll pay 400 to $500 to
the foster family.
strange economics involved.
OK, well, thank you for the
incredible work you've put
together, just reading through
this is a very impressive, um.
Staff also noted how nice it is
to have actual draft bills
presented to us,
so you know we don't have to do
the heavy lift to converting
them to legislation. Appreciate
it very much. Thank you so much
for your presentation. Thank you
so much. This is some of the
most important work I feel like
I've ever done in my life. Thank
you. Thank you.
OK, members will go now to the
Um
First of our two presentations
from the LFC committee staff.
The first one is the early
childhood education and Care
Department and Medicaid home
visiting.
So this will be Kelly Klundt.
Making this presentation.
Sorry
Thank you.
I don't know
Thank you.
Oh, and Secretary Grugowski is
here too. Thank you for coming.
Oh really? OK, thank you so
much, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I am Kelly Klundt.
I'm a principal fiscal analyst
with the Legislative Finance
Committee with me as Secretary
Elizabeth Gruginski of the Early
Childhood Care and Education
Department.
And I will be talking off of
this brief, which is in front of
you. It's got a blue bar at the
top and you can see stacking bar
charts with it.
Now, this is a leggistat brief.
This is different than just a
typical LFC brief. This has got
a, um, repetitive nature to it.
It's a type of program we've
piloted at the LFC for about 3
years now.
And we look at a very specific
topic that we think has a lot of
outcome and financial support in
the state and then we put
together recommendations that
are very actionable, and we come
back year over year and look
what of those actions have been
acted upon what are in progress,
and what our future
recommendations. So when you
look at the end of this brief,
the very few last pages, you'll
see that we have some tables.
And those tables have the
previous hearing dates, what the
action steps were, but the
status of the progress of those
action steps are and some
comments, so you can see, for
example, we had a a legis set on
this hearing on August 18th of
2022.
We had a hearing on the same
topic in May 24, 2023, and this
will be the 3rd iteration of
this report, August 21, 2024,
which was before the LFC last
week. So this is a very specific
framework. So if you see a
leggistat brief coming out of
LFC, they're very specific and
they follow the progress of the
recommendations so that you all
can see those progress in these,
um, table forms.
So with that, I just wanted to
kind of give us how to think
about Legistat before we started
this hearing. So this is very
specifically on Medicaid home
visiting, which is a subset of
our home visiting program. So we
have home visiting and some of
it's funded by state general
fund. Some of it's funded by
early care Early Childhood Trust
fund. Some of it is funded by
federal revenues and what we're
hoping is that we can better
leverage Medicaid to use our
state revenues to serve.
Children by bringing in a $3.40
match to every state fund that
we put forward in this program.
And I should have said before I
started this, I really want to
thank, um, some of my LFC
co-workers, Doctor Sarah Dentis
and Dr. Allegra Hernandez, they
do a lot of the data work on
this and so shout out to them.
They're amazing.
So when you look at this
Legistat hearing, we're looking,
you can see early childhood
revenues on that stacking bar
chart, how much we've increased
early childhood since FY 12 to
the current fiscal year, FY 25,
and that's broken out by
program, so you'll notice that
home visiting is that reddish
color in that stacking bar
chart.
And so you can see in fiscal
year 12, we were spending less
than 200 million on early
childhood services and as of the
current fiscal year we're
spending over $7700 million.
We've seen a lot of growth in
these programs in the last few
years, but a big portion of
those, um, increases have gone
to pre-kindergarten, or they've
gone to, uh, childcare
assistance.
Why is home visiting different
than those?
So home visiting is not a
program where you take your
child and you drop them off and
it's a safe place for you to
leave your child while you go
work economically. Home visiting
is where a professional or
paraprofessional comes into your
home and they screen you for
needs. They give you, um, expert
trained experience on lactation
support on behavioral health
support on, um, hitting your
developmental milestones, so
it's like somebody in the home
to support those parents.
In a really sometimes stressful
early.
Um, perinatal or prenatal time,
so hopefully you start
prenatally and they stay with us
in the program for a couple of
years, but it's, it's, um,
support for the families so that
they never reach a point of
crisis. Why is that important?
Well, you all just heard that
we're struggling with some of
our CYFD outcomes we're seeing a
lot of children in hitting that
point of crisis. This program
could be a key cornerstone to
preventing that point of crisis
ever happening.
OK, so you have to think about
it in that way and they're very
specific home visiting models
for implementation that are
targeted to child welfare.
So if you look on page 2.
You'll see that there's a table
and it's got a bunch of little
orange check marks and there's
some green boxes.
The models with the green boxes
are the ones that have national
research to show that they
improve child maltreatment and
so if we could implement these
programs to Fidelity and target
them to the families who need it
the most, we could reduce our
child maltreatment anywhere from
3 to 5%. That's pretty
impressive. So this is a
cornerstone of our early
prevention system to make sure
families don't reach that point
of crisis. Now I know most of
You're thinking, OK, Kelly, if
this is so great, how come we're
not doing so good right now on
our child protective service
data as it is today.
And what I would say to you is
that we're not really serving on
a population level so you can't
see population change when
you're not at that level.
OK, so we have about 21,000
children born in New Mexico
every year, 21,500, give or
take. OK? And we're serving
about between 5 and 7000
families across 3 years of
cohorts, so we're not serving
anywhere near what we need to
have popular population level
change. OK?
But if we could use the state
funds that we have today, which
is significant and leverage the
Medicaid funds, then we can more
closely receive that population
level, and we wouldn't have to
do a lot more state investment.
We have the state dollars there.
It's about really kind of
getting that Medicaid system
forward and bringing in those
funds so that the families who
are eligible for Medicaid, we
can pull down those dollars and
that would free up dollars that
for families that are not at
Medicaid eligible to be served
with other state dollars.
Because it's a universal
program. We don't want it to be
stigmatized. We want everyone to
feel like this is a program that
benefits everyone and it does
have benefits for families, not
necessarily an ROI forever
family, but the benefit is
there.
And so we've been trying to do
Medicaid home visiting in this
state for several years now. Um,
we started in 2021.
That was the first cohort where
we were able to get Medicaid
funding because we had to have
it written into the waiver.
And so at that time we had 2
models that were able to, um,
bill for Medicaid revenues and
it was nurse family partnership
and parents as teachers. And we
only had, I think, 3 providers
in the whole state who are
implementing those two models,
so obviously we will not be able
to saturate.
And you can see since 2021,
we've grown a little bit, but
not really where we want to be.
Part of the issue is that.
We didn't have enough models in
our waiver, so not every
provider can do nurse family
partnership. That's a very
expensive model that requires a
nurse to deliver the service.
And so we don't have a nurse for
every provider to be doing that.
So there's other models that we
can do. So you'll notice in the
back of the charts one of the
check marks of things that we
did accomplish was to add more,
uh, Medicaid waiver eligible
models. We added former models,
so now there are 6 models as of
the current fiscal year.
That we can start building up to
service these families.
So you'll see the goal on the
very first page is that blue
line is an example of a cohort.
That was born. The purple line
is an estimate of how many of
those cohorts are Medicaid
eligible. The yellow line is an
estimate of the agency service,
although, um, there's some
notations that we can talk about
later about that number can be,
um,
differentiated between us two.
Um, and then that red line is
how many families we actually
served in home visiting in FY
24. So the goal is to make that
yellow line and that red line,
much closer to that purple line
using federal dollars. That's
our goal and to implement the
right models to Fidelity.
visiting included in the
Or they're 2 different numbers,
but the yellow line, those
families, a big portion of them
are probably Medicaid eligible.
They're just not being Medicaid
billed.
Yeah.
Um, so you can see on page 3,
here's another example in FY 23,
there was about 10,600 families
that were referred by the MCOs
for for home visiting.
Uh, sorry, that we're eligible.
6500 were referred by the MCOs
and 440 were enrolled and
served. Now, I will note that
during 23, there was only those
two models and not enough
providers, so we could have
never saturated that number as
much as we can, but this chart
really shows opportunity. I
mean, we're 6000 referrals is
pretty good. When we're talking
about trying to get, you know,
referrals out of MCOs. It's just
trying to get the provider um
capacity so.
That 6000 can then flow down
into a much higher number.
So then I will note, I just want
to go over some of the
challenges. So we, there are
challenges. This is not going to
be easy, but they're not
insurmountable challenges.
One of them is that we have to
get providers to move to models
that are eligible for Medicaid
reimbursement. So many of you
know first born in New Mexico,
it's a homegrown home visiting
model. Unfortunately, um, CMS,
our federal oversight, will not
approve that model for
reimbursement. That doesn't mean
the provider has to drop
firstborn, but it does mean if
they want Medicaid, they would
have to add another model to
their organization for that, or
they would have to switch
models. There is a cost.
To training and purchasing those
models. We should not be asking
the providers to burden that
price tag. So there's some
system services that we need to
support providers to be able to
move to those models. Um,
Billing. Man, Medicaid billing
is just not easy. So we do have
to do some support, um, whether
it be a bundled rate or a
centralized billing hub. We
shouldn't ask, there, there's
some providers that, of course,
UNM can bill Medicaid home
visiting and that's easy for
them. They have the
administrative apparatus, but
our mid to smaller size
providers shouldn't be missing
out on those funds because
Medicaid billing is burdensome.
So a centralized billing or um
other
Billing hub might be something
that we should look at to also
take that administrative burden
off of providers so that they
can focus on, focus on system
delivery.
And then just even applying to
become a Medicaid home visiting,
right? You have to apply to HCA
first, and then HCA can take, I
think it was 20 some days to a
preview and then those providers
have to apply to each MCO
separately and that has like
another 45 day wait on top of
it. We could centralize that
application process and I know
we can because I've seen it in
other states, so that it's a
one-stop application after HCA
consolidated to the.
COs
So that stuff's not easy, but
it's not insurmountable. It's
something that we can get done.
And the agency to their credit,
has gotten some of these things
done. So they added more models,
um, they funded first born to do
more research to hopefully
become um evidence-based and
yesterday, was it yesterday?
Yeah, yesterday they um did a
preview for us on what their new
referral IT system looks like
and it looks Friday. OK. It's a
day that ends in Y, a day that
ends in why they showed me.
Exactly. And it was really
impressive. It was, we've
already had over, I believe 115
referrals, um, to that system.
So that's something that's
really interesting cause before
either provider had to seek out
that, uh, family, or they had to
call a number and maybe they
would be given a list of
providers in their area that may
or may not fit their family
needs. So streamlining it for
providers to do this and
streamlining it for families so
that there's no wrong doors.
Those are the things we need to
do.
So that this becomes a really
robust intervention, early
prevention system. And with
that, I will turn it over to the
secretary.
Good.
OK, thanks. Good afternoon. This
is, I haven't been in front of
the Health and Human Services
Committee in a while, so it's
great to be here. Thank you for
having, uh, me, for Kelly, for
inviting me and thanks to Kelly
and the team at LFC for, um,
keeping us on our toes as it
relates to home visiting. Uh, I
do want to walk you through some
of what the department has done
and because we do not disagree
with the fact that all the
things Kelly said about the
benefits of home visiting, the
legislature, the governor, uh,
we've
made such a strong commitment to
expanding home visiting, making
it a universal program,
especially for those families,
um, who are, who are funded
through Medicaid. Now we have
continuous eligibility, so lots
of opportunities here and a lot
of things to celebrate, I think
as a state. I'll talk about 3
main things, our efforts to
improve the outreach and the
recruitment and the enrollment.
She stole a little of my thunder
with the thing, but that's good,
that's OK. I love it when we
could do that, leverage Medicaid
funding, uh,
eligible families and then
overall enhancing the quality of
the statewide system because we
know as Kelly mentioned, if
these programs are delivered,
but they don't have the fidelity
and and the they're not
successful, we won't all realize
the outcomes that we want. So
you'll see the next slide shows
get a home visiting slots on,
uh, the left, how many funded
slots. We know that oftentimes,
um, families, multiple families
may occupy one of those slots
and then how many providers. It
is
Little bit of an eye chart, so I
won't belabor that, but just so
you know, we have 39 providers
across the state. And, um,
overall, I think we're funding
at about a little over 6000, um,
child slots. So this is a change
and I'm going to talk about that
when we get to the quality
improvements, best practices
across the country is to fund by
child and in New Mexico we have
been funding by a family rate.
So I want to just highlight
because as Kelly had the, the
great graphs with the
This is our actual progress in
expanding access to home
visiting in the state of New
Mexico since 21.
So you can see the difference
there when we, if we talk about
family members, uh, we're
talking about 6,966 families,
but if we talk about child
numbers, we're reaching 7,773
children in fiscal year 24. And
you can see year over year we
have increased 4.8%, 6.8% this
last 24 was 7.6%. So there is a
lot of progress, but as Kelly
notes, many of those children
could and should be funded by.
Medicaid first and we're using
state dollars to do that because
of the areas she mentioned.
Some, you know, providers, it's
not easy to just become a
Medicaid home visiting provider,
but we know that there's work we
can do in the department to make
that happen. So the first thing,
um, was getting and the
legislature was very generous
and gave us $200 to build what
they called, we called a
coordinated intake and referral
system for home visiting. To
what Kelly was saying, I sat
before the LFC a few times and
they said, well, how do you get
into home visiting? How do you
do it?
Well, you could call so and so
and this and these people, you
know, it doesn't work, that
doesn't make sense in a state
that is so vast and that this
referral system, you can go in
there and create an account so
quickly. Like I think there's 5
data points you have to provide.
You as a parent, I'm struggling.
I want to get home visiting. I'm
gonna go on and make a
self-referral, or you're a
Medicaid managed care
organization and you have a
family or you're one of our home
visiting providers. You go on
there and you see every
provider.
that's in your county that
provides home visiting. You see
a link to their website, you see
some information about the
curriculum they use, the model.
If you don't really know which
one you want to use, you say no
preference. You go into an open
queue. The next day, home
visiting providers or that same
day, they can go in there and
they can grab that referral. So
this is a big advancement and as
she said, in one week we had
11749 of those are already fully
enrolled in a home visiting
program and gonna start
services. So,
We're hopeful. Of course, all of
you will hopefully help get the
word out, share it with your
constituents and make sure
everybody knows how to get into
home visiting in New Mexico, as
I said, I mean, we have expanded
all those models that Kelly
showed in that chart. We have
them now in New Mexico. So
that's again another big
improvement.
We also realized and um Senator
Hickey will appreciate this,
that sometimes we can't reach
the medical professionals. Uh,
it's, we know that that's where
the best referral would come
from, from an OBGYN. If not
then, then a pediatrician or a
family practitioner. And so we
decided to go out again with
funding that the legislature
gave us to expand our specific
advertising for home visiting
and decided we'd create
healthcare champions. We thought
we'd pick one, we'd find some
amazing healthcare champion.
But we had so many wonderful
applications for all over the
state. We decided to pick one in
each area of healthcare, a
doula, a nurse practitioner, a
physician, a social worker. And
so each of these champions now
are out there with testimonials
and messaging, not only about
home visiting but also the
family infant toddler program,
and why these programs are so
vital. We're going to be
sponsoring major medical
conferences in New Mexico where
these testimonials will be
shown, really trying to reach
into a market.
And welcome any ideas from this
committee, a market that we know
is essential for us to expand,
then they can go on and make a
quick referral and hopefully
that this, you know, we can
close that. So we're going to
constantly be monitoring those
referrals to make sure that
somebody was connected and that
they made that connection. What
you'll see on the next page and
this somehow this got left out
of my LFC, um, PowerPoint, but
these are some examples of the
home visiting family enrollment
campaign. So this was again part
of that advertising money that
The legislature gave us. And so
these are on social media,
there's billboards, there's
radio spots, really working on
that destigmatizing. My home
visiting is caring. They're
collaborating. Everybody needs
home visiting. Uh, if you're,
you know, don't have a big
social support or circle of
family, uh, home visiting is
something that can benefit you
and your family.
The last slide talks about our,
um, baby showers. This was a big
success. We went kind of all
over the state. We had, as you
can see, 3071 families were
referred to home visiting
providers and 150 were referred
to other community resources. I
think that's the other wonderful
thing about home visiting is
they connect families to all the
array of services, whether it's
housing or transportation or
behavioral health or child care
or pre-K, uh, and then again, we
are working and we're excited.
That are, um, family connects
New Mexico is, uh, we have a
certification for Bernalio
County. Thanks to our partners
at the Department of Health.
This means that we can now bring
universal light touch, home
visiting to every every baby
born in Bernalio County. Our
goal is to make this statewide.
So this is a partnership with
all our birthing hospitals, uh,
but where they're, they've been
at the Eubanks clinic, they're
now reaching out to UNM, but we
want to see every place where we
have babies born in New.
Mexico, getting that 2 to 3
visits just to make sure that
everything is good. And then our
local early childhood system
building coalitions also have
this as part of their, um,
charge is to make sure that home
visiting is at the table and
that they're helping connect
families.
So leveraging Medicaid, I just
want to say I meet regularly,
monthly with the secretary
Armijo and Alana dances and our
team at ECECD really wanting to
make sure our coordination and
collaboration is strong around
leveraging Medicaid. We've
improved some of the technical
assistance manuals. I've taken a
look at them. They need more
improvement, um, to Medicaid
billing claim system in our home
visiting database. Uh, that has
been a support only 7 providers
are using it and only one is
truly.
Using it for billing. Um, and I
think we need to, we'll dig into
that and, and learn more about
why. And then we added language
to the 25 provider contracts
that outline what we expect from
home visiting providers in terms
of claiming Medicaid.
What we've realized is that we
talk about our home visiting
system as one big, um,
Group of entities, but they
actually are different
categories of providers within
that system. We have folks who
have been doing Medicaid
claiming who have evidence-based
models. We have told them
Medicaid is your first payer.
Don't, don't because the the the
department set you up with some
startup money and gave you some
money to start working on the
Medicaid path. They've kind of
stayed in that lane like this is
over here. No, you're a
Medicaid, a home visiting
provider, you go to Medicaid
first, your state dollars go
further.
up to what it actually costs.
Uh, and then category two are
those home visiting programs
that are offering evidence-based
models but haven't gotten on the
path at all to start thinking
about doing Medicaid and
becoming a Medicaid, uh, biller.
So lots of work we have to do in
the department to make sure that
technical assistance and our
team is there and ready to do
it. But you can see here, this
is the language from their
contracts. So you can see how
each, depending on what category
of provider, we, we got the
message, we understand.
We've we have to be drawing down
more Medicaid dollars. We
estimate that we probably left
between 18 and $20 million on
the table last year because
our system, our home visiting
provider system was not set up
and we as a department were not
messaging correctly and doing
the work that we needed to do to
say, Medicaid first. So, um,
look for us to easily meet those
performance measures this year,
that 1500 that we've been
lagging on in terms of funded,
home visiting funded by
Medicaid.
That are not currently either in
an evidence-based or a promising
practice, which is, um, in New
Mexico, first born, um, and
again, you can see the timelines
that we have in there for them.
This is their year. This is the
year to get on the, the path and
start working towards, um,
claiming or becoming an
evidence-based model. We are
strengthening our relationship
with the national model offices
so that we'll have that support
here in the state. The fourth
category is first born. We are
supporting as
He said, uh,
they,
them obtaining evidence-based
status, and again, once they've
obtained that, we expect that
they also, uh, become Medicaid
providers.
To enhance the quality, um, we
expanded the number of models.
Not all families need the same
thing, uh, and not all models
offer, um, the different things
that, uh, that families need. We
transition to paying by child.
This is a big change. So I
visited a program in Las Vegas.
A mom came. She had 3 children
in the firstborn home visiting
program, she was getting one
rate from us, you know, that was
it. So, you know, now she would
get that rate times 3 and that
home visitor would be supported
to really spend.
with that family in the ways
that they need it different
assessments, different
screenings, establishing those
direct relationships. Um, I have
meetings set with all the
national model offices. I plan
to have written agreements. This
is a recommendation in the LFC
evaluation and offer the kind of
support that home visiting
providers need. You know, why do
they all that out there try to
figure out how they're going to
get training. That's the role of
the state. We should be doing
that at the department, making
sure those trainings, that
information is available on a
route.
basis so those providers can
plan accordingly. And then just
overall improving communication.
This is a big need in the
department, um, through monthly
leadership calls. There are a
lot of changes we rolled out in
a very short order, including
the last one I'll talk about,
which is the cost model. Uh,
this was another thing noted in
the LFC evaluation, finish the
cost model. We've been doing it
and talking about it for a
couple of years. On that last
page, you'll see what it, what
it costs to deliver each of
these models at 10.
10% of the cost. The other
cautionary note we were given by
LFC is if you pay it 100%, what
will be the incentive to do
Medicaid claiming. So we don't
want to pay it 100% of the cost,
but at least it's an equitable
system now because we're using
a, a cost per child through a
model that was developed with
home visiting providers, um, to
set those rates. We had rates
kind of all over the map, um,
and some of the past years for
different providers. So we are
working towards that, you'll
see.
The thing that is driving the
cost, you'll notice most are the
caseloads, um, and then the
number of visits. So if you
have, you know, 16, you can only
have 16 children and you have to
do 50 visits in 9 months,
you know, that's going to drive
a higher cost than if you have
28 children, uh, and you're only
doing 24, um, at the bottom with
the Partners for Healthy babies.
So this is just a way for you to
see how we're using cost
modeling to really think about
and improving the quality of the
home visiting system overall in
New Mexico. Thank you.
Very good. OK, well, let's go to
the committee then for
questions. Let's start with the
Representative Jaramillo, and
we'll move around this way this
time. Getting dizzy here keep
switching up.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
So, uh, Secretary Gruginski, I
am, uh, of the 39 home visiting
programs, how many do currently
bill Medicaid?
There are, I think, 12. Let me
look at my categories, um.
Mm
And 10, but they covered 23
counties. Thank you. And, uh,
Have we shared the the cost
modeling with, uh, with
agencies, providers, public?
They're in the LFC report we did
provide background on what the
cost model was and then in our
June home visiting meeting, we
shared kind of high level, um,
what the inputs were, but it'll
be in our report, our five-year
finance plan that will be
released, uh, either in October
or as, uh, Vice Chair Small
asked for, um, in September.
Thank you. And, um, and when
we're moving forward, what are
the ideas to help agencies to be
able to become Medicaid
providers.
I'm sorry, I forgot to go
through the chair. Sorry, Mr.
Chair, and Representative
Harvey, um.
The some of the ideas, and I
think it was one of the
recommendations in the LFC
evaluation was looking at a
third party biller or what do we
call it,
an in centralized hub,
something, and you know, we have
that with fit. Uh, we, we, we
have civics, so we started
actually some preliminary
conversations to say, hey, you
know, what would this could this
look like? I think that's one
way. I do think we have to have
more easy to read and navigate
information about how to go from
not being a, you know, Medicaid
credential to getting in through
HCA and then on to each of the
four MCOs. I'm hopeful that HCA
will, will get to that one
credential for all 4 MCOs
because that is, that is a lot
of work, um, to go to each one
if they each have a different
system, but I think it's through
those monthly collaboration
meetings with HCA as well as
more intentional monthly
communication with our home
visiting providers and
development of actual tools, um.
Are my thoughts.
Mr. Chair, thank you, and I also
wanted to thank you for your
meeting last week. I was able to
jump on board and attend that,
uh, that you did with providers
and explaining this new process,
so I appreciate that very much.
Thank you. So just to follow up
on Representative Harail's
questions.
The Medicaid home visiting
program,
it run through the MCOs? They
get the money? Why do they have
to credential the provider.
Chair, I think it's for anybody
that gets Medicaid funding, they
have to be credentialed in order
for them. I mean, this is a,
this is a big the state be a
credentials for home visiting.
So just like any Medicaid
provider, it's the same as like
if you were a Medicaid doctor,
you have to go through and get
credentials to the MCOs and the
money does get billed and then
paid back to the provider. So
like ECCD transfers money to HCA
Medicaid for Medicaid home
visiting and then a family
enrolls, the provider delivers
the service and then they bill
and receive the reimbursement
for it.
But the MCOs don't process the
paperwork or anything.
I mean, the state could sort of
what I'm getting at is the state
could say, if you're one of
these providers that, that we
have, that's the credential you
need. I mean, what else is the
MCO going to do, say no, you're
not a provider. I don't
understand why they have to be
involved at all in it.
Hm.
Mr. Chair, I, I would say maybe
they're, they, their own
financial value. I mean, you
know, like different, they might
have different requirements
based on, I think like to
Kelly's point, anybody who wants
to get Medicaid funding has to
be credentialed with each of the
Medicaid managed care
organizations regardless of the
type of services. So and
regardless of whether the
Medicaid managed care
organization is paying them or
not they do end up paying, they
do pay for all the home visiting
that is, you know, for.
That it's offered through
providers that are credentialed
with them. They do pay for the
home visiting. We pay the match.
Do they keep a part of it? They
keep a part of everything else.
Now I'm out of my league,
I won't belabor the point, but,
but it, it's, it's kind of
strange that we're doing it that
way when we, when, when you're
already running a much bigger
program.
You don't run that through them.
You don't have to you don't
require those, those agencies
that you're using now through
ECCD to be credentialed.
But now all of a sudden if they
get Medicaid, they're going to
have to be credentialed by an
organization that will do
nothing.
Other than collect a little
piece of the action. I mean, I'm
not, I'm not sure it makes a lot
of sense, but.
Who am I to question the wisdom
of the managed care system.
Um representative Royal Callero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
to add to yours, um, how do we,
how do we advocate, um,
in making
Or making the inquiry or making
the change as per what the
chairs just addressing. I mean,
is there a mechanism in place
that we, where we can
Make those changes?
Uh, Mr. Chair, so neither of us
are Medicaid experts, um.
But I don't, I believe that
there is a federal requirement
for that credentialing to be
able to get the federal match
and so I'm not, I'm not really
sure there's a way around that.
What I'm, what I was trying to
present to you is there is an
easier pathway to get to that
credential and we have not
accomplished that pathway, and
if you take anything from my
hearing, please take these three
things.
We can do this. There is a lot
of technical support we need to
provide to
to do it.
The systems basically are not
set up for us right now to make
this easy on providers. And once
we do it, the models that we use
have to be the right models to
fix the outcomes that we want to
fix, and we have to do them with
fidelity.
If there's anything else you can
take away from that, I hope you
remember those things.
And if I could just add that we
are all on all of that. We
agree, and those are the efforts
that we're doing, you know,
every day in the department
because we know we are not where
we need to be as a department to
then, I mean, I think we are, we
have a lot of support and the
work that we have done to create
billing manuals and to create
support for people to get on
board. Um, I know we're going to
do more this year and I'm
excited to see us hit that 1500
performance measure of funded,
uh, and I,
I, we've had good meetings.
We're now meeting with our home
visiting providers kind of in
these categories because they're
all at different stages. They
need different things from the
department and that's what we're
building.
Uh, uh,
Mr. Chair, I was just, um,
tagging on to what you were.
Um, stating to my, my original
question is now coming up and
that is on the LFC report on
page 5 at the very top where it
talks about centralized billing.
Um, it says that uh report
funded by the ECECD department
in 2021 also made this a
recommendation. What is the
current status of
of the centralized building.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Royal Caballero, thank you for
that question. As I said, we
have built a module inside our
home visiting data system that
allows, um, the people to do the
claiming, there's only one
provider who's actually using
the module fully as they're
electronic record and, and
claiming it, the other 7 are
putting their stuff in there,
getting it and then transferring
it to what they need to submit
to the MCOs. So there's that
piece, but
There's the other of what we've
been talking about is possibly
having a third party entity that
could actually do a lot of that
legwork for the providers
because it's a lot, you know,
and just finally to to continue
with that one on, so do we know,
um,
How well equipped all the
providers are, um, technology
wise, do they have the capacity
and then are there funds
available through the federal
government to provide additional
technical assistance to build
their capacity.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, great, great
question. I think there is, um,
general support through the
maternal infant early childhood
home visiting program. It is
specific for only, you know,
evidence-based models delivering
them, but you make a good point
and I think that's something we
need to add to our inventory as
the TA is, do you even have the
equipment? Do you have the
bandwidth and then how can we
address that either through a
public-private partnership or
through, you know, state
dollars, but I think, um, it's a
great.
Point. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chavez, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So just to
follow up on, on some of the,
the sort of the same line of
questioning. So basically you
said that you are, um, working
to get folks on board, um, and I
don't remember how many home
visiting agencies there are that
you mentioned, but, um, so a
couple of things. One, what do
you, what's your timeline in
terms of getting everyone on
board and then the second piece
to that is.
I
Um,
Do they all have to be
credentialed? What if they're,
what if they're an agency that
doesn't necessarily want a bill
Medicaid.
Then they don't participate?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
Representative Chavez, thank
you. If you turn to page 8, 13,
sorry, uh, slide 13 through, uh,
15. You can see the different
timelines for the different
categories of providers. Um, so
I think if they're,
yeah, sorry, um.
So if, if they're already
credentialed with the MCOs and
they've been through it and
they're like it's their
expectation that they are
Medicaid first. That's the first
payer of first resort. And then
we go to state dollars. We're
thinking of a more of a layered
funding and so I think this was
some of the, the disconnect, um,
and we'll, I'll take ownership
of that from the Department of
them thinking specifically like
we got startup money to serve
this many children funded by
Medicaid. But once they became
it, then we didn't like push
them to make sure every child
that comes through.
The program gets billed there.
So they're, they're just, they
need to do that right now. The
others have this year. We want
them to be a Medicaid home
visiting provider by this
December, which means that they
need to get, go through HCA and
then they go through the
credentialing process. And then
by the end of this fiscal year,
at least, um, having a contract.
So actually they really only
have to go through HCA by
December and then by the end of
the fiscal year, have contracts
with the MC.
so
Mr. Chair, um, can you tell me,
is each credential lien process
because there's what, 3 or 4
MCOs, 4 to go through 4 MCOs.
Why I, I guess I don't, that's
kind of a long question that
that the chair asked. I mean,
why are we doing that? That's
like painful.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
would say that I know the HCA is
working on, uh, one, credential,
all four would, but they have to
negotiate that between the four
managed care organizations to
get to agreement on one
credentialing. So that, that
could take some time, but that
is the direction that the
state's going, which is a good
thing because, but right now,
this is what it's been, um, and
this is where these 10 providers
have gone through that process.
They had, you know, 4 and now
they have 2 new ones that they
have to work, work with.
Mr. Chair, it seems it would
seem to me that we as a state,
It's our money. We get to tell
them what the process is and not
have to go through this
negotiation process that would
take a whole lot of time, not
just
A whole lot of time for
everybody. It doesn't make
sense. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Could I jump in? I continue to
think we are contracting with
the MCOs. When you contract with
someone, they don't get to say,
I'm gonna do it this way or it
has to be. It's like we're
paying you if you want the
contract, do it. If you don't,
um, this negotiation stuff just.
Go and now going into negotiate.
So let's make it very clear. We
were told 6 years ago we would
have one application for MCOs.
All right, we've we've made our
point. We've, we've vented and
uh we will move on. Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Cates, you just
took it, so I'll say ditto.
Thank you. Otherwise, no
comment.
Senator Pinto, any questions,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we make a lot of
these changes, um, especially
when we're including the federal
government. It doesn't seem like
we consider the what their
criteria is and meshed that
together we decide to come up
with our own and then we're
doing double the work of, oh, we
gotta put this over here and put
this over here for the state.
Just a comment. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee.
Representative Heer. Thank you,
Senator Pinto. Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
presenters, so this is
wonderful, the work that you're
doing, um.
Secretary Gryzinski, one of your
biggest fans. One of the things
that I am most concerned about
in talking with residents in
this state is looking at a high
rate of infant mortality and
maternal mortality. So if we
have all this credentialing
going on and all of the and the
question was asked, why would we
pay 100%? What's the incentive?
Well, how about life might be
the incentives. So tell me, why
do we have such a higher rate of
maternal mortality.
And infant mortality in this
state, based upon what we are
able to provide home visiting,
credentialing. I, I'm looking
forward to hearing that.
representative, I'm not sure
these are the people who have
that data. We're talking about
home visiting and that's,
there's a whole infant and
mortal maternal and infant
mortality review board, but
these, these ladies are not part
of that concern is we do have
the home visiting right and we
do have people going into the
homes and looking at what's
happening with mothers and
children, then it shouldn't be
that high. There must be some
connection between the two. I
mean, I'm not blaming you for
I'm just saying that there, I
believe there is a connection.
They may not be able to answer
it today, but
Maybe you can answer it soon.
So, Mr. Chair, members
committee, I'm gonna take off my
early childhood hat and put on
my DOH analyst hat, um, yes,
home visiting doesn't
necessarily
reduce, um, low birth weight or
or infant mortality or maternal
mortality, it's not really the
target of that particular
program, but we do have programs
that do, and in particular, for
the first year, Medicaid is
going to start covering doulas
in the current fiscal year and
do
s actually have been shown to
um improve birth weight, reduce
C-sections, um, reduce emergency
visits afterwards. So we are, we
do have programs that are
targeted to that, but that's
more of a public health lens and
well I don't want to say that
early childhood is not public
health, it is public health, but
it's more of like a early
developmental family, um,
support kind of model. And those
two should be working together,
but we have a lot of poverty.
No, we have huge amounts of
deserts of just care for
families when they find out that
they're pregnant, um, you know,
there's, there's a lot of
complicated issues and that's
something that DOH really is the
centralized person or agency
that focuses on those pieces,
but I would love to put more
data together for you
independently of this report.
And if I, I could just add, I
think, Kelly, you might have
said it, but you said it in your
earlier remarks, you know, that
we're not at that population
level saturation, where we want
to be with these programs. Many
of these programs do help if you
get them prenatally to reduce,
you know, to make sure that low,
reduce low birth weight. There
are health outcomes for, um,
moms and babies, and, um, I
think the other thing, and I
just forgot what it was, but um
I the other, gosh, it was
profound, but OK, um, I, I, I
knew it was something.
About what you were saying and
that, and they, oh, well, the
family connects model, the
universal touch. So that's the
one that we want to have in
every birthing hospital that at
least a family gets that 1 or 2
check on baby, check on mom, and
then that I think would go a
long way. Our colleagues in New
Jersey I talked to who have been
doing it longer. I mean they're
finding things that you just
wouldn't, you wouldn't find a
way to get a home visiting
program or, you know, if they
don't have that right away, so
I, I do think it's expanding
these models, reachings.
at the population level and, and
investing and getting that
universal touch model up and up
and going.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And on
slide 2.
Where it talks about the um, the
slots and provided by county.
I'm gonna ask two questions
because I might run out of time.
First question is, it shows on
the left, uh, I'll just take my
accounting, for instance,
Lincoln.
And there's 105, um, home
visiting slots.
And then on the right, it shows
that there's one provider, that
one provider might have 3 or 4
people that could go into homes
correct? so they wouldn't be.
Overwhelmed or inundated. OK,
thank you. And then number 2 is.
You have a credential provider
and they are gonna build through
their MCOs.
And you said you're gonna go to
a model, Kelly, and what I was
wondering is.
Does this home visit?
Do they charge as much for this
home visit as they do this home
visit?
Or does it depend on what MCO
they go through.
Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair, the MCO rates
By the model are the same. So if
you're a nurse family
partnership doesn't matter in
what county you're getting the
same rate, but if you're a, um,
par as teachers, you're not
getting the same rate as a nurse
family partnership because
they're different costs to
delivering that service. Does
that make sense?
That does make sense. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I just wanted to
share, I just wanted to make
sure that whenever you go and do
a home visit that this one is
not charging this and this other
one's charging way up here and
make sure everything balances
out.
I would add that we're
incentivizing rates in Medicaid
to be more financially healthy
for providers than even our
regular state rates to help pay
for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you both for your work.
Appreciate the presentation. I'm
excited about taking this back
to the district.
I was just looking at your
website and, and it looks, you
know, pretty simple,
straightforward, um, with a lot
of possibilities. It's, it's
great. I'm excited about it.
And, um, I just want to talk to
you about this map as well. I
was really curious about the
numbers, especially down toward
my district. Um,
With Luna being almost dark blue
and Donana, Donana having 1,105.
home visiting slots as a and
that's the most in the whole
state and Luna is very high as
well. And why would that be?
I, I guess I don't understand.
Mr. Mr. Chair, Representative
Jones, it's a great question.
When I first saw these maps too,
I had a lot of questions
similarly like who who's doing
it, I mean, it's, it's entities
that come forward and say, I
want to be a home visiting
provider. I want to be a home
visiting program and they have
the ability to, um,
recruit and enroll families. So
this is why we need to have a
map that is more representative
of the population of children,
this is what we have right now.
So I couldn't tell you exactly
why, but I do have a list of
each of the
providers by county that I can
provide you. OK, that makes more
sense. It doesn't really
represent the need. It
represents the availability.
Of the service. OK, I see. I'm
sure there's much more need uh
all over the state. Yes, well,
thank you. Thank you so much for
your work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Representative, uh,
Representative Kate. Thank you,
Chair, and thank you very much
for your presentation. I too am
a fan of yours, uh, Madam
Secretary, and Kelly always, uh,
Appreciate your practical and
data-driven, uh, information. I
also appreciate you explaining
that um the upfront costs for
these evaluation tools can be
financially hindering expanding
provider groups. Um, it is, it
is, you think it's a couple of
$2000 or $5000 or $6000 but when
your margins are so small,
especially in rural areas where
you're traveling so much and
you're not getting paid for the
time.
You're traveling, um, it can
very much, uh, make or break the
program, so I appreciate that.
Um, I wanted to ask you a couple
things. One is, um, because, uh,
you've kind of touched upon it.
We're gonna probably end up
Increasing, um, birthing centers
in our rural communities because
we do not have OBGYNs in
hospitals. And so this is also a
place where children are being
born and where, uh, pregnant
people are coming. So are we
increasing our footprint in
these areas as well as the
hospitals and being able to
educate about the benefits of
home visiting.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Cates, thank you. Um, thank you
for your support. Um, it's a
great question. The Eubanks is
at a birthing center? Eubanks.
Birthing center. So that's where
we have family connects is our
first certified, I mean, in
Bernallio County, that's where
we started. So I would say our
goal would, yes, be to
definitely reach our birthing
centers, at least through the
light touch, who would then be
able to connect families with
one of these more longer term if
they needed it and, you know,
more intensive long-term, um,
home visiting programs. But in
terms of outreach, yes, those
audiences are absolutely an
audience we want to reach with
our messaging about family
infant, toddler, and home.
It increased birthing centers,
um, outreach. I'm sorry, I
probably only have one more
question left. Um, let's just
clarify what we've heard today
is we have a lot of different
home visiting programs. We, uh,
want to continue some diversity,
although we have 3 federally,
uh, federally 66 approved, but 3
are, um, ones in which we really
see are evidence based so
there's
6 of them. 6 of them are
evidence-based and that's the
ones we're wanting to, um,
focus. And we want all home
visiting to do Medicaid. You
don't want any no non Medicaid
home visiting, correct? You,
everything is just Medicaid
first and then the state
funding. Um, because the we want
to make sure that we're
capitalizing on federal dollars
or because there's a criteria
there.
I, I would not say we only want
to do Medicaid because we want
to keep it a universal program
to reduce stigmatization and
some families are just not
eligible for Medicaid, but we do
want to prioritize bringing
those federal dollars in. So,
um,
Yeah, that's my answer.
Um, yeah, and I would, Mr.
Chair, Representative Cates, I
would, I would agree that we
want to leverage with that
layered approach, so our state
dollars go further and we can
build the universal system we
all want, because if we keep
just counting on state dollars
and we're not leveraging these,
these funds that were literally
eligible to serve these
children, uh, then that's, you
know, that's we need to do
better at the department in that
guise, that realm.
Representative Chasey, thanks
very much, Mr. Chairman and
thank you both for your
presentations. Um, when I was
running for office in 28 years
ago in 1996, the RAND
Corporation had published a
study on, um, diverting children
from a life of crime. And what
they found is there were 4
specific approaches. So just
because I want to address the
fact that we are always trying
to improve people's lives and
improve community safety.
Um, but the most effective way
was to have
Effective early child at home
visiting. The thing about that
is you don't get results
overnight, you know, takes 22
years to get to the results,
but, um, then the other three,
I, I won't, I won't belabor you
those, anyone who wants to talk
about it, I, I still talk about
those, um, but
When the Columbine shooting
occurred, um, all the
legislators came in and there
was a special presentation by
two women who had written a book
called Ghosts from the Nursery.
And that too was saying if we
want to get at these children
who are, um, potentially going
to act this way. You need early
child at home visiting. So we
really are doing.
Something effective.
On the road to a safer state, a
safer, um,
Large number of communities with
the early childhood I'm
visiting, and I thank you for
the work you're doing,
Secretary, we're really happy to
have you here. Is there any risk
to providing,
um, the optimal number of home
visits needed by moving to
utilize Medicaid dollars first.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chasey, thank you and thank you
for that, um, story. The last
time I was before LHHS we were
talking about home visiting as a
behavioral health approach, you
know, and so thank you for
sharing that story. Um, there is
not, um,
Now, your question was, um, is
there,
Oh, the models, the models say
how many visits a family needs
to have. And so I think it's to
Kelly's and our point is making
sure their fidelity to the
successful implementation of the
model. Um, there is Medicaid.
Medicaid is paying us those
rates because these models have
been determined to have these
positive outlooks um
am I answering my researched
effectiveness, OK, OK, Mr.
Chairman, I just wonder if, you
know, a child would best
benefit.
From weekly or, um, semi-monthly
and Medicaid would only cover
one a month, and I just don't
want to have the optimal number
be reduced by this because the
state, we, we tapped into the
permanent fund partly for this
purpose.
And Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative Chasey, I think
if you look at the, um, the cost
model, you can kind of see,
which is the other reason we
want to have more models because
some families need very frequent
visits and other families don't
need as many, so you can see
there in a 16 week or 18 week
period with safe care,
um, I think it's Safe Care,
yeah, they'll, they'll get 18
visits, so they'll get weekly
visits. So that's where we want
to have, you know, a, a more
robust and nuanced system.
So that a family who needs those
weekly visits is enrolled in a
with a provider that's using
Safecare.
The first one child first is
actually 2. We have a clinical,
it's for families with substance
use and mental health issues.
And so we have one provider
implementing that now. So that's
getting 50 visits, um, uh, in a,
in a, in a year. So they're
getting, so you can just see the
difference, but Medicaid sets
their rates based on these type
of inputs, um.
That makes
Senator Tilman,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank both of you for being here
for your comprehensive,
interesting presentation.
So according to the bar chair,
it looks like we're spending $50
million a year on home is that
about right,
Mr. Chair were able to leverage
the Medicaid dollars that we
should be.
How much are we spending on home
visiting?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, I
believe it's close to 20
mid-twenties, like 24, 25
million. Yeah, I don't have the
right paperwork with me.
Page one.
Oh, you're OK.
I says home visiting is is is
red.
Because I'm colorblind.
Oh, so it's not 50 million?
Um, Ms. Chair, it's 28.5 million
and we are leaving about 20
million on the table from the
Fed funds, so that would be
close to $50 million if we were
leveraging correctly.
So it's only 20 million.
That we're actually spending.
28 million.
28 million
So if you divide that by
Roughly 7700.
Children being served, you'd get
about
3000.
hours
divide that by
30
It's only $100 a visit.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tubman, I, I
can't, I can't, I can't do the
math. I don't, but yeah, so
again, if it's 2 or 3 children,
then you would get the $300 for
the visit. So it's, it's per
child, but yes.
So, but that, that you just took
an average and that's why you're
looking at the cost model you
can see that there's different
amounts depending.
So
OK, thank you.
And um
Maybe you already answered.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Maybe you
already answered this, but why
aren't we leveraging more
Medicare money?
I mean, Medicaid.
Um, Mr. Chair, committee, we are
not leveraging Medicaid because
we don't have enough providers
in the system who are delivering
Medicaid eligible models, and we
also are not matching the
referrals of families to those
models so that we can build them
so it's a, it's a state burden
that we need to work on, not
that we don't have the provider
network that could serve these
families. Does that make sense?
Exactly. It's all I have. Thank
you again, panel for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I did get
I wanted to follow up on
Representative Chasey's, um,
Medicaid is a maximum, um,
annual visits, so there's, it's
not a monthly visit, so they,
um, let's see, they cap it at a
total visits, so for a model,
you can have this many visits,
so it's not a monthly thing if
you get too many visits, so.
Just to clarify that it's, it's
not a per month, but a, a total
number of visits a family can
have in a year.
But
Mr. Chair, it's going to vary by
the model, yeah.
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
both. Um, I think I'm going to
be president of the Secretary
Gruginski Fan Club. So just,
just to add that on there. Um,
so,
I realized that we haven't been
doing, you know, that it wasn't
till 2020 that we or looks like
2021 where we added in.
The Medicaid home visiting and
there's been very little growth
and
part of me says, oh, I know why
because it's such a pain in the
neck to do it and then another
part of me, I mean, I used to
do, I was a home visitor with
fit and, um,
It's part of it is that and this
may not be the case, it's been a
few years that, um, Medicaid
takes months to pay. And if you
are a small business and you,
you can't carry the load that
the state doesn't pay you, so
would, you know, mandating 21
day turner, whatever. Would that
be helpful?
Not that they would do it, but
would it be helpful, uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Thompson,
I, I, we have heard that from
some providers or they deny your
claims, and then you have to
resubmit. It tends to be some of
a typical. So I think that when
we take that layered funding
approach where you have state
dollars and you have Medicaid
dollars, um, and you have the
trust fund, I mean, all the, the
three that I think it does
create more stability, um, and
so instead of just thinking over
here, Medicaid, um, but you make
a good point and I don't know if
that's, that's a possibility.
As the healthcare authority, and
I will in my next meeting. What
is that turnaround that the
writers can expect because it's
a great question, what is the
turnaround supposed to be? What
is it really?
Oh yes, we pay. I know you
don't, um, and then I, I was a
little concerned with when it
said family connects is up to 3
visits per year. I thought,
well, that's, but then you said
something along the lines that
that's like an introduction and
then they get referred to a more
robust program from there. OK,
um, and as someone, as several
people have said, we in this
committee have been pushing for
single credentialing for the
MCO's for, it feels like my
whole lifetime, um.
And, uh, and we keep getting
promised, you know, it's, you
know, oh, now we're working on
it. So I'm just throwing it out
there, whoever's listening, we
are, we are serious about this.
We are not going to take the,
oh, we'll get around to it and,
you know, the next time the
Olympics are in Santa Fe. Yeah,
no, that's not gonna work. So,
um,
And then.
Let's see. Oh, and, and, um,
So the Medicaid rates are set.
Are, are the Medicaid rates, the
Medicaid reimbursement rates for
these, for the program. I mean,
I, and I know it differs by
model, but are the Medicaid
rates reimbursed at a higher
rate than, than, uh, state
funded.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Thompson, right
now we only have rates for nurse
family partnership and parents
as teachers, um, in our
conversations with, um, the
healthcare authority, those
other rates, we, we, we push
back a little bit when we saw
some of them, um, because we
want to see it, so we're going
to have a meeting together with
the rate setter Mercer, who does
the rate setting. But, um, those
should be released in 2 months.
They are comparable, but I think
we want to make sure that
We incentivize Medicaid, so
that's, so that's some of the
conversations we're having and
in most states who do Medicaid
home visiting, I mean, their
rates are really low. Um, and so
it does, it ends up not getting
off the ground. So I think
Kelly's Kelly's point is right
that they're, they're strong
enough that we incentivize and
we help our state dollars go
further to build the universal
system. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for your
presentations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
sorry I've missed some of the
presentation, but I've got the
gist of it and part of the gist
of it is, um,
Uh,
and I know Medicaid has a model.
But is that model adequate to
meet the needs and if it's not
adequate to meet the needs of,
of however you establish that
that visit, is there a way if we
this is wishful thinking. We
were funded as a state, we could
go on. I mean, because so
sometimes you put in so much
work and you get to almost 90%,
but if you don't get to 100,
it's just slides back downhill.
And you start all over again.
It's what we're doing in
addiction, you know, we just an
outpatient program by itself
does not work and it's just over
and over and we spend the money
and we get the same results as
the definition of insanity. So
I'm just wondering if there's
flexibility in the way that we
can, I mean, if there's an
assessment that some more visits
for the year would be
beneficial. Is there some
creative way or some way we
could legislate some sort of
additional funding.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Hickey, thank you for that
question. I think that's why the
department is taking more of
that layered funding approach so
that we have all the available,
um, funds that can support
families through home visiting
and the idea would be that the,
the rates are set based on the
model fidelity like this many
visits would happen in a year.
They might happen in more of
them in 4 months and some later,
but I, I do think that's the
approach we're taking for a
sustainable funding model, you
know, for, for home visiting to
to grow it and.
Spent
And, uh, Mr. Chair, the other
piece that you just brought up
is talking about the level of
compensation and so, but it
sounds like we don't have enough
providers, um, trained, trained.
Trained family home visit
providers is that is, is that
correct and is that an issue as
we're finding like so many other
places like the hospital in Las
Vegas, you know, we just aren't
paying competitive rates for the
world. Um, and so in the and you
mentioned the Mercer model which
um even though I know there's a
great person who works at Mercer
now who used to work for us, but
she works for New York. She
doesn't cover our area. I've,
I've not.
I've not been overwhelmed with
the accuracy of their rate
setting and so I would wonder if
we, if in we turned it over to
Mercer, they're a consultant, I
get that, but how are, uh, do we
have enough knowing consultants
having been a consultant, you
sometimes need to check on your
consultants that they're giving
you good information and I'm
just wondering if the
information we're getting about
what we should be paying to be
effective.
is, is the right model that
they're using because uh I, I, I
would bet a whole lot based on
some of the things I've seen
that they're not quite
understanding. This is America.
You compete for talent. You
don't just kind of throw a
nickel out there and think
people are gonna dive after it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Hickey, excellent question, and
we did, um, uh, the person who
works with us, the contractor
who does our cost modeling and
all that.
Work directly with Mercer and we
made sure that the, the the
model inputs and also she
brought in the national model
offices to also talk with
Mercer. So they, they were good
conversations and I think where
we have parents as teachers and
the nurse family partnership,
wouldn't you agree, Kelly,
they're, they're good, they're
good rates. I think it's these
new models and some of them are
looking good, but I agree with
you. You gotta go back and, you
know, push back a little and ask
some more detailed questions,
but I think we're going to be in
a really
place here in another, I mean,
we're already in a good place.
We have a lot to celebrate. I
wanna have you take that away
that much progress has been made
and the growth in home visiting
access in the state has
continued to improve. So we want
to continue to see more of that
momentum, and we think that
this, you know, next push with
these new models and rates will,
will be a big part of that. So 2
cents, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, for my
business career.
You're only as good as the
people you hire and the talent
that you are able to recruit and
retain.
And success is probably very
often recruiting by compensating
more. That's one of the factors
as well as a good place to work,
but so I would encourage you not
to go to averages.
You know, we should have paid
the teachers 60% more instead of
the 50%. It was just, why didn't
we go above other states because
this is talent in America right
now is scarce, particularly for
these types of stuff. So you
get, so if you want to get
benefits and results, you got to
get the people you got to pay
more to be able to get the
people so that we're competing.
So I,
your time is up. Thank you.
Senator Cedo Lopez, I'm so happy
about home visits, but I wanted
to ask a little bit more detail,
and if you want to do it
offline, that would be fine. But
just curious about, um,
reaching, reaching, um,
populations with different
cultures and how, how that's
going, um, whether about
language access and also um
sometimes there are no
evidence-based practices with
those cultures, um, you have to
really, I noticed you talked
about promising.
Practice, and that is one
category. So I'd like to hear a
little bit more about that as
well.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Senator,
thank you for that question. Um,
I would like to give you a more
detailed the thing I would point
to everybody is our annual
outcomes report, we do go into
great detail for the, the home
visiting Accountability Act as
well as our early childhood
education and Care Act about who
we serve, um, who serves them,
what models they use, what are
the demographics, um, I think we
even cover salaries. I think we
do with our home visiting. So I
would encourage you and I can
forward that to you, um.
To, to just take a look at to
see how we're doing that. I do
think we do a very good job in
the department of focusing on
language access and making sure
that our provider community, you
know, are very diverse and
reflect the community, um, the
communities that they serve. We
have some incredible home
visiting programs, um, that
really are bringing that
culturally and linguistically
responsive approach to their,
um, to their models, so.
I think.
Yes, absolutely.
Thank you. Um, so the answer was
yes, you serve immigrants, and I
was wondering if you, uh, if you
offer people, employees who are
bilingual, um, and culturally,
uh, competent if you offer them
a price differential.
In terms or not, yeah, a price
differential would be the, since
these are mostly contracts.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, so
the providers, we do not dictate
that in their contracts that
they do that? Are you asking if
ECECD does that?
I guess how do you measure that
and whether you compensate it.
Mr. Chair, I would have to, I
would have to look at I don't, I
don't believe that we require
contractors to pay differentials
to their home visitors if they
speak other languages, but I can
double check and we'll get back
to you. I think if that's if I'm
getting your awarding the
contract, do you give more
points or more?
A bigger contract because they
have that capacity?
I don't believe so. We usually
don't have I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
um, Senator, we don't usually
have competition like we can't
fund this program, we can't fund
that. We're like more programs,
so, um, but it's, it's a great
question and I'll definitely
take it back to the team. Thank
you.
thank you, because, um, as you
know, I worked at La Secuitario
and sometimes solve issues with
that in interactions with the
state.
Thank you.
Just a couple of quickies. um.
Oh, OK. Representative Laura
Cadena. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just to ask it another way, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, do you pay
an increased or higher rate in
your home visiting program or
early childhood contracts or
anywhere else for bilingual
service providers. Like, is
there a higher rate of pay
because they are creating more
curriculums or delivering the
curriculums in more than one
language. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Cadena. Uh, we do
have an early childhood.
bilingual stipend that anyone
working in early childhood who
is fluent, you know, in more
than one language, um, is
eligible to receive, but not per
contracts. We don't put that in
the contracts. Thank you for the
question.
Representative Ferrari, you had
a question? Yes, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I apologize for
Having to go to another
committee at the same time. I'm
sure it was a, a great
presentation and I appreciate
being able to catch up with all
the information. Um, but I'm
working with, um, uh, uh, the
children's Reading Alliance, and
I, um, am interested in how we
can expand if there are programs
that we're already um parents as
teachers and and different
programs that they're doing in,
uh,
Donana, but also to expand to go
statewide. Um, what would we
just meet with you and talk to
you about the different, um,
Projects available or and needs
that you have that they might be
able to fulfill. Yes, uh, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Ferrari, great to see you and
thanks for the question. I would
also, we have two local early
childhood system building
coalitions in Dona Anna County.
So also a great place if they
are in Donanaa County, for them
to start there because we do
fund them to do work with
families and but absolutely come
meet with myself and the team
that's supporting that local
work. Dolly Parton Imagination
Library is also
A very important resource, um,
across our state. We're in every
county and I think that's a
wonderful thing to leverage as
well, but it depends on what
exactly they're looking for, so,
and Mr. Chair, and, um, Madam
Secretary, um,
I was scrambling to find the
list of the different, um,
programs because there's
numerous and they might already
be somewhat involved, but we're
looking to expand, um, not only
in Donana the services, but you
know, uh, help with this
statewide. So thank you.
Mr. Chair, um, um, I'm gonna ask
if you missed the presentation
that you don't ask questions
because you don't know what's
been presented in the
presentation, the people who
have sat here through it, don't
want you to come in and ask
questions that were presented
during the presentation and I, I
know everybody's busy, but I
think it's only fair to the
members who sit here and listen
to the whole thing and then
someone runs in at the end and
has no idea what's already been
discussed. So just as a courtesy
to the other member
Members of the committee. If you
have missed most of the
presentation that you, you, you
catch up with the presenters
later or listen to it on the web
later. Thank you.
Um, so I had a couple of quick
things to ask about. The map you
gave shows slots.
Assigned to counties. That
wouldn't apply to the Medicaid
program. That's your state
money?
Is that going to continue if you
can get the extra Medicaid money
you keep those same slots or
will you reallocate the slots?
Mr. Chair, we would, that's
where we would be able to expand
to more. We'd be able to serve
more children because there'd be
more money in the system.
But, but Medicaid won't be by
slots, so.
Well, I mean, we know the number
of children, so like we're we're
right now serving over 5600
children that are Medicaid
eligible.
But right now, the providers
that we're only claiming 440,
maybe 400 now, so that, so once
they start claiming for those at
least 5000 of those, then those
state dollars are going to be
able to expand.
So I, you.
I mean, we'll, we'll be able to
see the map grow and to see
those, you know, the number of
slots will expand
we'll be able to serve one.
Last question, you know, first
born, you, you, you say it's in
the process and it looks very
good. It's gonna be.
Could you just run through what
distinguishes firstborn? How
would you describe that as
opposed to some of the other
programs that were already
declared evidence-based. What
does that model look like?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm, I wish I
knew all the models. I know the
head of the statewide firstborn
offices here in the, in the room
with us, um, Maa Gutierrez, is
she still here? Oh, she laughs.
OK, I was gonna say she could
answer that question and Kelly,
um, may be able to, but it's,
each model just has a different
focus, different number of
visits, how they work with
families, how they, you know, do
their, I mean, they all follow
our standards. So people are
doing similar things, but I, and
I don't know if.
I, I, I can't, I can't really
distinguish and differentiate
except that it's just a
different model and approach
that was designed and built here
in New Mexico and.
Has been something that is
expanding and more programs are
interested in it, so.
Kelly, could you, and, and what
makes it attractive for local
people to local programs to to
use that model rather than one
of the other ones,
uh, firstborn uses a
paraprofessional model that a
parofessional models. So you
wouldn't like nurse family
partnership, you would need a
nurse. Um,
and it focuses on, uh,
culturally diverse, um,
curriculum. It was developed
locally
So there's some insight that
that it has a better connection
to other local providers, but I
mean, they all follow the same
curriculum of like.
We know what developmental
standards are. Like that's
pretty universal. We know, you
know, um.
For instance, like, you know,
when's belly time, right? Those
things, they're all, they're all
kind of doing those similar
things, but the differentiation
of, of,
Some of the more evidence-based
curriculums, for example,
parents as teachers is does all
those things, but is highly
focused on education and nurse
family partnership is highly
focused on health outcomes and,
um, safe care, Healthy Family
Americas is highly focused on,
um, reducing child neglect, so
they all have a base curriculum
and then maybe a higher level of
focus above them. And we like
firstborn because it was
developed here and most of our
providers are first born in
that.
That's what we've been
delivering and it's been so far
working. So that's, you know,
it's hard to roll out new
curriculums.
OK.
Very helpful, really appreciate
the information and, um,
And so then we'll move on to the
child welfare workforce and
leveraging federal funds, Rachel
Mercer Garcia is going to make
that presentation.
So good afternoon, um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, my name is Doctor Rachel
Garcia. I'm the LFC analyst for
CYFD, uh, and I'm gonna be
talking from a PowerPoint that
looks like this. Mine has notes
on the bottom, yours doesn't,
um, titled Child Welfare
Workforce and leveraging federal
funds. Um, this is a pretty
narrow topic, and it is in part
response to I know questions or
interests that you all as the
committee had and talked about,
uh, when you were in Portales.
And so this is really going to
sort of be an overview of what
do we know about the state's
child welfare workforce right
now and what opportunity do we
have? Um, in particular, you
know, the workforce when it
comes to child welfare, and here
I'm kind of talking about
capital, child welfare
specifically, the workforce that
supports children and families
that are engaged, um, uh, with
CYFD and and the workforce is
really an opportunity or a
lever, um, to improve the system
overall. So this
This presentation is gonna just
again walk through kind of
overview, what do we know about
the workforce right now and what
opportunities do we have, in
particular to leverage um
training funds that come from
the title 4E program for
training with this um workforce.
And so if you all turn with me
to the first, the first slide
with real content in your deck.
Um, it's a slide number 3. This
is just an overview of of the
workforce when it comes to
protective services within the
Children, Youth and Families
department.
So for background context,
CYFD's personnel budget, uh, is
about $92.5 million within the
personnel category within
protective services. Um, that
budget would fund roughly 962
protective services employees.
Uh, at an average cost of about
$98,000 per employee. That's an
average and also kind of a fully
baked cost.
Um, we shared that data with you
all because sometimes we, I
myself even get a little mixed
up when we're talking about
funded vacancies, unfunded
vacancies. So the key thing to
know is, um, they've got funding
to fund about 962 positions
within protective services.
That's what their budget would
allow. Right now, they, uh, CYFD
has a headcount within
protective services as of August
1st of about 908 positions. Um,
If you look at what are those
positions in their budget right
now, about 530 of them are kind
of the frontline caseworker
position, positions that are
either caseworkers or
supervisors. There are other
positions, um, of course, that
operate within protective
services, things like Children's
Court attorneys, different case
aides and things like that, but
kind of the front line about
530. As of August 1st, about 75%
of those positions were filled.
Um,
if you look at kind of the, the
graph on the left of the chart
that shows you what the
protective services personnel
budget has looked like over
time. That's the blue, um, and
what you'll see is, uh, the
legislature has made some pretty
significant increases to that
personnel budget over time.
The red line shows you kind of
what filled FTE has looked like
within protective services over
that same period of time. And
one of the key trends that we
consistently hear when it comes
to protective services is a high
turnover rate. And so CYFD has
made some hiring progress within
the last fiscal year, but it's
often challenged by the fact
that there's a really high
turnover rate. So while they
make progress with hiring, we're
not seeing kind of a net
increase in terms of filled
positions within protective
services.
This data all comes from our
state, uh, the state personnel
office data system that we have
access to. And so the counts
that I referenced were as of
August 1st.
Um
One of the other things to key
things to note, and you all
heard about it during the
interim is the data that I
shared when it comes to, um,
protective services personnel
budget, um, and the number of
positions that they can afford,
um, is based on their budget,
what they're authorized to
spend. I will note you all have
heard a couple of times during
the interim, um, that CAFD has
kind of in the last couple of
years overprojected what they
can draw down in federal funds,
and what they've pulled in is
significantly less. And so this
doesn't account for, sort of
they may not have cash on hand
to fill those positions, but
it's what they could feel if
they in fact drew down kind of
what they're budgeted for.
Um, if you turn with me to slide
4, you can sort of see what the
protective services turnover has
looked like historically,
nationally, child welfare is a
very challenging field and, and
caseworkers in particular tend
to experience high levels of
turnover, so we in New Mexico
are not unique when it comes to
that challenge. Um, nationally
turnover rates, um, tend to
range between 20 and 30% in
child welfare. Um,
The Nie Casey Foundation reports
a turnover rate around 12% is
more optimal.
Also, we know that nationally,
um, a child welfare worker
remains on the job for about 1.8
years on average. Um, and when
we've looked in this bo data,
we're we're probably in that, in
that range, um very high
turnover rates among some of
these frontline caseworker
positions.
Um, if you look at that very
first chart, um, on slide 4, you
can see kind of what turnover
has looked like over time. Um,
and it has improved within CYFD,
um, over the last year or so,
but turnover remains about 30%
in those frontline caseworker
positions.
In the second chart on that
slide, page 4, CFD has shared
with us some exit survey data
that's a little bit older now.
It's from 2003, but you can see
the reasons that caseworkers
cited for why they left the
agency. And so that is just sort
of a helpful indicator around
what may be driving turnover and
again, why does this matter?
Because one of the key levers
when it comes to stabilizing,
improving the child welfare
system in our state is our
workforce. And so we know that
we continue to have
High rates of turnover within
protective services.
Um, if you look at slide 5, I
shared with you all, uh, some
data around how our caseworker
compensation benchmarks or
compares to other states. I
imagine that might be on your
mind when we come to think about
what can we do to address
workforce challenges. And so
that chart, um, is some
analysis, uh, done through a
study that was, um,
initiated last year, um, the
legislature entered into a
contract with Deloitte to do a
general compensation
benchmarking study for a variety
of positions within state
government, and this is a
specific comparison, um, for
child welfare related positions
that that study looked at. It's
from 20 2023, and it compared
average salaries in different
positions, um, within CYFD to uh
benchmark similar positions.
In 11 other states. One of the
things that you'll see is we
actually tend to benchmark
pretty well or pay more than
some of our surrounding or
comparison states when it comes
to compensation. I will note
though that it is a benchmark of
caseworkers in our state to
caseworkers in other states. And
that doesn't necessarily account
for the fact that, for example,
if you had a licensed social
worker in our state, they're in
high demand. They might be able
to make more doing social work
in another position.
But this does give you a sense
of how do we as New Mexico
caseworkers compared to other
states.
I will note that CYFD has made
some investments, um, uh, over a
year ago now in resetting some
salaries, particularly in
investigations and so you'll see
the um you'll see that
difference actually playing out
in the average salary data that
we have for you all.
So that's just sort of how do we
benchmark when it comes to
compensation?
Um, I know that one of the
things on your mind, uh, is kind
of social work and are we able
to actually get social workers
into frontline caseworker
positions. Um, if you look at
slide 6, this is just sort of an
overview when it comes to social
work in our state. Um, according
to the child welfare League of
America social work degrees in
particular are considered to be
the most appropriate degrees for
child welfare work when it comes
to practice, and, um, the
presence
The social worker within a child
welfare agency is linked to
better outcomes both for
children and families within
that system.
Um, we, uh, the CFD has shared
with us that roughly 7% of the
protective services caseworker
workforce currently, um, is a
licensed social worker and so
that tells us that the vast
majority, um, of caseworkers
are, are not licensed social
workers currently, um.
You know, the CFD is also not
alone in trying to compete for
social workers. We overall kind
of have a shortage of social
workers in our state. And so
you'll see the data on slide 6
is what, um, enrollment and
graduation has trended when it
comes to our schools of social
work. Um, what you'll see is
actually over the last decade or
so, we've seen a decline in both
enrollment and graduation from
schools of social work. Uh, you
The legislature have made some
pretty significant investments
to try to bolster
Endowments at schools of social
work, and that included 10.5
million to create a school of
social worker at UNM.
Those endowments should
basically increase program
budgets by about 44% over FY 23.
Um, but we may not yet be seeing
the impact of those investments,
as you can kind of see in the
data when it comes to enrollment
and graduation, um, increases.
We are actively working with the
schools of social work to update
some of that data as we go into
the next academic year. Um, but
what you can take from that is,
you know, we don't have enough
social workers in our state and
there are some investments.
Target that challenge, though
they may not yet have resulted
in increased graduates.
Um,
if you look at slide 7, we also
identify some of the key
investments the legislature has
made, um, over the last few
years, specifically targeting
workforce at CYFD.
Um, so back in, uh, there was an
increase the legislature made of
about 7.7 million to CYFD's
personnel budget in FY 24. At
that time, that was the estimate
that it would take to sort of
cover the needed caseworkers to
address, um, uh, different, uh,
caseload benchmarks. And so back
in FY 24, there was that 7.7
million that was projected to
fill about 50, uh, positions.
And then there's also
recurring investment within the
higher education department,
about 432,000, um, for student
loan repayments specifically at
CYFD. In addition to those
recurring investments, there
have been a couple of really
specific ones on the
non-recurring side that we're
also intended to address
workforce challenges at CYFD.
So, um, those include 30 for a
workforce development plan um
that was appropriated two years
ago, um, as at the end of FY 24,
um, that appropriation had gone
largely unspent and was
reauthorized with the language I
know you all have referenced
before in committee that it was
intended to target recruitment
or training of social workers,
the social work language, um,
was vetoed.
They're also starting in FY 25
is a special appropriation that
was specifically intended to
pilot a program to incentivize
the attainment of master's level
social workers, um, within CYFD.
So this is just sort of an
overview of where has the
legislature made target
investments to try to address
some of the workforce gaps, um,
or challenges that I, that I
just talked through.
Um
So that is sort of where the
state has made investments. The,
the last part, uh, general
overview I was going to cover
with you all is a request you
all made specifically to learn
more about Title 4E and Title 4E
training funds. So I talked a
lot about the state investment,
but much of the child welfare
and foster care system is
actually federally funded.
Um, and so that is where we have
a real opportunity to leverage
some additional dollars for
training, um, and development
within our, our child welfare
workforce.
Um, so that's what I talk about
now. If you look at slide 9,
I've just shared a general
overview about what is Federal
title 4E. Um, under title 4E of
the Social Security Act, states,
tribes, and, and, um,
governments can claim
reimbursement for a portion of
the costs that are incurred for
providing foster care, adoption
assistance, and kinship guardian
assistance. So it's very similar
to the Medicaid system.
That Federal Title for
reimbursed states for specific
costs that are associated with
the provision of foster care in
particular.
Historically, um, Title 4E has
really only covered three types
of costs, and they are
reimbursed at different rates.
Uh, the first is sort of the
room and board costs associated
with foster care. Those are
foster care maintenance
payments, and those are the
payments that go directly to
foster care providers, those are
reimbursed for eligible children
at the state's FMAP rate, which
just means federal government
currently picks up about 70% of
the cost if a child is eligible
for foster.
Care.
Um, the second portion of Title
40, uh, covers administration of
the foster care program, um, and
that's for things like case
management, child placement, and
licensing. Um, those kinds of
costs once a child is in foster
care, and if the child is
eligible, um, the state can
reimburse, um, 50% of the costs.
And then there is a portion
specifically allocated for
training, states can reimburse,
uh, at a 75% match rate,
training expenses associated
with the provision of foster
care, both short-term training,
um, as well as long-term
training. Um, again, if it is
associated with the delivery of
foster care. And so that last
section, kind of the training
costs is where states often find
money to
Cover training costs associated
with the child welfare
workforce.
Um, I will note that there are
now are other sections, uh, that
are other costs that states can
provide through Title 4
specifically prevention and
intervention services. That was
part of the Family first
prevention Services Act in 2018,
if a state has an approved
prevention plan. There's kind of
another category, um, but New
Mexico doesn't currently have an
approved plan and I know you all
have talked about that. Um, but
these are the main costs that
Title 4 covers on a
reimbursement basis.
So what I'm gonna talk to you a
little bit about is the
education and training portion
and where we sort of have
opportunity.
Uh, if you look at slide 10,
this kind of outlines um state
education and training programs
within Title 4 that are also
called stipend programs. Uh, so
again, states can reimbursed for
training and education costs
associated with training the
child welfare workforce, and
it's reimbursed at a 75% match
rate multiplied, um, by our, uh,
the number of eligible children
which is connected to our
penetration rate.
Can you explain Yeah, oh gosh, I
feel like, can I? No, uh, it's
very it is a complicated uh
multiplier that has to do with
if a child is eligible for
foster care, and then there is
also a multiplier associated
with, um, socioeconomic status
for children. Our um multiplier
has decreased over time. Uh, I
believe last year it was 0.49%
and I think CYFD shared in a
previous hearing, it may have
gone down even further.
But essentially it's a
multiplier that determines
eligibility. And so it's 75%
times this, um, penetration
rate, which used to be about
49%. Sounds like it may have
decreased and is probably an
area where we as a state should
kind of really try to understand
why it's going down.
I, that's probably not a great
explanation.
Um, but yes, essentially, if we
could get that up, that could
also probably help us and
and
Correct me if I'm wrong, but,
but I think we were told that at
one meeting that the penetration
rate is computed based on just
checking some boxes that that
and but that failing to check
those boxes and when you fill
the paperwork out on working
with a child or a family.
Leaves you ineligible or drops
your penetration rate so that if
the staff just were well trained
in how important it is for them
to complete the documentation of
what they've done.
that the state could be
realizing a lot more federal
money in that program, yeah, I
think Mr. Chair, it is our
understanding that while there
are a variety of components
within the penetration rate that
documenting the eligibility of a
child for foster care is
important. um CYFD did receive
some technical assistance funds
in FY 25, and it's my
understanding that they are
going to seek some technical
assistance to try to understand
some of these Title IV
acclaiming.
Elements, um,
With the potential that we may
be drawing underclaiming and
also have potential to increase
that, that Title VV rate.
Yeah, um.
So, uh, kind of jumping that it
does get very technical in the
weeds in terms of the
calculation, um, but kind of the
overview to know is that
they're, uh, within the Title 40
program is this training and
education component.
Um, often states are structuring
in a stipend program
specifically because, um, states
can enter into a partnership
with universities to deliver
training and education, um, for
a child welfare workforce, and
they can provide stipends.
Or tuition reimbursement for
bachelors of social work or
masters of social work.
Programs, um, and those
programs, uh, kind of have the
agreements have to be approved
by the administration of
children and families. So there
is sort of a federal approval
component. Um, and there is a
component to repay um in the
event that graduates of these
programs do not complete their
terms of service.
Um, but there is research that
suggests that these programs
tend to be pretty effective in
terms of training, um, social
workers who then retain and stay
within child welfare, um, and
that kind of research that is
tracked and evaluated some of
these programs nationally have
found that participants who go
through the Title for a training
programs tend to stay longer
within child welfare than than
folks who don't.
And so I imagine the question on
your mind is how is our program
doing? So New Mexico does have
these Title for a training
programs in place with 4
different schools of social
work. If you look at slide 11,
we outlined some of the data
that we have. Um, I will know
we're still actively working
with some of the schools of
social work to get a specific
numbers on trends over time.
There are 4 programs, Eastern,
uh, Highlands, NMSU and Western
all operate and.
have these kind of title 4E
training programs. Um, the
stipend amount, the specific
amount that the student receives
and the specific repayment
amount varies a little bit by
institution. Generally, there's
sort of a for every one year of
uh stipend you receive, you have
to do a year of about a year,
and it looks like a couple of
cases, 18 months of service with
CYFD. You can get more than one
year of stipend. Um, the amounts
also range a little bit, um, I
think I.
Low end, we saw one institution
was about 5000 per semester.
NMSU was on the higher end if
you stacked it all together, it
was like 24,000, so there's a
little bit of range in terms of
how much and for how long, um.
What we have seen over time is
that kind of the number of or
social schools of social work
reports the number of
applications and the number of
students pursuing these stipend
programs has declined. Uh, what
you'll see in the chart is the
data we got back from NMSU and
Western, um, it looks like there
are only about um, under 15 in
those two institutions in the
upcoming year. Um,
NMHU is going to get a specific
numbers, but it was less than
10, um, and then, uh, Eastern
has about 6 to 8 every year. So
we're talking probably around
30-ish students, and that number
has gone down over time. Um, but
the specific, some of the
specific data points were still
gathering. Um, COFD reported
there are about 33 active
stipend participants, um,
working within CYFD currently.
Um, in addition to seeing kind
of a decline in the number of
students. We've also seen a
decline in the amount of money,
understandably that CYFD is then
drawing down for the stipend
program back in FY20, that
number was about 3.2 million in
federal Title 4 stipend funds,
uh, or training funds, and, uh,
we received a production in
April of this year that looks
like FY 24 would end about 2
million. So we've seen a decline
in both the number of
participants, students.
Participating in the program as
well as, um, a decline in what
we're drawing down. And so,
And
There there's probably an
opportunity here to rethink how
the program is operating and get
more students kind of in social
work who then want to go work in
the child welfare system.
He turned with me to slide 12.
We highlighted just a couple of
ways that other states are
thinking about their title for
education programs that might be
kind of worth considering in New
Mexico, um, in particular, a
couple of states, Colorado and
Texas seem to really be
targeting the programs to their
existing child welfare
workforce. And so they're
within, within, um, employees
who currently work in the state
child welfare agency. They have
kind of different criteria, um,
and they have really targeted
those people for
Example to obtain a master's in
social work as opposed to
relying on the school of social
work to sort of bring them the
students that they have and then
convince them that child welfare
is where they want to work. So,
um, Colorado and Texas are a
couple of examples that we, um,
might look to or think about how
to redesign the program. Um,
again, this is a partnership
that exists between institutions
of higher ed, schools of social
work, and within state child
welfare agency. Um, they then
kind of enter into contracts
that have to
be approved or sort of the
program has to be approved by
the federal government. Um, in
a, in a way that's kind of
similar to Medicaid.
Um, so it's kind of wrapping up
what could New Mexico do to
think about how to kind of
professionalize the child
welfare workforce. Address some
of these gaps that we've seen
over time, as well as, um, get
more kind of professional social
workers working, uh, within the
state's child welfare agency.
Uh, on slide 13, we summarize a
couple of things, um, one, CFD
DFA and the legislature could
work together to identify
performance measures
specifically related to the.
Number of frontline caseworkers
who are licensed in social work.
Um, so this would essentially
say set a goal or a target that
we could work toward and then
report on when it comes to the
composition of the workforce.
A second is, you know, there
have been a variety of
performance, uh, evaluations
conducted by LFC over time that
have touched on, um, different
kind of workforce issues and
recommendations, and those are,
um, the last three bullets. One
is kind of looking to
research-based hiring practices
that do things like provide
realistic job previews, um, so
that people wanting or
interested in working in our
state's child welfare agency
have a more rigorous and
realistic understanding.
Kind of what the job involves
and research shows that tends to
produce a better result when it
comes to retention.
Uh, in addition, CYFD and
schools of social work, um,
could probably come together and
redesign and rethink some of the
way the Title 4A contracts are
structured, um, to provide
greater partnership and also
really target where we're having
challenges one specific example
might be kind of target, um,
recruitment for the program from
within, uh, the existing
workforce that, you know, based
on data likely doesn't have a
social work degree currently.
Um, and then the last thing is
leveraging special
appropriation.
that are already there to pilot
and evaluate, um, strategies to
increase the number of licensed
social workers, um, within CYFD,
particularly that $3 million
that had gone unused, and then
the new 1.7 million to
incentivize masters of social
work attainment.
Um, so that is really all I have
for you pretty narrow and uh
focus today on sort of what's
the current state of the child
welfare workforce, what
opportunities do we have, um, to
kind of address the challenges
that we face as a state.
Let's see
See a show of hands to those who
have questions.
He
Representative to you this way.
If you don't have a question,
just skip over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um, so
one of my questions has to do
with the number of stipend
students that are currently at
CYFD. It says it doesn't say
anything about numbers that have
completed and gone through first
stipend, do you have any
numbers um about that and so Mr.
Chair, Representative Chavez,
we're still working to complete
the total picture. There were 2
institutions we didn't hear back
from. But if you look at the
chart on um page.
I slide 11, we do have numbers
for NMSU and Western kind of
stacked together. Um, and so,
for example, you can see in
2022, there were about 30
stipends awarded from the
institutions. Of those, about 8
defaulted and didn't finish
their term of service. Uh, we
did in this chart sort of, um,
we're counting one student and
one default. So that kind of
gets you that picture. We're
still working.
To complete that chart, um, for
Easterns, we got, uh,
But we'd already printed, so we
can get that update to you and
we're still working with NMHU on
their historic data. So a follow
up question to that, uh, Mr.
Chair, do, do the students, is
there sort of an exit interview
that's taken with uh with the
students why do they leave?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we, um, gathered this data from
the institutions. Um, they
primarily track because they
then have to collect from the
student those payback stipends.
Um, I don't believe we did not
hear a consistent exit interview
kind of processor data to be
able to speak to that though we
heard kind of variety of
anecdotes, um, often in the
arena of it's really
challenging, it's a challenging
place to work, it's a
challenging field.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I'd like to,
you know, maybe they could dig
down a deep, deeper a little bit
into what do they mean by by its
challenging, you know, it could
be a variety of a variety of
things, and I think if we know
that would be really helpful for
us, um, the other, the other
question that I have is that
there's a chart. I don't
remember what page it's on, but
you look at the you have
information there in terms of
the number of students who are
enrolled in social work programs
versus the number who actually
graduate.
Do we know are the institutions
gathering or do they gather any
information in terms of why
they're not graduating? Is it
because of financial reasons?
Did they change their mind? Do
you have a sense of that? Mr.
Chair, Representative Chavez,
thank you for that question
because I should probably
clarify this, um, chart is
essentially a snapshot in any
given year. So in any given
year, there are, there were at
last year 1891 enrolled in 594
that graduated.
But that doesn't necessarily
mean that it's only 13 graduate,
if that makes sense. We would
likely have to look at the data
in a different way to get what
at what you're asking that, that
would be great if we could do
that, yeah, um, and then the
other question that I have is
with regard to the um job titles
and the pay, the pay scale, um,
I don't have a.
Looks like my time is up.
With.
Um, I was gonna ask, it looks
like the, the top paid.
Frontline worker is the worker
who does the investigations.
I don't know what page that's
on.
Um,
Mr. Chair representative,
page 5. Yeah.
Um, so it looks like, no, I'm
sorry, the child, the CPS
placement specialist is the
highest paid worker. What's the
difference between that job and
the CPS investigation worker.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
would likely need to go back and
kind of look at those job
descriptions, um, some of them
are at different levels, so
they're sort of a a laddering
up, um, to be able to do that
comparison. But we could, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, we
could follow up and give you
sort of the job descriptions for
those different roles that would
be.
Great if I could get Mr. Chair,
um, or if we could get actually
the job descriptions for all of
the jobs that are listed on this
table. That would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. Um,
on page 7, where you, um, talk
about the higher education,
student loan repay, uh,
repayment.
How about, do, do, I do we do I
say weepism is social worker one
day, one time qualify for, uh,
public service exemption. I
think we do, right? And the
federal government.
For, for the student loan
forgiveness program. Mr. Chair,
Representative, I don't want to
say something incorrect, so we
need to go look it up. It is my
understanding, yes, um, but can
follow up with details and more
specifics. This one is a
specific program that's an
appropriation to the higher ed
department, but it's 4 CYFD for
student loan repayment and it's
that kind of $432,000 a year. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. I asked
that because that's another
connection between
Federal, um, student loan
forgiveness and state and
perhaps if we can identify who
would qualify under which then
we could increase the pool of,
of funds available for those
that don't, I guess, for
whatever reason. So that was the
reason for that. And then, uh,
on page, um, 10.
Do we, do we have data that
shows um.
The number of
Individuals taking advantage of
these.
Benefits or I don't know for
lack of another word,
how to what to call it, but
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
that is the data on.
Slide 11 for two of the
institutions, we're still
working with Eastern will get
added to the chart and animate
you to gather their data. Um,
this lumps them together. So Mr.
Chairs representative, we could
also follow up with the breakout
by institution if that's
helpful. That would, that would
be helpful. Thank you. I
appreciate that. And then final
question has to do with page 13.
And you know, I
Retention in this in this area
is very difficult. Uh, I began
my career as a clinical social
worker and the first assignment
I got was working with in child
welfare and, um, taking abused,
uh, uh, children.
Um, and, um, it was the most,
um.
Difficult first introduction
into the world of casework and
and social work. So I would in
the recommendations and
opportunities, I would try to
work in, um, viable, um, ways in
which we can, uh, increase our
retention.
And not and and reduce the
burnout and the
PTSD
That's associated in this field
with child welfare workers,
especially those that have to
work closely with, um,
The the most devastating
population in this field. So
that would be an important, very
important, because it, it left
me traumatized and as a result,
I had to leave the field that
particular area of expertise. So
I hear that today from those
that have dropped, um, also. So
somehow we've got to find a way
to
Help
Uh, retain by also providing um
very needed, um, social
emotional support for those case
workers. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chair,
Representative, on slide 4,
you'll see that CYFD exit survey
data that really mirrors some of
what you're sharing, um, and
that 3 million appropriation for
a workforce was really intended
to try to address some of those
issues, sort of the, the, the
behavioral health needs of the
case.
Workers so that they could
continue doing the work and
retention strategies like that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
wanted to point out.
Web page I think it's 6,
something that only 77% of
protective services workforce
has a social work degree. And
you said, of course, in the
presentation, you say this is,
you don't, you don't make it,
you don't, you don't come out
and say this is way too low, but
you talk, you say something
softer like the preferred
education is a social work
degree. I want to share with you
that I was talking to some
lawyers and they were talking
about the litigation, some of
the litigation that
has been brought against the
state and a big area.
was the failure of or
The lawyers really looked at the
qualifications of the
individuals who didn't have
social work degrees, um,
Making decisions and that they
thought that was one of the
reasons that we got such big
judgments against us.
Do you measure?
What
Lack of training.
The financial impact, the lack
of training of this workforce
might have on the state because
of liability issues.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, we, um,
haven't looked at it in that way
or don't kind of have data um in
that arena beyond knowing that
research does predict better
outcomes when when there are
licensed social workers, um, in
the field.
Yeah, and I guess that's my
point, if we know that we
should, we should really make a
targeted area and I want to
commend you for the for the
report, but also the focus on,
on increasing that. Um, I think
it needs to be a really big
priority. Um, and then with
regard to that issue, social
workers, I've been, I've had
meetings with social workers who
complain about the pay scales
within the state and the social
work degree saying that their
degree
their master's degree didn't get
them the credit that they
thought it needed to within the
system because they were at the
same level of people for whom a
master's degree wasn't required.
It was very complex and I was
just wondering if anybody has
gone into that and and we raised
it, Senator, um,
O'Neill and I raised it, um,
with some of the state agencies
in the, in the secretaries who
all kind of blamed Spo.
Um, and I'm like,
Spokan't be the source of all
problems. Is there a way to get
that, um, is there a way to
review that is or do your does
your office review that, um,
issue because I think that's
another problem for social
workers leaving when they're
not when they're experiencing
degrees are not being valued.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Cedo Lopez, our office doesn't
review that specifically. What I
will note about the data on
slide 5 is that is the sort of
caseworker salary in this state
to caseworker salary in other
states. Our system doesn't
really account for or
incentivize currently the
attainment of master's level
social workers within the
existing
structure. be another priority
and
I have one more question. No.
OK, I'll give it to somebody who
hasn't spoken. OK, great. Thank
you. Senator Ferrari. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, um, I will try
not to be redundant.
I'm concerned we have all these
ideas of how we want to
strengthen the child welfare
workforce, um,
but, um,
thank you. um.
When you have, um,
Reports of lack of support from
leadership being
We above and beyond the other um
complaints of um reasons for
leaving, um, shouldn't we
concentrate on doing that as
well as the other things to
incentivize people to get, um,
credentialed within the system
and then, um, coming into the
system, uh, the stipends and
things like that.
If, if we could show improve how
that's a great place to work. I
think we would, um, have the
retention as well as the
recruitment.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrari, um, I think in this
report we're sort of looking at
the workforce overall and some
opportunities, but not, um,
suggesting that what you're
proposing is not something we
should also focus on.
I think it would make what we
fund more effective and also,
can you tell me why the governor
vetoed, um.
Well, what was the nature of the
meeting, right, thank you.
Uh, the licensed social workers,
um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the appropriation specifically
reauthorized $3000 to address
CYFD's, uh, workforce plan and
directed a targeting to the
recruitment and retention of
licensed social workers. The
governor's veto, vetoed the
words licensed social worker,
which is what we definitely
need, um, and how we, um
grow the 530, well, there's 530
positions, but we're short, um,
like 200, I believe you said,
um, oh, Mr. Chair
Representative, that was if, if
the state were to give you some,
put some numbers behind
potential ideas. So, um, if the
state were to want to set a
target for the number of
licensed social workers within
protective services.
Uh, to reach 50% of kind of
those frontline caseworkers.
CYFD would need about 200 more
social workers. So that's what
that number is, sort of putting
numbers around potential goals.
That sounds good. And that
reminds me, um, you mentioned
something about uh the plan.
Does CYFD have a plan that
they've applied for approval or
is there no plan or they're
waiting for approval. Um, so Mr.
Chair, Representative Ferrari, I
imagine you are referencing the
states, um, Families First
prevention, uh, Services Act,
the prevention plan, um, our
state has submitted, uh, a plan,
several iterations, um, I
believe last submitted in, uh,
last year, we have received
feedback from
The federal government and it is
our understanding that CYFT is
working to address some of that
feedback and resubmit.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. So the
first thing that caught my eye
was that 7%. It's like, oh crap.
I mean, we're in deep trouble,
um.
Do you have a sense of how we
compare to other states?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and Vice
Chair, we did look into some of
that data. It is hard to find
comparisons. Um, we found a
couple of comparisons are in the
range of 40 to 50% while also
finding research nationally
about this being a challenge for
child welfare agencies decline
in the number of social workers
as well as a decline in interest
in in people wanting to go into
child welfare, um,
so don't have great benchmark
comparisons.
And Mr. Chair.
So who is work? I mean, is, is
there, are they teachers, are
they, you know, business major,
uh, do you have a sense of who
the other 93% are? Um, Mr.
Chair, Vice Chair, um, that data
is housed at CYFD, so within the
state's personal system. We
don't collect that data at the
state level. An agency can
collect it. Um, we, we do not
have it. What I can share with
you is currently job postings.
Um, for caseworker positions,
preference, uh, a bachelor's in
social work. Note that other
fields are acceptable, things
like psychology, uh, or
education and also note that a
high school credential with 4
years of experience can be
substituted, um, how that
actually translates in terms of
a breakdown for the workforce,
um, is something that I don't
have access to.
Mr. Chair, wow, that's really
scary. High school with 4 years
like, OK, um, so my last
question, Mr. Chair, is on, on
slide 11, under defaulted, does
that mean they didn't complete
the, the education or they
didn't complete their time at
CYFD. Chair, Vice Chair, that is
that they did not complete the
work component at CYFD and
therefore needed to pay back the
tips. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just really quickly, thanks so
much, um, and I will tell, uh,
the vice chair that having
worked in this system as a
court-appointed attorney for a
long time. They have degrees in
criminal justice. They, um, and
they're called workers. They're
not called social workers, but
when um we started doing, um,
and it was in in Sandoval
County, uh, implemented a model
where
A social worker was appointed by
the court, a licensed social
worker appointed by the court,
the cases started going so much
more smoothly, and that is what
the Office of Family
Representation is based on that
model. The, um, Kristen Conley
and Leslie Jones, um, part of
that and it made it better
because the social worker knew
so much more about helping
families. It made it better for
the kids. It made it better for
the parents, even
No matter what the outcome, if
there was actually, um,
and ending of the parental
rights, very often it was um
For a guardianship or so it
wasn't, they didn't do a
termination of parental rights.
They went with the family
guardianship or something like
that, which is much less
negative to the children and the
families. And it was because of
the presence.
I, I attributed it to the
presence of a social licensed
social worker on the case. Now,
um, I, but I worked with the LSC
for years with um Charles and,
and with um
Uh, John, on
doing the, um,
I, uh, it used to be called
after alternative facts, I
changed it to um differential
response. So it's a differential
response rather than alternative
response because there were no
alternative facts in it, but
that did call for the, the
hiring of licensed social
workers. So I have a feeling
that the veto was because they
aren't there and they don't want
to be told they can't spend the
money on other kinds of workers.
But the difference
Between the caseworkers and the
social workers is, is very, very
dramatic and consequential.
So.
After that observation, just so
many dittos, I, I mean it, you
know, I often complain health
care about people get paid and
so forth, but the social workers
are so fundamental to the health
of the state. I mean, it, it, it
is the, um, I mean, think of a
chain reaction or whatever where
healthcare is delivered later
that so much wouldn't be
delivered as social workers were
able to apply their skills to
these family situations and so
again, we can't give
Up to fight to get that more
towards the 50% plus category.
And, um, thank you for your
observations on that, just how
much easier it would be and how
much and think of the outcome
for the family. Um, just, I, I
want to point out a couple of
things in, in your work and, and
I want to tell you what great
work that you are doing here. I
mean, and you're, you're helping
us identify potential policy
solutions and uh and I want to.
Encourage the LFC staff to
continue to bring policy
solutions to us because we don't
have the staff to investigate
that. So, uh, like on, uh, page
4 where you cite 19%
uh are leaving because of lack
of leadership support. If we
could, and people have kind of
edged towards that. If we could
drill down on that and know what
that was, and I see that as a
of the LFC. Now that's just
maybe my vision, but we don't
have anybody else who's gonna do
it and so I, I hope that we
continue in this manner. I, I
know you wouldn't be able to
say, oh, we know that it's this,
this and that for better
leadership support. So anyway,
great job in leading us, but
keep, keep going forward and
keep digging deeper, the, um, I
have one minute left and I just,
uh,
I, I'd love your bullet points
here.
And
the, the question is, what I
find frustrating is that how do
we as a state government
coordinate with the executive in
these departments to set up the
answers to these questions. I
mean, so within the state task
force, it includes you all from
LFC from my observation,
participating with those others
to then do lay out what our
potential answers looking at
other states and building
project management and the goals
that go along with it so.
That we're disciplined and we
don't just kind of say, well,
Mikey's gonna do it, you know,
we all, we all do it. So thank
you, um, uh, you give me a lot
of hope that we'll get to the
bottom of this and that
unfortunately without our leader
here, we're going to have to
pick up the mantle of social
work, uh, this committee and
carry forward it's incredible
impact. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Vincent, do you
have anything?
representative Herndon, do you
have any questions, Mr. Chair.
And so I, I would direct your
attention to page 13, where
there are the recommendations
and opportunities to strengthen
the child welfare workforce. And
one of the things that happened
a year ago was that we
implemented mental health rooms
in all of our schools and so
they need to be staffed by
interns, and I'm just
Destined to you among your
recommendations, that it could
be for interns working in these
mental health rooms, then they
would also become more engaged
with the children and with child
welfare, welfare systems that
might make them be more engaged
and then participate in
something called Grow Our Own
right here. They'll be going to
school here and and then
strengthening that program. And
then the other thing is with
respect to all of these items
that are listed here, some of
you are referring to
CYFD and DFA uh making these
implementing these items, these
are the recommendations you made
to them as CYFD and have they
said yes or no?
And the same with DFA. Can you
please explain that?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, my pages have gotten
mixed up, but that's OK. Um,
overall, it's OK, um, they are,
the recommendations that you see
on that page are actually
recommendations that LFC has
made over time. Some of them
going back to a program
evaluation, um, from 2011. Um, I
think we have had sort of
different stops and starts in
terms of, um,
Implementation when it comes to
those things and kind of as you
highlight, a lot of the
recommendations are sort of in
the arena of the executive side.
um, while, you know, certainly
the legislature has done some
things to try to incentivize
things like um social work.
So are you saying there is
something that you think the
legislature could do to
implement these recommendations.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, what I would offer is,
you know, in the budgeting
process, for example, the
targeting of funds to certain
actions, um, can encourage um
implementation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, madam.
Anybody else? I've got one, just
one question for you. Is there
any evidence that the department
is using the 4E program
currently to uh encourage
existing staff to return to
school and get their master's
degree.
Or bachelor's, I guess if
they're hiring high school to
people, they ought to be using
it to get at least a BSW out of
it.
Mr. Chair, um,
when we met with the schools of
social work, they did identify a
few instances of that happening.
Um, but also shared, it could
likely be much more robust, um,
kind of with focused attention
there.
Well, thank you so much for the
presentation. It's really been
helpful and, uh, uh, we look
forward to seeing to what extent
it'll make a difference in the
future with CYFD and Mr. Chair,
I will not, you'll see there was
some incomplete data on the
schools of social work as those
come in, we would be glad to
kind of give you all an update
for the other two, yeah, that's
great. And there is somebody
here from CYFD, uh, I, I've
already forgotten your name
though. I'm sorry, sir. The new
head, the deputy deputy
secretary for administrative
services.
Operation said CFT.
OK, IT and, well, HR this is
perfect. Thank you so much.
Thanks for being here with us
and good luck in the new job.
Thank you very much.
Excellent, thanks. So we do have
a couple of people who've signed
up for public comment, uh, is
Doctor Trista Hughes here?
Come on up and use the mic. You
just have to push the little uh
human being icon there whatever.
Is it working? OK, thank you. Hi
everyone, my name is Trista
Hughes. I'm a physician here in
Socorro practicing family
medicine and obstetrics, and I'm
here to speak on behalf of
firstborn and more of Socorro.
There are local home visiting
program. I work very closely
with. And so they provide home
visits for a lot of my patients,
so I see patients, um, in two
different capacities here as
family medicine and I work with
them more as for.
Prenatal care and obstetrics. So
in pregnancy, a large percentage
of our patients are referred to
them and follow with them
throughout the pregnancy,
postpartum period and throughout
early childhood, um, home
visiting programs are incredibly
valuable and I think an
underused resources, a resource
kind of nationwide um home
visits, uh, in this context
result in decreased postpartum
depression, anxiety.
have been shown to reduce rates
of intimate partner violence,
uh, child abuse, etc. so they're
very valuable, um, what I love
about our program here in
Socorro, it's very family
centered relationship based my
patient grow to have really
close relationships with the
people that they follow with,
and that builds a lot of trust.
And that's essential for me as a
practitioner because I typically
have very short periods of time
with patients, and I see them,
you know, frequently and
Pregnancy and that lets me to
build on that relationship, but
I don't get that same sort of
interaction as somebody who can
go to them in their own space on
their own terms. And see their
day to day, the way that I
can't. I frequently get, you
know, their best face forward,
um, and so I've, I've found
these programs really beneficial
for my patients. My patients
come to me and tell me that they
feel supported, that they have,
you know, the firstborn is
helping them to navigate things
that they might not know how to
navigate.
Otherwise, um, and so that's
during pregnancy, but also in
early childhood. I have a number
of patients and even friends in
the community who have followed
with firstborn, um, and are
really grateful for all the
things that they do for our
community. So I just wanted to
come here today and say that I'm
so grateful to have them, um, to
support my patients and my
community and also, you know, to
answer anything that I could as
a physician if you guys had any
questions about that.
Well, thank you very much,
doctor, and, and thanks for
coming in and expressing your
experience with firstborn. And I
see several other people with
first born, um,
Um, affiliation signed in but
didn't ask to speak, but there
is one more, and that's Diana
Oforiwa. Oriwa.
Is that the way you say it?
Thanks so much. I have a great
experience with firstborn and
more. I'm from Ghana. My husband
is a student at Tech. He came to
do a PhD and through that I got
pregnant and a friend introduced
me to Martha. And ever since I
met Matha.
Life has never been the same.
Anything that we need.
I will tell my tamata we need
this.
And when you have, he provides
for us. When I was when I gave
birth, there was some things
that I don't have like diaper
change and those things, diaper
change table. I told Martha we
don't have that. Martha brought
us a diaper chain table, and
anything that we need that
matter has like baby clothes,
even he has extended to my
children, the grownups ones.
They provide a lot of clothes
and those things for us.
And these days you have add
something to the program that is
very beneficial. The bags that
they bring with the vegetables
and those things. We really
appreciate it. It goes well for
us, and whenever matter comes
and I tell him anything that has
happened to the baby. Like, for
instance, he came the last time
and I told Matada the baby
tastes milk in the evening when
he's sleeping, and he said that
that the milk will spoil the
teeth, so sometimes we should
try.
What and that one too is really
helping. First, more and more
has really we have really
benefit from it. And whenever
matter comes around in the
issues, even family issues, I
can even discuss it with Martha
and it's very, very, very, very
helping. Mata is a very good
home visitor that we really
appreciate everything through
1st
1st born and more, we have
gotten. We thank you so much. We
are
that the program will extend
more and more benefits will come
from it. We thank you so much.
Well, thank you for coming in
and for bringing examples.
This, this turned into a show
and tell. It's very it's very
good.
Now we have 2 people who signed
up to make public comment online
and are they still on, uh, Leo?
Or some grace, so we have Nat
Dean.
Hey
Thank you.
Yes, I was, it muted me then
unmuted me, then muted me again.
Are you there, Nat?
Can you hear me?
Can you hear me?
Just text
Can you hear me?
Hello.
She texted me the Zoom chat is
turned off, so I'm asking you is
public comment 2 or 3 minutes. I
signed in, but Chad is disabled.
And it's 3 minutes.
Hello, can you hear me? beyond
my Can you hear me now?
Hello, can you hear me?
Hello, can you hear me?
That if you can hear us, they're
working on the tech, so hold
tight. You can hear us, they're
working on the tech so hold
tight.
Hello.
Can you hear me?
Hm
Hello, can you hear me?
Mr. Chair, while we're waiting,
can I just before you leave, uh
thank you for being in the
services they're so
fundamentally critical. I just
want to thank you for having the
wisdom to do all that and to be
here.
Thank you.
Hello, can you hear me?
Hello, can you hear me?
Mhm.
Hello,
can you hear me tell a joke.
Um, they have to be clean.
Dad,
are we getting close to getting
this resolved or should we just
ask them to they'll they'll sign
up for tomorrow again, I think,
I think we'll just do that at
this point, um, and Mike
McMillan who signed up, we're
gonna ask you to, to be patient
with us and sign back up for
tomorrow and we'll hear you
tomorrow. And with that we'll
call the meeting adjourned for
the day. Thank you all.
In the morning at 9.
Is it 9:30? 9:30 a.m. with
Quando Los Ninos. All right,
sleep in.
