Representative Pamela Herndon, I
represent House District 28. The
exciting district where you will
be able to join us for Linwood
Park Heights night on the last
Saturday in July. Put that on
your calendars right now. I want
to see each and every one of you
there, and thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's always a pleasure to
introduce myself.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Chavez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. That's a hard
act to follow. Um, I'm
Representative Eleanor Chavez, I
represent the uh West side of
Albuquerque and the Parito Mesa
in the South Valley.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Joanne
Ferrari, um, representative for
House District 37 in Donana
County and kind of the northeast
part of Las Cruces.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Liz Thompson, um, House District
24, which is in the heart of the
shopping district. If you were
in our caucus, you'll get the
joke.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
John Blockhouse District 51 in
beautiful Otero County. I
represent Almo Gordo, and it's
great to be here in cold
freezing Santa Fe. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
And uh go ahead uh uh Sandra,
why don't you start the staff
introductions off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Xander
Dawson, uh, lead staff for this
committee, and, um, joining me
is Andrea Lazaro. Uh, she's a
staff attorney with the LCS. We
have Grace Balderrama. She's a
proofreader with the LCS
considering maybe going to law
school, so we'll, we'll see if
that title changes soon. And
then uh we have Ruby and
Esquivel uh joining us from LFC.
What does it say that if after
spending the entire summer
hearing about the shortage of
healthcare personnel, our staff
person decides to become an
attorney
Like the world has a shortage of
attorneys. Come on, uh, good
morning, everyone. I'm state
Senator Jerry or TZ Pino, a
social worker.
perfectly valid profession, uh,
to consider, uh, and currently
the senator representing
District 12, a district which
has been moved on the map from
the heart of Albuquerque.
And in the new year we'll be in
Rio Rancho and Ventana Ranch.
Half in Sandoval County, half.
In um
Bern Leo County and which
represents and which was the
only, actually that was the
change in the Senate. There's
now one more Republican senator
than there was before the
election, and
There were a couple of
Trade-offs, one Democrat, one
Republican lost, but then this
new district went Republican, so
my old district has now become a
Republican district.
For which I am responsible.
And then
I have an announcement to read.
Um
I have an announcement to make
regarding virtual public
comment. This is something we
we're supposed to say at the
start of the meeting for people
online.
There are new guidelines and
instructions that have been
posted to the website.
To register
Use the raise hand feature in
Zoom when public comment begins.
That makes it pretty simple. Do
not raise your hand.
Unless it is to register for
public comment.
And do not raise your hand until
public comment begins.
And with that, we'll get started
on our agenda for the day and
the first item is the New Mexico
justice reinvestment initiative
Working Group.
That is quite a name, summary of
findings and recommendations,
and with us we have Colleen
Baganovic, the senior policy
specialist with the Crime and
Justice Institute, and we have
Melanie Pitkin.
The policy specialist with the
Crime and Justice Institute and
welcome and thank you for being
here this morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you so much for having us this
morning. Um, as the chair
mentioned, my name is Melanie
Pitkin. I'm a policy specialist
with the Crime and Justice
Institute. I'm joined by my
colleague,
Colleen Baganovitch, a senior
policy specialist with the Crime
and Justice Institute.
We are here to share the key
findings from the New Mexico
justice reinvestment working
group, um, as well as their
policy recommendations.
To start off, I wanted to give
an overview of our organization,
the Crime and Justice Institute
or CJI is a nonpartisan
nonprofit organization that
works with local, state, and
national partners to use data
and research to create
responsive solutions to criminal
justice challenges.
Data-driven decision making is
the basis of our approach to
technical assistance at CJI.
Well they're studying a county
or statewide system, the
technical assistance involved
involves an analysis of
qualitative and quantitative
data, the facilitation of
conversations among local
stakeholders and comprehensive
implementation assistance.
CJI is one of two technical
assistance providers for the
Justice reinvestment Initiative,
or JRI.
As CJI's ongoing assistance in
New Mexico, uh, is funded by
JRI. We wanted to provide a bit
more background about the
initiative.
JRI is funded by the DOJ Bureau
of Justice Assistance and
utilizes CJI to provide
technical assistance to state
partners interested in using
data to analyze and improve
their justice systems.
JRI state leaders work with
experts to conduct data
analysis, develop and implement
solutions to criminal justice
challenges and maximize
resources to achieve stronger
and safer communities.
JRI has received bipartisan
congressional support since 2010
and to date, 44 states have used
JRI to improve their justice
systems.
Through JRI states have
collectively saved more than
$3.2 billion. And these savings
allow states to invest hundreds
of millions in effective
supervision and treatment
programs to make communities
safer.
Each state is then given the
flexibility to determine how to
direct these savings to achieve
its public safety goals. And I
apologize for not flagging
sooner, but I'm gonna move now
on to slide 4.
So how does JRI generate these
cost savings. There I support
focuses on 3 goals to reduce the
number of people cycling through
the system, to shift resources
into leverage cost savings to
prioritize and improve public
safety.
I'm moving on to slide 5. As I
mentioned earlier, 44 states
have engaged in JRI.
CJI is currently supporting
phase one efforts in both New
Mexico and North Dakota.
Um, so I mentioned phase one,
which brings me to the two
phases of JRI on slide 6.
And the first side, first phase
of JRI support, CJI works with a
bipartisan multi-sector group of
state and local policy experts
to collect and analyze data from
across state and local agencies
to spotlight the most pressing
trends and drivers of crime,
recidivism, and costs.
Uh, meet with a range of
stakeholders to gather
qualitative data from state
leaders, local experts, and
people doing the frontline work.
Assess statutes, policies, and
current practices and deliver
findings and policy options to
state leaders and stakeholders.
The second phase of JRI support
uh involves assistance with
implementation of those
policies, assessing the outcomes
and then reinvesting the cost
savings into programs that
sustain prolonged success.
So how is phase one, the phase
one JRI process looked in New
Mexico, uh, in the summer of
2023, state leadership invited
CJI into the state to provide
technical assistance through JRI
specifically looking at the
nexus of the criminal justice
and public health systems.
CJI gathered and analyzed
qualitative and quantitative
data from across the state and
presented this data to a working
group of New Mexico leaders,
including legislators, the
executive branch, law
enforcement, and the courts.
Working group is chaired by
Captain Kevin Burns of the San
Juan County Sheriff's Office.
Working group identified key
data findings and policy
recommendations to address these
findings, which were compiled
into a report that will be
published on the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission's website
later this week.
Moving on to slide 7.
So we'll start with the working
group's key findings to develop
these findings, the working
group reviewed qualitative and
quantitative data from across
the state, including law
enforcement, jails, courts,
prisons, and behavioral health
data.
I'm moving on to slide 8.
The overarching challenge
identified by the working group
is that the substantial gap in
behavioral health services has
created an interrupted cycle of
response, threatening public
safety by straining the
resources designed to address
public safety threats.
The criminal justice system has
become a de facto treatment
provider in the state, and law
enforcement has assumed a
primary role in responding to
behavioral health crises.
Law enforcement will always
answer the call, but they are
not always the best response.
Public safety response to the
state's public health challenges
has resulted in more individuals
entering the criminal justice
system with the behavioral
health need who are not
receiving the necessary
treatment interventions.
The situation has contributed to
poor public safety outcomes.
In fact, New Mexico had the
highest violent crime rate in
the country in 2022.
Responding to crises of
low-level crimes driven by
substance use, strains law
enforcement resources and limits
their capacity to focus on more
serious threats to public
safety.
Um, moving on to slide number 9.
Working group found that the
scarcity of behavioral health
treatment impacts the entire
justice system.
Over the last decade, the
prevalence of unmet behavioral
health needs in New Mexico has
increased considerably.
Where there has been a lack of
direction from the state on
these issues, various agencies
and counties across the state
have been forced to react to
these problems rather than
proactive intervention or
prevention.
From the individual's first
point of interaction with the
justice system all the way
through to reentry and community
supervision, comprehensive
services are needed to help that
individual not to come back into
the system, while accountability
is necessary to ensure the
safety of the community.
Working group took a deep dive
into these issues, and today we
will share a summary of the
qualitative and quantitative
data they analyzed over the
course of 7 months.
Moving on now to slide 10.
One of the working groups key
findings is the unmet behavioral
health needs are driving
entrance into the criminal
justice system.
New Mexico's rates of substance
use disorder are are higher than
the national averages.
And research shows that the
justice involved population
experiences these issues at a
much higher rate than the
general public.
On site 11, uh, this graphic
which uses national data,
depicts out individuals with
behavioral health needs are
significantly overrepresented in
the criminal justice system.
These figures illustrate a
higher prevalence of both
serious psychological distress
and alcohol use or dependency in
both prisons and jails when
compared to the general
population.
It's also important to note that
the most recent national data
that we have on individuals with
behavioral health needs in the
criminal justice system is
nearly 15 years old. A time gap
highlighting the need for better
data on the behavioral health
challenges facing justice
involve individuals just a quick
clarification, these are New
Mexico data or national data?
That's national data.
Thank you, chair.
All right, um, moving to slide
12, which is also national data.
Uh, this is a deeper dive into
the behavioral health
backgrounds of individuals in
the criminal justice system.
This graph shows that about 3
out of 4 individuals said they
had received mental health
treatment in their lifetime
prior to jail or prison
admission.
This crap also breaks down these
needs by type of care received.
About 40% of incarcerated people
who met the threshold for
serious psychological distress,
said they had stayed overnight
in a hospital, and about 62%
said they had taken prescription
medicine prior to incarceration.
Many individuals identified as
having severe psychological
distress also reported receiving
mental health care since
admission or at the time of the,
um, moving on to slide 13, which
is our last national data slide
before we move into some more
specific New Mexico numbers, um,
to focus in a bit on substance
use disorder. This graph shows
the prevalence of addiction and
the carceral setting.
From 2007 to 2009, more than
half the individuals in prisons
and jails met criteria for drug
abuse or dependent.
All right, here on slide 14, um,
which has quite a, a bit of
information and we're gonna turn
to New Mexico's justice involved
population.
Um, on the state level and in
many counties as I'm sure this
committee is well aware, there
are some challenges with data
regarding behavioral health
needs, um, which is consistent
in municipalities across the
country.
To offset the gap in data, the
working group reviewed anecdotal
data plans from reliable
resources in the state.
In terms of qualitative data,
the Bernalo County Metropolitan
Detention Center or MDC provided
data from one day regarding who
was currently in their facility.
The snapshot gave some insight
as to what a typical day looks
like for the state's largest
detention center and contributor
to the overall prison
population.
From here you can see about half
of the individuals reported they
were unhoused and almost 3 out
of 4 individuals reported they
were unemployed.
Regarding behavioral health,
since the MDC utilizes validated
instruments to assess for
behavioral health needs as
detailed in the graphic on the
right side of that slide. You
can see that about half of that
daily population scored as
medium to high knees.
It's important to also highlight
here that these individuals came
into the facility with these
conditions pre-existing and
would have been identified by
law enforcement and pre-trial
court appearances, even if not
form formally assessed. I'm
moving on to slide 15, um, we'll
pivot to statewide data.
Individuals entering New Mexico
State prison facilities are
assessed by behavioral health
services during the intake
process and are given an average
score from 0 to 5.
These mental health codes
indicate the level of need um
with higher numbers indicating a
higher level of need, 5 being
the highest and 0 being the
lowest.
With that, over 4 years, mental
health needs have increased by
22%, with the percentage of
incarcerated people indicating a
need for any level of mental
health care, increasing from 37%
in 2019 to 45% in 2023.
I'm looking at the graph,
besides those indicating no
mental health needs, who has
indicated by score 0 in gray.
You can see the largest
percentage of the population
scored a 3 out of 5, which is
indicated in red, uh, which
means that those folks need a
moderate mental health needs and
a need for psychiatric
medication.
This group increased 28% since
20.
Moving on to slide 16 for the
next key data finding.
Working group found that low
level offenses driven by
substance use are draining
public safety resources,
including law enforcement,
courts, and supervision that
could otherwise focus on more
serious threats to public
safety.
Diverting substance use
challenges to the public health
system would free up public
safety resources to focus on
crime reduction.
Um, moving on to slide 17, uh,
take a quick step back and kind
of lay a little more groundwork
across the country on behavioral
health needs are not met by
treatment resources, individuals
involved frequently end up in
the justice system.
National research demonstrates
that police spend more time
responding to low-level calls
for service than any other type
of emergency calls with between
1/25 and 2/3 of those calls
typically involving some type of
mental health, medical or other
non-criminal activity that could
otherwise be diverted to mental
health crisis or other first
responders.
Recent studies have shown that
early intervention and
deflection for individuals whose
substance use has led to
criminal behavior, requires
thorough evaluation and
community partnership to produce
successful outcomes in reducing
crime and improving, improving
lives.
Within this theme of misdirected
resources, one of the working
group's key findings was the
predominant presence of
individuals going through the
criminal justice system with a
4th degree felony as their most
serious offense.
The graph here shows case
filings, but the same is true
for prison and community super
supervision admissions as well
as reentries into prison
facilities.
To bring it back to behavioral
health. The the data also
indicated that the most common
4th degree felony found
throughout stages of the
criminal justice system was
felony possession of a
controlled substance.
Moving on to slide 19 to delve a
little deeper into that, that
data point. Um, here are the top
5 most common 4th degree
felonies across data sets
analyzed by the working group.
According to these analyses,
felony possession of a
controlled substance was
consistently the most common 4th
degree felony. Making up around
1/3 of all 4th degree felony
court cases and admissions.
The next most common 4th degree
felonies make up less than 10%
of offenses in this class.
Although a great deal of
resources are spent on these
offenses. There's little effect
on individuals' behavior and
stakeholders reported a lack of
accountability among this
population as well as a lack of
available treatment resources.
Moving on to slide 20.
Uh, so what is this data look
like in, in out in New Mexico.
Public safety resources are
focused on the population with
behavioral health needs, while
recent data shows that rates of
serious certain serious crimes
continue to be well above the
average.
Stakeholders noted that these
persistently high crime rates
are due to a variety of factors,
and while on law enforcement
respond to every call regardless
of crime type, low-level
criminal conduct driven by
substance use contributes to the
highest call volume and use of
resources across the state.
In some areas, transporting an
individual to mental health care
takes an officer off the street
for an entire 8 hour shift.
These scenarios are common
across rural areas in New Mexico
and worsen as the prevalence of
crime increases.
Stakeholders also shared that
while brief periods of
incarceration may interrupt the
incidents without appropriate
supervision and wraparound care.
There's little prevention in
place and subsequent criminal
behavior seems unaffected by the
threat of incarceration.
Um, moving on to slide 21.
Despite these challenges, it's
important to note the progress
in Mexico has made to address
behavioral health separate from
the criminal justice system.
This includes the formation of
Albuquerque Community Safety
Department and New Mexico's high
utilization of the National 988
suicide and Crisis Lifeline.
Although New Mexico has
developed, state and local
behavioral health programs for
justice involved individuals.
Many of these programs are small
or geographically limited and do
not meet the scale and scope of
the need for behavioral health
support.
For example, although 988 call
volume has increased 73% from
2022 to 2024. A large percentage
of calls are still transferred
to law enforcement in rural
areas where resources are
scarce.
Across the state, behavioral
health alternatives to
incarceration vary greatly
depending on location.
Uh, moving on to slide 22.
Beyond entrance to the system,
the working group also found
that the misdirection of public
safety responses to public
health challenges is not only
contributing to initial contact
with the justice system, but
also driving recidivism.
Uh, moving on to slide 23.
Across the state, stakeholders
reported frustration at
individuals booking into county
detention facilities who are
experiencing behavioral health
crises to then be released
quickly and without additional
supports.
County detention facilities
reported challenges connecting
individuals to resources.
Even if someone is incarcerated
for a short period of time, they
may lose stabilizing factors.
This could include losing
connections to treatment,
housing, employment, and family.
This revolving door is not only
a challenge for jails, but
prisons are also seeing
individuals with underlying drug
possession charges, cycle in and
out.
Many diversion programs are
restricted to first-time
nonviolent offenders. So when
someone's struggling with
addiction is involved in the
justice system. It's
increasingly challenging to find
a way out.
I'm moving on to slide 24.
Uh, so in addition to this being
a consistent theme and
stakeholder interviews, uh, this
is also something that the
working group saw in the data.
The Community supervision data
shows that among individuals who
had at least one probation or
parole violation, about 80% had
a violation related to substance
and alcohol issues.
This this percentage was
consistent across time and
community supervision types.
What is driving this high rate
of substance-related violations,
interviews with stakeholders
noted several challenges in the
re-entry process, including
access to housing across the
state, long delays in getting
into treatment and a lack of
understanding about the
treatment resources available in
their communities.
Moving on to slide 25.
Continue on this topic of
violations. Well, the percentage
of individuals with violations
has decreased over time, the
number of violations per
individual is going up.
The average number of probation
violations among those who had
at least one violation increased
nearly 80% from 5 violations per
person in 2014 to almost 9
violations in 2022.
There's a similar trend with
parole violations with an
increase from 23% from 6.2
violations per person in 2015 to
almost 8 in 2020.
And moving on to slide 26.
Working groups analysis also
took a look at new admissions in
2023 and compared those who had
a prior admission during the
time frame of the data provided
and those whose 2023 admission
was the first in the data.
One such analysis was a
comparison of the most serious
crime category associated with
the 2023 admission.
According to the data, 31% of
the readmissions or uh that's
the individuals who had a prior
admission and a drug offense as
their most serious offense when
admitted in 2023.
Which is almost 1/3 higher than
the 2020 22% of individuals who
did not have a prior admission.
The data indicates that
individuals are returning to
prison are more likely to have a
drug offense.
Uh, moving on to slide 27, um,
to wrap up the key findings.
As part of the discussion of
behavioral health and
recidivism, the working group
reviewed research and best
practices related to the
underlying drivers of criminal
behavior and found that
addressing risk factors is
critical to reducing justice
system involvement and
recidivism.
For for example, and an
individual with an untreated
substance use disorder is
unlikely to maintain employment
or abstain from criminal
behavior until they receive the
appropriate substance use
treatment.
Targeting criminogenic risks
like substance use disorder is
dependent on assessing for those
risks.
Across the justice system, the
working group found limited
utilization of assessments to
target risk factors including
substance use.
I'm moving on to slide 28.
Um, that concludes our overview
of the working group's key data
findings, which will be
available in more detail in the
working group's report.
on the key data findings, the
working group's next step was to
convene in subcommittees to
develop policy recommendations.
Moving on to slide 29.
Working group determined
recommendations in these 4 key
policy areas as a comprehensive
package to address New Mexico's
challenge.
Um, you have a summarized
version of all 19
recommendations and the the New
Mexico's public safety challenge
document, which was the single
sheet in addition to the packet.
For the purposes of this
presentation, we'll give an
overview of the working group's
priorities within each policy
area and provide some brief
context on how they reach these
priorities.
The subgroups reviewed key data
findings and best practices from
across the country to develop
these recommendations.
Just to reiterate these
recommendations were developed
by the working group, which is
composed of New Mexico leaders.
Although we are presenting them
here today, our role is to
support the working groups
process and the working group's
decision making.
Over the course of the JRI
process, the working group
didn't dedicated their time and
effort to reviewing the data and
research, uh, best practices and
policy examples to reach this
package of responsive solutions.
Moving on to slide 30, this is
the first key policy area, which
is about aligning public safety
and public health resources to
focus law enforcement on serious
public safety threats and
behavioral health providers on
addiction and mental health.
I'm moving to slide 31.
The working group found that
current public safety responses
do not produce positive public
health outcomes.
Across the state, interviews
with law enforcement indicated a
cycle of interacting with the
same individuals engaged in the
same misconduct repeatedly with
little change in their behavior.
Research shows that an estimated
65% of the US prison population
has an active substance use
disorder, and that another 20%
did not meet the official
criteria for substance use
disorder, but we're under the
influence of drugs or alcohol at
the time of their crime.
Working group considered these
findings at length.
Also reviewing best practice
examples from other states that
have seen positive outcomes from
earlier intervention efforts and
appropriate responses for
addiction, uh, for individuals
dealing with addiction and
mental health issues.
With public safety being a top
concern for New Mexico. The
working group determined that
deflecting these individuals out
of the system and into treatment
would allow law enforcement to
focus their resources on more
serious threats to their
communities.
Moving on to slide 32 with the
next key policy area, which is
focusing prison resources on
serious and violent, uh, on
slide 23, we'll go into the
working group's discussion in
that policy area, sorry, slide
33.
This group of policy
recommendations focuses on the
over-reliance of public safety
resources to address behavioral
health-related offenses, which
pulls from the capacity to
respond to more serious offenses
and violations.
Working group discussed the
importance of utilizing
evidence-based interventions
proven to help individuals
struggling with addiction to
exit the criminal justice
system.
Within this group of
recommendations, the working
groups on opportunity,
opportunity to better utilize
existing resources.
Interviews with stakeholders
know existing barriers to
diversion options that include
the underutilization of New
Mexico's treatment courts, which
statewide are utilized at an
average of about 50% of capacity
due to both eligibility and
condition.
Uh, moving on to slide 34.
The working group's next area of
focus is prioritizing resources
for high utilizers of the
system.
Flight 35.
As we discussed previously, the
working group found that
individuals in the justice
system are not receiving an
assessment-based continuum of
care.
Use of assessments is generally
lacking across the justice
system and when assessments are
utilized, they're rarely shared
between jails and prisons or
from jails and prisons to
community-based providers.
The working group highlighted
the importance not only of
utilizing and sharing
assessments, but also of
ensuring access to continuum of
care, the individuals can
receive their assessed level of
treatment without interruptions
based on transfers between
facilities and released to the
community.
Um, slide 36 for the last
category of uh recommendations.
In New Mexico, the lack of
infrastructural support,
reliable funding streams, and
intergovernmental collaboration
has been a consistent challenge.
The working group recognized the
need to address this challenge
and has recommended solutions to
support the sustainability of
its policy 37.
To promote the savings and
sustainability, the working
group discussed the importance
of building systems to support
the training and staffing needs
of the public safety and public
health systems and to foster
long-term collaboration without
putting additional
responsibilities and burdens on
staff.
Um, and slide 38 to wrap up, um,
in summary, the working group
found that New Mexico
communities suffer from
insufficient mental health and
addiction services that divert
law enforcement resources away
from resolving more serious
public safety threats.
After analyzing data to reach
key data findings, working group
developed these policy
recommendations to move mental
health and addiction treatment
and crisis response to the
public health system, thereby
allowing law enforcement to
focus on public, on more serious
public.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you so much for your time
today. Uh, we would be happy to
answer any questions.
Well, very good. Um,
Representative Thompson, why
don't we start with you? We'll
go this way and we'll come
around.
I almost forgot my duty. Hold
on. Oh, we've got plenty of
time, I think, uh, don't we? 3
minutes each. Yeah.
3 minutes.
So, thank you so much for your
presentation. Um,
It's interesting to me on page
15.
Get there, um.
There are no.
No individuals with the score of
5,
I find that um
Interesting to say the least. I,
I, I would assume that we would
have folks who have a score of
5, but
Um
So do you have any response to
any ideas, any
Reasons
Uh, thank you for the question,
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
uh, apologies for the print, uh,
colorization, if that's even a
word, and the um visual there,
it's the 2nd from the top, so
the 2%, 2%, 2%, 3%, 3%. So there
is, that's the um
B5s represented there.
And they're, they're all 4% and
then the little one on top that
we can't even see is is the.
OK, OK, well, thank you for
that, yes, apologies for the no,
that's OK, Mr. Chair. Um, could
we get a list of who the working
group was, and I'm hoping that
there was someone from the
executive on the working group
because um we've been trying to
get medication assisted
treatment in our prisons for at
least 3 years and we're up to 1
person. Um, one, so.
That's an issue, but it's not
like we have not attempted to
fix it, we just, uh, and it gets
stopped by the executive agency.
So, um, I'd like to see that and
then
In
On page 30, talking about moving
it to public health. I mean, the
Department of Health does a
great job on public health, but
I'm not sure there are in any
way um prepared or even able to
take on something like this, so
was there discussion of how to,
how to make our Department of
Health um.
More robust so that it could
actually do this. I, I worry, I
mean we're one of few states
that have our um public health
state-based as opposed to
county-based.
So just if you could address
that real quickly.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for that
question. Um, we would be happy
to share a list of working group
membership, um, that will also
be available in the full report
that will be published later
this week. Um, the Secretary of
Corrections did participate in
the working group effort from
the executive.
Uh, regarding capacity, it's a
challenge in every state and
every municipality across the
country, um, to identify the
behavioral health challenges
needed to kind of redirect folks
struggling with behavioral
health who are in the criminal
justice system to the behavioral
health system. Um, but something
that's really exciting in New
Mexico is the 11:15 Medicaid
waiver, uh, to provide coverage
for folks, um, prior to release
into the community. Um, we know
there are discussions underway
about how that implementation uh
will look.
But um that's a, that's a really
exciting update around providing
these types of services to folks
who are involved in the justice
system.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thought
you were going to go the other
way.
I was wondering, um, as you're
speaking about all of this, and
we're trying to um reduce um
Um, consumption of alcohol by
raising the excise tax and then
putting that money into funds
that could help with behavioral
health in these situations, but
I'm also wondering, are you
familiar with the Miami model.
treatment as people are in um
incarceration or coming out of
it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, thank you for that
question. And we have heard
several folks talk about the
Miami model, and that's
something that the working group
did discuss as part of their um
discussion around potential
solutions. Um, and it does seem
there's a lot of excitement
around utilizing that, that type
of structure to um behavioral
healthcare.
Oh good, I'm glad to hear that,
um, so that's something we can
help support too. Um, and I
think that was my main, I think
the information you have, um,
is what, you know the.
Felonies, you know, that um the
lowest felony class, you know,
very much involving substance
use, um,
And different percentages for
homicides and uh gun violence,
things like that, that we're
finding from just even alcohol
use disorder. So, um, yeah, this
is, this is great information
and look forward to, you know,
supporting some of the different
initiatives you have. Thank you.
Before we go to Representative
Chavez, are you finished? Are
you or are you right in the
middle of phase two?
So we are right in the middle of
phase one. So phase 1, phase
two, would come after the
adoption of any policy or
legislative or uh changes, um,
and that is something that, uh,
New Mexico could engage through
JRI um to help support the
implementation of any of these
policy recommendations that are
enacted.
So let me see if I understand.
We would have to make another
request for you to continue. Is
that the point?
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes, that's
correct. And that would have to
come from whom the governor? Uh,
that would come from state
leadership, Mr. Chair, thank
you.
Well, these are all state
leaders, they could ask you.
OK.
Representative Chavez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
have a couple of questions um in
terms of you, you cited a
Basically you said I think that
uh in 2022, violent crime was
up, was that a state figure is
that a national figure?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee that's uh using
national data.
Then.
Right, um, so the other, I have
a couple of other questions. One
is something that um
The vice chair age in terms of
medically assisted treatment.
Was there any conversation about
that on your working group and
was there a discussion about why
it's taking so long to for the
corrections department to sort
of um begin to introduce that
into especially the state
facilities.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for that,
that question, um, and that is
one of the, the 19
recommendations made by the
working group. Um, that was
something that the working group
talked about quite a bit and the
importance of, of making that
treatment available. Um, and the
recommendation really looked at,
um, kind of an individual's
progression through the entire
justice system. So looking at um
mat resources that are available
in the county detention centers.
That was something that the
working group talked about as,
as
really important is making those
mat resources also available in
county detention centers, um,
the working group talked about
making um induction available as
well as continuation, so that
means uh that an individual
could start on the map
medications while incarcerated,
in addition to being able to
continue any mat medications
they may have been on in the, in
the community. um, and
Kind of looking through into uh
uptake of Matt in the
correctional facilities and then
through into the community, um,
talking about spaces to utilize
that 11:15 waiver, um, and the,
the group did talk about kind of
some challenges with, with
uptake and in the corrections
department, um, and discuss kind
of different aspects that might
be able to, to, uh, so, Mr.
Chair, was there any kind of a
timeline put together in terms
of what those challenges are and
how
The corrections department is
going to overcome that come them
so that actually matters
actually implemented. So the um
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, the working group, um, kind
of looked at the timelines in
current statue, um, that have
been established and, and some
of those, those deadlines are
coming up in the next few years
around timelines for
implementation of math, uh, and,
and just talked about ways to
support, um, the, the
implementation of mat in the
cursor role setting.
OK, um, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
have one more question. Is there
a breakdown, um, of state
facilities and county facilities
where there are treatment
programs already established and
also mat already established
that we could um have access to.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, we believe that
may exist, um, and we can look
into that.
Senator Pope, welcome.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, the question I have is on
this, did JRA, you know, this
working group, was there any
work done on
Juvenile justice. And the reason
why I bring that up is
Uh, we all know that could be
maybe an entry point with what's
going on with the families with
behavioral health, with
substance abuse, and
unfortunately sometimes
With, uh, the youth. And so,
Was there any discussion and
talk about that as far as
programs to avoid.
Juveniles going into the system
as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for that
question. Uh, the working group
focused on the uh the adult
population um and providing
comprehensive, uh, solutions,
the challenges in the adult
system, but a lot of these kind
of readjustment of resources to
allow law enforcement, um, kind
of more flexibility to focus on
serious threats to public
safety, um, wouldn't be, uh,
limited to just, uh, adults. So
there, although juvenile issues,
is obviously a very complicated
and require a kind of separate
analysis, um, they're because of
this package being
comprehensive, there would be
some kind of impact on that as
well.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I just think we need to be
looking at this and we're
talking about public health
getting involved.
CYFD, our school systems, um,
and we really need to look at
prevention there as well,
because when we look back at
folks that are in the system,
sometimes some of this started
there and they didn't get the
help they needed, so I just
think that needs to be discussed
at some time going forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we'll go
to uh Representative Chasey and
then to Senator uh Lopez will
swing around back to you,
Senator Lopes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you very much for your
presentation and it's been good
working with you. Um, but, you
know, as I'm leaving and I'm
listening to these findings and
we've been in contact all along
because we helped um get this
started here.
I'm taken back to when senator
um representative Edward
Sandoval chaired what was the
beginning of this committee and
as a result, I carried a bill, I
think in my 1st or 2nd term
about
Appropriating a million dollars
to divert people with mental
illness from prison. Of course
we didn't get that pass and that
wouldn't begin to fund this, but
as I'm getting ready to retire,
I'm like some of these things
just really aren't fixed, but we
actually have these data now to
prove to us that this is what we
need to be doing.
And it, it remembers it reminds
me, I, I recall uh when we were
working on the repeal of the
death penalty, Senator Ma asked
us, who had been a prosecutor
for 10 years or something in 2nd
judicial district talked about
how the very best prosecutors in
his office, at least 2 of them
were taken off of a lot of the
violent felonies.
Simply to build a case um for
Uh, death verdict.
In a, in a case which they never
got after two mistrials. And so
sometimes not enforcing or not
prioritizing what the real
problem is makes the streets
less safer, and that was his
point with um the best
prosecutors being taken off of
the um
Cases of armed robbery and rape,
just to try to get a, a murder
conviction. Look, the only
question I have for you is how
similar these findings are to
national.
Data.
New Mexico's.
Mr. Chair, members of the
community, uh, committee, leader
Tracy, thank you for the
question. Uh, the trend of
challenges addressing behavioral
health in the justice system is
something that we see across the
country, um, it's, it's a
challenge everywhere, uh, that,
that we work, um,
There are some kind of outliers
and in the New Mexico data, one
is, um, we discussed a little
bit the prevalence of the of the
4th degree felonies. Um, so that
is one space where, uh, New
Mexico is an outlier, uh, but
these are, these are certainly a
challenge across the country,
um, these, these issues of
addressing behavioral health in
the criminal justice system.
And I, I, I wanna say, Mr.
Chairman too, I, I know that
they've been meeting around the
state with the um
The
And with the counties and
individuals throughout the
state. So it's not just um
North of Route 66 that they've
been gathering new data. So I
hope we can um continue your
work in phase one in the future.
Thank you. Uh just to clarify
your answer to her question. So
New Mexico is an outlier in
regard to 4th degree felonies
in, in, in the large, we have
more people being imprisoned for
4th degree felonies than the
national figure, is that what
you're indicating?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for that
question. Um, in regard to using
the, the state's lowest felony
class as the primary driver of
prison admissions and primary
driver of the justice system
does make New Mexico an outlier
with regard to uh utilizing
public safety resources.
Thank you. I mean.
All the call for getting tough
on crime basically means we're
jailing more people for
possession than other states,
uh.
Uh
I'm, I'm gonna go to Senator
Lopez next and then
Representative Block and give
the two senators that
legislators that just came in
the chance to, to, if they have
any questions, I'll come back to
you after representative block.
Senator Lopez, do you have any
questions?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Oh, I was listening as I was
driving up this morning, so I
cut a little bit of the
presentation, although it's
always good to have the visual.
Um, I guess, Mr. Chair, what I
wanted to actually say without
going through some of your um
the visuals that you have is
Um
Going back here to page 8,
I think this one states exactly
where I, I think we are in New
Mexico.
Where communities are suffering
from insufficient mental health
and addiction services.
Um, that do divert our law
enforcement, and I know um
Mr. Chair, Madam co-chair is
that.
At least in Albuquerque and and
I know in some other communities
where we look is creating
another department, an entity
that can come out.
Um, and actually deal more with
the mental health issues than
having an officer coming to the
door.
I know it has helped a couple of
persons in my community that I
have spoken with some
constituents, um, because they,
they were truly afraid, Mr.
Chair, of making a phone call
and having law enforcement show
up and then an end result that
would be disastrous for all
involved. Um, so I know, Mr.
Chair, I think this session
we're gonna have some.
Hopeful, uh, I say hopeful
legislation, we see what will
happen during the 60 day run,
but uh.
I think Representative Tracy's
brought back some memory as to
with Representative Ed Sandoval,
who did chair this committee.
Um, mental health parity was an
issue that took how many years
to get through this legislature.
We're, we're a body that moves
slow, Mr. Chair.
We don't move as fast as the
society moves, and I think
that's just for me, I've always
said it in some fashion or
another, it's a shortcoming of
the legislature, we can't
address things fast enough.
And society changes faster than
we move.
Um, so I, I just want to say
thank you, apologize, I'm not,
was not here to, to go through
your visuals, but that's my
statement for right now. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you both for being here. Uh,
couple of questions. I, I think
it's super horrifying in my
opinion, to see.
Almost half the population of
prison inmates are, they have
one of these behavioral health
conditions or
Things that they have challenges
with. So, Mr. Chairman and uh
Miss Buganovitch and Pitkin. I'm
wondering, uh, regarding
mandatory treatment while in.
Incarceration while in prison,
has that been floated by your
group and how does that work
versus something that's more of
a diversion program before they
go into prisons, uh, maybe,
maybe both approaches like a
multi-spoke approach would be
something in order, has your,
has the working group looked at
both of those, Mr. Chairman and
ladies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
question. Um, so I, I
The the group.
The recommendations are focused
more on the voluntary components
that the deflection, uh,
components, um, understanding
that there's been a lot of
discussion of mandatory
treatment and also that there is
a Supreme Court, uh working
group that's looking at some of
these issues, uh, the JRI
working group focused in terms
of those kind of two modalities
represented that you mentioned
on those uh voluntary diversion
options as opposed to the the
mandatory treatment component.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that answer. I
just thought it might be
interesting to look at that
because if you're forced to be
in prison for a certain amount
of time, you might as well also
be mandated to get clean so that
when you get out, you can have
job options or potentially get
back into society. And also I
was thinking maybe a good idea
could be to have tax incentives
for businesses.
To higher individuals who were
previously incarcerated, who may
have had substance abuse and and
got treatment in prison to have
more prospects for these
individuals when they get out.
So I just think we have to look
at all approaches. I know that
this committee, it's like
drinking from a fire hose, all
the good solutions and maybe not
so good solutions, and I think
it's a, it's good that we're
having this conversation, Mr.
Chairman, and I'm probably at my
3 minutes now, so I'll stop.
Thank you both. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Silvio Lopez or Senator
Pinto, do either of you have a
question you want to bring up?
We'll, we'll start with Senator
Sio Lopez and then go to your
senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
When you say that nearly half
the prison population in Mexico
has a mental health code, um,
did you look to see how the
prison is dealing with these.
Um, with these problems?
Like, is it, and I, I apologize
also for being late and missing
the presentation, but is that
Um, that's a worry that so many
people need the treatment and my
perspective is they're not
getting it.
What's your perspective?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I thank you for that
question. Um, so there is a
variety of mental health
treatment that is available in
the corrections department. Um,
the 11:15 waiver that I
mentioned earlier, um, there is
um excitement around the
possibility for uh expanding
inreach that's covered by
Medicaid, um, so to have, uh,
providers start those services,
um, prior to release and and
kind of ease that transition
into the community.
Um, so that was one discussion
about kind of how to
Expand resources, um, and ensure
that folks are getting the care
they need.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And did
you also focus on prevention in
the first place, because your
report says that um the
percentage of people who are
just as involved, uh, has so
many
So many drug dependency, alcohol
dependence, or alcohol misuse,
uh, mental health problems. Um,
did you focus on getting them
treated and clean prior to
arrest or try to prevention
work.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for that
question. Um, the group did talk
about kind of deflection
options, so what are options
when someone is out in the
community, obviously struggling
with a behavioral health
challenge, particularly what
potentially with with substance
use, um, how to create more
options to get that person
somewhere that's not a jail. Um,
so that could look like, um, law
enforcement having more options
of somewhere to bring that
individual or it could look like
having a completely non.
enforcement response. So the,
the group did talk about that
and how to kind of at that first
juncture point um between the
public health and the criminal
justice system, how to those
folks who are struggling with
their behavioral health, how to
put them into the public health
system instead of criminal
justice, so it was really
focused on the justice system
and not prior, but like not a
prevention program from uh
trying to prevent people from uh
Misusing alcohol or drugs in the
first place. Uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for that question. Um, the
working group did take a, a
comprehensive look at the
justice system, but with the
front end really being that
deflection from the system.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Pinto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for your presentation.
Um, a couple of comments first.
Because I know we do funding
through the AOC for the DWI task
force, and then it was uh out
traveling somewhere and we had a
DWI sign at the airport.
And I was really like, how much
are we spending for this
billboard in an airport versus
actually funneling it where it
needs to go.
Um,
and when we drive around
Albuquerque, you see like two
police cars at the at Target.
And, you know, it's probably
just for shoplifting.
So, you know, that I can really
see where the statistics are
going with, um, you know, we
we're, we're, we're
incarcerating a lot of people
for, for stuff that shouldn't
be.
And
Even with the um
When you talk about this.
Page 19.
And the costs.
You're saying great, um, let's
take the top one, the 20
district.
Criminal cases filed and 3%
above 500 in less than 2500.
I mean, I think when we really
see the map in this.
We're probably spending more
than, and that's probably really
what will make a real big impact
on us. We talk about budget.
And I think we've tried to
really get some of those numbers
in. But thank you for your
presentation, um, but I think we
need to really
those big numbers out there for
us, but thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I think
one of you mentioned that to
start substance use treatment as
they near the end of their
sentencing.
Um. Let's see 11:15 waiver, but
it, it seems like it would make
more sense to make the prisons
less violent, less drug
smuggling if we start a
treatment when they got there.
So is there, I mean, does the
11:15 waiver say that we have to
do it, you know, within 6 weeks
of release or could we be smart
and start it when, when, when
they get there. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
thank you for that question. Um,
and I think I need to clarify a
little bit, um, I, I didn't mean
to imply that treatment didn't
start until prior to release,
but that the Medicaid coverage
for the treatment would start.
So the treatment would still be
available um earlier on and in
person's time of incarceration,
um, although it, it varies kind
of based on type of facility and
which facility how much
treatment is available, um,
where that Medicaid coverage can
be a support is easing that
transition into the community.
Um, so
My apologies for that lack of
clarity.
And
You know, our information is
that the opioid settlement money
could be used for that, and
we've given the Department of
Corrections opioid settlement
money.
a million dollars, but to our
knowledge, they've not spent it
yet.
They're still trying to, I think
they're dealing with some
institutional opposition.
Some old time wardens and guards
attitude is, why do we want to
do that? It's just exchanging
one drug for another, you're not
really getting them off of it,
uh, until we deal with that, I
don't think we're going to see
much change in the corrections
department. It needs some kind
of attitudinal change on the
part of leadership. I mean, the
secretary came before us and
said, oh yeah, we really want
this, we'll do it. Nothing's
happened, and I think it's the
individual wardens at the
individual institutions that are
blocking it. That's just my
opinion.
Um, now, the big issue you raise
is how do we, where do we send
it?
I mean, Representative Block was
suggesting that we send him to
jail or prison, and then while
they're in jail or prison, we go
ahead and mandate that they get
some kind of treatment.
Um
Other people have talked about
an alternative to jail or
prison, but mandating that.
And other people have said,
we're not even fully utilizing
our voluntary um outpatient.
Resources.
But I wonder,
The insurance companies have
have for a long time been
telling us, oh, outpatient
treatment is just as effective
in the long run as inpatient
treatment. You don't need to
have these expensive inpatient
hospitals and residential
treatment programs cause the
outpatient is just as good.
It was certainly cheaper.
But whether it's as effective or
not, I'm becoming a real skeptic
of that, uh, and I think Senator
Hickey on this committee has
been adamantly, you know, uh,
urging that we at least consider
the possibility of 6 months of
inpatient before you can
actually say somebody is in
recovery.
And these
12 day or 26 day programs.
To scratch the surface and don't
really get at the underlying
issues.
Um, have you?
In your work, not just in New
Mexico, but across the nation
reached any conclusions about
the relative efficacy of.
Even the most intensive
outpatient programs. These are
the inpatient residential
program where the person is
there 24 hours a day and in an
environment where they're not
going to be able to use drugs or
alcohol.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee that I think the
simple answer is that um in all
of our work, I think, um, in
many states have, have really
focused on a continuum of care
and making sure that the
appropriate response is tailored
to the individual, and that
needs are assessed at every
level of care, so that, you
know, when an individual is
either diverted into a treatment
option and then they're they're
in treatment that, you know.
The appropriate uh steps are
being taken to make sure that
the care matches, uh, the
treatment level that that person
needs. So really that continuum
of care and that's something
that the, the working group in
New Mexico really took a deep
dive into was um making sure
that the recommendations were
tailored to the individual and
and at every, uh, you know,
intercept point or every
decision making point within the
criminal justice system in New
Mexico that there is an option
to either, you know, create
accountability where there needs
to be accountability.
created within the system where
there's a lack thereof or that
um if there's a need for some uh
for uh diversion or deflection
option, uh, for an individual
with high needs.
for the experts that are best
equipped to handle those needs,
um, that we're creating those
options as well. So sort of
creating the appropriate
pathways for individuals in a
continuum of care and sort of
wraparound services throughout,
so it really the the the
modality of treatment is is less
important than, you know, making
sure that um it's focused on the
individual at at each point.
So thank you for that question.
Yeah, and, and my concern is,
you know, you talk about a
continuum of care but in New
Mexico, we basically have
A few inpatient beds, turquoise
lodge basically is it.
And we have lots and lots of
But I would not call intensive
outpatient, we have, you know,
T12-step meetings, group
meetings, um, weekly counseling.
That's just not gonna cut it for
a lot of these, and it doesn't
cut it for a lot of these guys.
Now some of the medication
assisted programs now are
stepping it up.
They're having daily, uh, group
meetings and so on, trying to
fill that gap, but it really, I
mean, I, I, I really think
we're, we're wasting a lot of
money.
Because people are recidivating,
I mean, if these approaches that
we're trying now, we're working,
we wouldn't have those
readmissions that your data
indicate are are going on. We
wouldn't have people just
constantly recycling through.
Um, they're not getting much
while they're in prison. I mean,
it would be great if they were
getting treatment cause, but if
they were, they wouldn't be
recidivating at the rate they
are. And when they get out,
we're not offering them a whole
lot. So I don't know why we
expect anything different. We're
just not doing enough. And of
course, this committee is dealt
over the last 3 years trying to
deal with the big obstacle.
When we blew up the Medicaid uh
payment system for behavioral
health 10 years ago. A lot of
the professionals left or they
got other jobs, they all got
good paying jobs with the MCA.
The MCOs as a care coordinators,
but that that doesn't exactly
provide treatment, uh,
We don't have the workforce, and
so we're, we're trying to get
the pipeline stoked up, but
until we get it, we're just kind
of taking from one.
It's a, what's the guacamole
game. I really thank you for the
work you've done. This is
terrific data. I hope that the
leadership of the state, whoever
that is, extends the um uh
invitation to continue your work
so that we can get phase 2 and,
and hopefully the the
legislature will appropriate
money to the, to the right
places and get some diversion
going, uh, Representative Chase,
you had one last comment.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Um, when the vice chair
mentioned she hoped that the
executive branch was involved in
the work here. I really want to
second that, um, recommendation.
We, Senator O'Neill did have a
bill on probation parole reform
that was supported by um usually
not by the district attorneys,
but in this case, there was no
opposition on it, at least at
the time that it went through
the legislature.
But it was vetoed.
And uh so, and it's something
that, you know, we've been
relying for a long time on data
from the LFC saying we
absolutely have to do something
about the technical violations
of probation parole. So, um,
the, the task is still out there
for for all of you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Thank
you for bringing that up and it
just, it just brings to mind how
easy it is to urge people to get
tough on crime, and then to do
stuff like this, it actually
adds to the crime problem.
You said
Again, thank you so much. We
have to move on, but hopefully
we'll see, we, I won't see you
Representative Chase you won't,
but others on this panel will
see you, uh, hopefully next year
when you make a report on how
things are going with phase two.
OK, moving along, then we have
the legislative Finance
Committee reports on
developmental disability waiver
program.
So we have uh Doctor Dey, Sarah
Diny it's a program evaluator,
and we have Drew Weaver.
Another program evaluator from
LXC. Thank you for coming to get
some coffee. I'll be right back.
OK.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. Thank you so
much for having us today. Uh,
we're excited to present to you
all today. Uh, we're here to
present a developmental
disabilities and media waivers
progress report. I believe it
was just hinted out and it looks
like this.
Before we get started, we want
to thank Jen Rodriguez and her
team at the Developmental
Disability Supports division or
DDSD were working really
collaboratively with us
throughout this whole process.
Also, I want to remind you all,
this is a progress report from
an evaluation we did 6 years ago
in 2018 on the Didi and Mea
waivers. Uh, these waivers
support individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities and they use an
option uh for the states to
cover people through Medicaid
services.
LFC conducted this progress
report to see the status of
recommendations that we made
back then, uh, that were focused
on costs, oversight, and to
learn more about how the system
has responded to our state
embracing the opportunity to
effectively eliminate those 13
year waiting list.
You'll please turn with me to
page one.
We'll start with a summary of
the report.
The DD and me via waivers are
administered by the
Developmental Disability
Supports division or DDSD, and
they serve just under 8000 New
Mexicans with intellectual and
developmental disabilities.
These waivers provide state and
federal Medicaid dollars that
are used to deliver living
supports, community services,
therapy, as well as other
supports and services to allow
waiver participants to live
within their community.
Since the previous evaluation in
2018, DTSD has resolved the over
35 year Jackson lawsuit and had
effectively ended the
thirteen-year waitlist for
services. However, problems with
provider capacity have arisen,
and persistent issues with
quality monitoring and cost
containment remain.
In FY 24, the state serves 69%
more DD and participants than in
FY 17, with the majority of this
growth occurring since 2021.
The rapid growth of the waivers
is likely strained providers
with at least 50% of providers
not accepting new clients.
DDSD is working to improve its
processes around abuse and
neglect, but has not yet
assessed capacity of case
managers and consultants, uh, to
monitor participants, and this
has resulted in uncertainty
regarding physical quality.
Waiver costs have also continued
to increase, which can limit the
number of new individuals the
state can provide services to.
Since the previous evaluation,
cost per client has grown 26% to
98,000 across the DD and media
waivers, and this is largely due
to higher levels of care, as
well as provider rate increases.
The report has 3 main finding
takeaways. These are that
provider capacity has decreased,
likely due to increased
enrollment.
That abuse, neglect, and
exploitation processes in
develop disabilities uh system
is improving but needs to be
monitored and that costs are
continuing to increase.
Now please turn with me to page
3 for some background
information.
The DD Media and supports
waivers served 7,849 individuals
at a cost of approximately 800
million in FY 24.
These waivers are administered
by the Developmental Disability
Supports division or DDSD, and
they offer home and
community-based services, so
participants can live and be
active within their own
communities.
You'll look at chart one.
You can see the steady increase
in the DDSD budget related to
these two waivers since FY7.
Didi operates three waivers as
discussed in table one. these
are the traditional uh DD
waiver, which provides
comprehensive services to
individuals through uh a uh with
are coordinated through a case
manager.
Then there's the media waiver,
which is a more self-directed
option, and it permits
participants to choose and help
manage their own services, um,
and this is done through a
consultant rather than a case
manager. And then there's the
supports waiver. This waiver
provides $10,000 for individuals
on the waitlist, uh, who
allowing them to, uh, better
allocate their services.
Now if you'll turn with me to
page 4, you can look at table 2
and chart 2. These show
enrollment in cost increases
associated with the different
waivers with chart 2 showing the
increase in enrollment and per
client costs since the 2018
evaluation.
While enrollment has increased
69% since by 17 and per client
costs have increased 24%. Total
spending has increased about
118%.
Further down on page 4, since
2022, DDSDs provided allocations
to 5700 potential clients.
In November of 2021, as shown on
page 5 he'll turn with me to
look at chart 4. The state began
using American Rescue Plan Act
funding or AARPA funding to
remove people from the waitlist
and have continued to do so
through FY 24.
The state used approximately 211
million of ARPA money to
allocate services and expects to
continue to add people to the
wait lists annually using both
general fund and Medicaid
dollars.
Adding additional individuals
though comes with a price tag
for the state, especially as
federal ARPA dollars are gone.
HCA projects to need between 73
and 89 million in FY 25 to
remove people from the waitlist.
While removing people from the
waitlist allows for more
immediate access to services for
those who would otherwise be
waiting. It can also strain our
provider capacity and may
negatively impact performance
metric.
Looking at chart 5 at the bottom
of page 5, you can see that New
Mexico has some of the highest
waiver costs in the country,
based on the most recent
available data.
Furthermore, the Medicaid
Assistance division or MAD
projects continued cost
increases, expecting a 14%
increase in developmental
disability waiver costs between
FY 24 and 25. Most of this
increase in costs is coming from
increased enrollment as well as
provider rate increases.
Looking at table 3 on page 6.
You see that provider rates have
increased between 16% and 64%
between FY 2 FY 18 and FY 25.
This is a predomin and this is
uh depending upon what uh
service category you're looking
at for customized in-home
supports level one, which is the
lowest, uh, acuity, uh, in home
support that uh increased only
16%. However, if you'll look at
uh occupational therapy,
physical therapy, and speech
language pathology that last row
in that uh table, you can see
that those.
64%.
Looking at the bottom of page 6.
A subset of services make up the
majority of our state's
expenditures. These were, uh,
the waiver as we've discussed
already, offers an array of
different home and community
based services, um, and the they
come at different price tags. If
you'll look at, uh, page 7
charts 6 and 7. You can see that
living supports make up the
majority of our spending.
This is followed by community
supports, and if uh
Definitions would be helpful you
can look at table 4, which
provides definitions for these
highest.
Uh, now we're gonna move to page
9, to discuss status of our
previous recommendations.
Despite some progress, key
findings from the 2018
evaluation are still unresolved.
This includes rising costs and a
need for additional oversight.
Table 5 provides a summary of
which findings have yet to be
addressed from the previous
report.
With the state resolving the
Jackson lawsuit and basically
eliminating the waitlist, but we
still need to focus on costs and
oversight, both of which will be
discussed later in the report.
However, now we're gonna move on
to discuss provider capacity.
You'll please turn with me to
page 10.
New Mexico has limited provider
capacity for high-demand
services.
Writer capacity challenges are
common nationwide. They're
largely due to too few workers
to provide direct support to
participants and few therapists,
at least in New Mexico.
You'll look at chart 8 with me,
you can see how the proportion
of counties with providers
accepting new clients has
dropped. Um, and this is
especially true for our most
expensive services. Um, however,
it's not only dropped overall,
but it's also dropped in some of
our most populous counties. For
instance, if you look at
intensive medical supported
living, which is uh a very
highly, it is a service provided
for our most acute clients, um,
even though the number of
individuals isn't very large,
uh, Bern Leo, uh, Dona
and Sandoval counties uh had no
openings for new clients when we
pulled this data uh this summer.
And if our most populous
counties have no openings for
new clients, is less likely that
the majority of individuals will
be able to be served.
Additionally, if you'll look at
page 11 on table 6.
This shows that more than half
of waiver providers were not
accepting new clients.
For instance, if you look at
August of this year, uh, while
there were 282 providers across
the DD media and uh medically
fragile services, 159 of those
282 were not accepting any new
clients.
Even in these issues, DDSD
commissioned a provider capacity
report in 2023 and worked with
the public consulting group or
PCG. This report found that
roughly 50% of clients cannot
access all services within their
individual service plans.
On page 12, DDSD is working to
address provider capacity.
But could also proactively
implement federal policy and
best practice.
Table 8 shows the list of
recommendations made from that
2023 PCG report and it also
highlights that DDSD is
addressing 9 of those 12
recommendations, but it could do
more, particularly looking at
wage pass-throughs.
At the top of page 13.
Federal rule will require DDSD
providers to pass through 80% of
reimbursement rates to those
directly providing services, um,
or the developmental support
professionals called DSPs by
2030. And we as a state could do
this sooner to help improve
retention and recruitment of
staff.
DSPs are generally low paid and
have relatively high turnover.
Salaries for most direct support
professionals were between
$12.17 dollars an hour in FO 23.
And providers have a turnover
rate of roughly 32%, which was
higher than it was in 2018.
While early implementation of a
federal rule could lead to the
state needing to revise its
practices after the federal rule
is established, uh, at least one
other state has already done
this. North Carolina included
pass-through recommendations in
their 2023 budget bill. New
Mexico should enact legislation
to require pass-through uh prior
to enactment of the federal rule
in 2030 with uh DDSD providing a
monitoring, uh, and, uh,
implementation plan prior to
that.
At the bottom of page 13, has
through other ways to increase
DSP pay, uh, would be through
incentive payments, which is a
practice that many other states
currently do.
For example, in Oklahoma, uh,
they started pass through
payments this year and they
provided $1000 as a recruitment
or retention incentive, and then
an additional $1000 every 6
months through January. New
Mexico could use its government
results and opportunity fund or
growth funds to see if this
would be an effective strategy
for New Mexico.
Two additional strategies that
we as a state uh could use to
create a provider capacities
include increasing uptake of
telehealth services and
examining our current states
therapy usage. Uh, now I'll turn
the presentation over to Drew,
who will present our next two
chapters.
Thank you, Doctor Dents Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
if you will turn with me to page
16.
Our next finding is that while
the healthcare authority is
addressing some safety concerns.
Others regarding client
monitoring and requests for
assistance remain ongoing. Just
to clarify our acronyms, these
findings touch upon DDSD as well
as the division of health
improvement or DHI, which is the
abuse and safety regulatory and
oversight body of the HCA.
As many of you are aware, a
waiver participant died from
abuse in 2023, prompting both a
quick response from the agency
in the form of wellness visits
for all 6800 participants, but
also with the help of a third
party consulting group,
Accenture, a longer term
reevaluation of the division's
organizational structure and of
their processes for abuse,
neglect, and exploitation, or
A&E.
On page 18, table 11, addresses
some of Accenture's main
findings, and 7 of the
recommendations they flagged as
needing most immediate
remediation.
As a note, a full list of wrecks
can be found in Appendix D if
needed.
Within table 11, DDSD has
already made progress on a
number of these. For example,
they have further articulated
their own key concepts and
mission statement and identified
ways to build these principles
into daily practice.
Another recommendation from
table 11 identified in red and
for which more progress could be
made involves assessing case
management and consultant
capacity. An important step in
coordinating safety and service
quality for participants.
Chart 11 on the bottom of page
18, shows both the total number
of case management and
consultant providers, as well as
the number with at least one
deficiency related to monitoring
participants.
23% of case management providers
and 83% of consultant agencies
were cited for either not having
evidence of visiting
participants for not having
monthly contact or for not
recording this information
properly within their
information management system.
In addition to potential
compliance and safety
ramifications. This builds off.
Another Accenture finding that
even when these visits are
happening, they can be
compliance-driven or check the
box.
On page 19, the blue callout box
highlights another finding
regarding abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
DTSD and DHI are in the process
of addressing this regarding
process and clarity, and this
includes the need to identify
accountability points for risk
and safety. Update job
descriptions with enhanced role
details and responsibilities,
and develop new communication
and training across agencies to
help implement these tables.
On page 20, table 12 touches
upon a few of these
communication and accountability
points.
Regional office requested
assistance, Aurora, can be filed
by providers or participants for
help receiving services in a
timely or correct manner.
And FY 24 cases took 9 days to
assign, and 58 days from
assignment to closure.
This marks both an improvement
from FY 23, in which cases took
over 93 days from assignment to
closure, but still falls above
the 4 and 45 day guideline to
assign and close respectively,
that the agency has set forth.
One additional wellness and
safety finding highlighted and
bold at the bottom of page 20 is
that DDSD and DHI monitor
compliance but have not
traditionally assessed
participant quality of life or
other patient outcomes.
Page 23, sorry to have you skip
a few.
Highlights current performance
measures for DDSD and DHI
related to the DD waivers,
including many new ones from the
Federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid, with a large number of
these positively addressing
abuse, neglect, and
exploitation.
However, on page 24, table 15
lists potential performance
measures that DDSD could adopt
related to patient outcomes,
excuse me, participant outcomes
such as community inclusion,
individuals residing in the
least restrictive environment
for their needs and individuals
progressing towards personalized
goals.
Finally, if you turn to page 26.
Our final chapter is that DDSD
has limited oversight of
participant budget expenditures
and service delivery.
Waiver costs have consistently
exceeded LFC and Medicaid
Assistance Division projections.
Table 16 shows average
participant expenditures versus
projected average expenditures.
Looking at the traditional DD
waiver in FY 24, for example,
the state's per participant cost
of over 115,000 or 34% higher
than the projected cost of
77,000 used for budgeting and
planning, which can have severe
implications for cost
projections moving forward.
This trend is exacerbated by the
fact that new waiver enrollees
already exceed these projected
averages in their first full
fiscal year on the waiver.
LFC's 2018 evaluation found that
new waiver members' costs could
rise 78% between year 1 and 2 of
service, and another 23% between
years 2 and 3.
One potential explanation is
that in general, participants
are using higher level and more
services.
Table 17 illustrates how
reimbursement rates for
supported living vary by
category, ranging annually from
75,000 for category one, on up
to 156,000 for category 4,
according to FY 25 rates.
On page 27, chart 14, shows that
nearly 80% of individuals are
enrolled under the highest
acuity levels of supported
living and that this is up over
10% points from 2017 when LFC
identified it as an unmonitored
trend then.
Table 18 breaks this trend down
further, showing Category 4 as
the primary enrollment driver,
encompassing 50.6% of supported
living individuals in growing
yearly.
Another categories such as
therapies, a much higher
proportion of waiver
participants are enrolled or
using services than nearly any
other state.
Table 19 shows peer
non-institutional states on
either side of New Mexico in
terms of average expenditures,
and what proportion of the
waiver anticipated using
physical therapy, occupational
therapy, or speech language
pathology.
In addition to having a larger
participation rate, those using
therapy in New Mexico also use
more of it than these peer
states. The callout box
highlight how 24% of users
across the three therapies
exceeded service caps, a problem
which could exacerbate provider
capacity.
This occurs even though an
articulated goal within RDD
waiver standards is to fade out
or transition off services when
they are no longer needed.
The state, however, has not
reported receiving a fadeout
plan within the past 3 years.
Two potential reasons for these
allocation trends, which we
highlight on page 28.
Or the lack of a two-step review
process and the lack of a
validated assessment tool, which
can decrease oversight and may
increase the risk of
misallocating services.
Figure 3 on this page
illustrates the service and
budget development process in
which an interdisciplinary team,
including family members, case
managers, and the providers who
will be contracted for services,
help the participant build and
submit a plan.
We highlight two parts of the
process.
The gray box indicates where a
validated assessment or a
consistent tool to measure
participant needs and abilities
could help determine appropriate
service levels.
The state used one beginning in
2013, but then removed it
following a lawsuit, Waldrop
versus the Human Services
Department regarding service
reduction for participants.
The lawsuit, however, did not
forbid the tool, nor did it ban
service limitations. Two things
which ended up happening.
Instead, it addressed how the
tool was to be used, fair
hearings, and exception
processes to receive additional
services.
Excerpts from the Waldrop
settlement are contained in
Appendix F.
Second, the red circle denotes
another former step, which was
an outside reviewer to conduct
clinical review of service
plans. This was phased out in FR
24 and eliminated in FR 25.
Finally, on page 30, LFC found
that DT and media participants
are significantly over their
budget allotment or service
caps.
The media waiver are more
self-directed option as an
individual budgetary allotment
or maximum.
Excuse me, or maximum amount of
funding, which was set at just
over $72,000 per participant in
FI 24.
Part 16, the histogram
illustrates the number of
participants based upon
expenditure range.
With the sky blue bar
representing the 360
participants between 70,000 and
80,000 where the max allotment
is.
Over 1500 or approximately half
of the participants expended
between 800 and 100,000 FR 24
and another 300 expended more
than 100,000.
If the allotment had been
adhered to, the state would have
had an additional 42 million or
enough to a fully funded another
575 individuals.
Similar findings exist for
several DD service provisions.
On page 31, we highlight how for
other services, however, such as
community-based and employment
supports, New Mexico does not
have service limits, even though
it's common practice in many
other states.
All 4 of the peer states alluded
to, for example, do so in
different ways, whether it's a
monetary or an hourly limit.
DC, the most generous of those
peer states as a weekly hourly
limit for community employment
services combined, allowing
participants to choose how they
feel that.
In which of New Mexico had in
place would have saved 17
million.
With that, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'll turn it back
over to Doctor Dinis for key
recommendations.
Thanks, Mr. Weaver. If you'll
turn with me to page 2, we'll
look at some of the key
recommendations from the report.
The Legislature should consider
enacting legislation to require
providers to pass 80% of
Medicaid reimbursement rates to
salaries of direct support
professionals for the CMS final
rule starting in FY 27. This
legislation should require DDSD
develop a compliance monitoring
plan by September 1st of 2025.
DDSD of the health of the
healthcare authority should work
with the LFC and DFA to create
performance measures for client
outcomes, quality of life, and
provider quality.
PTSD should also ensure case
manager and consultant ability
to meet current standards,
including monitoring of
workloads. If case managers and
consultants are not meeting
state standards, we should
increase training and oversight
of case management and
consultant processes.
Uh, DDSC should also follow
through on plans to require the
Finland adaptive behavior scale
and required the results of the
scale to be used to develop
individualized service plans
within the traditional
developmental disabilities
waiver. And for the traditional
developmental disabilities
waiver, we should develop
appropriate budgetary caps for
services for new enrollees and
for the Medicaid is for the MA
waiver, adhere to the individual
budgetary allotment, unless
there are justifiable
extenuating circumstances. Thank
you so much for your attention
and uh I'll turn it over to
questions.
Couple of things you didn't
mention that I'm, I'm curious
about. One, usually when we get
these reports from LFC, there's
some comparison to institutional
care costs.
We still are way below
institutional care costs, aren't
we?
Um, so, yes, when you submit a
1915C application, one of the
requirements is to show
institutional care cost. Uh, I
don't think we received that
methodology for how that is
figured, but yes, our averages
are under the institutional care
costs listed in the application.
So isn't that the primary
concern that we should be
worried about?
We're providing an alternative
to institutional care that's
cheaper.
We're using 75% federal money to
do that as well.
So
What's the problem?
The juicy
I think there are a number of
points that we just wanna,
they're not necessarily red
flags, they're yellow flags that
we want to urge caution around,
uh, chair. One of these is the
idea that like we wanna make
sure that we're close to what
our projections are, we're way
over our projections, we need
to, we may need to improve our
projections, but we also need to
understand where our costs are
so that we have an accurate
understanding so we can budget
appropriately. Also, if we are
significantly over where we
Uh, where, where we expect to
be, this can create issues in
bringing on more individuals,
uh, to the waiver, and we, uh,
did a wonderful thing by
allowing uh or by uh increasing
the number of individuals on a
waiver. However, by doing that,
it can create other problems and
if our costs are also going up,
then maybe we we we could need a
waitlist again, and that's
something we just want to have
caution around so that we
understand what the situation
is,
my, my understanding of, of our
dilemma with bringing more
people is
We can't find providers.
I mean, it's not like we're, we
don't, we've run out of money.
We can't spend the money that
We might have available uh
because there's nobody out there
to do the work, uh, did you
address that at all in your
recommendations? Yes, we did. We
have a whole chapter, um, uh,
Mr. Chair, regarding, uh,
provider capacity and we have a
number of different
recommendations focused on that.
The other question I had is, to
what extent is that Los Lunas
program that the state runs. I
mean, I saw that little box on
one of your pages that talks
about the exorbitant rents that
were paying out for those 22
homes. We could have bought
those homes.
10 times over by the, the rent
we're paying, that just suggests
to me some kind of insider
dealing in the community of Los
Lunas where people are, they
figured out a really good thing.
They're renting their homes to
the state.
Instead of selling them to the
state.
And they're, I mean.
We we're probably one of the
primary uh uh
contributors to the gross of the
gross community product of
Valencia County with that, but
beyond that, I mean, does it
make any do you factor in Los
Lunas into all these numbers or
is that a totally separate
figure.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we use all the data
that we have, we do not uh
exclude one provider, we used
all the expenditure data that we
uh received from the
Developmental Disability Sports
division, which should include a
number of those costs. And so
the state program in Los Lunas
is considered as one of the
providers.
For supported living at M for
supportive living and um
employment supports, yes, we did
not look at the ICF, uh,
component of uh Los Lunas
because my understanding is that
that's a very expensive program.
Verging on institutional care.
And, and that
That may be.
Skewing the overall figure if
they're, if they're included. I
mean, if some of the other
community providers aren't
getting anywhere near that level
of reimbursement.
But they're being, you know,
they're being included in the,
in the average, then wouldn't
that kind of skew it? Shouldn't
we separate them out and deal
with them totally differently.
uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that absolutely could
skew it um if you would like
different data, whether that's
looking at median cost or 25th
and 75th percentile or a
different way of approaching
supported living data. We're
also happy to provide that.
OK, let's go to the committee.
We'll start with the vice
chairman and then just go right
around. I have a lot, but I
wanted to jump in on this, so is
there a recommendation that the
Los Lunas Community programs do
business differently. Is that
one of your recommendations and,
and some of the people um at who
work in the Los Lunas Community
program are being paid
outrageously high salaries
compared to what folks that
aren't in the Los Lunas
community program work, um.
So I have a whole list of
questions, so I'll wait till
last, but uh it, it, uh, I agree
with the chair that it could
really skew um numbers and um
And it seems like if the house
needs cleaning, the place we
should start is within our own
house as opposed to outside the
house.
Mr. Chair, members Committee
Kelly Legislative Finance
Committee.
Yep, I hear myself echoing, so.
Oh wow,
OK.
Absolutely, thank you. This is
gonna be quick. So analyst for
the LFC, I have one of the
agencies, which is the
Department of Health, which LLCP
falls under for this discussion
purpose. So the end for the
clients at LCP is relatively
small compared to all of the
clients that the data set here
is looking at, so it may have
some type of um increasing
effect, but I don't wanna say as
clearly as it was here that that
is.
True. We could look at that, but
the end is small. There's only
what, 20?
There's 22 homes, but each one
must have, so you're looking at
probably a couple of people but
we're talking about 6,000 80
people of 6000 so we need to
look at that before we give you
a for sure answer on that.
Secondly, I will say yes, the
provider, the, um, caretakers
are giving higher salaries
because they're state employees,
but that is offset by state
general fund. State general fund
gives money to LLCP to operate
that is necessarily outside of
what a provider would get.
And so
You're giving me a questioning
phase I don't understand it, so
they're not paid with the
Medicaid money. They're paid for
both. What I'm saying is that
there are two revenue sources
covering um their large
expenditures versus a provider
who is surviving off of raids.
Does that make sense?
So yes, they are paying more but
because they have a secondary
offset of a revenue source.
And their state employees and
that somehow makes it better.
No, my, my point, I guess is is
that, um.
To vice chair Thompson's
question about the providers
being paid, they're being paid
at that rate because they're
falling under a state payment
structure that is required of
them, and some state general
fund is offsetting that cost. So
it's not an apples to apples
comparison is my point.
OK, well, let's go to the
committee for some questions and
we have plenty of time, I think.
We have an hour and a half.
So that much divide that by, so
each of us have 5 minutes to ask
questions.
Uh, we'll start with, uh, where
do we start? Representative
Ferrari, you want to start?
We'll go around this way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um I
was um,
Wondering
the providers are dwindling,
which, you know, with
healthcare, we're seeing, you
know, the.
Competition for um
People in that industry, but we
do have a lot of um different
groups that are providers, um,
but are they dwindling because
we've had this.
Um, gap where we pay less, and
we expect more, Mr. Chair,
Representative for, uh, are you
referring to chart 8 where we're
discussing how the number of uh
counties are not accepting as
many new new, uh, I think it was
back there, um, if we can look
at that page together. I believe
it's on page 10 chart 8,
highlights the percent of
counties with providers
accepting new clients and so
here we're not necessarily
directly looking at our direct
support professional.
s which is what I think you were
also talking about, so I wanted
just to make sure we're looking
at the same thing, and I think
the one of the biggest uh causes
of what we're seeing in chart 8
is um that we have added so many
new individuals so that
providers don't necessarily have
the ability to add more new
clients to their roster. Does
that answer your question?
Yes, but also my concern is on.
Um
Generally, other things that we
have uh DD providers.
That, you know, just aren't
getting the pay scale that they
deserve, so that's my concern.
Chair and representative, uh, we
would also echo that concern,
and that was why we have a
couple of different
recommendations. Uh, if you'll
look at the end of this chapter
on page.
Struggling to get there on page
15, uh, we have 3 different
recommendations that are all in
regards to funding. The first is
to enact the legislation uh to
provide those uh pass throughs
that we briefly discussed. The
next is to fund expansion and
startup costs for a number of
providers to help expand the
number of individuals able to
accept new clients. And then the
last is to um use our government
results and opportunity fund our
grow money to pilot uh incentive
payments to see if that helps,
um, improve our
Recruitment and retention of uh
direct support professionals.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Miss Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um,
I have my, I have a couple of
questions, but one of them is
around the the whole issue of
oversight, and on page 26 at the
top, it, it says that the DSD
has limited oversight. Why is
that? What's, what's, um,
preventing them from having more
oversight, and what do you
recommend?
Mr. excuse me, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, I
think that's related to a few of
the other findings within this
chapter, one of those would be,
for example, the validated
assessment tool that at the
service level, sort of having
maybe um
More clarity, more consistency
with what types of services are
being assigned, and then towards
the end of the chapter
mentioning caps right now
because certain surfaces don't
have those, um, this sort of
variability and how much is
being expended.
So who's responsible for the
assessment?
Who does those assessments.
Uh, who, excuse me, a chair and
representative who does the uh
validated in the in home
assessments, uh, but currently
the uh third party assessor does
that, but we can bring up uh our
our colleagues from uh DDSD to
provide more clarity if that
would be helpful.
Uh,
a vice chair, um, representative
Charles.
To clarify, if you're asking
about.
Assuring compliance. I'm sorry,
Kira Ochoa, deputy secretary for
HCA. I'm here with um deputy,
uh, director, uh, Scott Doan,
um, Jennifer Rodriguez is on
work travel. So,
Um, in terms of oversight, um,
to Doctor Dent's point about the
assessment tool that's really
looking at somebody's service
plan and making sure that all of
the components of the service
plan are being met, the division
really agrees that we need to
validated assessment tool, and
we are going starting in 206 to
use the vine land assessment
tool as the report states, um,
if the question is more about
Um, quality or assuring safety.
Is that where you're really
asking all of those pieces
because it, it, I have a concern
in terms of if there's not any,
if there's not the kind of
assessment that we need, what's
happening to these folks who are
on the DD waiver, they're
getting their services, you
know, all of those kinds of
things. I'll, I'll leave that
question for Mr. Done.
And, and who is, is, is there,
is it someone in in the in the
particular home that does that
assessment on on the client to
determine the services, sort of
what's that process like?
Uh, thank you for the question,
uh, Mr. Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Vice Chair Representative
Chavez. Um, so to answer your
question directly, the violent
adaptive behavioral scale. We
currently have that in our media
self-directed uh waiver program.
That's completed by the
consultant who is um it's
another word for case manager,
and they work with the
individual, um, and the person
support system to complete that
scale. We are looking to adopt
that scale within the
developmental disabilities
waiver program.
And so to use it for a
person-centered planning, and
that would be completed by the
case manager, along with the
individual, their guardian,
family members, and their
support team, which includes
direct service providers.
And and is there a case manager?
The employee of who are the
employees of.
The case managers, Mr. Chairman
and Vice Chair Representative
Chavez, the case manager is a
third party. It's separate from
the direct service provider
agency, so it's independent of
the direct service provider.
It's their own, their own agency
case management agency.
So they're not state employees.
They are not state employees.
Right.
And then, so then they report to
You guys?
The case managers report to you
guys.
Mr. Chair, uh, and Vice Chairen
Chavez. Um, we have a provider
agreements or contracts, if you
will, with case management
agencies. So yes, we are
responsible for the oversight of
that case management contract.
We being the developmental
disability supports division.
And so, how often did the case
managers see the clients?
They are, um, Mr. Chairman and
vice chair Representative
Chavez, case managers are
required to see individuals on a
monthly basis.
Um
Mr. Chair and Representative,
just as a point of
clarification, you'll look at
page 18, 1 of the findings that
we had within this report though
is that according to the quality
Management Bureau reports of
these case management and
consultant agencies, a number of
them are maybe either not
documenting or may not be going
to those visits, and so I want
to bring your attention to chart
11, where you'll see both the
total providers in blue as well
as the uh number of providers uh
with required remediation
related to monitoring and red,
and so what you'll see.
He was for the DD individuals,
it's about 1 in 4 and for the
individuals, this is about 83%.
However, I also want to point
out that this is just the number
of providers having any um flags
regarding remediation, it does
not necessarily mean that all of
the providers under their
purview are not seeing clients,
it's just that there is some
range between uh one of the
individuals within their sample
up to 50% of their sample, not
necessarily documenting or
seeing clients at an adequate
level.
If I may, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair.
Go ahead. Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair of Chavez, just
to further verify with Doctor
Dentson said is so with the um
findings on page 18 with respect
to case management and
oversight, for example, these
surveys are for the overall
compliance of the agency. Well
let's say the agency has 10 case
managers, and you have one of
those 10 case managers who may
not have completed a monthly
home visit. Maybe they entered a
case.
not late, or maybe the case note
um did not have the exact
criteria for a complete case
note. That agency as a whole
would be counted as
non-compliance, but if you
further drill down, you had 9
out of the 10 case managers who
are in compliance, but overall,
that one score could would um
have that agency as
non-compliant. So I do think
it's worth noting to have to
really look into uh the details
of those agencies, not the the
LC did not, Doctor, uh, insist,
to explain that but.
wanted to just make that point
very clear.
Senator Pope.
I don't have any questions, Mr.
Chair. I'm just gonna listen and
hopefully there's enough time
and folks can maybe continue
asking questions by not me not
using my. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Senator, Senator.
Its. Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, first of all, if
you would provide um uh this is
a LFC uh question if you would
provide a cost estimate to
purchase those properties in Los
Lunas, I will introduce a bill
for this, and that will stir up
the conversation, um, to see,
you know, to bring attention to
the whole rent issue, etc. So if
you could get back to me on
that.
Uh, secondly, Mr. Chair, my uh
question as I listen to
everybody else's, when you did
this research.
Did you compare
Uh, our providers, uh, to, uh,
to other states, like when we
talk about the dearth or the
lack of providers.
Uh,
a chair and uh Senator
Stefaniks, uh, we looked as much
as we could at the that data, we
didn't have a a large enough
sample to really make any strong
conclusions about that.
OK, so Mr. Chair, I'm wondering
if uh an organization like NCSL
could help you get that
information, but um,
It would seem that there might
be some information about best
practices that we could bring in
to our state.
To address that particular
issue, and I know it's, it's,
it's, it's a struggle. So, um,
We might just put that on the
To do list. Thank you.
Uh, chair and uh Senator
Stefaniks, I would like to point
you to, um, the first finding
that begins on page 10, we have
some recommendations and we did
look at the uh PCG report that
uh DDSD commissioned, which did
look at some other state
practices, uh, some of those
recommendations include using
incentive payments, uh, another
recommendation that was in the
PCG report but that we did not
include here is to create a uh
career ladder for, um, uh,
direct support professional.
s those are just a few that we
can touch on uh we touched on
here and we are happy to talk
more about others if there's
others that you think we should
be able to gain it. I see those.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. That's all, or Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Chase.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I, I was wondering um uh with
your recommendation on page 2.
Do I understand?
The, the very first one enact
legislation to require providers
to reimburse 80%. Does this get
at
The notion or the fact that if
we served more individuals, we
would be drawing down more
federal money.
Or am I taking this too far.
A chair and uh um Representative
Cheesy, I think, uh, there may
be a slight miscommunication or
misunderstanding here this
recommendation is focused on
ensuring that we have an
inadequate workforce for our
direct support professionals,
which are individuals who
directly support individuals who
are in support of living homes
or in other uh uh service
arrangements, and yes, if we um
we're better able to fully staff
homes we may have more.
providers uh who are accepting
new clients, but I don't think
that that would more that would
increase the drawdown of federal
funds beyond the fact that we
would be serving more
individuals and therefore, uh,
being able to take in more
Medicaid funds. Uh, thank you
very much and, uh, Madam Chair,
the second, um, recommendation
also appears again on page 15
about uh funding provider
expansion and startup costs.
To increase the number of
providers able to serve new
clients. I mean, clearly this is
a glaring need.
In New Mexico. And I'm wondering
when
Senator, um, Ortizipino
presented in front of CCJ last
week about his um
Proposed constitutional
amendment regarding the um
Changes in the anti-donation
clause. I mean, this is
certainly um supportive.
Of
That because right now, uh most
of these providers are nonprofit
agencies and um I would think
this might be something for
those.
Who are going to carry forth
that effort in the future to
coordinate with the LFC to um
Look at
Providing for the public what
this could mean. so that we have
more services in more locations.
Um
Throughout the state of New
Mexico, because as, as you've
pointed out before, Madam Chair,
it's not really helpful to be
providing the services on um
Remotely
When you have people who have
severe needs. And Senator Ortiz,
you know, I was just saying that
this recommendation that's
number 2 on page 2 and also on
page 15, I think would support
the um
Efforts you are contemplating
for others to take over
regarding the um anti-donation
clause changes. So I just wanted
to bring that up. And then um
finally, with regard to the
vinyl, I, it's been many years
since I was a
Certified educational
diagnostician, but my
My use of that was as the
diagnostician, I interviewed the
parents.
I interviewed the people who
knew the client the best. It
wouldn't be somebody who sees
the client once a month, but
it's not a, it's, it's not
really um
Um, well, I, I think it might
provide you information for
goals, but um,
I, I, I don't know, it could be
revised and renormed and and and
so forth. I, I just never saw it
as a as a tool for someone who
occasionally saw someone sign an
individual.
If you want to mention
come in on that, I'd be happy to
hear it.
Mr. Chairman and vice chair, um,
I hope I get this correct, uh,
floor leader Chasey, I apologize
if that's not correct. So, uh,
that's the exact intent of our
use of the violence of the case
manager who visits once a month.
They are responsible for the
completion of the tool, but
they're responsible for
interviewing the, the, the, the
person served, number one, to
the extent that they can
communicate with us and through
also assistive um devices, the
direct support personnel who
work with them on a daily basis.
and that if they're involved,
corporate guardian that they're
involved, uh, friends, other
family members. So yes, that's
the intent of that's how we
would apply the violent um uh
through the DD waiver, just like
the self-directed labor.
Thank you very much, um, Madam
Chair and Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go this way then we'll start
with the representative Kates
and work that way.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much. I'm sorry. I
apologize for being late for the
presentation.
Juggling meetings, um, thank you
for such a deep dive in a
comprehensive report. I have a
bunch of questions, so I'll ask
for shorter answers, and I do
apologize because I know these
are complex issues that you may
want to provide to others. I
read your, um, let's go here.
When, when on page, uh 18.
Uh, you state that over 80% of
MA consultants are not
adequately monitoring DD
clients. How are you aware of
that statistic.
Uh, chair and Representative
Kates, uh, this comes from the
Quality Management Bureau of the
Division of Health Improvement.
They conduct, um,
Semi-regular, uh, surveys uh of
providers and what they do there
is they ask for a sample of uh
the uh reports basically looking
at a number of different clients
and from there they uh are
required to have specific um
criteria uh included such as,
uh, did they, do they see a
client, uh, if a case note is
not included or if the person
did not indeed go see that
client, then they would fall
into this category. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So I have like a
two parter questions. Sorry, I'm
trying to cram all the questions
and, um, do, does uh does the
data indicate when um they've
been refused to services like
they've tried to contact and
they were either not available
or um or they refused to be
seen? Do they separate that data
at all from the 80%, uh, chair
and Representative Kates, the
data that I looked at did not,
but maybe there is additional
data and then is there a process
sorry, Scott, just a minute and
is there is a um is there a
process in place that once they
receive that, if they've had
that data way before LFC asked
for it. What is their process?
With that knowledge of the data.
Uh, chair and Representative
Kate, I would, uh, call, I would
ask Dan Linari, who is the
director of DHI to provide a
more detailed uh summary than I
could. So I'm gonna cut to the
chase cause there uh my chair is
gonna cut me off pretty soon and
then I'll work my way backwards.
My only uh issue my one of my
many concerns is under your
suggestions, I don't see any
more funding for.
Auditing support or for the
state to confirm what is going
on. So it's wonderful, this is a
third party, LFC, but you're
using the data the state has
already created, why isn't the
state done anything after that.
And if it's because they are
short manpower, why is that not
a suggestion for adequate.
Um, adequate oversight and
adequate technical assistance
and accountability. What is the
accountability? Thanks.
Good morning, chair, and members
of the committee, uh, so I'm Dan
Linari, the division director of
DHI. So, um, as far as those
surveys, so our quality
management bureau visits each of
those providers at a minimum of
every 3 years. Um, however,
based off of their performance
and their findings, we may visit
those providers on a more
regular basis, uh, for example,
every 12 months or 18 months or
perhaps every 24 months. And so,
as far as that data, those
surveys are
headed back to the providers at
DDSD um for follow-up. But us as
the regulatory agency, uh, that,
that is where, um, you know,
our, our service, you know, as
it relates to those findings,
um, you know, we provide that
back to the agency for
follow-up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the answers. So let me
just uh clarify. So DHI is who
confirms the data and then you
provide the data findings to
DDST, so DDST is the one either
holding providers accountable or
ensuring the safety of those
they serve. Is that correct?
Chair and Representative Kates,
yes, they're the ones who would
be providing some technical
assistance and Scott didn't
speak that.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair Representative Kate so
I'll try to be brief. So to go
back to your question,
there is an opportunity when the
quality Management Bureau goes
out and they complete a survey.
They interview that specific
case manager. And there's an
opportunity for the case manager
to explain I didn't complete my
visit this month because the
individual refused. The
individual was out of town, or I
didn't do this, um, note for
whatever reason, before they
complete that survey, QMB allows
the case management agency
provide documentation to
reconcile those findings before
they are completed.
Once the final report comes out
in about 45 days, the, if
there's findings, then the uh
case management agency is
required to submit a corrective
action plan to correct those
findings for that individual and
across the agency and DDSC also
gets a copy of that, and we take
that into account um with their
provider agreement, for example,
we're making recommendations for
a renewal or for um contract
revisions and so we also provide
technical assistance to the
management agencies on how to
resolve those specific concerns.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um, I, I don't want to
press my luck with the chairs,
um, but I do have other
questions. Thank you.
Representative Block, your turn.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess
I should press the luck with the
tears and I don't sit on your
committees in the general
session. No, I'm just kidding.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for
that.
But,
uh, Mr. Chair, I guess my first
question is, is pointed directly
toward, uh, the chart on page 5.
Regarding the spending and
What we spend
Regarding other states. So, Mr.
Chairman, and I guess uh
It would probably be for doctor,
Doctor Sarah, Mr. Weaver. I, I'm
just wondering, uh, life
expectancy. Did we look at that
as a factor? Are we tracking
that? And maybe this could be
for for DDSC. Are we tracking
that data?
In New Mexico versus other
states and also relative to what
we pay out uh per client, Mr.
Chairman. Chair and
Representative Block, no, that
was not data that we dug into.
Do you have an additional?
Um, yes, uh, Representative
Block. No, we do not know life
expectancy. We did look at age.
We looked at how age related to
expenditures and we looked at
how with the weightless
elimination, the overall
demographics of the waiver has
changed.
Related to age.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that. So I'm
wondering, did we, I, I see the
numbers here, like in Delaware
where they pay like crazy amount
of money per person. Is that
because it's such a tiny little
state with highly dense
populations. What, what factors
go into that, like Delaware, New
Mexico versus Virginia, said our
Mr. Chairs representative block,
I would give maybe two answers
to that. First of all, um, each
state is not exactly an apples
to apples comparison. So if we
were to look at Oregon, for
example, which I believe is at
5000. A lot of those.
services such as therapies
aren't delivered through this
waiver, they're delivered either
through the Medicaid State plan
or an 1115 waiver or other
mechanisms. Um, so that's kind
of maybe an important point to
note. However, as we highlighted
in the report, we do think that
there are also cost containment
issues at play.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for that. So I'm wondering,
does Delaware cover residential,
uh,
Restitutions.
Institutions.
Uh, Representative Los Delaware
in DC. DC is actually the
highest, but that got cut off.
um, at 141,000 does cover
supported living and residential
habilitation.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that answer and
thank you for the ability to
speak very quickly to get to my
5 minutes. So, Mr. Chairman, my
next question is regarding uh
getting providers to work for
these MCOs and for any
individual that provides
services. I know places in my
area like Alamogordo, we have
people that are paying minimum
wage jobs that are $19 an hour
and people would rather work
there. Do we have any data on,
on the factors relating to
recruitment, and if these
services, like you said, I think
Oklahoma, giving $1000 does that
actually work, Mr.
Chair and Representative, uh,
first of all, we do not have
specific data looking at each
individual county as to uh their
DSP, uh, recruitment retention
issues, uh, DDSD may, but we'll
save that for a second. Uh, and
then the second part of your
question, uh, we do not have a
lot of data as to whether the
incentive payments are working,
and that's why we suggest that
it is funded through the grow.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that. And then
also I, I heard there's a lot of
data from DHI that goes to DDSD
and all this stuff. How many
individuals that like are in the
program are in Media and Didi
waiver, etc. How many of those
individuals have been
interviewed for this data, Mr.
Chairman, I don't know we're
actually asking the clients
themselves. Uh chair and
representative block, uh, in
regards to talking to the
clients we spoke to a few
clients when we did, uh, visits
at supported living homes, and
we reached out through the ACQ
to talk to.
uh Family man and other
individuals and spoke to a few
there.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that. And you had
something to add, go ahead, um,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Block. So in
terms of average age, DVSC does
have that data available if you
would like to see that in terms
of, um, direct support staff and
salary, I, I would encourage you
to take a look at the House Bill
395 report, which has lots of uh
data about um number of staff in
the system, their hourly wage,
how long they've been there, um,
so that might offer you some
additional information.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
I guess I'll give my 30 seconds
back to the chair. Thank you so
much.
Appreciate it we're giving 5
minutes.
So, uh, Senator Silvio Lopez
and, and just a reminder, we're
giving you, everybody 5 minutes.
So it's a luxurious day
don't push your luck.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for this incredible,
um, work to, to get here, to get
us here. I just have a few
questions. Um, one of the key
recommendations and I, I think
I'm like this, is it 80% of
Medicaid reimbursement rate
revenue.
go to the direct support
professionals. Um, I think that
that's a good thing, but what
would it do to the, to the
income of the of the uh direct
service providers, cause I
noticed um when you just said
that um there was a report on HB
394 and how, how many got paid,
but I just want to know what
that means to provide 80%, will
that give
Everybody, especially the home
health workers a living wage.
What, what is that gonna do?
A chair and Senator, uh, Sia
Lopez, if you'll turn with me
to, I believe it's figure.
3. I'm just flipping through
pages, sorry.
pay.
13, we have an illustrative
example of what it would do. Uh,
we believe that it would
increase, uh, individuals'
salaries to at least $20 an
hour, uh.
There are some other like
nuances within that and we can
dig into that if that's
something you would like to have
additional well, at least $2 an
hour for the, the lowest paid
individual, yes, for those
individuals who are uh direct
sports professionals, uh,
working in a supported living
home.
Or is it an average? I just want
to ensure that every, oh, I see
what you're saying this was an
illustrative example based upon
some data that we had from a
provider uh in Albuquerque, and
I think, uh, Mr. Weaver can add
some additional clarification.
Yes, Senator, I don't think it
actually mandates a certain pay,
I think is that what you're
asking what the level would be
or I don't think it mandates a
certain pay. It's just how much
of those reimbursement rates
would be passed through.
OK, cause, cause I did a bill a
few years ago to try to ensure
that all who contracted with the
state for these services would
get at least, um, and I, I think
it was $20 an hour, but I don't
know a minimum a living wage,
um, and the bill went pretty
far, uh, but that provision was
cut off and uh one of the
reasons that it was stated that
it was cut off was because of
This program, um, that people
that it would be really hard on
the providers, that is the
for-profit and the non-profit
companies are providing the
services to to provide a living
wage.
And I found that a little
disturbing, but they, it was cut
off. I mean,
When they modify your building,
they modify your bill. Um.
So, I, I would be supportive of
this, if I knew or if this bill
um had a guarantee of a minimum
wage for the lowest paid
individuals in the system,
because it seems to me from
That a lot of people do this
work for
Or are for the state minimum
wage, and that is unacceptable.
It's not a livable wage. And so
if this bill that you're talking
about had a minimum of floor
that anybody working would make
things that would go a long way
to attracting individuals to do
this work. Um, so, but I, I
think I support this. I just
want to really know what the
impact is.
A chair and uh Senator Cio
Lopez, I will say that our
current um.
Mention here is not to
necessarily create that floor, I
think that's something that we
could dig into the data for um
395. House Bill 395, uh, to, um,
show that data what we, the data
we did include in the report
shows that 2% of DSP salaries
were reported at the state
minimum wage. So the majority
are making more than that state
minimum wage, but some are
indeed making that, but
sometimes it's like 50 cents
more or $1 more, and again
that's not livable. So, um, like
I said, I, I would, uh,
Before I supported this, I, I
would like to know what the
actual impact on the workers is.
Um, and then the caps on
services, um, you say that other
states have caps on services. Is
there any analysis um of
Of how that works because it
seems to me that it should be
individualized, like some people
need less services and some
people need more services, and
an artificial cap, I think would
would hurt people who need it
the most is, is my concern about
that.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, um,
that varies state by state and
all 50 states kind of have
slightly different mechanisms
for how they do that. So, as
I've said, DC and Maine, and we
could give you plenty of
examples. I know those are
anecdotal. Some of them might
have a quote unquote artificial
cap. So to give you an example,
uh $40,000 a year for employment
support or 40 hours a week,
whatever that might be. Others,
it's maybe more tethered to
certain types of, I think,
assignment at the the earlier
process.
When you meet and decide
services and um as far as what's
justified, uh, medically. So
that's a way of saying, yes,
states do it differently, uh,
most of them don't just have an
artificial cap, but some combo
of the two.
And is that what you're
recommending as I understand
this. Are are you recommending
an uh
An appropriate.
Exceptions to this cap.
Yeah, so I, I don't think we uh
recommended any one specific, it
has to be DC's, it has to be
mains, but we do think that,
yes, there does need to be, for
example, exceptions if there's
justifiable circumstances,
reasons to go over, absolutely.
That's time, Senator.
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator
Lucas.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. And
first I'd like to say thank you
very much for um this progress
report, um, Mr. Chair, Madam,
co-chair, but um we need so much
more time to delve into this.
Um,
So this is just, I know, kind of
like a a breeze through for me,
I mean.
Just gonna take more time, Mr.
Chair, for me to go through this
and and really look in depth as
to what some of the
recommendations are, um, but one
of the, um,
And some of us have
institutional memory about other
things that have been tried over
the years and that failed and
that we're not good and didn't
benefit um those in our
community who need.
Support services, right? Um,
So, um, Mr. Chair, I guess one
thing I just um
wanted to
To put out, and I know the vice
chair, all of us, I think, have
made some allusion to it is in
your recommendations on page 2,
of course, is to follow through
and plans to require the Finland
adaptive behavior scale 3.
And um
Mr. Chair, it's, it sounds good
when you wish to look at and see
what um
What, what some of our persons
may need and maybe less services
or more, but it, it reflects to
me, Mr. Chair, on
Some other systems that we have
in the state.
Uh, when you have guardian ad
litems in another venue who
don't really meet their clients
until maybe the day they're in
front of a judge.
Um, you have others, you know,
some caseworkers who are busy
and have many on their list and
maybe don't have the time to
spend in working with that
particular person.
So Mr. Chair, one of my
questions, of course, is to ask
how adequately staffed.
Is the division, right, to be
able to accomplish this? Are we,
how many employees do we have,
uh, the caseworkers are are
employed by whom? What is the
oversight on the caseworkers
because when you're asking them
to go and clock in.
You write a report and such but
then who oversees that?
Um, and Mr. Chair, it's just,
it's part of the systems issue,
not, not just here, but in other
departments that we have.
Um, there's always a concern.
So, and the last time that we
went through this type of an
evaluation, um, there was
It was kind of I call it hit and
miss, so they went in very
quickly here, this is kind of
what they were talking directly
to the the client, and sometimes
your clients don't definitively
know what the requirements and
what their needs are, right? And
if the case worker or new person
doesn't know. Do you feed
yourself? Do you, I mean, basic
questions sometimes the client
doesn't answer correctly, and if
that person is just doing a
hurried review, then you have
clients who lose services, and
all of the other issues.
issues. Um, so, Mr. Chair, I
mean, we can go on cause some of
us have lived through this. Um,
I have concerns.
And I know that as word will get
out for those who are providing
services or parents or other
family members, there's going to
be an outcry.
Because we've been down this
road before, and it really hurt
many of our in our communities
who lost services.
Because of whatever the
evaluation that was put forward.
So I just wanted to to mention
that, um, Mr. Chair.
And then when you talk about uh,
you know, the 80% pass through.
Well, it sounds good, but then
when you listen to some of the
providers, Mr. Chair, I think
that's still a conversation for
us to have, um, because, you
know, looking at budgets as to
what some of the providers have
to provide with healthcare and
all the other costs. Um, I know
there's pass throughs that we
have with regards to the
Medicaid budget.
Um
I think we still need to be very
cautious.
Um, and looking as to, as, as
Senator Siel Lopez was talking
about with regards to a living
wage.
I was working with a family in
Albuquerque.
Whose son has several issues,
um, and at the place where he
was living.
Uh, of course, they, they had
different owners who came
through and left because that's
another issue also, but those
who were providing services
where college students.
And college students, of course,
you know, they're they're
working, finding a place to, to
provide for themselves whether
they're going to college for
something else, but they don't
have training. They don't have
the patience and other
experiences needed, that some of
these clients do need.
And this particular young man
had 4 different um
Levels of need and when his
mother actually went back in to
visit after she had, she was
having health issues. Um, it was
disgusting.
I was there and it was very
disgusting.
And Accordingly, Mr. Chair, I
mean all these oversized
caseworkers and such, so there's
still so much for us to look
into and when we do these types
of recommendations. I really err
on the side of caution.
So I just want to leave it
there, Mr. Chair, cause there's
a lot more to digest from this
report. Thank you.
Thanks, Senator, uh, Senator
Pinto. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for your presentation. A lot
including
Seeing
Even with the last presentation
was when we legalize cannabis.
Then I expect it to increase.
Expected to increase in the
sense of where, I mean, I have
some of
The people I grew up with who
are grandparents having to raise
their grandchildren.
And they're not even close to
retirement, um, because of meth,
because of opioids, and I
suspect because we're going to
see some uh disabilities too,
because of um the use of
cannabis. So I hope we can get a
hold on this. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you guys.
Uh, no questions. Representative
Martinez, any questions?
Then it comes back to me. No,
it, it comes to you, uh, uh,
Vice Chairman.
Mr. Chair, and I have asked the
chair to to use a little extra
time, um.
You can have Senator Hickey's
time. OK.
So in terms of, you know, you.
Through the years, through the
decades that I've been involved
in this. It's always, oh, costs
are going up, costs are going up
for everything, not just the DD
waiver, and it, it frequently
feels like that's, you know, a,
a, a thing like, oh my God, the
DD waiver, well, we don't, oh my
God, the prisons, we don't, oh
my God, the whatever, and so I'm
just saying that maybe it's time
we start looking at things and I
wanted
Inform the members that the, the
chart, I think on page um that
talks about what states, what
states spend that chart is
comparing apples to elephants. I
mean, it, it really, it's, it's,
there's, it, we shouldn't use it
because as they said, Oregon
doesn't include therapies. We
are one of few states that have
few institutions that have no
institutions, no institutions,
so those
of people in other states are in
institutions, so they're not
counted. So of course ours look
higher because we're giving
better care in a community
setting as opposed into an
institution, and we've all heard
the horror stories about
institutions. And then in terms
of um
A&E, you know, people get up in
arms, abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. I have gotten
several reports from my son's
caregivers that they had to
report an A&E and it was as
simple as their outing went
longer than expected, and he
missed the time for his meds or
the meds didn't get refilled on
time. So it was 2 hours late. So
A&E is not all it's not only,
you know, rate.
Or physical abuse or stealing
their money, it can be as simple
as missing a medication and I
think we need to keep
remembering that.
Um, on page 3.
Let me see.
It talks about um
The DDSD budget on chart one,
that it's gone up so much, but
it doesn't tell us how many
more, I mean, many more people
are on the waiver now. So this
is again a chart that's
disingenuous in my mind because
it looks like, oh my God, the
growth, the growth, well, the
growth is numbers, not just in
cost. So, um,
Uh, let's see, um,
Uh
That, that we have few
providers, that's true, both
direct service providers and
professionals because they, they
can make a whole lot more money
doing something else. I mean, I,
you've probably all heard about
my son who wipes feces on the
ceiling and pulls toilets out of
the floor. You can work with him
for $12 an hour or you can work
in McDonald's making fries for
19.
I mean, only, only people who
can't get jobs elsewhere or
people who are truly angels on
earth are willing to do that
work for that low pay, and I
think we need to finally say
that that is not acceptable and,
and we're through with it and we
need to start paying people, um,
Let's see, page 13, this is
going to the uh Los Lunas
Community programs.
It's just, I mean, it, it's sad
to think that the people um who
aren't state employees are
treated like dirt and the people
who are state employees are
treated like state employees
that, that should, shouldn't be
um that different um page, OK,
let's see, page 26, um.
Mm
On page 26, the um
The actual versus projected
cost. If you're off that much
every year, could it be maybe
that the projections are wrong,
not that the costs are too much,
but uh we started too low to
begin with and I'm really tired
of things that make the DD
waiver look like the bad guy.
Like, oh my God, the cost here.
Well, you know, if, if you say,
oh it's gonna cost, you know, $2
for this tank of gas, and it's
30, well, you underprojected,
obviously, and I think that's
what's happening here and I
think I, I really wish we'd stay
away from those kind of things
and actually make a projection
based on reality, not based on
what we wish, um.
Let's see, page 27, 19.
Um, and again, I mean, it looks
like we have a lot of, of folks
receiving occupational therapy
and physical therapy and speech
and language pathologists.
There's a lot more that need
them, that can't get him, and I
don't think we need to race to
the bottom and say, oh,
Alabama's only giving them to 2%
of people. Let's, let's be
Alabama. That is totally wrong.
We, we need, we need to stop
looking at doing a good job as a
negative. If we are providing
services to the
Population, that's a good thing.
That's not a negative. It can't
always be about dollars.
I know I'm on a rant and just
excuse me, but that's what it
is. Um.
And then the, the small box on
page 28, the 34% of physical
therapy.
Exceed the 280 units, that's 70
hours. That's basically an hour
a month.
I mean, an hour a week.
Which is, which is fine for some
people, but if somebody has a
swallowing disorder and they
need a lot of therapy to fix
that so they don't aspirate and
die, then it's a cheap thing to
do. So again, the, the things
that we don't want to go for the
bottom. We don't want to race to
the bottom and be the worst. We
want to be the best and stop,
stop acting like being the best
is a negative. Um,
Let's see.
And in terms of the 80% to the
direct service providers. I know
that my son is very expensive to
care for. As I said, he pulls
out toilets. He breaks out
windows in the, the group home
van at least monthly he breaks,
he breaks things. And so to say
that the, the, I mean, and I am
all for 1,000% for providing our
DSPs more money, but to say that
the, the agency that has all the
costs so that
are not covered.
Take a loss, that doesn't make
sense either. So rather than
saying 80% has to go to the
direct service providers. How
about we
Appropriately fund for both the
agencies and the agencies are
not big out of state
multibillion dollar
corporations, their Altamira,
which has been in business in
New Mexico for 40 years. It's
New Mexico, born and these are
not greedy. This is not the same
as hospitals by any stretch of
the imagination.
And then the viland scares me to
death. How many of you remember
the cyst?
The cyst was a disaster and
we're going right down that same
path using, uh, I was looking up
some uh reviews of it.
And it says, um,
Yeah.
Well, first off, has the viland
been normed for purchase, for
purposes of setting up an ISP.
Is that what it's for?
Or has there been any study as
to whether that is an
appropriate use, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, uh, yes, the
violin has been normed and it is
used, um, uh, for individuals
with developmental disabilities
and make one point, I, I hear
what you're saying about the
supports intensity scale and,
you know, what happened there,
the difference with our
implementation of the violin, we
do not um plan on using that
tied to resource allocation.
This is for person centered
planning purposes to help.
team develop services for the
individual not to dictate the
number of dollars for that
person. But my question was, Mr.
Chair, has it been normed for
that purpose.
For person centered planning,
yes, yes, yes, madam chair. OK,
again, it's a warning. I mean
that somebody's gonna be
interviewed, my son.
Has maybe um the, the ability to
answer questions at a 4 year old
level. So you can ask him and
generally what you say last is
what, you know, do you like
burgers or chicken, he'll say
chicken, do you like chicken or
burgers, burgers, so and that's
what happened with the cyst, and
I'm not in his life every day
since he's in a group home and
this the direct care staff has
such high turnover, they don't
know him either. So who are you
gonna interview that that's
to get to this without getting
all kinds of, you know, it's
like somebody's been a staff
member for 2 weeks and you ask
him, oh no, he has no behavior
issues. Well, you've just been
lucky. You haven't worked the
shifts where you had behavior
issues, or he, he has them less
frequently, so maybe he hasn't
had one for 2.5 weeks. So I find
this really, really concerning
that, that this is the way to,
uh, I think we just need to look
back at the cyst and I'm glad
you're not using it for funding
purposes, but we need to be
really careful about.
about what, what instruments we
use, um,
Let's see.
And then just in terms of, in
terms of our low pay, you know,
we tend to get folks who, who
can't get jobs elsewhere, you
know, when you can get a job at
Target, you know, you may be
hard work, but it's, you know,
it's not like wiping feces off
at 33 year old man and off the
ceiling and washing his clothes.
And so I'm afraid we're gonna,
all we're gonna do is be
attracting folks who can't get
employed elsewhere, um, and then
there are some people who just
do it cause they love it and
some.
how they're able to survive on
no pay, but um this is
disappointing overall because
we're, it's still making the DD
waiver look like the bad guy,
like the clients are the bad
guys. They're using so much
money as opposed to looking at
as we have a stellar program in
New Mexico and why would we want
to tear it down or
Financial reasons, uh, and I
will tell you if we go back to
institutions, the costs are
going to go way up and the care
is gonna go way down, but I
don't see any, any medium
ground. So, um, I'm just putting
it out there that we need to
stop treating the DD waiver as
the red-headed stepchild and,
and as it, uh, you know, our
number one goal of the waiver is
to save money, save money
wherever we can. That's not
helping the state, that's not
helping families and it's not
helping the people just.
disabilities. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
um I'll just have a couple of
comments and, and, um
The first one is, it, it, it
does seem to me that we continue
to
Make
Comparisons between what New
Mexico is spending on this
program.
And but other states are
spending on the program, and
that that has little or no
validity because as even the,
the uh uh evaluator mentioned.
Apples and oranges, very
different. Beyond that,
The amount of state money
involved is going to vary widely
because the states Medicaid
match ratio is so wide. We, we
have one of the most favorable.
So
If we're spending
twice as much as another state
on this waiver.
But our ratio is $3 for every
$1. We're actually saving quite
a bit of money because the
institutional care would be in
all state dollars. So it, it,
it's just not a fair, the only
comparison that makes any sense
really is, what would we be
spending on institutional care
for this client, and what are we
spending through the waiver. And
as far as nothing in this report
indicates that we're
overspending what an institution
would cost.
So I think, you know, the, the
My concern is that this report
goes to the LFC. I mean, we're
kind of incidental to the
report.
And the LSC is made up of people
who are formulating the budget.
We're formulating what's best
for clients. And, and I, you
know, and not to detract from
the LFC members. I'm sure they
also take client considerations
into account, but balancing the
budget is their number one
concern, and this becomes
ammunition in their hands.
To reduce what we would think of
as necessary additional spending
for this program. So that's,
that's the concern there. The
other, uh, when I started off
before everybody ask your
questions, I said there were two
concerns that you didn't cover.
One was that and the other one
was this. Did you at all address
in your evaluation, the issue
that's we've spent a lot of time
on.
The use by our community
providers of non-employees of
contractors to provide the
services as a way of saving
money.
And, and, and that
To a lot of us seems like clear
violation of federal law.
We've raised that issue to 3
different state level
departments, none of whom seemed
to be bothered in the least by
it.
Including the uh Department of
Workforce Solutions, which runs,
you know, you know, which cracks
the whip over uh private
employers who try to get away
with that stuff, and yet they
don't, they, they, they've not
acted at all on it, and, and,
and I guess the division is
still contemplating allowing uh
providers to do that. So I, I, I
just don't understand that
issue. So did the evaluators run
into that and what were, what
were your findings concerning
that issue?
Uh, thank you for, chair, for
the question. We included it as
a callout box, we do not make
any specific recommendations in
regards to that, uh, we
understand that it is a current,
uh, it is a problem currently
within the uh
ecosystem of the DDME waivers,
but we did not dig deeply into
any any recommendation because
we uh were concerned that if we
made a recommendation in regards
to how individuals have their
clients that then the state
almost becomes the uh employer
and so we flag it as a problem,
but do not dig into. So you did
flag it though. Yes, I can try
and find the exact, at least it
got raised and, and I think that
it's crucial that the LFC
members, you know, also
At least be exposed to some of
the same concerns that we've
voiced in the past. So thank you
for that.
Well, thank you for your
presentation. Uh, obviously, uh,
uh, a lot of work went into this
and we appreciate that.
We appreciate the, the
recommendations and, and
certainly the, the two devoted
to the legislature that you
raised are, are ones that we, we
ought to take up and uh
representative Chasey mentioned,
uh, an an initiative going on.
To eliminate the
The barriers that the
anti-donation clause, uh,
currently would pose to the
state helping providers buy a
house or, or
You know, fix up the house to
standards that would, that would
meet the contractor
requirements, uh, and, and so if
we could do that, it makes it
possible to, to uh to do a
little more in the way of
helping expand the number of
providers out there who serve
these clients.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Now members we're, we're a
little ahead and so we're gonna
do, we're gonna be uh deviate
from our agenda and go to public
comment
Oh, and if there's anybody
online who wants to make public
comment, uh, don't forget our
little guidance that says, if
you want to make public comment
and you're online, you need to
uh raise, go to the icon that
says uh reactions and raise your
hand, and then we'll recognize
you. But we'll start with the
people that are here.
in the room, and we have
Robert Cagle and Nat Dean.
And I don't know about Angelique
Tafoya. Are you, or you don't,
or you just, you're just here.
You just signed in. OK.
OK, Robert.
3 minutes
And you know that you'll draw
the wrath of the vice chairman
if you go over.
Well, you just have to deal with
it. Um, the evaluation of the
whole, uh, one of the basic
premises is uh under federal
law, um, of the Social Security
Act 1915C is in a waiver has to
be less than institutional care.
Any assertion that a waiver is
over exp expensive and doesn't
deal with that. To me, is
blatantly prejudiced and
bigoted.
Um, calling these people
expensive is, and that just
doesn't cut it. The federal law
requires the state to provide
adequate rates to provide
services with the contractor
issue, we are not doing that
right now.
The provider capacity as you
came to this state in 1918 when
uh former governor was leaving
and they didn't want to put
people on the waiver, so we
invented this provider capacity
thing.
Yeah, well, Morda where my kid
is, Walmart does not have a
provider capacity problem,
neither does McDonald's, neither
does Lowe's, neither does Home
Depot, none of them do. They
just pay the wage.
We are in violation of state law
simply by not paying an adequate
wage to do that, and all the
rest of this plain flat smoke
and mirrors. We have to give
people an honest wage.
My kids' day staff, their take
home, one of them is $900 every
two weeks, the other one is $800
every two weeks.
Judy has worked 40 years in the
in the business and from Fort
Stanton all the way up, she's in
her early 60s. She makes 59
cents more than the college kid
who just started.
It took us a year and a half to
get a new staff person to
replace the convicted felon that
was working nights at my son's
house. That's how bad it is.
So,
We are violating the law by not
funding this program. Everything
you look in that, that thing
they handed down, always quotes
the high federal dollar and
intentionally misleads
legislative finance Committee
staff as to the true cost. If
you look on page 3, it says it
costs $800 million. It does not.
That's the total federal share.
Nowhere in this where you find
out the return we're getting on
the gross receipts tax that all
this pays, that we get back.
There's no analysis whatsoever
of that. There's absolutely no
analysis whatsoever of the
hundreds of millions of dollars
in economic benefit that is in
every con every representatives
district, every senator's
district in the entire state.
If you compare that to what
we're spending in the movie
industry, there is absolutely no
comparison that the benefit from
this DD waiver far outweighs
what we're doing with the movie
industry and to not give a
legislator the information so
they can make a true decision on
what it actually costs is
really, really, really bad.
There have been a number of
things I would like to point out
that there are no DD people in
this room.
This is discussing their budget
and evaluation that has a
horrendous impact. Where are
they? Where is their right to,
to come here. There were, there
were none yesterday in LSC. So,
I'm proposing that we do a
developmental disability Bill of
Rights Act, and so people have
the right to vote, they have the
right to show up and, and, and,
and we have a capital that's
accessible to them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rome.
Um
Nadine.
She was, Oh, here she is.
Welcome then.
Excuse me, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee, members of the
public, um, my name is Nat Dean.
I am a person with multiple
disabilities, and I am a
disability advocate and I am
independent. I don't work for
anyone.
I try to make a bullet list 3
minutes.
I'm sorry if I don't have the
assistive devices sometimes I
miss a few things. Um,
person-centered planning is
rarely done in a very robust
fashion, because it's a very
time intensive process, and it
also requires that you have a
rapport with the person, and
that that takes time to develop.
So just bringing in a PCP person
since they plan in person and
then try to do it in one visit
is just, it, it leaves a lot
out. Um, a lot of people when
they're answering next bullet
point, a lot of people in the
answering questions on their
ADLs or their I ADLs, um,
Feel shame in answering the
question in an accurate manner,
and so they tend to answer the
question in a way that says,
yes, I can do that, or
misunderstanding of what that
question really means and I that
was just a little bit paused
your time ADLs are activities of
daily living.
an instrumental activities of
daily living, they like, can you
cook? Can you clean? Can you
eat? Can you dress? can you
toilet? Can you manage money?
Can you drive? Can you schedule
a ride there, they have various
different levels. Um, oftentimes
during assessments, um,
People will, yes, ma'am.
Oh yes, ma'am. Yes, yes, yes,
yes, ma'am. Because again, it
may be a confusion about the
content, or it may be a matter
of, of feeling shy or feeling
embarrassed. Um, something
that's very difficult is we
often get the just do nothing.
And when we just do nothing, the
sensation is that the equal sign
for us so we don't really
matter. The person who has the
needs.
Um, poor advisement from care
coordinators and consultants
such as media, um, is that they
don't have the experience to uh
perform the, the duties that are
involved, and I think that that
is, it's a, I don't have the
answer, but it's still a very
concerning question. There may
be no eyes on in a visit because
a parent may even be saying,
well, my child doesn't want to
talk to you today when really
they don't want to have the
child or an adult child talk to
the uh person who's uh
went through on the continuity
of care and the quality of care.
Um, in terms of check the box,
sometimes you go out the radio
button, the same way, yeah, I
will never deny another ride to
a person with a service dog, and
then the, the minute that the
Uber Lyft sees me with the
service dog, they like drive
away.
Um, thank you very much, Ms.
Madam Chair, Mr. Vice Chair
members as members of the
public. I think I've used my 3
minutes.
Thank you, Annette, and we have
one person online.
It's uh Karen Kushner.
Go ahead, Karen.
Hello, my name is Karen Kushner,
um, madam.
Vice chair, Mr. Chair, I just
wanted to, to chime in and say,
I concur 100% with the first two
people that gave comment.
We, we assigned dollar values to
this before we're really looking
at what all the needs are. You
can't say that, you know,
somebody's care should be
limited when maybe they don't
have any say in this, in this.
They, they need the care that
they need, and that's the end of
the conversation. Um, I sat in
the LFC presentation of this and
sitting in this presentation
today.
There were some omissions, there
were some things that were just
assumed that the members of LHHS
had already read and understood.
And I think that there's a lot
more that needs to be said a lot
more that needs to be
Um, discussed before we start
putting limiting factors on
these services. Um, thank you
very much.
Thank you, Karen. And Angelique
Tafoya from Altamira wants to
make a comment too and uh go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mrs. Vice Chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Angelique Tafoya. I'm the
executive director of Ultimi
Specialized Family Services,
which was mentioned as going on
for decades of providing
services in the greater metro
area here, um, in New Mexico. I
am so thankful for the
conversation here at the LHHS,
um, I'm so thankful for all of
your thoughtful comments about
the services that we provide and
the many people that we support.
I do just want to stress that I
know a lot of.
it does come down to the funding
and as a provider, we, we, we
can't offer the supports if we
don't have the funds to provide
the supports. If we don't have
the workforce to provide the
supports, it's all know at that
point, so all of our IDD
services, our services for
people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities from
fit services all the way through
all of our waivers are
essential. This year's
specifically, we are asking for
some significant increases in
the budgetary ask for all of our
services because every single
person
with the disability is at a
position to lose services
because of workforce issues,
capacity issues, and low
funding. So I'm so thankful
again for the conversation here.
And I just want to let you guys
know as, as far as this report
goes, I know that it's looking
at saying that we're increasing
costs, we're increasing costs,
but I would ask you all to
remember that when the super
allocation occurred, it was a
known thing that more people
were gonna come into the
service. It was going to be
expensive and as those people
aged up, it's gonna get even
more expensive, so I ask you to
consider that as well for future
discussions. This is not an end
all be all. The conversation
today about how expensive our
services are. People are going
To get older, they're going to
get into residential services.
It will continue to be an
expensive program and we have to
fund it. We absolutely have to
fund it, um, if we don't, then
we are impacting some of the
most vulnerable people in our
New Mexico population here,
please, I ask that you just talk
to your LFC members and you
discuss with them this this
report that came out and the
importance of making sure that
not only is the waiver funded
but fit is funded as well. Thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much, Angelique.
Uh, and then before we break for
lunch, I'm gonna ask those
members who haven't had a chance
to introduce themselves, uh, to
go ahead and do that. So we'll
start with the Representative
Martinez, and we'll work our way
around here. Some of us did
early on, but the rest didn't
yet.
think, Mister Chairman, I'm
sorry for being late this
morning. I was tied up at a
meeting in Rio Rancho.
Uh, my name is Alan Martinez. I
represent the House District 23.
Um, in Rio Rancho in the West
part of the town of Burnham.
Senator Martin Hickey
representing the east side of
Albuquerque and uh had to
finally be here, sorry, I
couldn't be here earlier.
Um, my name is Antoinette Sadil
Lopez, and I represent District
16, which is the university in
the CNM area of um northeast and
southeast Albuquerque.
Representative Kathleen Cates
from District 44, that's all of
Corrales, parts of Rio Rancho
and uh north of.
Norte in uh uh from the river
down to I-25 and um and thank
you and thank you for this
waiver discussion. I wish
legislators could sign up for
public comment. Thank you.
Well, we have time, so we may go
ahead and allow public comment
from legislators, but
Senator Poop.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, state
Senator Harold Pope Junior,
District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque, west side of
Albuquerque, the west side is
the best side. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Stephanics. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Liz Stephanic, Senate
District 39, parts of six
counties, and I will miss
tomorrow afternoon because we
are doing the we are finally
doing a groundbreaking for the
hospital in Valencia County
tomorrow afternoon.
Congratulations.
Do, do you have Valencia County
in your district?
Oh, wow, such a strange
district.
That's
all.
Uh, uh, yes, Representative
Herndon, you didn't introduce
yourself, did you?
You, you know, Mr. Chair, I did,
but if you'd like me to
introduce myself.
Oh no, you gave the great radio
voice, yeah, that was terrific,
yeah, very good introduction,
best introduction of the day.
Uh, any public comment from
members of the committee.
Representative Kate, we're
spelling because the food isn't
here yet. We're gonna have a
working lunch. I am so very
grateful. Thank you. That'll be
one of my Thanksgiving
gratitude. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, I, I do very much
appreciate the presentation, and
I do appreciate the the deep
dive, but um there are so many.
I, I, I'm not sure who asks LFC
what statistics to provide, um.
And there does seem to be um
A conclusion that they want so
many times and I've had with
previous uh LFCs for over a
decade of why are they mixing
apples and elephants as my vice
chair, so eloquently put, um, we
are able most uh large
providers. I for full
disclosure, I have been a
provider uh for waiver services
and fit for services in the
past, um, I absolutely want poor
providers to be held accountable
and I want.
Uh, a good providers to be
funded properly. Um, the, the,
there any provider will have a
wage range where this is where
you start when I can hire you
without your DOH education, then
this is the race after you've
completed your trainings. Here's
the rays with 2 years'
experience. Here's the raise
with 5 years' experience and so
on. That is inappropriate
business structure and would be
uh more appropriate as long as
you are keeping that 20% for
overhead for and the uh
providers. I would, uh, ask the
LFC to look in why is employment
so low. I have my own theory,
which is DVR has been a show of
nothing since 08 009. It used to
be a robust agency who was very
much engaged with helping
individuals.
with disabilities to be
integrated in employment, and we
do not have that support in this
state anymore. And
Um, I would say in if there is
too much money in the waiver
provider group, why do we not
have enough providers. We do
have enough smart business
people, and if they wanted to
make money and there's so much
money in the waiver program. Why
aren't we flooded with
providers. We are not flooded
with providers, and in fact, I
have been uh uh happy to be uh
the CEO of a provider group that
have been serving.
this state since 1958 and 2
years after I left the agency,
they stopped doing waiver
providing.
Because it loses money, because
for the 10 year because they're
smarter than I am because when I
was the CEO I said was losing
money, but it's the heart of our
mission. So let me try to figure
it out, and they couldn't figure
it out anymore after since 1958.
So we have a broken system. Our,
our direct care providers have
training between CNA and LPN, it
should be getting $30 an hour,
not $20 an hour, just so you
know, um, and we have studies to
show that, um, but it should be
arranged on experience and um
and though I am speaking very
positively providers, it does
not mean I don't want them held
accountable. We will all rise to
the when we hold each other
account.
accountable, but um making
blanketed decisions by not
understanding the nuances of
what the data is that's being
brought to us is not gonna help,
um, our state or the people we
serve. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And our vice chairman wants to
make a public comment to yet
another public comment.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
I, I, I was, I was thinking
about it and we heard that um
the vineland will not be used to
uh do budgets. I would like to
see that in writing, um, because
I believe that's how the cyst
started out too. Oh, it's just
gonna help us, you know, know
our clients better next thing
you know it was determining how
much their budget could be, so
I'd like to see that in writing,
and I would also like to ask
that the LFC.
I mean the LFC is.
That's full of smart people,
full of people who, who
understand the budget part of
it, but not necessarily
understand the programmatic part
of it, um, as, as shown in some
of these. So I would ask that
when you are working on um any
kind DD waiver whatever that you
pull in some sort of policy
expert on the actual
programming, um, and someone
outside of the state because the
state folks
also have their um prejudices
and, and pressures. So, I mean,
I, I would be happy to be
involved with the LSC when you
do deep dives on the DD waiver
because I know it because I've
lived it for
20 year, not quite 20 years, but
so just a suggestion that pull
in people with expertise in the
actual programming that aren't
that don't, that aren't part of
the state system where they
might have a differing motives.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. All right.
I think uh
We're gonna have a working
lunch.
Um, but the food is not here and
the, and the presenters are, are
in the building and making their
way here. So why don't we take,
uh, what, what time is it now?
It's um not quite 12. Why don't
we take a 10 minute break.
Then get your food and uh uh
come back and eat here at the uh
at the table while we have a
working lunch and a presentation
from the Council of State
Governments Youth Justice
