I.
Yeah.
All right. Good morning, folks.
We're going to go ahead and get
started. Hope you had a nice
evening. Welcome back. So we'll
go ahead and get started with
English language learners,
programming. So Natasha, please,
when you're ready.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, um, we're here today
to talk about uh English
learners and programming. Um, I
am joined by Viana Cisneros. I'm
sorry, is that right? OK, who
helped us during the summer as a
teacher on special assignment.
Um, she did fantastic work and
offered great insight into into
the educational experience of
English learners. Um, I must say
that I have learned so much from
her, so I'm actually happy to be
up here, not actually, that's
wrong.
Terminology. I'm so sorry. I'm
I'm actually happy though,
really. Um, so I'll start the
presentation. We are also joined
by um some of the most
passionate individuals, Michael
Rodriguez from dual Laguage
Education of New Mexico, um,
Anya Garcia from Las Cruces
Public Schools and Dr. Candace
Costello from PED.
So with that, I will begin with
the LESC's brief on English
learner programming needs, um,
which can be found behind tab 6
of your binders.
So, English learners or ELs are
students who speak English other
than English at home or speak
languages other than English at
home and require additional
support through both financial
and human resources.
While various programs aim to
address their specific
linguistic and academic needs.
The effectiveness of these
efforts is often limited by
resources constraints. A
shortage of teaching English to
speakers of other languages,
TESOL certified teachers, and
the unique challenges faced by
smaller districts and tribal
communities. As a number of EL
students continue to grow in New
Mexico, the difficulty in
adequately serving these also
increase.
These students also increase.
In his decision in the Martinez
Yazzi Consolidated Education
sufficiency lawsuit. The court
found New Mexico had failed to
adequately meet its English
learners' needs. 6 years after
the court's 2018 decision, Eels
continued to lag behind their
peers in academic measures.
Though there are promising signs
of improvements.
Simultaneously, the court
emphasized the need to provide a
culturally and and linguistic
responsive education.
For Eels.
That means valuing.
And sustaining home languages
while providing support towards
English language proficiency.
This brief examines the state of
supports for ELs, including
federal and state funding
sources, the need to improve the
pipeline of educators equipped
to serve ELs, programs that have
shown success in serving English
uh English learners and the ways
the legislature can provide
support and clarity to school
districts in their efforts to
both sustain our state's
cultural and linguistic
diversity, while ensuring
ELs are on a path toward college
and career readiness.
Eels are typically identified
through language assessment and
provided with tailored
instructional services to help
them acquire the language skills
necessary for success in school
and broader community
environments. On page 2 of the
policy brief, you will find
information on how English
learners are typically
identified and tested for
English language proficiency. In
short, when students enroll in
New Mexico public schools, their
language background is assessed
using the New Mexico language
usage survey, which
Helps identify potential English
learners once identified,
students are further evaluated
with the WEA screener to measure
their English proficiency.
This process ensures that
students who need additional
language supports are properly
identified early on.
As mentioned earlier, the number
of ELe students in New Mexico.
Um, has steadily increased as of
the 2023, 24 school year. Um, on
page two, you can see on the
graphs that nearly 19% of New
Mexico students were identified
as English learners, much higher
than the national average, which
was at 10.6% in 2021.
This growing population
underscores our increasing
challenge inadequately
supporting these students.
I will now pass it on to Viriana
to discuss programs and services
for students identified as
English learners. OK. Thank you,
Natasha. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I am going to
break down the type of English
learners that we have within our
state. And so we commonly think
of English learners as one group
of students, but in reality,
there's a subgroup of students
within this EL umbrella. And so
that's what I'm going to break
down for you guys today. So the
first group of students that we
see and you can
Um, um, see, uh, the bullet
points on page 3 are students
with limited and or no formal
education, also known as SLF and
so basically these students have
unifying characteristics, one of
which is that they are entering
or re-entering the education
system to uh approximately
around 2nd grade. And so with
that, we see these students
having about 2 years, um, that
they're performing 2 years below
grade level.
And we can see that connection
if they're entering in 2nd
grade, they're likely going to
be 2 or more years behind.
Um,
these students also tend to be
illiterate in their native
language, which we know through
research that if students are
stronger in their native
language, it is easier for them
to acquire the second language,
which would be English in this
case. For students who are
considered or fall under sly.
They're they're lacking that.
They're lacking that literacy
component in their native
language makes it which makes it
harder for them to perform, um,
at the level you would expect
them to.
Once they enter US schools. So
when we think about these
students, we also have to keep
in mind what we need to do to
support them because they are
ELs but there's added components
to them, added complexities, and
so in this uh in their case, it
is important to provide them
with very intensive intentional
ELD, um, which we know our state
requires of of our schools to
provide for English learners.
But in addition to that, um, we
also need to take into account
what they bring to the
People essentially, what are,
what do they already know that
we can build off of versus just
assuming that they're low and we
need to start over from the
beginning with them. Um, they
also need to be afforded
supplemental programming, um,
and again, the state has worked
hard towards that by providing
after school hours, um, summer
programs, but, um, when it comes
to English learners, there are
certain programs that are
required for them. They don't,
um, they require more than what
you would provide for a non-EL.
For a summer's program or an
after-school program based on
their needs.
Um, in addition to that,
teachers really need to be
collaborating amongst each other
to support these students, um,
which I know I'm saying a lot of
the things that we are already
aware of that is important for
education, but when it comes to
these types of students that
additional collaboration is
required because we, we
understand that these students
are not only receiving ELD,
they're also receiving content
instruction, um, from other
teachers that are not
necessarily trained um in the
areas of language development.
Then, uh, the second bullet
point, we have newcomers and so
when we think of newcomers, it
life students could are
automatically newcomers, but not
the other way around. So when we
have newcomer students uh which
are students who have been in
the US for less than 3 years,
um, they are essentially, um,
students who uh potentially are
refugee, um, students here in
the United States and are
acquiring English as well. Um,
with these students, like I was
mentioning, they don't
necessarily um fall under the
Life category, these students
might be literate in their
native language, um, and they
need different support. So in
their case, potentially
intensive, uh, SEL support if
they're refugees, for example,
in addition to the uh ELD that
they would be required to
receive based on their status.
Um, so with considerations on
how to support them, um, it is
important to ensure that there's
a welcoming environment, strong
SCL development, and then, uh,
programs that connect families,
uh, and students to the school.
And so again, some overlap
there, but still two distinctive
groups. Uh, then we have our
long-term English learners, and
so with long-term English
learners, what characterizes
them is the fact that they've
been classified as an English
learner for over
6 years. So these are, this
tends to happen more at the
secondary level. Students who
have, who were initially
identified and have not exited
at the five-year rate that's
expected, um, research varies,
research says that an English
learner develops English
anywhere from 5 to 10 years, but
after 6 years, they are
considered long-term English
learners because if they have a
rigorous ELD program, the
expectation would be that they
would be able to exit that
status, um, with long-term
English.
learners, we don't have that
case. Now, again, making a
little connection to an overlaps
life students might be long-term
English learners as well. And so
when we look at long-term
English learners, again, these
are students that have not been
reclassified as English
proficient.
Um, after 6 years, uh, commonly
functioning at the secondary or
I'm sorry, commonly at the
secondary level, we see
stagnation with these students.
So what that means is that they
are able to speak English, they
are able to understand English,
but they are not performing at
the academic level, which puts
them at intermediate levels of
language development, according
to the standards that we use
here in New Mexico. Um, these
students tend to have uh had
inadequate prior schooling
experiences.
Um, and they obviously struggle
academically.
So when we think about
contributing factors that
influence this category, um, it
comes down to receiving a weak
ELD um a program, uh, having
content uh area teachers who are
not uh experienced or who do not
have um the training
under Tiso, which is teaching
English of someone can help me.
Students of other languages,
it's a long one. and so we have,
uh, which is not a requirement.
If you're a content teacher,
you're not required to have a
teacher.
Endorsement, but when you don't,
these students suffer. And so,
um, then there's other factors
that are also impacting these
students, which would be missing
school high absenteeism rate,
um, and then receiving remedial
courses versus targeted language
instruction and with that then
end ending up potentially
receiving special ed services.
Um, and so,
Uh, students who have been
classified as long or not
classified, but fall into the
long-term English learner uh
label, if you will, um, tend to
be uh going through very
exclusionary tracking practices.
What does that mean? Essentially
they don't have access to AP
courses. They don't have access
to classes that provide the
rigor because the focus is so
much on them developing language
that it's the sole focus and
everything else is just
secondary. Um, and so
Um, this also has to do with
scheduling when you think about
scheduling an English learner at
the high school level, for
example, ELD takes up an
elective. And so students are
not able to take certain
elective courses because they
are required to take that ELD
course unless, of course,
parents choose to waive that
right, but at the same time,
we're we're we're excluding them
from a right or from having a
varied uh classes that are more
rigorous. Um, and so
considerations for these
students would be to ensure that
they are
And heterogeneous, uh, rigorous
grade level content classes. And
so the idea of not watering down
their their instruction, but
rather amplifying it and really
focusing not just on the
content, but the language that
is required to provide um
Whatever the course requires,
again, various different content
areas also developing literacy
in a home language. So if you're
able to intervene in their home
language, the likelihood of them
being able to succeed in a
second is higher, um, because
they have a foundation to build
off of, um, links to college and
career development, uh,
intensive exposure to academic
vocabulary and then uh having
the opportunity to address oral
and written language instruction
in content area instruction. A
lot of the times and as a
teacher myself, we hear, OK.
Content area teachers are not
necessarily language teachers,
but in reality we are because we
we tackle language in every
component of our instruction,
and so it's important to keep
that in mind when working with
long-term English learners. Um,
and then also really different
knowing the difference between
um language acquisition
difficulties and uh language
processing difficulties to avoid
that inter that overlap in
instruction, I'm sorry, in
identification with English
learners and
Um, students with disability.
And on the fourth point, that's
exactly what we address here,
the duly identified English
learners, which here we uh one
of the characteristics for these
students is that they are long
term English learners. And so,
and then they're
disproportionately identified
for special education services.
And there's also similar and
then the idea of the similar
similarities between language
acquisition and language
processing.
And so, um, considerations for
these students, and I think this
is an area we really need to
work on as, as a state because,
um, ELs need a lot of support,
but this, I think this is one of
the areas where we um uh
definitely need more work on uh
in preparing teachers, uh, for
one, coaching opportunities for
special ed teachers and content
area teachers, um, also thinking
about TSO endorsements for
teachers that provide special
education and um.
And also understanding that one
service does not trump the
other. Um, and it's important to
know because they're both
federal requirements and so
students are entitled to English
language development federally
through the state and, and the
districts provide that, but then
also to follow an IEP and so
finding that balance to ensure
that these students are
receiving the adequate, um,
services that they need.
So, um, that one was the that
was the longer part of my
section. I'm gonna really
quickly run through some
additional complexities and I'm
going to point you to, um, uh,
um, the graph or the table, I'm
sorry, um, page 3. this is just
to also show that there's an
added layer to the complexity of
of the different differing
English learners. Um, so we, we
also look at ethnicity and race
and so um.
In when we look at that, on top
of already having a hard time
addressing the needs of English
learners. We also have to think
about the fact that they don't
all come with Spanish, for
example, as their first
language. We have various
languages that we need to take
into account when trying to make
those connections for students.
Um, and then if we can turn to,
uh, uh, page 4.
And I'm gonna direct you to the
2nd paragraph on that page and
so this is particular to
bilingual multicultural
education programs. When we look
at this, this is a way to
support students, uh, that are
English learners, but it's
important to note that that is
not um that is not the way we
automatically service English
learners and so although
bilingual programming is a way
to support them, uh, the idea of
bilingual programming is to
ensure that students are
developing.
Two languages that they're
keeping their home language at
at the same time that they're
developing English and so, um,
although it is a way to support
English learners, it, it's not,
um, they're not the same thing,
uh, and so I wanted to point
that out for everyone. Um, and
then, uh, I'm gonna jump a
little bit from one page to
another. If we can go ahead and
go to page 5, and we have a
little, a little box on the in
the corner it says standalone
English learner programs. Um, so
that's in addition to
bilingual multicultural
education programs we have
standalone English learner
programs, which are the common,
it's the common way we service
English learners. And when we
think about standalone uh
English learner program students
are, um, again, excluded from a
certain elective because they
have to take ELD, um, a lot of
the times they take the rest of
their courses, particularly
thinking about the elementary
level, um, they have to take the
rest of their contentary classes
uh from a teacher who might not
have a Tiso endorsement. And so
often
Time students who uh who work in
standalone English learner
programs or who get their
services from stand-alone
English learner programs.
are exposed to teachers who
don't have the pedagogy or the
understanding of how to support
English learners. Um, and so
want to throw that out there in
regard to services going back to
page 4, please. Um, so then we
look about, we look at teacher
demand and vacancies and so in
this section we talk about how
difficult it is for our state to
recruit English, uh, um.
Learner teachers, if you will,
teachers who teach English
learners and so and this is,
there's many reasons for this,
and we know that the legislative
Finance Committee did do a
report a little bit about
bilingual endorsements, um, they
might have briefly touched on,
on Tel endorsements as well, but
the idea is that teachers are
not using their endorsements.
They're choosing not to use
their endorsements to teach
students in these settings
because of the demand. It's a
high demand to support students
in these programs and so uh the.
Various districts are, um,
reporting that they struggled to
recruit, they struggle to have
teachers, um, pursue these
endorsements, and they have
districts have recommended that
it be part of the teacher prep
program that it be integrated in
their in their prep program so
that any teacher would be able
to support students in this in
this way.
Um, and so as we go down on this
page, we see what it requires to
have a TESOL certification. I, I
won't go through that, um, in
detail, but there, there are
quite a few uh hours that
teachers have to um go through,
uh, whether it be undergrad or
post-grad, um, to obtain this
endorsement and so added added
work from the start, if you
will.
Um, and then finally I'm going
to, um, address, uh, the funding
component, uh, regarding English
learners briefly. So as you can
see, there's a lot of
complexities when it comes to
servicing English learners.
They're very, uh, they're
different, it's not a one, a one
type of English learner. Under
that umbrella of uh English
learner, there are at least 4
subgroups that require various
um uh supports some more
intensive than
Others. And so I highlight that
um as a as um.
As I present because when we
think about funding, when we
think about the way we fund
English learners, New Mexico
does not have a specific uh uh
factor or funding that goes
directly to English learners.
And so what we have is um Title
3, which is a pretty low amount
that comes into the state. It's
not,
it's not so specifically uh the
state of New Mexico gets $5
million in federal funding, so
we, as you as legislators
understand 5 million is not a
whole lot when it comes to to
divide between
Various districts. And so, um,
and, and it's very restrictive.
The use of this funding requires
a lot of justification to be
able to support uh English
learners and their teachers. And
then in addition to that, we
have the at-risk factor which
addresses English learners, but
at the same time that it
addresses two other um
identifiers. So we're looking at
mobility and we're also looking
at poverty. In addition to
English learners. And so when we
think about how complex the
needs of English learners are,
And we didn't even touch base on
how complex it is to address
high mobility and poverty to to
assume that that amount could
cover and support English
learner needs.
is a stretch. I, I, it's, it's
difficult. And so when we think
about that, then we start coming
across this one size fits all
approach, which means you're a
teacher, you're an
administrator, you're part of an
instructional council and you're
deciding, OK, what's the worst
of all evils? What, what can I
address right now? Poverty,
English learner support, or uh
high mobility.
Educators, uh, administrators,
districts are left with that,
um, that question, how are we
going to support students and
for the most part I could say
it's a form of intervention. But
again, if we think about what
intervention is and how we
support students, you can
support students that are
developing English in that form,
but for the most part you're
addressing literacy skills,
you're addressing things at a
very, very basic level versus
pushing students to develop the
language required to access
The high content that we as a
state want from students. And
so, um, it's important to to um
kind of see just that how that
connects the the high
requirements, not just for
teachers but what students need
to do and how to support them
and then the funding that we
have in place for them. And with
that, I will turn it back over
to Natasha.
Thank you, Viana. Um, I'm gonna
go ahead and interview on page
5, the um exiting English
learner status. Um, the federal
government has established a
five-year timeline for ELs to
reach sufficient English
proficiency and exit EL status,
though the actual time frame can
vary widely. Existing the um
existing uh the program is
primarily exiting. I'm so sorry,
exiting the program is primarily
determined by students
demonstrating adequate English
proficiency on the access
assessment. Um.
Which means measuring listening,
speaking, reading and writing
skills. In practice, the rate at
which students exit ELe programs
is low. So on page 6, you could
see um in figure 4 that uh
exiting ELs as a percent of
current yells on page 6 shows
that only about 2 to 3% of EL
students exit EL status each
year, despite the goal of
achieving proficiency within 5
years. One district noted that
the major factor affecting this
Low exit rate is students
reluctant to speak during the
access assessment, which impacts
their ability to demonstrate
their true language skills. The
brief also highlights the
importance of tracking students
after they exit Yale status.
Schools are required to monitor,
reclassified students for 2
years to ensure they continue to
succeed without additional
language support. However,
there's no existing funding
dedicated to this monitoring,
which can lead to inconsistent
follow-up, putting the academic
success of these students at
risk.
I also had the opportunity to
talk with districts
predominantly serving indigenous
students, while bilingual and
multicultural education is
essential for preserving
indigenous languages. It is also
crucial for building English
proficiency. However, standard
English language learning
methods often do fully address
um indigenous students' needs,
emphasizing the importance of
culturally responsive teaching.
Well there's a structured
process for exiting EL programs,
challenges remain, particularly
around how long it takes
students to exit, and the lack
of resources for continued
support once they do.
Now, um, I wanted to explore the
role of dual language programs
in serving English learners, and
I believe that's page 8 of the
brief. Um, so dual language
programs are one of the pathways
that effectively support Yale
students by promoting
proficiency in both English and
their home language. These
programs serve both English
learners and native English
speaking students offering
instruction in two languages to
foster bilingual bilingualism
and biliteracy. Importantly,
they emphasize cultural
learning.
And exchange allowing students
to engage with both language and
cultural context. Research
suggests that dual language
programs can improve students'
literacy outcomes while
preserving their home languages
and cultural identity. In New
Mexico, these programs are
funded through the bilingual
multicultural education program
with additional funds supporting
schools that offer bilingual
programs. However, many EL
students do not participate in
these programs despite their
potential due to a lack of
qualified staff or limited
availability, which
Viana uh touched base on. So
expanding dual language
programs, especially in
underserved areas offer a
powerful way to address academic
and linguistic needs, while
celebrating our students'
cultural diversity.
So I wanted to also to turn your
attention to the policy and
budget recommendations, as New
Mexico works to help PLs achieve
English proficiency while
maintaining linguistic and
cultural sustainability, the
legislature can clarify the
resources available to schools
and ensure more educators
receive proper training to serve
ELs. The legislature should
consider creating a stand-alone
English learner factor in the
school funding formula. This
would allow districts to track
EL specific resources more
easily and direct them toward
critical.
Interventions such as bilingual
education, individualized
support, and professional
development for teachers.
Additionally, clearer funding
streams would help districts
measure the impact of these
funds on EL outcomes, ensuring
students receive the specialized
services necessary for academic
success.
Extending the EL factor to
reclassified students during the
federal mandated two-year
monitoring period.
Funding below the line
appropriations to support more
educators becoming TESL or
bilingual certified, and
studying the need to embed TESL
certifications or other
EL-specific strategies in all
educator preparation programs.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I will now
turn it over to Michael.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name is
Michael Rodriguez. I am the
executive director of
dual-language Education of New
Mexico for the past 23 years our
nonprofit has been providing
services to dual language and
multilingual learner serving
teachers.
schools, districts, and state
agencies, both here and around
the country. So, uh, you know,
we're, we're very versed in.
You know, the needs of our
English learner students and as
an organization, you know, we
first and foremost serve English
learners wherever we go in these
types of programs, making sure
that uh we're looking at it
through the lens of equity and
access to the curriculum for our
students.
In talking about quality dual
language programs, all the, you
know, programs around the
country are, you know, founded
and really vested in what is
documented in this do this book
here, the guiding principles for
dual-language education. It
actually started with a couple
of our um.
Employees that do language
education in Mexico back in the
late 90s when there were Title
III grants for startup of dual
language, and the ideas came
from there and in partnership
with Dr. Liz Howard at the
Center for Applied Linguistics.
It's now a document in its 3rd
edition and really serves as a,
you know, a guiding document for
all language programs around the
country. There are 3 main pieces
that uh these programs are
founded and that's bilingualism
by literacy, academic
achievement for students and
socio-cultural competence.
So as we dig into those three
pillars or those 3 goals of dual
language, the idea with dual
language programs is that all
students will be at grade level
in these programs.
All students will become
bilingual, biliterate and
developing those high levels of
academic proficiency into
languages.
So it's not anything that's
watered down. It's not anything
that is remedial. It's actually
an enriching program for all
students, um, the third pillar
or the 3rd goal of dual language
education is what uh Biano was
talking about in terms of making
sure that we're looking at the
whole child and the whole
student all the way through
graduation in terms of that
socio-cultural competence, so
students are able to learn how
to work with within other
cultures, having, uh, you know,
meaningful understanding of
cultures, um, and that
self-concept and self.
identity that is so critical for
students to to be successful in
education.
So just to give you, uh, either
refresher or an introduction to
the two types of dual language
program models. There's 9010
programs and there are 50/50
programs. So typically in the
9010 dual language program,
students would enter
kindergarten speaking night or
learning 90% of their time
through that first year
in the program language or
Spanish for many of the the
programs we have in New Mexico
and 10% in English, making sure
that we get that ELD, the ELA
pieces that students need in.
In that language, each year, the
the amount of Spanish or partner
language decreases until it
reaches 50% of English and the
partner language in around 4th
or 5th grade, and then it
remains 50% in the two languages
all the way through graduation.
So that's, that's one of the
differences between dual
language and other types of
bilingual models is that there's
no taking away of that first
language once they reach
proficiency or, you know, are
exited from a program in a 50/50
dual language
Program, same type of concept
except instead of starting at
90%, they go 50% in English and
the partner language all the way
through their schooling.
So in grounding us in the the
the context of this discussion
today with English learners in
New Mexico. I went to our 2223
um bilingual education bilingual
multicultural education report
from the PED which shows the
number of English learners in
the states and on this one on
the uh, the third column there
with totally yelts. You'll see
that there's about 57,000. I
know we're over 59,000 English
learners in our state right now,
and at the time, less than 50%
of our students.
We're in bilingual programs. So
in any bilingual program,
whether it's a dual language
program that goes all the way
through graduation or, you know,
even a transitional program
that, you know, gives them
experience through elementary,
there's that value of the
identity piece and uh you know,
connecting them to the content
in meaningful ways, uh, so
seeing these stats, there's at
least 50% of our students that
are just in English only
programs in our, in our states
and um are not benefit
Getting from what is possible.
So, you know, I point you to
this statement that's at the
bottom of the slide, which shows
uh through through research that
I wanted to share with you
today, that dual language
programs are the only programs
that assist students to fully
reach the 50th percentile in
both their 1st and 2nd languages
in all subject areas and
maintain that level or higher
through the end of schooling. So
again, it's it's an enriching
program for students and
particularly for English
learners who are trying to find
a solution for how to to to
better their education, dual
language is something that
Um, you know, I reckon in the
state seriously look at, uh,
expanding.
So this, this uh research by
Colli and Thomas, uh, comes from
over 30 years of research, uh,
at the time of this information
here, 2017, they had worked with
36 districts in 16 states, 7.5
million student data records
were analyzed. Um, English
learners of all different
backgrounds were involved in
these dual language programs
that they studied, and this is
something that continues to be
replicated in other research
studies. Now since, since 2017.
They have recently added another
district that they've worked
with, they have now over 8
million student records that
they've analyzed in this study
and um again, you know, it's
it's been replicated in many
ways in districts, and, you
know, dissertation projects,
there's they're, they're finding
the same results and it's, it's
astounding.
So I wanted to walk you through
this graph that they've
developed and in Hindu language
circles, this is known as the
graph because it's been around
for so long and the data points
just keep pointing to the power
that this has on this graph,
you'll see that these colored
lines that are on the graph.
This represents English learners
in dual language programs and um
again, you know, hundreds of
thousands of students have been
analyzed in these data records
over time. These, these
different lines represent
different types of bilingual and
dual language programs. So
everything from
Do language where they go
through 12th grade, getting
supported in both languages, uh,
down to number 6 there with ESL
pullout where they're in an
English class and they're given
extra doses of English in their
in their school days.
Now when, when we look at this,
that 50th percentile is if
you're familiar with the, the
bell curve, you know, right in
the middle is that average
student on the test, what the
doctors Colleen Thomas show here
is this 50th percentile, the
dotted line is a year's growth
in a year's time, so the grade
levels are down at the bottom
for a what we want for students
is for them to be at the 50th
percentile and, you know, at
least maintain that every year
of their schooling. For our
English learners, what they've
done is they break it down.
This way. So when we're looking
at research studies when we're
looking at um the effects of
dual language compared to other
programs. When you look at it in
the short term from kindergarten
through 4th grade, you'll see
that no matter what type of
program you have kids in,
there's gonna be some gains,
right? They, they have a very
limited proficiency when they
come in. By the time they get to
4th grade, any of these programs
are showing some promise, right,
and lots of times, uh, we've
seen state agencies, we've seen
districts, we've seen schools
say why
am I going to spend that extra
money for what I know it costs
to have bilingual teachers and,
you know, some, in some cases,
two teachers, um,
materials in both languages all
the way through when, you know,
I can have a pullout program or
a transitional program that ends
at a certain grade and get the
same results. So, you know,
there's really not a very
significant difference in the
results up to that point, which
is why that they extended it
into a longitudinal study, and
each of those lines, they
followed kids from kindergarten
all the way through graduation.
So it's not just cohorts of kids
or, you know, ideas of what
grade levels look like. These
are actual students, um, that
they followed all the way
through graduation, knowing that
many of them, um, you know,
there's still issues of dropout
and that kind of thing, but they
counted for that.
What happens in these middle
grades from 4th to 4th grade on
in the intermediate grades and
beyond, is that there's a what
Doctor Thomas talks about is a
cognitive demand increase in the
education of students, right?
There's, there's, there's higher
concepts, there's, there's
bigger things that they're
learning and um with that.
The students in other in other
bilingual programs, you'll see
they start to level off. So
again, if it's a straight line,
they're making a year's growth
in a in a year's time, but
between where those lines are
and where that dotted line are
is, um, there's still a gap,
right? They're still not
reaching proficiency and uh even
though they're gaining year
every year, um, they're not
proficient in in their schooling
and and in this case on this
English reading test. The dual
language two models, the, the
one way
Two way you'll see by 6th grade,
the two-A models students
typically reach that
proficiency. So that means that
they're on grade level, uh, able
to score at the same level of
their English only peers on this
English reading test. By 8th
grade, the one-way dual language
program reaches about that same
level.
Um, so when you look at the full
graph, uh, those are the only
two models that really help to.
Bring kids to parity with their
English only speaking peers in
in other general ed classrooms.
So, you know, this is some
astounding information that has
been out there and on this slide
here, you know, there's some
some additional information
that, uh, you know, further
shows why this is, this is
critical through their studies,
they found that there's higher
levels of cognitive academic
development. So in dual language
programs, there's, there's
things that happen when the kids
are negotiating meeting between
those two languages.
Where, um, you know, cognitive
function, executive function,
um, higher order thinking
skills, negotiating a meeting,
all those things are amplified
in these kids, which is why you
see those those differences in
the graphs, they're more deeply
engaged. We talked, it was
talked about yesterday in the
meeting where middle school
students are, you know, become
disengaged, uh, issues of
attendance is being higher
satisfaction by students when
they get to those middle grades,
it's where we start to see
students to dip into Mexico, I
guess was talked about.
Yesterday, and with dual
language programs, we don't
necessarily see that. Um, again,
you know, the students
identities are affirmed, right?
They they're, they're seeing
themselves in the curriculum and
they're seeing themselves
represented in the things
they're reading and through the
the teacher's validating the
home life.
Uh, in the green there you'll
see on your sheets as well that
uh this is also good for native
English speakers. So two-way
programs involve native English
speakers as well. And in this
enrichment, why would we not
want all students to benefit
from it, even students with
disabilities as we talked about,
um, there's in the research,
information showing that this is
good for students because of the
negotiating because of the, the,
uh, the higher order skills that
are being developed. It's good
for all kids.
Now the LFC report that was done
in 2022 reminded us of the fact
that the bilingual program's
goal is for all students,
including English learners, to
become bilingual and biliterate,
right? For if we really believe
in that goal, dual language is
the only one that is shown to
research to get our students
there in our bilingual
programming. Um, they also
research, they also stated some
other research. They cited some
of the research in their report
that talked about the power of
dual language for our kids.
Uh, just last month, the
Department of Education, US
Department of Ed, Office of
English Language Acquisition,
put out a document showing ways
to advance equity for K-12
English learners, and in this
document, you know, they show
how, uh, you know, helping
students and their families feel
safe and supported. That's
something else in the middle
school discussion yesterday that
came up in this, it's, you know,
leveraging the assets of
indigenous and students of
color.
Something that came up on the
green boxes there, you know,
talks about using instructional
programs and techniques to
develop ELs home languages and
cultures, and lo and behold, one
of the things that came out from
the research they funded also is
high quality dual language
programs as as a way of, of
meeting this.
So, just like anything I know in
the in the discussion yesterday
around science reading, it was
discussed that, you know, once
you train people, once you, once
you do this, there has to be
more training that happens,
right? We, we have to make sure
that all of our dots um are
connected and all of our arrows
are pointing in the same
direction with an investment
like this because that's really
what it is. It's a long term
investment in our students and
the education.
So when I look at needs knowing
that we're talking about needs
today, um, scaffolding
instruction for students is
something that is critical and
these colored boxes here is an
example from one of the one of
the instructional frameworks
we've created for both dual
language and multilingual
learner serving schools in
districts, you know, these are
critical things that all
students need to be engaged in,
whether it's a dual language or
other program, they need to have
these types of skills and
teachers need to have the
training on what that really
looks like, um, methods and
pedagogy.
types of things have to be
aligned to it. Instruction and
home language supporting
self-concept identity, all these
things are critical for
students and yesterday again
with the middle school
discussion that family
engagement, how do we keep that
engagement all the way through
and making sure that families
are connected to what's
happening in the classroom so
that there is, um, you know,
there are those discussions
about the attendance and other
ways of identity that are
validated.
It is a multi-term, uh, it is a
long term and multifaceted
investment that the state would
have to look at to fully
understand and see what these
programs could look like. We do
have dual language programs in
the state, but again, we have
issues and challenges like
qualified teachers and
administrators. So making sure
that we have sufficient numbers
of bilingual programs. I just
met with Western University
yesterday and they're doing some
great things with districts in
the area to grow your own
teachers. Um, our organization
Received a National Professional
Development grant recently will
be partnering with Highlands
University on Grow Your Own
measures. So those types of
things have to all be aligned,
right, and it's a higher edit
involved in this as well. High
quality professional
development, absolutely
pre-service teacher preparation,
again, like it was discussed
yesterday with the with the
structural literacy,
universities have to have the
same understandings. Our
organization actually um
copyrighted national language
teacher preparation standards in
2018.
That are being picked up by
other states and utilized to
help pre-service teachers
understand what it is that dual
language looks like. Number of
bilingual professors, I know our
states are working on that
adequate resources, both
funding, which you all are are
are very concerned with as well
as a curriculum at the school
level, making sure that they're
selecting and utilizing those
curriculums that represent
students. Concerns regarding
displacement of staff once you
get into implementation, there's
concerns about, well, I
been in this school for 10
number of years. You're telling
me that I'm not going to have a
job if you're gonna start doing
it this way,
not necessarily because the, you
know, we found very successful
programs based on a regular
teacher attrition that had
happened.igning expectations, so
we know that a tra trajectory of
a student, um, learning a second
language looks different than
what the typical tests.
Look for so just being cognizant
of that, uh, equitable
assessments again for our
students, how are we making sure
we're measuring the right things
we measure what you treasure and
change is really the biggest uh
barrier or challenge in all of
this. Change is difficult and in
order to really do this well, we
have to be looking at it as a
long term investment and follow
the research, you know, millions
of data points, hundreds of
thousands of students, English
learner students that have been
studied, um, show us that it can
be done and it's a matter of.
of moving in that direction. Our
organization holds the the
country's largest dual language
conference, and I am extending
an invitation to all of the
committee to attend. We'll be in
Santa Fe, same time as your next
meeting and I hope that you all
can just sit in on some of these
sessions from experts, from
teachers, from people that are
that are in in the field. Um,
we're having 30 to 4000 people
in Santa Fe. It's our 29th
annual conference, so we hope
you can make it. And with that I
held back.
OK.
Thank you, Michael, and then I'm
gonna pass it over to Anya from
Las Cruces.
OK, we're all. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, um, my
name is Anya Garcia Post, and
I'm the executive director of
the Bilingual Education
Translation and interpretation
and community outreach
department for Las Cruces Public
schools. Um, I want to start by
just thanking you for having me
here today to discuss the needs
of English learners and their
programming. It is an honor to
be here.
Las Cruces Public Schools has an
approximately 23,000 students,
4000 of our students are
emergent bilingual students, um,
which is this term we use for
English learners, 3000 of our
students participate in our
bilingual, multicultural
education programs, uh, which we
call BMEPs, and of those 3000
approximately 1700 are emergent
bilingual or English learner
students.
So in the previous slide you
heard me refer to English
learner students as emergent
bilingual students, and that is
the term that we use in Las
Cruces public schools to mean,
um, English learner, uh, which
is what our state and the
federal government is the term
that the state and the federal
government uses. In the spring
of 202023, our board of
Education revised policy IHBE,
which is our bilingual education
and English learner acquisition
policy, and in that
Vision, um, we moved to the
asset-based term emergent
bilingual to refer to our
students who are English
learners. We believe that that
term recognizes the assets that
our students bring to their
educational experience and that
it is important to recognize
that as we're educating our
students. It's something we have
in the forefront as we evaluate
our programs and strive to
ensure that they're meeting the
needs of all students, uh, even
though that can be complex, as
you've heard at times.
So within the department that I
have the honor of overseeing, we
do many different things, but
they fall into 4 categories. So
we uh run our emergent
bilingual, um, programs. We, um,
or our emergent bilingual
student programs. We also
oversee our BMEPs, of which
there are 3 in Las Cruces public
schools. We have the translation
and interpretation department
and we also have a community
outreach team. Uh, if we look at
our
BMEPs in Las Cruces public
schools, we have the 3 that are
listed here, dual language,
maintenance, and heritage. dual
languages are most robust
program and we do see that or we
do believe that as you've just
heard in the previous
presentation that that is the
best program to serve our
students' needs. We currently
have 19 elementary schools that
are running dual language
programs to middle schools and 1
high school that currently goes
through 10th grade. Next year
will be 11th, and the following
year 12th.
Uh, we do have maintenance and
that is at 6 elementary schools,
5 middle schools, and 4 of our
high schools. The, the 4th high
school because our dual language
program hasn't fully moved
through the, the building yet.
And then heritage is being run
at 5 middle schools and 4 high
schools.
Um,
Although we uh believe that dual
language is a program that
really serves our emergent
bilingual students best. It is
important to note that not all
of our students, as you saw in
the previous slide, participate
in this program for a variety of
reasons and that those reasons,
as you've heard today are
complex and something that we
are grappling with and working
through.
So when we think about our
emergent bilingual students, we
have comprehensive supports to
meet their needs, uh, and we
think about them in in several
different ways. So one way is
our students who are
participating in those BMEPs are
BMEPs are all um target language
Spanish and English, and so the
students who are participating
in those programs for the vast
majority or if they're emergent
bilingual, our students who come
with the home language of
Spanish. Those who do not come
with
The home language of Spanish are
so few that I, I know their
names, um, and while that's
exciting, um, most of our
students in our BMEPs have that
are emergent bilingual have
Spanish as their home language.
Then we have our students who do
not participate in our BMEPs and
within that category, we also
have students well within that
category we have students whose
home language is Spanish and
then many whose home language is
not Spanish. Um, so those are
all things that we think about
as we
Meet our students' needs. When
we look at our students who are
not participating in our BMEPs
for whatever reason, whether
they're home language be Spanish
or not, um, our approach is
very, uh, is really
differentiated, which becomes
complex. Uh, we have so many
different supports to include
programming, um, specific
supplemental curriculum to meet
the needs as Viridiana talked
about of our different kinds of
emergent bilingual.
Students, whether they be
newcomer or long term um,
emergent bilingual students. We
strive to also provide smaller
settings for students, um, who
are not participating in our
programs. We also um have
Looked at implementing or and
are currently implementing a
districtwide professional
learning or professional
development focused based upon
um a program known as QTel
Quality Teaching for English
learners that is focused on the
premise of providing students
high challenge with high support
and scaffolds to meet that
challenge and that rigorous
curriculum on a very basic
level, it is based on the
premise that we don't speak, we
don't wait to.
to infants until we think they
can speak back to us, right? We
all know that when from before
being born in in the womb,
children are spoken to and so it
is based on that premise that we
really provide all that
language, all that expectation
before we think that the
production can happen so that we
have the the stage set for that
to happen and provide the
supports.
Um, we also really work to have
that parent engagement piece
because we do believe that
sometimes our families are
choosing not to participate in
some programs because there
really isn't enough information
about that program or there is
misconceptions within our
community. So making sure that
we're really engaging our
parents. We also understand that
ultimately it is a parent's
choice, and while, uh, when a
student specifically to our
community with a language other
than Spanish, um, we
understand why they may not
choose to be in a BMEP and so
continuing to support the
families that are in that
situation while honoring and
valuing the assets and the home
language that they bring,
whether they have the literacy
skills in that language or not.
Um, and then lastly, we employ 8
international welcome center and
student student and family
advisors, uh, this, these staff
work through my department, but
are housed at our middle schools
and comprehensive high schools,
um, and they provide an
additional layer of support, um,
to work with students, to assist
with instruction, uh.
To engage families to provide
social emotional uh for the
social emotional needs of
students that may be unique, um,
when they have the English
learner or emergent bilingual
designation.
All of that is to say that we're
doing this with an asset-based
lens in that, in the sense that
regardless of the program that a
child is participating in or a
student is participating in, we
are valuing and doing our very
best to connect to that home
language, which can sometimes be
challenging when um as we have
new uh new languages coming to
our community, but it's always
seen as an enriching value to
our community.
Attainment of English
proficiency, uh, is something
that is of utmost important to
us regardless of whether a
student is participating in a
bilingual program or not, uh,
the goal, part of the goal at
the very minimum is that English
proficiency.
So the goal is that students
attain English proficiency, as
you heard earlier within 5
years, but we know that that is
not happening. So our current
trend is that this is an unmet
goal, um.
We do know though that we need
to look at why that is happening
and so that really speaks to
what you heard earlier about
thinking about which category
students fall into. Are they
newcomer students, or are they
long term emergent bilingual
students. So a student, for
example, who started with us in
kindergarten, received the
emergent bilingual designation.
If they have not reached English
proficiency by the time they're
leaving our elementary schools
in 5th grade and heading to our
middle schools, um, we're really
looking at
Why is that happening? We should
have a robust program for them
so that that need can be met.
So what we've done in that area,
um, but there still continues to
be a need is really that deep
data analysis, um, currently we
have a district-wide focus that
can be seen in our strategic
plan and our layer one
instructional framework as well
as our overall um professional
learning plan as a district, as
I spoke about earlier. Beyond
that though, um, and it's
interesting I heard Mr.
Rodriguez talk about that maybe
there was some discussion around
middle school. We are seeing
that our, our students
To enter, um, our schools early
on in elementary and do not
reach proficiency via the access
assessment before they go to
middle school really continue to
struggle. Um, and then if you
struggle in middle school and go
to high school, of course, once
you reach high school, the
credit implications can be very
significant and profound for our
students. So we have, uh,
deployed some specific.
Uh, interventions or targeted
approaches at our middle school
this year specifically, we have
a program, um, because in
looking at data, we saw that we
were meeting needs of newcomer
students at middle school.
And then we had a group of
students at middle school who
are emergent bilingual, who are
doing just fine and a stacked
ELD class, so a classroom with
students who are not English
learners or emergent bilingual
using our curriculum that is
school-wide or districtwide, but
we also had a group of students
who that wasn't cutting it for
them. They were not experiencing
success, but their English
proficiency was much higher than
our newcomer student classes. So
we are, um, piloting a program
or we piloted last year and are
now implementing a program to
really fill
Those gaps for our students in a
year, uh, so that we can
experience success in middle
school and really catapult into
using the curriculum we expect
for all students. Uh, we also
this year have implemented a
program to really support our
students specifically in middle
school, but also in high school
with expressive language when we
look at our data, we see that
students really struggle with uh
writing and speaking as measured
by the access test and one of
the reasons is that we often
hear from teachers.
Oh, that student talks all of
the time and they might, they
very they may maybe a talker in
your class that you're quieting
down quite frequently, but do
they have the academic
vocabulary? Do they have the
ability to, um, elaborate and
provide details and use specific
uh vocabulary words to be very
precise in their explanations.
Those may be different things,
and we, we know that from the
research. So, um, not only
giving students that practice.
But more importantly, giving
them very targeted and um.
Actionable feedback so that they
have the opportunities to make
those adjustments, not just on
an assessment, but when they're
working in our classrooms and in
the various activities that they
do throughout the school day.
Um, so we're doing those things,
but of course they take quite a
bit of resource and time to get
right. And so those are things
that we're working through now.
We also do have support as
required and monitoring for
students after they attain
English proficiency currently at
the elementary level, that's
happening really through the
grade level team that the
students are on once they have
exited the emergent bilingual
status and at our secondary
schools, um, that is something
that really is taken on by our
international welcome center
student and family advisors as
they work with students and then
congratulate them on that exit
but also continue to see um if
they're require
During any additional support.
So I will end by saying that,
you know, currently we are
working with several different
funding sources, um, as you
know, we have the SCG that funds
our teachers. It's
The operational budget that I
operate with in my department
it's also how we provide
stipends to our TEL and
bilingual endorsed teachers who
are working within our bilingual
programs. We have our Title One
funding that helps fund
positions, professional
learning, and also supports with
family resources. Our Title 3
funding that as you know, is
very specific to our emergent
bilingual or English learner
students, and there we find um.
Various things to include
positions and supplemental
resources, and then our Title 4
funding that, uh, supports
currently with some parenting
programming and also with uh.
Reimbursement for teachers who
go through TESL endorsement and
bilingual endorsement programs
at New Mexico State University
with the MOU that we have with
them. This year, we did not, we
were not awarded our BMEP
sub-grant last year. That was a
great help for us in um
providing additional resources
for our students and our
teachers and more robust
professional learning around
some of the things that Mr.
Rodriguez talked about really
those best practices in dual
language education and in
bilingual.
education that we know can
significantly impact the
trajectory for our students.
So hopefully that wasn't too
long. I can talk a lot, but I
appreciate your time again and I
just wanted to thank you and
I'll pass it back to Natasha.
Thank you, but I'll actually
pass it over to Doctor Castello.
Thank you.
Great.
Good morning, Buenos Dias. Thank
you so much for the opportunity
to be.
here today. My name is Candace
Castillo and I'm the deputy
cabinet secretary at the New
Mexico Public Education
department. Um, I oversee our
identity equity and
transformation division, which
is our student support services
arm and our English learner
services sits on our language
and culture um division and our
director Maya Valtierrez, who
would be the one doing this
presentation is actually on a
training um for federal supports
towards this program.
Um, and so before we get, um, I
forget that I do have the
clicker, um, before we get
started, I just want to share
that in the next couple of
minutes, I'm just gonna be doing
a really good, as my colleagues
have done a wonderful job I
think setting the stage on what
are the programs um
evidence-based practices that we
have to serve English language
learners. Also, um, we are going
to be talking a little bit about
how from the agency we have been
working on evolving the
Way that we service this group
of students. We also have just a
quick um data overview and then
um we'll like to discuss some
opportunities and how we can
work towards continuing
improving services and programs
for our English language
learners. And as we dive into
this presentation, um, I think
it's important to recognize that
being an English learner is not
a deficit, but rather is a
valuable strength where we
should honor our bilingualism
multi
When multilingualism and
multiculturalism to provide our
students with better life
experiences and actually enrich
the diversity of the world that
they're in, so their identity
and belonging, I really, um, a
core value that they can embrace
throughout their life. And so as
someone that English is not
their first language. I have
proudly experienced what being
bilingual and being able to
operate in different spaces
where I can bring this asset has
been a fantastic opportunity.
Not just in the space that I'm
currently serving but haven't
been able to be part of global
organizations where
communicating with different um
cultures and different um
languages have been truly um key
on succeeding on those basis.
And those are the very skills
that we should aim to ensure
that our students can build so
they can to feel that they can
thrive in the spaces where they
are part of.
And so some of the highlights um
for New Mexico. In New Mexico we
have about 17% of our students
classified as English language
learners and 13% of that amount
um are on track on achieving
English proficiency as we heard
on that 5 year track. I think it
is important to note though that
national research has shown that
it could take an individual
anywhere from 4 years to 7 years
to attain language proficiency.
So it's not um
As we have our kind of like a
one box fix all or a magic
bullet. There's actually um a,
a, a period of time that is
depending on the individual. I
think it's also important to
highlight that New Mexico ranks
10th in the nation, um, as a
state with the most um English
language learners graduate um
rate. And so I think it's also
important to call that out. And
the other thing that we would
like to highlight is that um New
Mexico is actually one of the
lead.
stayed at the national level
when it comes to the state seal
of bilingualism and biliteracy.
You have a graph on your um
document that shows the 5 top
states with New Mexico being
74%, followed by Oregon with 56%
then Hawaii with 55%, California
with 50% and Maryland with 48%.
I think just for context, um,
what this means is that we have
what we refer to ever English
learners, which is the
proportion of students who were
classified as English learners
at some point in their
education, um, journey and who
have then gone to achieve the
state of seal of biliteracy upon
graduating high school and the
state seal of biliteracy is the
official recognition awarded to
high school graduates who
demonstrate proficiency into or
more languages, um, with English
being one of them, and so they
have met a high level.
of fluency in both languages,
um, and exceeding that standard.
So that's the, the chart that
you have right in front of you.
Then on the next page, when we
think about um English learners
program, and if we want to do
this in an effective way we want
to ensure that we have a set of
standards that are granted on
evidence-based educational
theory where the program and the
practices have to be intentional
and have to be differentiated as
we heard before, but also that
we have the right type of
resources so that our teachers
can provide the right, um.
type of support and then that we
have an evaluation component
where we can monitor and we can
also see that if the desired um
results are being produced
within a reasonable time. I
think it's also important to
note that in order to have those
standards being implemented,
monitor and track with Fidelity,
having that dedicated funding
line is very important. It's a
way to better guide our school
districts in achieving and
meeting the standards.
I said before them and as you
heard before from my colleagues
are currently our English
learners' programs are part of
that at risk funding allocation
that goes into that SCG. So
separating the funding will make
it more efficient in the way
again that we can track and we
can monitor not only how much we
are investing um in the
programming, but what are the
actual needs and whether those
resources that are being
utilized effectively.
And then on the next slide, you
will see um how we look at the
approach of instruction for our
English language learners. So
when it comes to that
instructional requirement, are
English learners, one of the
best models that um we think
that can yield results are
having a designated English
language development, which
provides a structured targeted
instruction in 45 minutes
blocks, and this is aimed to
ensure that our students.
can have that foundational
learning of the language towards
that proficiency attainment. And
then we have that integrated
English language development
piece which allows those
language skills then be applied
in a real academic context. This
help our students to, um,
utilize and reinforced the the
skills that they learned during
the designated piece of um the
instruction and then they can
engage.
Across all of their different
contexts. Both the designated
and the integrated English
language development serve
different purposes, but yet they
complement each other.
Therefore, that's why we think
that having this model as an
instructional piece can help our
students not only achieve
proficiency, but it can provide
them with a well-rounded
language foundation that's gonna
support their learning
throughout. On the next slide,
um,
We have a little bit about a
specific um data regarding our
English learners again in New
Mexico we have about 17% of our
students classified as English
learners, those are um about a
little bit over 52,300 students.
And so from this number 18% of
the students are provided that
designated and integrated
English language development in
content areas, 42% of that
approach is happening in an
elementary.
school setting and 33% in the
secondary school setting. We
also have data um that shows
that 7% of our students are not
part of an English learning
programming due to pattern
parents' refusal, which is just
um the federal term to say they
have opted out of having um
their students be part of a
programming for a different
variety of reasons. And so, um,
this is kind of, again, just
wanted to highlight a little bit
of uh what that in
currently looks like.
Um, as we go through our next
slides on the proficiency, um,
performance for our current um
our current English learner
students. So we have preliminary
data for the 2324 school year
that shows that 19% of our
English language learners are
proficient in language arts.
This is a 2% increase from the
prior year. We also um see that
10% are reported proficient in
math, which remains somewhat
Flat from the year prior and
then we see that um our science
proficiency actually has shown a
large increase from the prior
year with um currently showing
17% the year before that
proficiency rate was 11%, so we
saw a 6% point increase on
science proficiency for our
English learners, students. We
also have seen that in New
Mexico's um early college high
schools they.
Providing our English language
learners with rigorous grade
level content demonstrating that
this approach can coexist when
our students are still learning
the language, which means that
um they, they are able to keep
up with that challenging and
rigorous um learning material.
And so in these high schools
proficiency for our English
learners can go anywhere from
13% to 30%, and again, it's
demonstrating that with the
right
Type of support our students can
actually thrive academically
while they're still trying to
work on mastering the
proficiency of the language. And
by integrating English language
learning with grade level
instruction our early college
high schools are enabling our
students to be able to thrive
academically.
And so once our students have
developed English language
proficiency. We want them to be
able to be successful in the
rest of their academic journey,
but in order to do that we have
to um ensure that they're ready
to exit that specific program.
So for students to exit English
learner um status, they need to
achieve an overall um composite
score of 4.7 or higher on the
access for English language
learners' assessment. This score
will indicate if they are
proficient in English across key
um language development domains
that includes speaking,
listening, reading and writing.
But even after our students are
reclassified as proficient in
English and exit um English
language status, we can't simply
stop there and say that they're
good to go. These students must
be monitored, um, to ensure that
they continue to progress
academically and in their
language um acquisition, so that
monitoring has to happen for at
least 2 years. The monitoring
phase is critical because it
helps us ensure that the exodus.
um is successful in their
transition, but also that they
can do so without any additional
language support and overall,
our goal is to provide continued
support and ensure that the
student um can thrive in their
academics after exiting the
program and that they can
perform in the different
subjects that they're um going
through the remaining of their
high school experience. And so
when we talk about what English
learning services have looked
for in New Mexico in the last
couple of years.
Um, we have evolved the way that
we guide um our English language
services. The agency has made
intentional efforts to support
our districts in moving away
from utilizing English learners
services as an intervention that
is focused on remediation rather
than the academic growth of our
students. Services, um, a couple
of years ago were very
inconsistent with identification
methods were that were not based
on effective practices.
Like they will use outdated
data, measures, even sometimes
just like a last name to
identify a student and most of
the measures were not aligned
with Common Core state
standards. Today we guide best
practices focused on grade level
rigor in English language
instruction, ensuring that
English learners receive the
same challenging academic
content than the, than as their
peers. We're moving closer to a
more standardized.
Identification, um, services,
also ensuring that those exits,
um, ident exit procedures are
standardized and that the
assessment is aligned with
Common Core standards. We also
want to ensure that our content
teachers are not only
responsible for delivering
academic content, but they can
be key partners on the language
development aspect across all
subjects.
And so when we think about um
where we want to go, um, as we
evolve our services and knowing
that we have made some strides,
but we have a much more work to
um to do. We want to ensure that
those practices and those
standards can be implemented all
across the state. One way to
achieve this is by properly
tracking, monitoring, supporting
all the resources and services
that are English language
requires through that dedicated
funding.
because that ensures that we can
specifically address the unique
needs of language acquisition.
We want to make sure that our
students can have that
structured English language
development um programs and that
those are also culturally and
linguist linguistically um
responsive to their instruction
needs. We know that there is a
high need for professional
development for educators and
those professional development
cannot be a one time. I trained
you once and I expect you to
know.
For the rest of your career, how
to continue to this. The best um
leaders, teachers, the best
professionals are those that are
continuously updating,
modifying, and innovating their
craft.
We also know how important
family engagement is, so having
family engagement programs that
support our non-English, um,
speaking families is very
crucial in New Mexico, 70% of
our student populations belong
to at least one at risk group.
This leave our school districts
having to choose what to
prioritize when everything gets
lumped into one bucket as it is
with the at risk, um.
Funding we're currently um our
districts are pulling funding to
support English learners. And so
this is creating an unnecessary
one scenarios for them and
stress where they have to be
choosing or prioritizing which
needs did I address this? Did I
focus on dropout prevention,
that I focus on mobility? Do I
focus on my English learners.
Having that dedicated funding
will allow that those specific
needs for English learner
students, um, received the
attention
that they require and they're
not competing with other
priorities that dedicated
funding can also allow districts
to have a more flexible approach
to creating adaptive innovative
practices that can allow to
ensure that the needs of our
students are being met for the
particular linguistic needs.
And more importantly, New Mexico
has a deep cultural and
linguistic heritage, so having
this separate um funding can
ensure that we honor and support
that multilingualism that makes
our state so unique and by
funding programs that promote
both English proficiency and the
preservation of students' home
languages, we can achieve that
as well. And as I finished um my
part of the presentation, again,
I would love to emphasize that
language.
is a tool for communication and
a bridge to opportunities. And I
do believe that continuing to
celebrate that in our students,
especially our English learners,
we have to ensure that we are
empowering them in a way that
allows them to become proficient
in English, but also embrace
their home heritage language so
that they can be poised to be
productive in the spaces that
they operate. And Mr. Sherman,
members of the committee
honoring that we have some
students here.
I would like to take a moment of
privilege to address our
students and families of English
learners with the following.
Annosantesi familia ques pre
quirolesqueleio de que el
lingles nos prima noon
desajainona fortalesa
amas let's bring down ajapo de
ros and la vida loca
passesqueson and loquiermeta
quese propongan no port
sloconaccento deviennio temple.
Too minarelia importantescute
vanando a probestaid de
demos que ramienta and El Camino
desexito contoeswars to the ion
la polla de cuado
mosquepodengarlejosra celebra
Conorguyosusraise is cultura to
all of our English language
learners, students and families.
I want to remind you that having
to learn English is not a
disadvantage but a strength.
Being able to
Speak more than one language,
give us a unique edge in life
and open up so many
possibilities. It doesn't matter
if you have an accent like I do,
where you're from or how long it
takes to master the language.
What truly matters is that you
are keeping pushing forward
using this opportunity to grow
and show the world what you're
capable of. Language is another
tool to help you succeed and
with your hard work, dedication,
and the right support, you can
go as
As far as you desire while
proudly honoring your roots and
your cultural heritage. And with
that, I closed my part of the
presentation and give it back to
Natasha.
Thank you all, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, we now
stand for questions.
Thank you. So members were
running up against time, so
quick questions please and then
presenters concise answers to
those questions, please. So
Senator Solz, thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I'll try and ask
quick uh quick questions, but,
uh, Ms. Davalos.
Why is it that we exit so few,
you had indicated that access
doesn't have a.
Language part of it or that the
students are um.
Reluctant to to speak during
that, is that a training problem
on how we're doing those classes
or why?
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator Solz,
thank you for your question. Um,
when I did interview, um, one of
the school districts, they did
express that there was a bit of
siteness coming from the
students when they did um take
that portion of the test, um,
when it comes to other districts
and beyond that, I'm not exactly
sure. Maybe my colleagues can
speak to that a little bit more
as to why um that would be a
barrier.
Thank you, because Mr. Chair, it
seems like that could be part of
preparing them for the exit is
practice how you're going to say
this, getting over the shyness
is is part of it.
If anyone else wants to comment
quickly.
Mr. Chair, Senators, um, again,
it goes to, I think,
professional development. If
students are not familiar with
that as an exercise, you know,
being able to, to express
themselves orally for, you know,
different purposes. It could be
something that is unfamiliar to
them when it comes to the test.
Thank you. Um,
Do we know how much is Tsol
being taught to all students
going through teacher
preparation programs? Have we
looked into that? I know we're
looking at revamping parts of
the teacher preparation
programs, do any of our teacher
prep programs have that as a
required portion or is that just
an option or an add-on?
Mr. Chair, Senator Souls,
currently, uh,
Pre-service teachers have to
take a course, a single course
in their preparation program to
get the actual endorsement.
There's um at least 12 to 24
hours that need to be added to
their undergrad program or if
they're choosing to pursue that
certification after they have
graduated. And so, um, in the
report, we mentioned that
Uh, teachers and other districts
are requesting that it be part
of the preparation program, um,
so that it doesn't feel like
it's an added on expectation to
be able to service these
students, but as of now, it's
one course that is required
unless someone chooses to
chooses to be fully endorsed.
Thank you. And, and Mr. Chair,
and, and kind of sort of towards
Ms. Castillo, is there money
through the public ed department
to pay for Tal endorsements at
for our currently licensed
teachers and as our teachers are
coming out as an add-on and
potentially as a salary
supplement once they get that.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman, Senator
Souls at this moment, that is
not a setup that we have at the
agency, but it will definitely
be something that we can look
into and with the support of the
legislature. I'm sure that we
can get it done.
Thank you, and I'm trying to
make these kind of quick, very
pointed questions. Mr.
Rodriguez, why is there an
increasing number in the ELL
students in New Mexico? Are we
having more migrants moving in,
Why is that number seemed to be
increasing over the years.
Mr. Chair, said our souls, uh,
that, that is a good question.
That is not something that I'm
familiar with. I'm thinking
maybe LSC staff may be able to
or PD talk to trends in uh you
know the rise in numbers of
Yals.
Thank you, Chairman, Mr. um
Senator Souls, uh, I would love
to look into that further
because I do not have that
answer for you right now. OK,
thank you. That, that
demographics might be
interesting, John, Mr. Chair,
Senator Souls, even though the,
the
It's not, it's not happening at
the same rate across the
country. The number of English
learners is actually increasing
nationwide, so I don't think
this is a specific to New
Mexico.
OK, thank you. Um, again, Mr.
Rodriguez, uh, I first saw those
spaghetti graphs, more than 25
years ago when I was serving on
the school board in Las Cruces,
and was at some national
conferences celebrating
opportunities for Hispanics.
It's nice that they're
continuing to follow those and
they're continuing to get
straighter or not straighter,
um, more
Specific. I mean, the data
continues to show the same
patterns.
The, the things that always
concerned me about that is
people often look at the 1st 2
years that a student is in the
program, and it actually shows
that in English only program
shows the most rapid gain, and I
love the way you covered up a
whole part of the graph and it
shows, oh, look, this is what we
ought to do. If you look at the
whole graph.
It needs to go out 7 or 8 years.
It's frustrating that we stop
after 5 or are expected to exit
everyone after 5 rather than
continuing the supports.
What would it cost for us to
follow the research and the
science to do it right in New
Mexico, you all left things,
Miss Davalos, Rodriguez, we
ought to do this. Where's the
number, the dollar number on the
end of those, what's it going to
cost? Everyone on here has heard
me say, we are a wealthy state.
We have lots of money. Every 1%
reduction in the cash reserves
from 25% every 1% reduction is
$100 million we could put
towards fixing these problems.
What's the dollar cost?
Mr. Chair center souls, the
actual dollar cost, uh, depends
on how, how we approach it,
right? It, it is a it is a
multi-faceted approach from
everywhere from.
Special development for current
teachers to uh revamping systems
within our universities so that
pre-service teachers come with
those skills, um, there, there's
follow up trainings that need to
happen for people and, you know,
yearly, biyearly, every 3-year
basis. My wife is a, she's a
charter school director of a
dual language school, but also a
realtor, and they're required to
do trainings every few years to
keep current, and that's
something that, uh, you know,
for dual language teachers, it's
essential because needs are
changing.
Um, there's, there's costs in
terms of materials, right,
finding the right materials,
finding the right assessments
that are going to give them that
data so that at the school level
they can, they can uh get that
longitudinal information for
their own context, um, which can
be compiled with, you know, to
districts and then for our
state. So so there's lots of
different uh pieces to it, and
I, you know, I'd love to be a
part of determining how, how we
get to that level. There are
states like um Utah, who have a
statewide initiative for dual
language.
who have shown success, the
state of Washington has startup
grants for dual language
programs in districts so that
they can have the funds to start
off on the right foot with the
means to do it correctly. So, so
there's models out there and um,
you know, again, the, the system
or the structure part of the
programs we can take from
others, but, uh, you know,
again, we need to have that from
a New Mexico context for for our
learners. Thank you. And, and
Mr. Chair, you know, certainly
money does solve problems
sometimes.
As legislators, that's often the
lever we have the most control
over and so please as we're
moving forward on this, keep
thinking about how much do we
need to put in the SCG. I think
you indicated some below the
line grants and things like
that, putting some recommended
dollar amounts are helpful when
we go asking of the finance
committee how to solve actual
problems. You kind of answered
my my next question was, what
are the other barriers that
prevent this where it's a lack
of people who have the skills
that have the training to
Do the actual coursework and
things of that sort. So you, you
covered a bunch of that. Um, Ms.
Castillo.
The, you indicated the
proficiency data is very low,
and 1011, 12% of the ones that
are being exited from the
program, what grade levels is
that? How long have they been in
the program and kind of what I
wrote down and partly because
I'm kind of a stat nerd and geek
and stuff like that, but
Is that broken out by years in
ELL and broken out with an
including the poverty level
because I think there's a lot of
confounding of the societal
issues with poverty and Ace
scores, uh, social determinants
of health in amongst also the
language barriers that come with
things. I don't know whether
that's available, but those
interactions and confoundings
would be interesting to to look
at.
So if anyone wants to comment on
anything else that I've, I've
said, finished with a very quick
story. I was the principal at uh
Garfield Elementary in the Hatch
District years ago and when we'd
have IEPs, the principal has to
sit in on those, probably 80% of
my students came in monolingual
Spanish. And so as I'm sitting
in on the IEPs, we always had to
have an interpreter. I made it
the interpreter was for me. I
was the one that was language
hindered, and so the meeting was
held in Spanish, and when I
needed, I.
Have the interpreter whispering
in my ear, so the parents and
the child and everyone else felt
supported that it wasn't seen as
a barrier, but they had the
assets. I had the deficit, so
thank you all for what you do.
Thank you, Representative
Currola.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, this is a great opportunity
for me to question my own boss.
So I think I'm gonna take all
the chances I can get here.
Thank you for the presentation.
This is what I do for a living,
so this is my passion in
education. Um, and I have some
questions I'm gonna try to be
short as much as possible. Um,
everybody here has known, known
already how much I believe in
this. I have seen it with my own
eyes. Um, I was a math teacher
who became an advocate in
bilingual education because I
saw the results, so not the
other way around.
Um, how long it takes for a
student?
To achieve a level of English to
be uh to be able to test as
their native English speakers
because conversational could
come faster, right? But how long
it takes for a student to
actually be able to test at the
same level that, that their,
their peers.
Anyone.
Mr. Chair Representative
Verrola, um, you know, we heard
from the PD that anywhere from 4
to 4 to 7 years, I've heard 5 to
8, um, is the amount of time it
takes for kids to become
proficient, uh, what I've also
heard is that's under ideal
circumstances where all of those
arrows I'm talking about are
aligned. It could take up to 10
years and in that we need to
make sure we're looking at the
long term investment piece of
that. So what I'm going with
this question is so if it takes,
let's say 7 years for a student
to achieve that level. And we
are
high academic content in
English. It does not make any
sense because the students are
not receiving that high academic
content because they are not
capable of receiving. They,
they, they, they are limited. So
if they are not in a dual
language program I can provide
with the best programs, the best
resources, the best teachers,
the train is gonna go blank. And
sometimes,
I'm, I'm wondering when we call
this high programs, but they are
not for whatever the students
need. So that's um um and that's
what concerns me when we have
students who are 67 years, and
they're not exiting the status.
Uh, because they are not
receiving that probably the
resources that they need, um,
um, I also like, um, um, and let
me see, you are the director
Garcia Post. Yes, uh, you
mentioned about in, in a Las
Cruces we're calling the
students emerging bilinguals.
What it will take, and this is
probably a question for our
staff here. What it will take
for our state to to start
calling our students with that
um in a different way. Seeing
them with an asset lens, uh, we
want, we want everybody to learn
English, but we, we don't want
them to erase what they bring to
the classroom. We have our, our,
our we have tried it doesn't
work. So, uh, what it will take
for our state to to call to
multilingual learners or
emerging bilinguals.
So we actually value what they
bring to the classroom like um
Las Cruces is doing, anybody has
that answer by any chance.
No. Well, that's OK. Maybe we
can look into that.
I really wanna look into that,
Mr.
Chair Representative Gurola, I
think as, as one of our
presenters mentioned earlier, I
think New Mexico currently uses
the language that the federal
government uses, and so I think
there's probably some
conversation about how you
remain in alignment or in
compliance with federal
requirements while also, you
know, deciding for yourselves as
a, as a legislature, what you
think the state should, what
terminology the state should
use.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, and
that was also my question. Do
you have any problems um
Accessing some of the funding.
For uh for the students when
you, um, I, in, in the work that
I do, I go to other states and
I'm required to call the to call
to do my presentation using
different terms, multilingual
learners, emerging bilinguals,
and I'm required because of the
funding. So in the funding that
you're using as cruises, is that
um um how do you manage that?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Coolla, thank you for the
question. Um, so the term
emergent bilingual is a term
that we're using within our
district, but when I do our
reporting, um, I work with the
state, I work with, uh, our
Title 3 grant, for example, I do
use the term English learner,
um, and I, I work with the PED
staff. They know that when I say
emergent bilingual, what I mean
in their they understand that,
but when I submit my formal
reports I use the correct
terminology. I do to your point
agree though that um.
You know, providing students
with those high challenge, high
rigor opportunities, part of
that for students to really
engage with that is feeling like
they can benefit or bring value
to their educational experience
with their home language. So
really seeing them as an asset
and using that term is
essential, um, not just in
practice, but also in the words
that we use. Thank you, um, and
I think also for the community
to start seeing that um that we
are learning English, but we are
not dismissing everything that
has to.
Brings to the classroom. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, and 11 last
question, um, I love when I see
that we are top in um bilingual
seals in our state. We uh lead
the, the, the, the country in
bilingual education and I have
seen that, um, so I wanna really
be able to see where.
We are in education. I don't
believe we are, I mean, probably
we're not number one, but I
don't really wear number 50.
Um, I believe that we are not
being measured in the way that
our diversity can be accounted
for.
Uh, we cannot compare um
different
You're to New Mexico in the same
way. I mean, there are things
that we can try, I, I work as a
consultant for NAEP, the
National Report card. So I
remember working and trying to,
to make the test as much as
possible um at um being able to
use in any in any state, but it
was discussions in just one word
forever. And anyone who has been
in the classroom knows that as
an adult, I could read a
paragraph, skip one word, and
move on. A kid can't, it will be
stopped
For forever. And when we have
time, that will affect the
results.
So I would love to see if we
could find a way to measure our
diversity in, in, in those
scores to see where we really
are and what is actually working
so we can continue doing that.
Um, and that was my last point.
I'd really like to see we are
leading in the country in some
areas. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you to the panel for the
presentation.
herbs gear.
Thanks Mr. Thanks Mr. Chair.
Thanks for this presentation
because I think you've really
pinpointed the fact that it's
extremely complex. It's
extremely nuanced. I would have
liked to have, uh, one of the
people in our state who works
with um dual language programs
with Native Americans. I think
that was missing, um, just
because when we talk about
English learners, and I'm Tel
endorsed. I've taught abroad.
I've taught all over the place
and, uh, one thing, um,
I'd like us to look into is how
funding's determined, um,
Because how does that affect our
dual language programs when you
have to have a, I'm not gonna go
into detail. I'll write it down
and give it to everybody here,
but how we determine funding for
dual language programs,
particularly Native American
programs is as you all know,
very complex, um.
So that's just something I want
to earmark for LASC and for all
of you in your work because I
know all of you are also
concerned with that, um, so how
we determine the funding by
course enrollment, especially
when we get to the different
grade levels. Um, let's see.
Um,
There's a couple of issues, for
example, I have a friend, she is
the only bilingual educational
diagnostician in Los Lunas
Public Schools with 8000
students. So I know with our
Spanish speakers often they are
not correctly diagnosed because
there's nobody to diagnose them,
so I guess I'd like to know an
audit of how many bilingual, uh,
Ed Dougs do we have in our
estate? Um, it seems like that's
a shortage of area and that of
course doesn't even include
Those
um diagnosing Native American
students who also get
misdiagnosed a lot of the time.
Um,
another question I have is
Um, we train, we talk about
training teachers with uh Tisa
endorsements, but I know as the
person who often was called in
to look at newly enrolled
English language learners. The
school counselor didn't have the
skills. So I think when we look,
we can't just look at teacher
endorsements, we have to look at
counselors and those other
categories, um.
Let's see. And you know, Spanish
is hard because we have a lot of
of immigrants who Spanish,
they're from Mexico but they
speak in Native American
language. And then some of our
staff doesn't even know what
language are they speaking. So
it's so complex, and I want to
thank each of you for staying
involved with that. So,
Yeah, I would like to look at
the funding, uh, personally, I'm
a, I'm a.
Uh, advocate of dual language
programs. I speak Spanish, uh,
as a second language learner
from 1st grade. I'm a Korean
second language speaker as an
adult. I was the English
speaking parent in a Korean
middle school with a uh, not
very academic student who wanted
to study in a Korean school and
finally realized he couldn't
compete. He couldn't do it. Uh,
so I know what it's like from
both sides, but
Um, oh, and then my final
question is the, the other
complexity is.
As a classroom teacher, because
I was teach on endorsed, a
French speaking student was
given to me. It's so hard to
juggle a class where you have
English language learners at all
levels. You have a totally
non-English speaking person and
then you have your, you know,
variety of students, period, who
speak English. So I just want to
salute all of our teachers
because what we're calling on
people to do is so
Oh, so challenging. And then my
final, um, let's see.
Our next presentation is on
budget priorities, and I feel
like we really need a seminar
just on what we're doing today.
It just, it's not enough.
Uh, to look at the policies, the
complexities, uh, Senator Soz
asked about funding. So just
thanks for really doing the deep
dive and I have a lot of more
questions that I'll pass on to
interim director Sena.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairs, Representative
Garrett, I, I do want to address
one of your questions. I know
some of them have to do with
like research, um, but one of
the things that through my
research that I've come to
discover is that in the state
and nationally, there has never
been a study on the cost
function analysis for providing
services to English learners, or
duing which uh programming and
so in order to respond that
question more adequately, I
think that as a committee, it
would be beneficial for you to
request that it
Uh, we have a, a large scale
study of what it means or what
is required to service students
in these settings because, um,
based on research, they're often
excluded from these um these
types of studies or not
necessarily excluded but not
focusing on what they need as
English learners within a
standalone English learner
program or a dual language
program. So nationally it's not
even happening either. So I
think to better respond to that
question, we need to study that
further.
I'm sure that's a really good
point.
Because if we're gonna fund all
these programs, we have to know
what we're categorizing.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I don't have any
body else on my list. Um, I did
have maybe 1 or 2 questions, um.
I guess I was wondering about
opinions on the courses that um
Educators would take to get
TESO.
Endorsed general thoughts about
those requirements?
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your
question. Um, during my
interviews with some of the
districts, um, I was told that
that that.
Getting Teasel indoors just took
too long. Um, and then there was
other options that were quick
and just um
Yeah, that's what I would say
it's like what my boundings
were. I don't know if my
colleagues have others to.
Um, what I would add is as a
TEL- endorsed teacher, thinking
back to the courses I had to
take in order to become TESL
endorsed. Oftentimes it was not
very easy to apply what was
taught in the classroom setting,
especially because there's a
certain requirement of hours
just dedicated to like a
language course. Um, so in
theory, you think, OK, if you go
through a language course, you
understand what an English
learner would go through in
order.
To learn a language, but it's,
it's not the same thing. It's
one thing, uh, it's one thing to
learn a language as a world
language versus uh English
language development, which is
what we provide to students in
New Mexican Mexican schools. And
so, um, I, I think that it's uh
it's necessary to look at um.
pedagogy, more on the pedagogy
side of how to support English
learners and not that that
doesn't exist in uh uh
pre-service or um the
endorsement courses, but there's
the theory and then there's the
practice and really bridging
that and then on top of that
having all those language
courses that don't automatically
transfer to teaching English
learners.
Cher, I would just add that uh
what teachers really need are
those practical pieces that they
can take with them on day one,
understanding, you know, they,
they have this very diverse
class, um, you know, how are we,
how am I gonna provide access?
How am I gonna validate the
students for what they bring and
how am I gonna make sure that
there's equity in both what the
kids are seeing and seeing
themselves in the curriculum and
uh being able to um.
Develop those relationships,
those critical relationships,
both the students and the
community.
And, and I appreciate that. um.
I mean, um, I think.
Part of the request or or the
policy suggestion is like, well,
how can we expand Tel
endorsement and it's almost
taking like what we have
currently is Tisoul endorsement
as something that's
Effective and, and I don't know
that that's necessarily been
proven to be the case that it is
for, for the reasons that you
all brought up and that's kind
of been my, my experience, um.
Because um I'm TESL endorsed. A
lot of it was my coursework in
Russian language, in Spanish
language, in German language,
um, in Chicano studies classes,
um, but
I would say that, um, except for
some of the conjugation lessons
in my upper level Spanish
classes. The rest has not
benefited me as providing EL
instruction to my students, um,
and, and so I would think that
if we're going to expand it,
that we also take a hard look at
like what the requirements are
for T cell certification, um,
um, to, to.
Make sure that that's a um as
effective as it can be in
providing um that sort of
training as to what our um
everyday educators, um, uh, uh.
Work with in our in our
classroom, um.
I guess the next thing I was
gonna ask as far as we've been
talking about funding is what
the incentive is for um teachers
to get TESOL certified because
we heard that it's too long,
it's something that we have
heard quite a bit, um, to be
TESL certified, but, but what's
been the incentive for educators
to get TESOL certified.
Uh, Mr. Chair, currently certain
districts provide a stipend for
TO endorsed teachers, but that
is not across the board in New
Mexico districts like APS and
Las Cruces, districts who have
the funding to be able to
provide an endorsement, have
done so. Tiso endorsement is far
less than a bilingual
endorsement, but even then
they're, they're not very high.
So for example, in APS, a TESO
endorsement will get you $3000
for a year, uh, providing the
service.
And when you look at addressing
all four domains of language
within an ELD course on top of
all the other requirements,
particularly at the elementary
level, you can see how $3000
really don't make up. They don't
make up for um the the high
requirement that Tel endorsed
teachers have, and then
bilingual educators um get a
5000 about $5500 stipend uh with
an EPS as well. But again,
we're, we're talking about at
that point teachers having to
address all
areas, um, in two languages. So,
um, again, a lot of requirement
for teachers there with um with
the amount of signment and
there's other districts that
just don't provide it. And so
when it's not provided, then
there really is no incentive for
teachers to take on that extra
work.
Mr. She just add that uh in
terms of program quality because
districts have to pull that
money from somewhere, you know,
even either affects hiring, it
affects, um, you know, things
that they can do provide in
terms of professional
development for existing staff,
uh, lots of times that we know
from, from data that a lot of
people don't use their bilingual
or their T sole endorsements.
They'd rather forego that and
not have the additional uh
responsibility and, you know,
challenge added to their days
with all the other things
they're doing. So, you know,
that's another consideration.
How do we make sure that
stipends are there that they are
equitable and they're they're
enticing people to have these
that already have these uh
endorsements to utilize them
because we have a a dire
shortage in our state of
bilingual and teach teachers.
I guess that brings up another
question, um, do we have, and I
think I've asked this before,
and the answer was we don't
know, but hopefully it's
different this time is do we
know how many teachers may be
bilingual and not teaching, um.
Uh, bilingual classes.
Or even getting the endorsement,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, there is actually an
LFC report that states how many
students are choosing or not,
I'm sorry, not students,
teachers are not choosing to use
their endorsement, and I do see
Sonny in the crowd. I don't know
if he would be able to recall
that.
But
Thank you, Viridia, Mr. Chair,
the LFC report found that there
was 4000 teachers who had the
endorsement and certification,
but only 800 were in bilingual
education programs, teaching.
So a
pretty big difference. Yeah, I
mean, my mom was one of those,
um, first language is Spanish,
um, but she refused to do it
because she's like, I don't.
Yeah, the, the pay is not enough
to make me do it, um, and yeah,
she went 20 years without doing
it, um, unfortunately, so, um,
cool, I appreciate that. So one
of our charity students,
representative Teraas has a
question. Quickly because we're
running over time.
Yes, thank you for showing my
tardiness, uh, Mr. Chair, we're
not allowed to not allow you
into class anymore.
You send me the principal's
office. I appreciate that. No,
I, I just wanted, I was
listening.
listening in on my way. I had
another meeting, but I think,
Mr. Chair, uh, your presentation
is amazing. I was one of those
students that my first language
is Spanish.
And so this is in the, in the,
in the 70s, here I am going to
first grade in 70, it would be
about 78. And when this was a
new program, and it was looked
back then, at least for my
family as a stigma to put your
kid in there. It was like, you
don't do that to your kid, you
just, you're gonna be, you're
gonna go with the rest of the
kids and I remember going
through and and understanding or
wanting to express myself and I
knew the word in Spanish but I
couldn't say it in English, and
I have to kind of
Describe what I was talking
about, but it, it's amazing how
far this program has come from
the late 70s and I don't know if
that's exactly when it started,
but that's what, what, when I,
what I remember, you know, it
could have been before, it could
have been, you know, but I know
for sure while I was there cause
I remember my parents deciding
not to do that almost as a
stigma rather than.
Right? It's just, it's evolved
and so I just wanted to make
that statement, uh, to make up
for my tardiness, Mr. Chair.
Oh, I don't know if that quite
makes up for it, but, but we'll
accept.
Um, well, cool, if there aren't
any other questions, we
certainly appreciate you all and
your expertise,
Viridiana, we have a letter for
you on behalf of the committee
and staff thanking you for all
of your hard work, um, this
interim for us. So thank you so
much. We really appreciate your
service to us.
Mr. Chair, thank you so much.
I'm going to frame that most
likely.
Oh yeah, and then we have
members of members, uh, wait a
minute, oh.
No, it's all right.
OK.
All right, folks, we're gonna go
on with our agenda. So we have
our initial budget
consideration. So if we could
have everybody quiet down in the
back or take your conversations
outside. That would be awesome.
Yeah, and legislators.
For you to come back, we have
our budget discussions.
The senators, they're so out of
line. All right, folks, if we
could quiet down in the back,
please, folks in the back,
please quiet down. We're gonna
get started.
Cause what?
The speaker faces this way.
There is a. Oh, OK.
Oh folks, if we could quiet down
please in the back stand.
I see you talking with your
hands.
We could quiet down, folks.
We're going on with our budget
discussion. So please, Daniel.
Morning.
test, test, test.
Hello again.
My name is Daniel and I cover
public school finance for the
LESC, uh, we are now on tab in
tap 7 of your binder with a
brief title the budget
considerations for FY 26.
So, Mr. Chairman, every year,
your staff at the LESE presents
some pretty high level
considerations for the upcoming
fiscal year, based on what you
all heard throughout the interim
from staff and from partners and
those these initial
considerations helped to frame
the conversation around budget
for the remainder of the
interim.
And so we're here today to start
that budget conversation for FY
26 and to get your feedback on
what we have here and what you
all have heard about throughout
this week's meeting, starting on
page one of your brief.
But before we get started, I
first want to say that your
staff is very focused on
building a strong recommendation
for FY 26, that is targeted,
that's focused, and that's
intentional and how it supports
public schools, and for us, that
means doing what we've talked
about throughout the interim,
which is prioritizing your
investments in the SEG.
Uh, being mindful of when we
propose that you all create or
expand below the line programs
and targeting funding to the
areas with the most need, like
attendance and like behavioral
health.
And as revenue growth continues
to slow, uh, we as your staff at
the LESC.
are going to be very intentional
in weighing opportunity costs.
Because we know that every
dollar you all spend on one
program has a cost in that it
could have been spent on another
program.
And you all know that we are
very data driven at the LESC and
we're not going to shy away from
proposing significant
appropriations that are
warranted by the data, like the
SCG revision that we talked
about yesterday, but we're also
not going to shy away from
telling you all there's a need
for a small targeted
appropriation to support an
emerging need or than an
existing program is receiving an
appropriate funding level, and
it shouldn't be increased.
Or that a program isn't meeting
its intent and so you all should
sunset the program.
Uh, those are the conversations
that we've been having as staff
and they've led to the
considerations that we have for
you all here today that we
believe are again one targeted
to focused, and 3 intentional in
their purpose, and that we
believe are appropriate, given
what we know so far about the
broader context of the state's
budget needs for FY 26.
So that being said, starting
with the brief.
Uh, during the interim, you all
heard from staff about the
challenges with recruitment and
retention, uh, the need to
adequately support the diverse
and complex needs of at-risk
students.
And broadly about the need to
strengthen the well-being of
both students and educators.
And based on the content that
you all heard throughout the
interim, uh, staff focus on how
you all can continue to support
regionally competitive
compensation, differentiation
and secondary programming,
residency programs, literacy,
behavioral health, and
attendance, and this brief
includes high-level
considerations that are
responsive to those topics that
you all have heard about
throughout the interim.
And as a background though,
figure one provides a visual
showing how you all have
increased your investment in
public schools, uh, since FY19
for both public school support
and below the line programs,
both of which have seen some
pretty significant growth
between FY19 and FY 25.
But moving into FY 26, we
believe there's an opportunity
to refine the way in which you
all support public schools. So
before we move on to the budget
considerations. I'm going to ask
you to join us in the section
titled Multiyear Budgeting.
Uh, throughout the interim.
You are consistently heard from
me on the importance and
potential of multi-year
budgeting where you all are
being intentional in supporting
specific programs with
consistent funding that allows
LEAs to plan out their
programming 3 years into the
future, and they also places
those programs on the path to
evaluation, where your staff at
LESC and LFC can determine
whether that program had a
measurable impact on student
achievement.
And if they did, deciding
whether that program should
receive recurring funding in the
future.
Uh, you all are already doing
that with grow, uh, where you
appropriated $600 million to
educate her clinical practice,
and $15 million for special
education differentials, but
moving forward, uh, LESC staff
is proposing that you all
consider expanding your use of
multi-year budgeting, starting
with reevaluating the purpose of
the public education reform
fund.
Uh, you all created Perth in
FY19 to support pilot programs
using reversions from K5 plus
and ELTP.
Uh, since you all repealed K5
plus and ELTP.
The lack of those reversions,
uh, flowing into Perth have cut
off the inflows to the fund, but
we've been thinking, really
thinking as staff internally
about whether the purpose of
Perth can be revised to where
it's essentially a grow like
fund for K-12 programs where it
would support the same three
years of consistent funding for
specific programs, and after
those 3 years, those programs
will be evaluated based on
performance measures that are.
Drafted by LESE LFC, and PD.
Uh, we've only had preliminary
conversations with our partners
around that general idea and you
all will hear more about it in
the interim, but we've already
started to think internally
about which below the line
programs are good candidates for
that, uh, multi-year budgeting
and evaluation, and we're going
to talk about some of those
programs in the presentation.
But to get started with your FY
26 considerations on page 2.
We have a table showing some of
the priorities you all raised
during the interim, and you'll
see they're grouped into 4
categories, including investing
in the educator ecosystem,
academic design, whole child,
and this broad category around
early learning, uh, CTE and
secondary revision.
And like we do every year uh for
our budget considerations, we've
included cost estimates for
those priorities so that you all
have one, the context, to the
rationale, and 3, the actual
cost of each consideration.
Uh, starting with the first
section, investing in the
educator ecosystem.
You all have invested a
significant amount of money in
increasing compensation and
benefits for public school
personnel, including a 3%
increase across the board in FY
25.
But despite those large
investments and compensation, we
still have a lot of vacancies
across the state, most of which
are in special education and the
elementary grades. So clearly,
uh we have more work to do as a
state and incentivizing people
to pursue careers in teaching,
and that starts with competitive
compensation and benefits. And
so our first consideration, as
it always is, is an increase in
compensation for all public
school personnel at a cost of
$33.8 million for each percent
point increase. So if you all
are targeting a 3% point
increase across the board for
all public school personnel,
it's 33.8 times 3.
And just to add some more
nuance, um, I might talk about
which consideration is an SCG
consideration versus the below
the line consideration, just so
you all know, 4 FY 26, there are
3 big priorities for the SCG.
It's gonna be compensation. It's
gonna be insurance and it's
gonna be uh the SCG revision
that we talked about yesterday.
So this is, this is the first of
those three considerations for
the SCG.
Uh, you're also likely gonna
hear.
Or see some differences in the
recommendations for compensation
between LESC and our partners,
but our goal as your staff is to
recommend an increase in
compensation that is both
responsive to the needs of
public school personnel, and
then it's also reasonable in the
context of the broader state
budget.
But any increase you ultimately
include for public school
personnel is going to build on
the progress you all made in the
last few years, starting with
the revisions that you all made
to teacher minimums in FY 23,
which is a pretty powerful step
that you all took to increase
the competitiveness of a career
in teaching.
And you all followed that with a
5% increase in FY 24, a 1%
increase for inflation and
health premiums in FY 24 and a
3% increase in FY 25.
So if I was a level one teacher,
hired in FY 23 at the new
minimum of $50,000 those
increases since FY 23 have
likely pushed me pretty close to
55,000 and more than likely, the
LA that I'm working at has more
than likely adjusted the salary
schedules to where a new teacher
is also likely entering at a
salary that is higher than that
$50,000 minimum in statute.
And that's great, uh, because we
want current and new teachers to
be earning more because that
keeps us regionally competitive,
and it also serves as a
recruiting tool for new for new
teachers.
But one of the challenges that
we found as a state is that
we're not being intentional
about revising the minimum
salaries on a recurring basis.
Instead, we're making these
substantial revisions in the
minimums, 10,000 in FY 23, and
then mandating across the board
increases over the next few
years to the point where very
few teachers are at or just
above the minimums. So moving
forward, uh, we as your staff
are really interested
And incorporating the idea of
multi-year budgeting for
compensation where you all are
adjusting the minimum salaries
on a predictable or recurring
basis and that just simply keeps
up with the revisions, the local
salary schedules that are
already taking place.
And by doing that, our hope is
to use the minimums as a
recruiting tool for new
teachers.
And so we're proposing that you
all start that process in FY 26
with the revision of the teacher
minimums to 55 for level 1, 65
for level 2 and 75 for level 3?
And because the compensation of
school admin is also based on
teacher minimums, they would
also see an increase in their
minimum compensation.
And as I said before, most
teachers are earning above the
minimums, so the cost of
revising the minimums by $5000
is only $5.4 million.
And as your staff, we felt
pretty obligated to include this
consideration for FY 26, because
it's a pretty marginal cost,
especially when compared to the
potential benefits for
recruitment.
And it's one level of nuance,
uh, this will require a bill to
change statute.
Moving on to insurance, uh, you
all know insurance premiums are
soaring all over the country and
public schools in Mexico are no
exception. in FY 25, House Bill
2 appropriated $25.7 million to
the SCG for insurance increases,
and that was substantially lower
in the large increases in
premiums than NMSA passed on to
schools.
Uh, you all will hear more about
insurance from NASA tomorrow,
but for FY 26, uh, we are
expecting a cost of
approximately $39.7 million for
NSA's increases to insurance
premiums and that does not
include the increases for APS.
And so that total number could
potentially surpass $500 million
if you all want to fully cover
the cost of those expected
premium increases for both NASA
and APS.
And in the last row for the
educator workforce, we have the
educator Fellows program, which
began as a pilot during the
pandemic and use federal relief
money, uh, with the goal of
increasing the availability of
qualified educators and to
increase the adult to student
ratio in schools. For FY 25, you
all appropriated $200 million
from the general fund to support
the program and for FY 26, uh,
we're proposing that you all
appropriate an additional
$200,000 for the educator.
program so that you all continue
to build uh the educator
pipeline.
And this program is an example
of what I said earlier about uh
staff not shying away from
recommending flat funding for
programs that are doing well
under the conditions they
currently exist. And so you're
going to see more of those later
in the presentation.
Moving down to academic design.
We have literacy on the first
row, and that's the money that
you all have appropriated for
the last few years to support
the phase in of the structured
literacy training for all
elementary teachers, and we are
now in the process of phasing in
grade 5, so we're almost to the
point where every elementary
teacher has received structured
literacy and you all heard from
Mary and Tim yesterday about how
we're seeing measurable
improvement as a result of
structured literacy, and so this
is a program we
believe is working based on the
data that we have.
So for FY 26, we are proposing
that you all appropriate an
additional $14 million for
literacy so that we complete the
phase in of all elementary
teachers and continue to support
our model and support schools,
and after that, as Mary and Tim
recommended yesterday, there's
going to be a need to shift our
focus to how we sustain that
practice and provide training
for new elementary teachers.
Related to that first row, we
have secondary educator literacy
on Route 2, which you all
supported with a $500
appropriation in FY 25, and that
money is being used to provide a
PD for secondary teachers in
literacy as part of an emphasis
that all secondary educators
play a role in teaching
literacy, no matter their
content areas.
And moving forward, we've heard
a general desire to support
reading acceleration and
intervention for secondary
teachers, addressing
deficiencies and identifying
areas of intervention for
secondary students who have not
yet reached proficiency.
Uh, this is a new appropriation
that was piloted for FY 25 and
we know that you all are very
passionate about supporting
literacy. And so we are
proposing that you all
appropriate an additional $500
for secondary educator literacy
in FY 26.
But you'll notice this
consideration has an asterisk,
and that means it's a program
that you all may consider
including in the multi-year
budgeting framework that we
talked about on page one. So,
unlike structured literacy on
the first row.
Uh, we don't yet have data to
show the secondary educator
literacy program is having a
positive impact on student
achievement, but it is something
that may have potential if
implemented over several years
with Fidelity.
And so we're proposing that you
all consider including secondary
educator literacy and your
multi-year budgeting framework
so that it receives 3 years of
funding and gets evaluated by
LESC, LFC, and P. Next, we have
Steam and we included this this
in the brief because you all
made it really clear to us that
you want recurring funding for
Steam, especially considering
that HB 2 did not include
funding for Steam and FY 25.
So for FY 26, we are proposing
that you all appropriate $800
for STEM initiatives, and we
really want to partner with PED
on how that money can be best
used to support student
achievement, especially in math.
And just to know, Steam has been
included in in Houseboat 2 with
recurring funding in the past
and the lack of recurring
funding in FY 25 was an anomaly,
and so we're only recommending
that recurring funding be
restored in FY 26.
Related to steam, we also have
the STEM network on the 3rd row,
and this is something that
Connor has been working on over
the last year. Uh, the STEM
network would basically be one
component of a comprehensive
approach we're taking in
supporting STEM throughout the
state, by bringing together the
various STEM learning
opportunities and resources
around New Mexico, and it would
serve as a facilitator for
collaboration between LEAs uh
industry, higher education, out
of school time programs and
state government.
And it would build a high
quality STEM education that is
universally accessible
throughout the state, and that
ultimately helps to build a
robust workforce pipeline.
The network is also being
designed to serve as a potential
delivery mechanism for any
future appropriations or
investments you all make in STEM
education.
Uh, you'll hear more about this
later in the interim, but we are
proposing that you all also
include the STEM network in your
multi-year budgeting framework,
starting with a $2 million
appropriation in FY 26, and this
would also be something that
would likely require a bill.
And last in our academic design
section, uh, we have special
education initiatives.
In FY 25, you all appropriated
$6 million for special education
initiatives, and that money was
used to build the statewide IEP
that you all heard about this
interim from Merritt, uh, where
instead of every LEA having
their own IEP forms, uh, we now
have a universal template that
is used across the state.
For FY 26, the goal is to build
an information system that
allows for those IEPs to be
accessed when a student moves
between districts or between
charter schools, and that is
what the $6 million
appropriation that we're
proposing to you all would fund
in FY 26.
Moving on to the whole child
section.
Uh, first, we have the revision
of the at-risk index, which we
talked about yesterday, and we
estimate the cost of the
revision of the at-risk index
would be around $41.3 million
and that money would again be
targeted to low income students
and English learners, and it's
also intended to address the
Martineziazi lawsuit, uh,
pivoting to out of school time.
Uh, you all heard from the out
of school time network at
Triscoll Heritage about how
before and after school
programs, summer programs, teen
centers and internships
positively impact attendance,
emotional well-being, and
achievement among students, but
they also spoke of the lack of
adequate funding for out of
school time programs in rural
and tribal communities.
At the same time, they also
spoke about how the $150 million
appropriation for out of school
time programs in FY 25, 8.5
million of that was earmarked
for tutoring, and so that
earmark decreased the amount of
money that went directly to out
of school time programs that
were being operated by both LEAs
and community-based
organizations. So for FY 26,
We are proposing that you all
appropriate $20,000 exclusively
for out of school time programs
without an earmark for tutoring
programs.
And we estimate that $200
million could support 20,000
students throughout the state,
both at programs run by LEAs and
by community-based
organizations.
On community schools.
We know their support on this
committee for the general
concept of a community school,
but we also know the concept of
a community school in Mexico is
something that needs some
refinement and some formalized
structures. So for FY 26, we're
proposing that you all
appropriate $10,000 for
community schools and that you
all consider including community
schools in your multi-year
budgeting framework.
that the program is funded for 3
years at a consistent level and
is placed on the path to
evaluation.
You'll notice our proposal is a
$2 million increase over FY 25,
and that is because you all
funded community schools with
$100 million in FY 24, and that
was dropped to 8 million in
House Bill 2 for FY 25. And so
our proposal simply restores the
program to $1000 and places the
program on the path to
evaluation.
For universal school meals, you
all heard about this program at
the joint hearing with LFC at
ariscoll Heritage and how we're
seeing an increase in
participation that is also
increasing the cost of the
program, uh, but as a great
problem to have because the
concept of universal school
meals is that everyone's
participating in the program,
but to sustain that growth, we
are recommending a $56 million
appropriation for universal
school meals, which we believe
is sufficient to adequately.
Fund the program in FY 26. And
we also want to flag for you the
potential that there is a
request for a supplemental
appropriation for FY 25, for
universal school meals.
And just so you all know,
One of the main questions that
you all maybe posed with during
the session on Universal school
meals is whether the program
remains below the line, or
whether you all push the money
into the SEG or whether you make
universal school meals a
categorical program.
And you all will hear more about
that later in the interim from
LASE staff.
We are now on school panic
buttons, uh, you all have been
supporting school panning
buttons for a few years now, and
for good reason, because you all
know school safety is a is top
of mind for many communities.
And so we're recommending that
you all continue to invest in
school panic buttons for NFY 26,
uh, with $1000. And there will
likely be more considerations
around school safety later in
the interim, but we want to
highlight the importance of the
issue in this brief.
On the next row, we have
attendance.
You all heard from ESC and PD's
staff and everyday labs at the
Triscoll Heritage about the
continued challenges that we're
seeing with attendance, uh,
where Jessica and Tim reviewed
the state's attendance policies
and focused on expanding our
collective understanding of
chronic absence and the
underlying factors that are
contributing to those attendance
challenges.
Uh, PED staff then spoke about
some of the barriers to student
attendance like housing
insecurity, transportation
issues, and just brought
disengagement.
They also spoke about how they
use your appropriations for
attendance in the past,
including grants districts and
awareness campaign, assistance
for technical issues and
attendance conferences.
And finally, you heard from
everyday labs who spoke about
how we often invest the bulk of
our time and resources and
addressing absenteeism when it
happens, rather than investing
the bulk of our time and
resources in whole school and
individual prevention.
And that prevention is gonna
look different in each school
and it'll require a lot of
intentionality in identifying
students' needs, engaging with
the community, and removing the
barriers that students are
experiencing.
And so based on what you all
heard in September, we are
proposing that you all
appropriate $1,010,000 for
attendance initiatives, an
increase of $5 million over FY
25, and that addition of $5
million recognizes the pretty
stark needs we continue to see
with attendances across the
state, and this is another
program that we want to partner
with PED on building a shared
vision on what the money should
be used for. Next, we have
behavioral health.
Uh, you all know there's a
critical need to address the
social, emotional and behavioral
health of students, especially
after the pandemic, but
addressing those challenges is
really complex and requires
significant resources that many
schools just don't often have.
And unfortunately, House Bill 2
didn't include an appropriation
for behavioral health programs
in FY 25. And so,
Teachers, please excuse.
So for FY 26, we're proposing a
$5 million appropriation for
behavioral health programs.
Again, we want, we want to
partner with PED on how that
money can be used to provide
targeted and intentional
supports to students.
Moving on to supports for
students who are unhoused, uh,
you all heard about these
initiatives from Merritt at
Atriscoll Heritage, where New
Mexico apple seeds spoke of how
there are between 15 and 20,000
students in New Mexico or
inadequately housed, and the
graduation rate among those
students is 61%.
Uh, in response, they developed
a pilot program called a
guaranteed payment for
attendance, uh, where students
receive a $500 monthly payment
when they attend school and
tutoring services, and students
often use that money for housing
or transportation or food, and
so far in the areas the program
has been piloted inadequately
housed students who receive the
payment has seen a 93%
graduation rate compared to the
61% graduation rate for all
inadequately housed.
Students
Uh,
we know that you all have a
strong interest in alleviating
the impact of insecure housing
on student outcomes and based on
the on the success of the pilot
program, we're recommending that
you all appropriate $10,000 to
support on house students using
the pilot approach launched by
New Mexico Appleseed, um, and
that $10 million appropriation
is also being recommended for
inclusion in your multi-year
budgeting framework.
Moving on to the last section,
early learning, CTE and
secondary school revision, uh,
starting with the revision to
the secondary factor that you
all heard about yesterday, uh,
we estimate the cost of
increasing the SCG factor for
grades 7 through 12 would be
around $51.1 million and that
additional funding could be used
at the local level for CTE
programs, secondary fine arts
programs or broader social,
emotional, academic, and
behavioral supports for
students.
But as I said yesterday,
The revision to the SCG for
secondary students is not the
only way we are proposing that
you all support CTE programs
because there is always going to
be a need for below the line
funding that helps LEA start and
scale their own locally
responsive CTE programming,
especially our small LEAs that
don't generate enough money from
the SCG to actually start those
programs on their own.
So for FY 26, we are
recommending that you all
continue to invest in CTE
programs below the line with the
same $45 million appropriation
that you all appropriated in FY
25.
And this number includes 4
programs, the next gen CTE pilot
program, work-based learning,
innovation zones, and
internships.
Um, all those programs are in
the same $45 million bucket, but
there are some programs that
We as your staff feel.
Warrant some evaluation, uh,
especially innovation zones. So
for FY 26, we will likely
propose at least some portion of
that $45 million bucket be
included in your multi-year
budgeting framework so that you
all place some of those programs
on the path to evaluation.
And before I wrap up, I want to
say that our next step uh staff,
uh, is to incorporate any
feedback that you all may have
and come back to you all in
December, with a draft of the
high level that includes the
entire public school support
scenario for FY 26.
Thank you.
All right.
Senator Stewart,
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thanks to you, Daniel and EASC
staff for
Paying attention and putting
this together for us. It's
really, it's really a great
document.
And and it's a great document to
talk to other legislators about
because uh.
You know, some of you know I was
called on to as Zoom this
morning with the chair of the
finance committee, and he
certainly wanted to know what we
were thinking and, and, and
luckily I could tell him what we
were thinking, so, uh, this is a
good first start. I, I really
like the changes to the SCG. I
just think they're going to be
significant in many ways if we
can do those. uh, I just wanna.
So to correct something you
said, which is that
This year we're doing 5th grade
teachers for structured
literacy, and then we're done.
So I'll, I'll just remind the
committee that in the 1st 5
years of a teacher, you know,
when teachers start in the 1st 5
years, 30 to 40% of them leave
the profession. It's too hard.
They didn't realize they were
going to have to manage
these room full of ruffians, uh,
they can't do it well or a
variety of other reasons, so the
teaching of uh early liter.
rac y skills is ongoing. Um, I
certainly, yesterday we heard uh
from Kobre about how excited
they are they got a significant
grant to really drill down and
to do more training, but of
course silver did not, uh, so it
depends on if you can get more
resources to do more training to
get yourself a uh a good coach,
etc. so.
So this money is not, it's,
we're not done with this kind of
training unless the colleges of
education finally come to the
table, uh, that's what I hope
eventually happens, so, um, so,
you know, those, those are my
comments, um, I just think this
is a great start, a good
document. I like the idea of
this 3 year, uh, I, I think
you've identified the right
ones. I just don't have, I don't
have.
Any complaints other than what
you said about teaching
teachers.
Mr. Chairman, Senatoro, just to
clarify uh what I said during
the presentation, there is a
need to continue that $14
million investment to actually
complete the phase in of all
elementary teachers, and in the
future, there will likely be a
need for some similar amount of
an appropriation to support uh
the actual practice itself, but
also to phase in all new
teachers who are entering
elementary grades, just to
clarify that really quick. Well,
Mr. Chairman, thanks for that
clarification.
Um,
You know, the, the thing that's
missing is some planned
specific, detailed work on
mathematics at the elementary
level, which impacts secondary,
uh, tremendously so I, I don't
know where we're going with
that, um, uh, several years ago,
the, the new Secretary of
Education uh told us that that's
what he was working on, but now
we have another new secretary.
Not quite sure what she's
working on. I will say that when
we get the information that I
wish we'd had before about what
the results of our six week boot
camp experiment. What those
results are, um, it's my
understanding that PED wants to
continue doing that and I really
support that, um, so I, I think
that PED will have a larger
amount that they're coming.
Forward with to continue, um,
the, the boot camp idea in after
school or before school
tutoring, um, and to do it again
next summer, so, um, I'm just
uh.
Alerting people that that number
will probably go up from the
governor's office, but um I look
forward to those results. I wish
they'd been here already, but.
It is what it is. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Represent Urola.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Sher.
Thank you, Daniel for all the
work that you, the whole staff
is done on this. Um, I just have
a
Clarification here.
Last time that we're talking
during the session about the
budget, we included some uh
funding for biliteracy.
Um, can we include something for
biliteracy. We just have a
presentation about how these
programs actually help and, and
are the best way to address some
of our students. So, um, I just
wanna know if that's possible.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Grola, I just wanted to clarify
that these are some of the
recommendations, these are not
all the recommendations they're,
they're the ones we chose here
with the exception of maybe a
couple are very big ticket items
that we wanted to make sure that
you understood where we're sort
of coming down as
recommendations from us. Um, as
Daniel said in December, we'll
have the entire high level which
will include all the below the
line appropriations, some of
which are not included here and
so we'll.
include that recommendation.
Thank you. That was thank you.
Representative Vlada.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
thank you, Daniel, for the
excellent work. I really
appreciate this. I really,
really do, uh,
uh.
I think um
Interim director answered my
question because I was gonna
talk about transportation.
Because I know my superintendent
has been really coming and
talking to me about
transportation and the and the
costs that they that they've
been incurring. But one of the
things that I also have another
question and Mr. Chair, Daniel,
so the universal meals.
Is there any collaboration or is
there any any any integration
with the New Mexico grown uh uh
uh initiative that's happening
that the schools can apply for
or is it or still is it still
gonna be a separate thing?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Laura, this
recommendation that you all have
for universal school meals, the
$56 million. It does not include
the appropriation for the other
program. It's a separate
appropriation as of right now.
OK, thank you for that. And I
think, uh, I guess in the future
I really think we should
consider that in that way, not
only do we provide, um, New
Mexico grown products to our
children at the schools, but we
also support our farmers and our
ranchers. That's, that's all I
have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represent me one way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Daniel, um, for this. I have to
say I really love this
multi-year budgeting approach. I
think it really helps, um, these
LEAs be able to plan and they
know that they have this money
for 3 years. So, uh, and the
programs that we're hoping to,
uh, you know, put in that is
something that they know that
they can really dive into uh a
solution to these issues because
they have the money for 3 years
and then we can actually
Actually see getting the money
for for one year and then seeing
if that program works, we all
know, especially in education,
nothing, we, we don't usually
see results in one year, you
know, it's, it, it takes time,
so with 3 years it's perfect
and, and, and I'm so glad that
we're, um.
Kind of going towards that and
then we can evaluate whether it
needs to stay or move up, that
kind of thing, um, and be fully
funded. I have a quick question
about, um, the attendance, um,
which I do believe that we
really do need, um, that extra
funding in there. um, and I know
you said that later on we were
going to be talking about what's
what it would be used for, but
do you think that it's gonna be
including like FTEs for
attendance coaches that
that money uh that uh funding
for it or is it
Other things that would be, it
would be used for. Mr. Chairman,
Representative Moya, I think the
initial conversation that we've
had as staff has been to
continue to support LEEs with
direct grants so that they can
actually leverage that money for
attendance coaches of Harvard,
whatever locally responsive
programming that they want, but
on top of that, the revision to
the secondary factor would also
provide additional support
outside in in the SCG that would
also complement and supplement
what they would possibly get
below the line.
Perfect, thank you, thank you
very much.
Senator Soz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Where's the money for the
science of math, uh, STEM
certainly has math, but that
tends to be more at the
secondary or after they've got
skills of promoting it similar
to the literacy, where's the
math literacy, which was
actually a higher priority under
for Judge Singleton than the
literacy was.
Apparently I get the hard
questions, Mr. Chair, uh, so Mr.
Chair, Senator Solz, um, you
know, we've worked with the
department through the interim,
uh, to hear a little bit about
what they have planned, um, I
think this is a conversation
nationwide where people want to
identify the science of math.
What is the, what is sort of the
silver bullet for training
teachers, uh, for how to teach
kids math and so far, no one's
really found it. And so I think
there's, there's work at the
department happening to
determine.
What professional development
should look like for elementary
school teachers, for instance, I
know the department has done
some work in middle school
around algebra, and so we're
working with them to identify
what they think is the best path
forward for um supporting
teachers in math training while
also balancing, as you've heard
for the last 2 or 3 years, the
uh, the sort of heavy load that
we've already put on teachers in
um with letters training and
some of the other, you know,
social emotional learn
which we've talked a lot about,
has meant that schools have also
implemented a lot of new
curriculum around
social-emotional learning that
teachers are being asked to
implement. So I think we're
trying to be cognizant in
working with PED about what they
see as the best path forward
while also balancing the load
that we've already put on
teachers, um, while also
acknowledging the intense need
for improvement in math
outcomes.
Thank you. I think that doesn't
really indicate where we are,
where we're going or how we're
going to get there. It's like,
yeah, we know there's a need,
um, and certainly lots of it
ought to be carried by the
teacher preparation programs
that need to do a better job of
ensuring that teachers are
capable of doing math. Um, for
an elementary teacher teaching
basic math, they can't only be
capable of 5th grade bath. You
know, they've got a really
understand the math that's
underneath it and, and I
unfortunately in our
it's appropriate for people to
say I'm not good at math. I've
heard lots of lawyers say that's
why I went to law schools
because I'm not good at math,
and everybody chuckles where
nobody would ever say, you know,
I, I became a mathematician
because I can't read, you know,
that somehow it's acceptable to
be good, not good at math, where
it's unacceptable to be
illiterate, and I think that's
something that we need to change
and particularly we need to
start by changing that with our
teachers. Uh, and so we need to
make that a priority so the PED
people who are here.
And, and Greg, I know we've
talked about it and you carry
that message back, uh.
Mr. Chair, and, and Daniel and a
couple of 2 years ago or so,
Stan and I were working on
putting money in the budget
undesignated for districts.
Every district has different
needs.
And when we prescribe that these
are where the buckets are and
where we're going to support
things that doesn't meet the
needs of all of the districts,
some that may have a bigger need
in some of these areas and some
that have a lesser one and some
that are unidentified here. How
do we go about in the budget
getting some money that's
undesignated for the district to
make those decisions. And again,
we keep hearing there's lots of
um one time money or
non-recurring money probably the
more accurate term.
Is there a way of putting in the
budget non-recurring money and
the districts understand, don't
count on this for future years,
but use this to solve your
problems.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator Sols
yesterday we spoke about the
LESE's proposal for revising the
SCG and one of the
considerations that we're going
to propose that we did propose
to the committee was increasing
the secondary factor. So the
factor that all students
generate in the SCG in grades 7
through 12 and we estimate the
cost of increasing that factor
is $51.1 million. During
yesterday's presentation, we
talked about how.
The priority would be for
districts to use that money for
CTE or for secondary fine arts
programs or just broader
supports for students.
If you all were to increase the
SCG and provide that $51.1
million to secondary students,
districts and charter schools
could have considerable
flexibility in how they actually
use that money. They wouldn't
need to use it for for CTE or
fine arts programs that can use
it in whatever locally
responsive ways that they deem
fit and so for FY 26, our
revision to the secondary factor
is our approach and actually
providing that flexible funding
that you've been calling for for
the last several years.
Thank you and I appreciate that
some districts, the needs may be
at the elementary and middle
school levels. So it shouldn't
just be generated out of the
secondary where there's an
expectation that it's only used
at secondary. And so that's why,
you know, I guess it comes down
to I really trust our
superintendents and our
districts to know what their
needs are and want to make sure
they've got money to do those
things rather than trying to
keyhole their needs into where
the, the buckets are that we as
a legislature think they ought
to have.
Um, and giving them at least
some flexibility for all of
that, so I'll continue to kind
of look for and and advocate for
some of that. Um, and Mr. Chair,
kind of, the last one we talked
about and I'm pleased to see the
money for the universal meals,
where are we as far as funding
for the the infrastructure
capital needs to rebuild
kitchens in all of the schools
and things of that sort, and I
don't, that may be more in the
PSCOC budget.
But you know, is there the money
for those kind of one time
buildouts of the infrastructure
needed for universal meals. Mr.
Chairman, Senator So Connor
stood right up and he ran over
here. This is his program.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Senator Sol, so I'll try, I, I
looking forward is a bit harder
to answer, but at least looking
back when this as this program
has been implemented, there was
both federal and state level
funding to support kitchen
infrastructure and capacity
building for schools. Uh, from
what I've heard, when I've
talked with LEAs, a lot of them
have used that to buy more
warmers, to buy more ovens, to
buy more anything that would
help them do the scratch cooking
that the rule the rule and the
law call for, uh, I believe the
total amount.
For the the state grant was
which went through DFA for the
past year was about 20 $20
million.15 of those went out and
one initially, mostly to
districts and then another the
second, the remaining 5 went out
mostly to charters in the 2nd
round.
Uh, I, I will say that at least
anecdotally in some places, the
challenges they've had with that
is that while that funding is
available to them. They haven't
been able to use it because they
are maxed out at square footage
as they are and so that's when
it becomes more of a capital
outlay conversation of they
don't just need more ovens or a
bigger kitchen, they needed a
new facility. And so that
becomes a much larger
conversation than that grant
funding could provide.
Thank you because yeah, I think
it's important if there is that
funding, is that funding meeting
the need or our districts in
order to meet the requirements
of that law and taking money
away from classrooms to, to meet
the.
The infrastructure needs on the
other side, in which case we
need to put in a sufficient
funding to, to cover that
mandate that we've made in the
school meals. So, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Is Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Uh, thanks
for this. It's, it's, um, it's
always great to start with
something and then we start
shooting at it, so thank you.
Um, my question is on the
investing in educator ecosystem,
you really stress compensation,
SCG insurance.
I'm concerned that it says
educator fellows versus
education educator pipeline,
particularly residencies because
the residency's got uh,
put in with fellows and the
residncies, I, I don't know why
fellows get all the attention, I
would say educator, pipeline
with residencies, possibly
fellows.
Any feedback on that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Gere, I had been a big fan of
multi-year budgeting because it
allows us as staff to really not
have to worry about including
certain things because in FY 25,
you all appropriated $60 million
to educate her clinical
practice, and that included
teacher residencies, principal
residencies, and paid student
teaching. So those programs are
already funded and grow for 3
years. And so
There's no need to essentially
revisit those programs.
In an annual budget cycle.
OK, so Mr. Chair, you feel it's
already been revisited.
The programs, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Garrett, the
programs are already funded for
FY 25 for FY 26 and FY 27.
Educator fellows are not
included in Grow, and so they
have to be funded on an annual
basis. That's why the fellows
program is included in the list
and not the residency programs.
Does that make sense?
I think so.
But
yeah, can you?
Uh
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
just want to, I'll try to
clarify, so last year when you,
when you all pass grow $60
million was put in specifically
for those purposes. So we
didn't, we didn't want to
include that here to make you
think that you were funding it
again. You've already funded it
$200 million per year for the
next 3 years. Fellows, it was
not included there, so this
recommendation is just to pay
for the next fiscal year if you
choose to do that.
OK, I'll, I'll
Contemplate on that and come
back if need be, OK? It's just
that even that 60 million how
that gets used.
is concerning.
Like what have, how do we track
what actually happens.
To that money, you don't have to
answer, but that is a question I
have. And then, um, Danielle, I
really appreciated some of your
discussion on what things meant
special education initiatives
you mentioned, um,
What that included, um,
What about the stipends. You
didn't mention that. You said it
was used for the IEP templates
and making an accessible online
system.
Does that money includes
stipends. Mr. Chairman another
one of those we already did it.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, the stipends for
special education personnel are
also included in Gro, so they're
funded for those 3 fiscal years.
OK, thank you. Maybe at our next
meeting we can have the grow
list so that we're really clear.
Thank you.
Representative Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just had
a couple of questions. Um, you
said you had a pilot program,
uh, for, um, the students were
unhoused this $500 I'm gonna
call it a stipend. Where is that
being piloted?
Uh, Mr. Chairman
Representativerazas, the program
was piloted by New Mexico
Appleseed, and I believe it was
piloted in Las Vegas.
And Cuba, those two communities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
so
Good morning, please, doing king
and queen.
That.
Small school. I know all their
parents. OK, so, um, real quick
here, so it's piloted over there
and so you've you're allocating
you're requesting uh 100 million
where is that going to be across
every district? How, how are you
gonna, how are you planning on
spending that? Mr. Chairman
Rosas, uh, that money would
flow, I believe, to PED and they
would be responsible for seeking
requests for applications and
districts could have the option
to opt in, I believe.
Mr.
Chair Representative Trasas, um,
the, the reason we picked
$10,000 as a recommendation is
that would fund about 1500
students across the state, which
I believe is.
Half of all high school students
are currently experiencing
homelessness, so that's based on
a number that we know would
address about half of those
students, um.
And the other reason we, we
recommended 10,000.
I, um, it just, it just
coincidentally, the committee
has heard that, you know, um, as
a state, if we could graduate
about 1400 more high school
students per year, we would
actually meet the national
average for for high school
graduation and so just
coincidentally that there's this
1500 students that we might be
able to to help. We we heard
earlier that the graduation rate
for the students in the pilot
was about 93%.
So it's sort of a.
All these factors coincided to
land on this recommendation.
Mr. Chair, I, I really do
actually, I love the, the
statistics are great 93%, so in
with a respectful pushback, why
wouldn't we double it to 20 so
that we would cover all.
The students, Mr. Chair,
Representative, you get to
decide.
Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, I just, yeah,
that, that would be, I mean, I.
OK yes please report to the
security gate.
Jose Reyes, report to the
security gate.
Again, that's a respectful
request. I don't, I'm not, I
don't sit on this committee. I'm
here because it's in my local
town and happened to be here and
I wanted to learn some more
about what you guys are doing.
Learn about the budget and so
forth, but I think that's just,
I mean, when you hear numbers
like that, it's just, man,
that's.
That's incredible. So there's
the only one I'll I'll leave it
at that and so I think that the
committee can decide if they
want to increase the
representative, more seriously,
uh, part of the consideration
was the cost, but the other
consideration is that the pilot
was relatively small.
And so the 1500 number is a
pretty considerable,
considerable ramp up from what
they were doing now. We wanted
to make sure that the folks who
got the money, this would
probably be new to a lot of
districts. There's capacity
building that needs to happen
again. Uh, part of the reason
that we built it into that
multi-year funding, uh,
idea so that.
Districts have an opportunity to
do it right over the course of 3
years. So I didn't mean to be
flippant with the answer, um,
you know, we've we thought over
whether or not.
10 or 20, I mean, there are more
than that, uh, as far as
students across the state who
are unhoused and, you know, we,
you could potentially support
that with a lot more money. We
want it to be thoughtful in the
implementation as well.
Well, and I appreciate that, Mr.
Chair. I just, I just think that
the return on investment is so
huge and, uh, when we're having
all these, uh, you know, such a
surplus of cash right now, I
think, you know, $10,000 is a
drop in the bucket of where we
could spend it and and and
invest it in our children.
Anyway, moving on, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, I noticed that, uh,
on behavioral health, um, is
this new funding that we've
never done that before, we've
never done before on Whole
Child, on the whole child's
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Rozas, I believe in FY 24 you
all also funded behavioral help
for that fiscal year and FY 25
House Bill 2 did not include an
appropriation for behavioral
health. And so our proposal is
to simply restore that funding
that was appropriated in FY 24.
OK, um, and, and I just last
question, I because I don't want
to go on and on just F I 25 to
26 was the overall increase, uh,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Represent, the
overall increase in from year to
year from fiscal year to year
fiscal year. I'm just looking at
FY 25. I'm looking at your all
the increases that you have just
on this, on this yes, I'm I'm
sorry, I should have specified
Uh, I don't have that on hand,
but I can calculate it really
quickly right after the
presentation if you wanted to
have a quick,
uh, overall deal. Thank you.
And, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representativesas, just for some
clarification, uh, sometimes we
forget
That we're all steeped in these
budget conversations. Part of
the reason we don't have a total
here is that this is, this is
not include the entire public
school support request. What we
will have in November for our
for our committee and for the
legislature as a whole is a
breakdown of the recommendations
for recurring funding that flow
directly to school districts,
the categorical pieces that also
go to school districts, but are,
but are specific to particular
purposes and then those below
the line non-recurring
appropriation recommendations
and
And there will have definitely a
year to year comparison for each
of those different categories.
No problem, Mr. Chair,
I think just because I'm a
numbers guy, just if I would
have that calm just to see the
increases in a total would have
helped me. Thank you very much.
Other questions?
Rela, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
apologize. My apologies uh
represented Tara has brought
something up and I, and I,
something just popped into my
head and I was, was wondering if
I can have some clarification
is so going back to the unhoused
uh students.
So quick question is the reason
we're setting aside state money
for this because McKinney Vo
doesn't cover it or doesn't
allow this, Mr. Chair.
Do we know, Mr. Chairman
Representative Lara, there was a
presentation on the McKinney
Avento money at your hearing in
the Triscoll Heritage, uh, the
money that we get for for
McKinney Vento is pretty small
compared to the overall needs of
the state when it comes to
inadequately housed students. So
that's the primary reason that.
We're proposing that
appropriation. OK, thank you for
that because I worked with Mick
and Invento for many, many years
and, and I'm just wondering how,
how, how this is gonna work.
Another question that I have,
Mr. Chair and Daniel, so how do
we avoid the the ever looming,
um, anti- donation clause when
it comes to the Mr. Chairman,
Representative Lara, I was given
a really strong answer to that
same question that I gave to our
interim director, and he has a
really strong response to that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Lada, I don't remember any of
that conversation. Uh, but I
will say this, uh, so this came
up at our, at our hearing in in
at at Triscoll last month, when
the folks who did the pilot
actually presented those results
and talked a little bit more
about the implementation. There
was a question of anti-dation.
Since then we've done a little
bit of research and I, and I'll
I'll use the usual caveat, and
I'm also not an attorney, but
there is a clot exemptions to
anti-dation clause.
Uh,
one, if there's a, if you're, if
you're doing a public good and
there's an exception for
indigency. So if you're
supporting students, indigent
students, this is potentially
OK, again, that's a non-legal
opinion, but we feel pretty
comfortable with the
recommendation.
Thank you for that. That makes a
lot of sense to me and uh and I
think uh uh this is a great
opportunity and I I can't wait
to hear the next presentation
that's coming up. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I,
I've got a burning question. Uh,
I don't think Daniel can answer
this. It's really for the PED,
but.
How did we spend $600.
To create a new form for an IEP.
Just don't quite understand how
that.
How that happens, that's a lot
of money for a form. Yes,
everybody has to weigh in, but.
6 million for an IEP form?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart,
um, actually in conversations
with PED we may be seeing an
increase in that request from
what we've, what we've heard
from them is this is not just
the creation of a form, but the
rollout of a new sort of techno
technology platform that would
mean that these IEPs are
transferable between districts
and would communicate with
student information systems
across the state, so it's not
just a a standardized template,
for instance, that all districts
are using, but that they would
actually.
Communicate to improve the
ability, you know, one of the
concerns we always hear is that
when a student transfers from
one district to another, the IEP
doesn't always follow that suit
and it could take weeks or even
months, and this would uh enable
them to automatically transfer
that information, um, I don't
know if um, Assistant Secretary
Frost that wants to add to that,
but that's what we've heard from
them so far.
Mr. Chair and Senator Stewart
and members of the committee,
thank you, uh.
I don't believe that the agency
has spent $6 million on an IEP
form. We do have a C2 project
that we have submitted, which is
what um director Senna was
discussing that is actually a
$12 million ask because it is um
an online platform that would
roll across the state where the
IPs would follow a student
across districts and schools.
Um, there, there has been
funding that has been spent to
support development of a new IEP
template.
But it's not nearly $6 million.
All right, thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All right,
um.
So, thank you, Daniel, for
putting this together and I
really appreciate that you
divided into the 4 different
categories that we've been
looking into for for um our
education system, um.
I had a question that on the
multi-year budgeting, the second
paragraph in that um first full
sentence talking about utilizing
the perf as another way to fund,
um, I guess pilot programs over
3 years. How?
What is the thinking or the
conversation about how that
would be distinguished from the
growth. Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Mr. Chairman, um, currently grow
is the vehicle to
fund all the pilot programs that
are currently being piloted by
the state, we think.
More intentionality in using the
perf to specifically only fund
K-12 would be a good step in
actually getting more of these
programs to the point where
they're being evaluated by uh
LEC LFC and PED staff. That's
the majority of the thinking
behind it.
So they grow is a lot more
expensive than what the perf
would be used for, and this
could be.
Specifically.
Education related to K-1212.
Cool, thank you for that. Um,
then I had a question about um
middle school literacy, um, and
currently is there funding from
PED toward middle schools to
provide um literacy programming
for their students.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, if you look at
the 2nd row under academic
design, that's secondary
educator literacy piece is the
vehicle through which PED is
supporting both middle and high
school.
And, and so do we know what that
programming looks like, so like
how long it's been up and
running, um, what the outcomes
may or may not be in the
programming, Mr. Chairman,
Merrit's been working on this
appropriation and so she's gonna
come over and provide some
context on the actual
programming. All right.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, PED is currently
doing some work to support
secondary educators to support
um literacy across the content
areas. So this is my
understanding and PD can weigh
in, it's a two pronged approach.
It's helping educators teach
literacy across the content area
as well as ed um interventions
for students. PD also has plans
to have a letters like program,
um, it's not.
Call letters exactly, but it's
through Lexia as well. I'm the
names escaping me. I believe
it's Ames Pathways, but I'm not
sure, and it is to support
secondary educators for students
who did not receive educators
who had been letters trained up
to this point.
And it has this, I guess, in the
past year since this funding's
been available that this
programming has been available,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's correct.
I guess for
for Greg, um,
Has the PED talked about
tracking and how we're going to
be tracking the results of the
participants and who might be
like the recipients of this
funding, um.
I guess would be my first
question.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, your question is
about who would receive funding
to support secondary, I guess
who has been so if this funding
has been available, who has been
receiving funding for this
programming. I don't have that
information. I'll have to follow
up with you on that one. OK. And
then I guess the follow up to
that would be um how the
department plans on tracking the
results of the participants in
these initiatives in terms of
Evaluating the effectiveness of
the program. Yeah, let me, let
me get that for you as well. I
would appreciate that because as
we start talking about, you
know, moving this into
secondary, it would be nice that
we have this funding available,
we have programming there to see
what's working so that if we
decide to start scaling this up,
we could have a good idea of how
much money would go into it and
and what's being effective at
the secondary levels.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Yes, I'll
get that information for you.
Cool, thank you. Um.
0, 3rd time.
Let's determined we have
remedial reading programs in
middle school, at least. We
don't really have them in high
school, but there, there are
extremely good programs to help
middle school and high school
kids with how you decode
multi-syllabic words and why
they look like that and and it's
a phenomenal, they're phenomenal
programs, so I'm very excited
that they've moved up because
people are saying, OK, we're in
middle school, get the kids that
can't read. Now what do we do?
Well, this will.
Help them with that.
Yeah, and I'm certainly
interested in seeing um the
results of that so that if it is
working as well as your, you're
saying that they will, then,
then we have.
Some guidance into where we're
going because I agree in high
school, it's difficult. I think
I was talking to an interim
director yesterday, um, during
the presentation about how in
high school, you almost take it
as a given that our students are
at a certain level in their
reading when um that tends not
to be the case and we have
students that are all over the
map in terms of their reading
ability, but we almost take it
as a given that they're at a
certain level and we move
forward with content or
whatever.
Um.
Go, I don't have anybody else on
the list, um.
Certainly, I encourage folks
that if things come about is to
reach out to to uh our LESC
staff for me about budgetary
issues as we go into uh budget
making season. fun. Cool.
Thank you all. All right, um,
so.
We will take a lunch. Um, oh,
that clock's been telling me
it's like a quarter till for a
while. It makes sense now. Now I
get it. Um.
But
We will come back at one o'clock
um from lunch. Thanks, folks.
