Welcome everybody to um the Land
Grants Interim Committee. My
name is uh Linda Serrata. I'm
the chair. Why don't we go ahead
and get started with some
introductions. Uh, we'll start
with introductions from the
committee, uh, then from the
staff, and then from folks that
are joining us as well. So, uh,
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
Matthew Queen. I represent House
District 50, uh, House District
50 is the southern half of Santa
Fe County and a portion of
Sandoval County. Uh, I'm in my
11th year, uh, in the
legislature in my 11th year on
this committee. Uh, it's always
a pleasure to come to a place
like this. Uh, I, I apologize,
Madam Chair, I'm gonna have to
leave early today, uh, to get to
another meeting in Santa Fe, uh,
but it was still, uh, worth the
drive to see everyone and, and
just the drive itself. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm a
Senate, uh, Senator Aunt
Thornton, uh, Senate District
19, which is the East Mountains
of Albuquerque and includes
Berneil, Sandoval, Torrents, and
Santa Fe Counties.
Um,
I drove up here this morning,
early this morning, and uh it
was a wonderful drive, beautiful
drive. I actually, I'd been up
in that area before, but I never
made this drive before, so I'm
really happy to be here, looking
forward to learning. This is my
first year on this committee, so
I have a lot to learn. Thank you
very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
colleagues, uh, I'm Susan
Herrera. I'm the representative
for this district, uh, District
41. My district is, uh, composed
of Rio Rio Santa Fe, um,
Sandoval and um Taos Kenny's,
um, and of course
uh, it's always a pleasure to be
here, uh, with Steve and, and
all the members from the North
and a lot of uh
a lot of uh leaders in the
audience and uh I'm really
looking forward to this
committee hearing and um just
happy to be with everybody again
today. Thank you.
Um, we wanna Dia de la Dios
uh representante Miguel Garcia
the Arisco
uh Distrito catorce um.
yeah
yeah well uh Beti no anos
comolela.
so you know de los Originales.
que establish commit.
and smires
yo maso el lunio que que que de
zequecomamo este commit.
tengo mucha Raises and
terminosse uh esuerzos
organizativos sa terra maria.
irrecuadoverbinido at the Dao.
uh clinic reunion quetenana
quienne and tierra immuerte
dearcito ai la clinicca tenia
car.
Xyvianosa reunion.
late 70s early 80s cuatro cinco
anos.
Iconoso de loschadores de la
mer.
He uh seraz uno noretara cones.
Good morning. I'm Representative
Rod Montoya from uh, San Juan
County, um, my
family is from here though, so,
uh, my, my roots are, are here
in Rio Riba. Um, I as well, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, as I expressed
earlier, I want to be here for,
for this, and I will be back
tomorrow for the tour, but, uh,
I'm gonna have to leave a little
before
lunch to get to revenue
stabilization at the capital,
but glad I was here. Hope to
help you establish Quorum.
Thank you for that, Rev. Uh, can
we have the staff also introduce
themselves?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm Ian
Keller. I'm a staff attorney
with the Legislative counsel
Service and the lead staff for
the land grant Committee. Also
joining us from the council
Services, Mark Edwards, who's
also a staff attorney and Lisa
Rivera Morrison, also a staff
attorney with our office. Thank
you.
And can we go to the audience
for also introductions. We can
just go row by row.
Mm.
And my name is Melvin Apoaka and
I'm on the, uh, board for the
General Maria Land Grant Council
as a trustee.
we're on Webcast.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Leonard
Martinez. I am the president of
San Joaqui Nri Chamalangun.
Buenos lets Dios, uh, committee.
I'm Monica Rodriguez.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gerald Chacon. I'm a
secretary of Land and Water for
the San Joaquin Land Grant.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Len
Harran. I'm the chief executive
director at La Clinica del
Pueblo.
oleos, Madam Chair members of
the committee, my name is Arturo
Arletta, and I'm with the New
Mexico Land Grant Council.
Ahmed Sanchez from Savoya.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee welcome, uh, my name
is Henrietta Morales.
My name is uh Moises Morales. My
name chairman committee.
I'm the commissioner of District
3. Thanks for coming to here.
Good morning. My name is Jessica
Johnston. I'm the district aide
for Representative Susan
Herrera.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Committee members, I'm Patrick
Samoa, the treasurer for the
Tierra Maria Enre.
Bienvenidos todos busos. My name
is Steve Polaco, and I'm the
president of the Terra Maria La
Grant, the Mercede los Pula
Terra Maria.
Estacasa esta terras.
years
just like it is ours. Thank you.
Yes, good morning. Juan Maestas.
I'm from Chama and I'm a
planning on joining the
uh where am I? The land grant uh
committee here. See what I can
do and what I can pitch in for
them. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone, and as
mentioned, I'm Linda Serato. I'm
the state representative for the
South side of Santa Fe and HD
45, um, uh, I was on this
committee, uh, on during the
session, we have a land grant
and cultural affairs Committee
as well so I'm the chair there
as well. Um, I know that, uh,
Vice Chair Senator Jaramillo
sends his regards. He is
overtaken by work and he really
wishes he could have been here,
um, but, you know, I know that
we have, uh, you know, oral
balancing as many of you are. So
I wanna thank all of you for
taking the time to come out here
and Mr. Polaco,
um, you know, for your
graciousness in hosting us, the
Tierra Maria land grant for
offering so much, including
wonderful fresh fruit and
wonderful breakfasts as well.
Um, we just, we're really
honored to, uh, to have, to be
allowed to be here and to, to
learn more about what you all
are working on. Uh, we have some
wonderful presentations. We're
gonna go ahead and get started
over the need to hold off on.
So, uh, we can operate as a
special subcommittee for the
purpose of taking testimony. And
so we're going to go ahead and
begin with that, um, and then we
expect one more member to help
us make quorum, um, and she'll
be here very soon. I, I
anticipate. So, uh, Mr. Polaco,
if you can come up, we're gonna,
uh, hear from Tierra I'm Maria
Land Grant and just hear
updates, uh, and what's going on
with you all as well. Thank you.
Again, good morning, Stipolaco
from the Terrameia Land Grant.
Welcome to the famous Terra
Maria Lan Grant. This is where
it all began. This is where the
struggle started
with the raid at the courthouse,
uh
there were previous tries by
our, uh, in the 50s, but a lot
of those tries were, uh, uh, set
aside by the authorities at that
time because they were, they
knew what our struggle was
about, so, uh, the precinct, uh,
uh, we tried to get a precinct
going up here and that didn't
happen, but that brought on the
struggle with the courthouse
raid.
And so since then we have been
moving on that. Uh, we created
our land grant, uh, we
registered with the under
Chapter 49, and we're recognized
through the state. So thank you
very much for that. It's helped
us a lot. It's helped us gain a
lot of recognition not only in
the state but also in the feds.
A lot of you, we've know, we've
recognized and we've been
dealing with you and we wanna
thank you for everything you've
done for us, but there's some
new people here and we want to
let you know that, that, uh, our
struggle is a struggle that's
been going on for almost 365
years. It came to, to, uh, uh,
to its peak at the courthouse
raid, uh, where Reyes Tellina
came in and there was a, uh, uh,
injustice that was done and
there
was a battle that happened and
several people were injured. In
fact, 1 or 2 were.
were critically injured.
So moving on, uh, just a brief
history. I have a pamphlet here
that uh you all have in front of
you, and it's a history. It's an
overview of our land grant, uh,
which consists of 594,000 acres
and uh we, uh, our forefathers
were here, uh, beginning and
after the, uh, expedition of
Escalante and Dominguez, which
happened in the 1500s.
We, uh, they started settling
this place, our ancestors in, in
the late 1700s and uh petitioned
the king and queen of Spain for,
for the, the, the, the, the
right to, to settle this, this
uh this this part of the
country.
Uh, nothing was out here. There
were nomadic tribes. There was
the ute and the Apaches who were
here were eventually uh mingled
with our blood and so we have
Apache and Newt in our in our in
our blood.
Um, and we finally established
the area in 1832. Uh, we had a
patent and we still have that
patent, which was supposed to be
an an inviolably respected.
um, uh, in 1846, the United
States government upheld that
patent under the Treaty of
Waupalgo, um, uh, uh,
unfortunately, uh,
things didn't happen that way in
the US did not protect our
rights to access our common
lands. Uh, there was a
politician in Ladd speculator
named Thomas B. Catron
who came in and he was a
notorious person who was a
member of the Santa Fe Ring
uh, which, uh, back in those
days, it was like the old wild
west, uh, there was a lot of.
uh uh
shenanigans and chicanery that
was happening and uh how our
lands were, were taken from us.
The Ho history the history and
the issues of our of our
pioneering land grant leaders
were truly to involve the
establishing a nutrient and
economic well-being
in our community by establishing
common lands and traditional
uses. The purposes guaranteed to
sound economic base where the
land could yield economic
opportunity through grazing
arch agriculture, hay crops,
vegetable gardens, everything to
sustain, to be able to live here
as colonizers.
With the loss of our land base
which was terrible. We had
nowhere to go, so our economic
well-being and the beginning of
the of the deterioration of the
fundamental use of our
communities.
Even so, our community still
exist.
Uh, uh, some of our people are
coming back
Our youth are coming back, and
by us, uh, giving a leadership
to, to, uh, be able to have
small jobs and, and our, our
goal is to try to bring
education back to them, uh, try
to get uh work with the Northern
community uh College out of uh
uh Espanola to, uh, to come up
and put in some kind of an
office here for students won't
be able to have to travel all
the way down to Espanola, and
they'll have
like a sub place here.
um
today we're involved in
re-establishing the common use
of all of our common lands in
traditional uses, but, uh, most
of our common lands were taken
up by these private entities,
LLCs and speculators and uh
they, they put up trespassing
signs, so we're like strangers
in our own land. We can't go out
there. I keep telling, uh, my
members and people in the
community, they only have a
quick claim deed. It doesn't
guarantee that they own it.
So if you go out there and they
stop you, you let them know who
you are. Let them know that, uh,
you've been here, we have a
patent, and, uh, they have a
quick claim deed. We've been
claiming this for years,
hundreds of years.
So, um, they're slowly starting
to go back up into the
mountains, and I try to tell
them, you know, when you go,
make sure that it's, you know,
you recognize it like is it's
your own home. Don't litter.
Don't destroy, just use it like
it's your own home and uh it is,
it is your own home.
So
they're slowly starting to do
that. Fishing was trying to,
they were trying to limit us to
fishing and try to privatize the
rivers, uh, we fought that, uh,
thankful for our attorney
General. He with the lawsuits.
Uh, we prevailed. Our our rivers
and, and waterways are are open
for the public, not only just
us, but all the public.
Uh, and that's a big deal
um
uh
we have current projects that
are going on now and
collaboration with San Joaquin,
uh, Riochama Land Grant, Mercer,
the Juan Bautista, Valdeslan
Grant Mercer.
and the purchase of the
renovation of the Preda Lume
Visitors Center, which we call
the Mercedes Unidas because
there's 3 of us, so we're united
in trying to get that visitor
center going up.
The issue that we're going
through now is uh, uh, we had
renovations on uh on the lec
electrical paneling and what
have you because all the copper
was stolen.
and it took us about 3 years and
we started the project back when
COVID started. So, uh, supplies
was, uh, back, was, was, was,
was hard to get because of
COVID. So it took us about 3
years to finally get that done.
The second step was to take work
on the water, and there was a
well there that actually there's
two wells, but one we were
concentrating on and we, uh, we
heard down the grapevine that
there was a, a pump that was
stuck in the about 250
feet below in the well. It's a
450 ft well.
Uh, we had a, a well drilling
outfit that came out there, and
they looked at it and uh sent
cameras down there and what had
happened is the well had
collapsed at 257 ft.
So, um, it collapsed, so we
tested the water and the water
was full of calcium. It wasn't
very good and the and the, the
lining of, of the casing itself
was metal, and it had a lot of
corrosion.
So they, uh, told us that it was
advised us that uh
it'd be best to just drill
another well.
So we're we're gonna be meeting
with the other land grants to
discuss more of that.
And, uh, once we get the well
going, then we'll work on the
buildings cause there's some
deterioration on the buildings.
And once we get going there,
then we get on the move and we
get going on and have a visitor
center and something like
bodies's there, something uh
with an RV park, something that
will accommodate all the
tourists and hikers to come down
through the continental trail
because it's right in the middle
of the continental trail. So
there's a lot of hope there.
The second thing that we did was
uh the acquisition of 216 acres
of common land
known as uh La Colonia de Jose
Maria Martinez and previously
known as the Terra Muuerte
property, where there was a big
showdown on uh uh a company from
uh Arizona that came out and uh
sued one of our member, uh, one
of our members of the TA grant,
and he prevailed, and we
prevailed uh by, by, uh, uh,
gaining that 216 acres
Uh, at that time, uh
uh, the older people had a
board. It was called El El
Consejo, and it was uh January
night. It was a real cold night
and, uh, several people from
Colorado came down. It was
Alfrente de Lucha.
and they told the old people
that uh they are no longer the
board, that they were the new
board. There were 3 of them, so
they created, they
the old people were defenseless.
They were old and these people
were young, so they were
threatened, so they left.
and these people took over
Fronte Lucha took over. When the
Terra Maria Langrant became the
recognized uh we went up to
visit uh the myself uh and
Moises and and uh uh uh uh
uh Melvin and several of our
board members Bill Armino and
what have you. There was a group
of us that went up and to try to
negotiate with them to see if we
can use it in common.
and they didn't want to have
anything to do with it. They
didn't even want to recognize
this as the land grant.
So we went to, uh, to the New
Mexico Land Grant Council talked
to Arturo. He referred us to,
uh, uh, the New Mexico, uh, the
UNM Law School, and we started
working with the UNM Law School,
and they uh created some kind of
a, uh, they created a, a, a, a
argument list and we took that
to the Attorney General at that
time. It was Hector Balderas.
Hector Balderas looked at it and
saw potential, so he
took over the case. So they
represented us in that case, and
we hired through, through them
we hired a Jesus uh um
Lopez, who is a well-known
attorney at that time, and, uh,
so we prevailed in that, in that
case on a settlement, uh, so we
now own that 216 acres, and
ongoing negotiations, uh, up
until now, from 2017 to now, the
present, the New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish
commissioned for the acquisition
of common lands of the, uh, uh,
Laguna del Champo, uh,
previously known as
Burns Lake. Uh, there was, um,
uh
22, uh
405 acres with storage of
diversion rights during, during
the 2019 legislative session
that was held, uh, Senate Joint
Memorial Number 2 authorized the
state game and fish to transfer
the laguna that Camel properties
to the Terra Maria land grant.
And we've been in negotiations
with them since then. It's been
very tedious and, and, and
really expensive for us at that
time in the beginning stages,
uh, we'd have to travel to Santa
Fe wherever they would have
their meetings. Sometimes they
would have them in Clayton, New
Mexico. They would have them in
Las Cruces. They would have them
everywhere else, and it was
really hard for us to get down
there.
So we finally convinced them to
uh have zooms with us and so
those Zoom meetings we were able
to establish a lot of things and
and, and we're down to the point
where they, well, they issued
two deeds. The first deed was
not part of the negotiations
that we had. So we, I, they
insisted that I sign that deed
and I didn't want to sign it
because it, it didn't, it
didn't, uh, it didn't.
it didn't show what we were
asking for. So,
it went on for another year and
so then they wanted to write
another deed which they did, but
then once they wrote that deed,
they showed that they couldn't
transfer the easement to, to the
parking lot because there was
federal monies that were used to
purchase that, that easement,
and they had to give us some
kind of a, a temporary agreement
on an easement. We're waiting on
that temporary agreement
agreement, uh, for our lawyers
to, to look at so that
uh, that it, it'll satisfy our
needs.
So, uh, we're waiting on that. I
do have the deed in my office,
and I'm ready to sign it. Uh, I
talked to David Benavides, who
is, who is, uh, working with us,
and he said, uh, what we need to
do is we need to match up the
description of the property and
the new deed and make sure they
match because they, they, they,
they change it every now and
then. So we want to make sure
and it's, it's been going on
for, gosh, since 2017.
And this is, is, is, is very,
uh, disgusting to hear that, uh,
a state agency would do this.
They told us that once we get
it, they're going to clean it
up. Uh, the toilets, they are
pretty bad. There's a lot of
clean up and uh that's gonna be
part of our tour tomorrow. I
want to show it to you to show
what's, what's all about. We've
got another tour of our colonia,
uh, which is used to be the
Terra Muerte property. We've
done a lot of projects. We're
going to have a thinning project
through soil conservation to
come up to uh to prevent fire,
uh, retardation.
uh so that fires won't spread
and we qualified because it's so
close to the village of TA.
Uh, we have a, a, a medical
clinic that was donated to us by
the county through
intergovernmental exchange, as
well as this building.
This building is a lot of
potential for it. We got a, a,
a, a meeting room, uh, up,
upstairs, which is twice the
size, and we were hoping to get
that done, but we in dire need
of an elevator to get that. So
we're asking for funds for that,
uh, it's, uh, we have an agri uh
architect who came in and is
gonna have plans for us and give
us a, uh, an idea of what it's
gonna cost us. Uh, we have a
grant writer that's gonna work
on
that and see if we can get that,
but we do need funds to not only
for the elevator, but uh our
floors, our buil, everything
that we have to do, we want to
take down the, the paneling and
bring it back to its natural
state, expose the, the roof, the
or the ceiling to to expose the
the Vigas, uh, the hardwood
flooring. We want to make
hardwood flooring, take this
carpet out. There's a lot of
things, uh, we need new heaters,
uh, for the winter time. These
are old heaters and
they're very costly. They're not
as economic as, as the modern
day heaters. Uh, we're gonna
look at the solar, uh, solar
program to try to get solar here
to help us out with the lexical,
uh, our water system is good.
We, we're under the water system
with the the Tierra Maria Water
domestic uh uh water
association.
uh
but our propane is very high. We
know that the that the, the
state or I don't know who
brought in a gas line to the
schools, uh, but it, they took a
detour and went, uh, at the
blinking light, they went to the
schools and we're hoping they're
gonna come here and we, we need
to contact our our our uh county
manager and our, our
representative on the county
commission to find out and push
them to see if they can get it
in here to help us out with the
with the
with the gas instead of propane
because propane is very
expensive.
So in that, um,
uh if there's anything you guys
want to say.
No.
Well
I have a couple of things, uh
Madam Chair and committee
members and ladies and
gentlemen, would you pull your
chair and you can come. Yeah.
Let me do this
I'll hop along like a little
rabbit.
At, at any rate, Madam Chair and
committee members and
members of the public, uh
every time I come before this
committee and we've been before
you several times over the last
few years. It's a historical
event for me, and I think that
uh for everybody else that's
involved with, with this
committee
feels much the same way. Uh, we
have been before you and in
times when there was a dire need
and that hasn't changed very
much.
We're still in dire need of your
help and your support, and we
appreciate the help that you've
given us in the past.
Um, the, uh, the issues that
belonged and are before us right
now are severe because we still
don't have a solid foothold
within our own properties, and
that's the Tierra Maria.
Uh, we have been in this
struggle since the uh
Mexican-American War in 1848 and
the struggle continues, and we
have made some progress.
but it's been very slow,
unfortunately, but with your
help, your continued help,
especially economic-wise, uh, I
think that uh strides to improve
ARPs within the land grant are
going to
It's like Steve said that when
uh the, the fraud that was
committed against us by those
that came here from other places
of the, of this nation. When it
happened, they uh broke down as,
they broke down our economic
well-being. The, in essence cut
off our economic legs.
and uh we've been suffering from
that severe takeover since then.
It's no different that, that's
what happened to other people in
this country, but this was
rather severe and uh we're
again, uh thanking you for being
here today and, and I thank the
audience for being here with us
and, and especially you, the
committee members, uh, for the
help that you've given us in the
past and we hope to continue
with you in the future. Thank
you.
Thank you all for uh.
It's the wrong button. Thank you
all for your presentation. Uh,
Mr. Polaco, can you, uh, tell us
again what the new name for the
tierrouerta
uh, uh, the property? The
property, uh, what's the new
name for it? The new name is,
um, La Colonia.
de Jose Maria Martinez. Ah, let
me see. So that's at the
beginning of the second
paragraph on the on the back
page right, perfect. Thank you.
Um, some of our stuff we're
asking. I will open it up to
questions from the committee.
Representative Lloyd.
Thank you.
Thank you. And actually, I'm
sorry, can you also introduce
yourself? That's what I was
going. That's what I was going
to say that, uh, thank you and
good morning, Madam Chair.
Apologize, I'm late. I blame the
map it told me 3 hours it was
longer than that to get here.
It's always longer to get to
everywhere in New Mexico than
you think, or sooner, somehow
you get in this weird time warp
and you're there sooner, you're
there later. But I'm glad to be
here. Thank you. It's always
good to see familiar faces.
Thank you for your presentation
because I always appreciate
learning about the land grants.
It's, it's amazing history and
it, it's, it's, I'd love to hear
about your needs and what you
guys need
for your, your, your to make
progress. It's very
disheartening to hear about this
lake that has been in limbo for
so many years, but that's
government right there for you.
Sorry, I'm on this side and I
understand it too, but I'm happy
to be here. I don't really have
any questions right now, but I
look forward to the tour
tomorrow. Thank you. Oh, I'm
Representative Lord from
East Mountains, District 22.
Thank you, Representative Ford.
Anything you can help us out
with, uh, will be appreciated
and we'll put it to good use.
Thank you.
Senator, uh, Thornton
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Just
a quick question on this um
this 22 acres that you've been
struggling just to get the title
to and completed, uh, help me
understand why this is taking so
long from the State Department.
are there issues that they're
not agreeing with on you, with
you all or particular areas you
mentioned the easement before,
but, uh, so what is, what do you
think is the delay? Why hasn't
this been turned over? It seems
to me it would be a fairly
you agree to it, it's, it's,
everyone seems to be in
agreement, so I'm trying to
understand why the delay.
Well, it all began at the
beginning when a landowner
adjacent to the lake complained
that uh there was a lot of
partying going on, and he wanted
to, uh, talk to the director at
that time, director Sloane, who
was, uh, his compadre, compadre
meaning that he baptized his
daughter, and so there's a very
close relationship there.
and so, um
there was, uh, they
I was approached by this person
and told me that if you guys get
this lake, we're gonna oppose
it. We're gonna fight it as much
as we can.
So that's what started it. And
ever since then, we've tried to
meet with uh with uh the Asea
that fills that, which is the
ditch that fills that pond or
lake, and this person was, is
the president or is a member of
that ditch. And so we wanted to
negotiate with them that, hey,
you know, we can be a, a, a part
of your dish and what have you
and we'll, we'll abide by your
rules and what have you, but
they
didn't go for that. Uh, he told
me flat out we don't want you as
a member.
So
then it went on down and uh the
first complaint was they said
that the the lake needed to be
breached because there was a
danger to the downs downstream
people.
So we had a tour of that, uh,
with.
some of the representatives, and
we looked if it was to be
breached. It's in a valley and
there's one shed, it's a shed.
And then off to the side there's
a, there's a mobile home that
somebody lives in, but it's like
on a hill.
So everything, there was no way
that it would breach and it
would, it would, it would cause
damage and secondly, the sake
that that uh lake was classified
as being filled by the Chama
River.
It's not Chama River doesn't has
anything to do with it. It comes
off of the asseass off of the
Brazos River, and are mm the
most monitor the flow of the of
the water in our ditches or a
seas. So there's no way that it
could breach. So then they threw
in another thing, saying that,
um,
they needed, uh, to withhold the
water rights. It came with 10
CFS cubic feet of water.
uh, that took a long time to
negotiate with them. They didn't
want to give us, but maybe 2 CFS
out of the 10, and so we said,
why do you want to do that? And
they said, well, we want to
preserve it for economic
development.
or purposes, and we said, well,
you know
OK, well, let's try to
negotiate. So we started
negotiating. This took us like
about 2 or 3 years negotiating
just about the water rights.
We told the board decided well
we'll negotiate with 7 CFS.
and see what they say. So we
went back and we could hold them
we would take 7. They said, No,
we'll give you
3.
We said no, we can't do that. If
anything, the most we can, the
less we can do is 5, half and
half. That took at least another
year or two.
Uh, so they finally agreed on 5
CFS.
So
we did that and then
they had to have a survey and
recognize a survey with the road
on there. That's where they came
in with the description of, of
the property, the metes and
bounds and what have you, uh,
when the rep when the
legislation gave us under the
resolution, the description was
there.
They changed it. They changed
it.
So we said no, we can't do that.
And then a Commissioner Hickey,
who was the president of, of,
of, of the commission at that
time went and spoke to that
person cause I guess she knew
him and they decided that I
don't know what they decided,
but it just got worse and worse
and worse until now, uh, they
sent the second deed to me and
it looks good, but we need to
check up and see if they
made any more changes. And then
with the, with the easement for
the parking lot.
um, they said that that they
couldn't trans make the transfer
complete so they would have to
have a separate agreement on the
easement because that easement
was purchased with federal
monies.
So that's where we're at.
Yeah, and, and we're hoping
they're not gonna
change anything again.
Uh,
we were thinking on going uh
taking action.
but that's, uh, a thought.
and people are encouraging us to
take action.
So we're gonna see what they do.
We're gonna see what this deed,
if it compares to the original
res what the resolution says,
and if, if it's, if it's, if
it's legit, we'll sign it and
record it, and it's ours. We're
looking at buying some property.
We've got capital outlay money
that we've been accumulating on
acquisition of property and its
right adjacent to the lake.
Um
we wanna purchase that
and that way if there's any
problems about the easement, we
will create our own easement.
Uh, so there's a lot of
opportunities and things that
that uh.
we can do if, as long as we get
our lake
and um
at that time they told us that
they would clean it up.
Uh, there are some outhouses
there that are in dire need of
repair the
sometimes disgusting to get
near. The weeds are overgrown.
Trash is thrown all over the
place. The state's not
monitoring the commission take
game and fish aren't taking care
of the place.
So we've had locals from, from
the, from the community pick up
trash and try to deal with, with
the, with the weeds and what
have you.
Uh, as far as handicap, we want
to restore the lake to where we
can have had have handicap
access with ramps. We had a, a
gravel aggregate company that
said that they would donate that
back in the early days, so.
we need to talk to them again
and see if that still holds. If
it does, we'll do that and we'll
put in shade because there's no
shade out there. We want access
for wheelchairs to come out to
go on to the lake and fish.
on a platform so they can fish.
Right now, the fishing is is
regulated that
uh, any, anybody under 14.
can fish, uh, and anybody over
65 can fish in the in between
you can't fish.
Madam chair, is that a game and
fish rule? Game and fish rule.
OK. So, we need to look at all
those rules. We're going to need
management. We have people who
are ready to, to move on it. I
mean, after this many years, you
know, they're getting anxious.
Some of them have passed away
uh, but new ones are coming in,
and, uh, we, that's what we
want. We want new, younger
people to come in and we've been
seeing that they, they've been
coming in. So that helps us a
lot.
Uh, we're gonna be need funding
for that.
Um,
luckily upon the colonial, we're
having this sinning pro pro uh
uh project that's gonna happen
and that's gonna be no cost.
It's through the soil
conservation it's for fire
retention.
So, uh
that's gonna help us out a lot.
and our clinic, well, we're, it
used to be the old clinic before
the clinica came in.
So it needs work. It has an
apartment on the side, and that
would have been ideal for the
ideal now if, if we would have
been able to have the resources
to fix that up. It's really in
good shape, but we need to do
electrical hookups, sewer,
water, and a little bit of
cleaning up. It's tongue and
groove, really nice.
We could have accommodated some
of you to stay overnight.
you know, it's really nice place
in the downtown Los Sojos right
in the center next to the
church, beautiful church.
So that's
that's what happened with the,
with the Leguna del Campo.
Thank you, Senator Thornton. Uh,
thank you for that. Uh.
Mr. Pillaco, I appreciate the
the history there. Um, that's
all I have right now, Madam
Chair, thank you. Thank you,
Senator Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, Mr.
Pillaco, sounds like, uh, maybe
we should consider reorganizing
game and fish.
Sorry,
that was a. Yeah, I think that,
that, I think they tried to do
that. Oh, OK. I think that's,
uh, that's a little bit of an
inside joke there. I know.
We, we didn't just try. We did
it good. I'm glad. That's,
that's great.
Um, Mr. Pillaco, um
as we were talking earlier,
it's, it's good for me to come
back to
to
kind of my roots, uh, as we were
talking earlier and, and I
would just for the, for the
committee, I've had the, I've
had this conversation a little
bit with, uh, Representative, uh
Garcia
uh, about, uh, mm, my family and
uh and uh.
and connection to Reyesijerina.
and that is my, my great uncle
Azebdeo Valdez, and when I
mentioned his name, he said,
that sounds familiar, and that's
if you've read Greya's
Autobiobiography.
Uh, you'll, you'll, you'll see
that it was my great uncle who
was a
Assembly of God pastor like
Reyes and uh Reyes at the time
was a pastor, I think in Texas.
but had
if you follow his, his, his
life, he ended up in a commune
in Arizona
and then uh when uh Reyez was at
a convention in Salt Lake City,
where he met my
my great uncle Zivvideo.
Zeb
brought him to New Mexico
and uh
it, you know, you start, you
hear different stories exactly,
you know, uh, you know, with
exception of uh
Mr. Morales back there. There's
not many people that maybe
eyewitnesses.
to everything that took place,
but as I understand it, uh,
the, I've been to the courthouse
a couple of times just to, to
see what where
all the stories where everything
took place.
um
but uh
it
if, if they would have had these
things back then, they probably
would have been no riot at the
courthouse because there were no
one was in jail at that time.
They had all been released.
um, but that, that fight went
forward and it sounds like
you're still fighting to some
degree. So when I hear you say
you want to take action, don't,
don't take those actions. No,
no, we'll be. OK. So, uh,
anyhow, it's, it's nice for me
to be able to come back home
here and, and nice to, to, to
get kind of reacquainted with
the, the, the motherland, so
thank you, Madam Chair. You
know, excuse me, Madam Chair,
um, you know, as far as taking
action, you know, in the olden
days, uh
we would go to court and what
have you and the courts were
against us, so we were forced.
to do the terra muerte.
die or
you know, live, give us our
land, or we're gonna die here.
My family was involved with the
Mundys.
We went all the way.
uh, to court and then appealant
court backed up on us. They,
they didn't agree.
So we took it to federal court
and they wanted to evict evict
us from that court.
We said no, we were going to die
there. Today, fortunately, we
don't have to do that anymore.
I, I hope, I hope.
But if we have to do it again,
we'll do it again.
We'll die at our land
So
that's that. Thank you. Thank
you. uh, Representative, uh,
Garcia,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh,
uh, Hermano Steve, uh, for your
presentation and
um.
um, and congratulations on all
the hard work that you guys are.
have been doing
Um
kind of continuation of the
the spirit of the struggle of
your ancestors.
you know, um
and I wanna touch on three kind
of issues.
that you're welcome to elaborate
on or, or just kind of.
um
um, kind of address.
uh briefly
but one is the situation with
Thomas Catron.
uh
because that wasn't just any
land.
theft.
terms of Thomas Catron
Uh, secondly
Terra Maria went to 3 lawsuits
in the span of 30 years.
And lastly, um,
the uh wildlife refugees.
The sergeant Humphreys and the
Rio Chama.
Approximately 75,000 acres total
under the hands of game and
fish.
on common lands
that Thomas Captain stole
So Thomas Catra Maner
was not just any old lawyer.
He was at one point a US senator
during the territorial days.
and he was Attorney General,
first day in New Mexico.
And it was right here in Terra
Maria.
that he laid out his plan.
of seizing
huge amounts of common lands.
and he did it with one ihuela.
here in the Terra Maria
and Nihura is a title
is a, is a dedicated title
from the original inhabitants of
the Grant, and a lot of your
members still have that ihuela.
It's a documentation
Thomas Catrin got a hold of that
rihuela from that prop from
that.
air
Gave him a bunch of money. Maybe
not so, maybe gave him sense.
back then, you know, but
he used that ihuela in court.
to justify him taking the
500,000 acres.
And he did it
This is where it started
Thomas Caron then jumped over to
the motor gran.
applied the same strategy, the
same tactics that he did in
Tierra Maria.
Then he jumped over to the
semoyeta Grant by Laguna Pueblo
did the same thing
Then he jumped over to San
Antonio de las Huertas, the
Placitas Grant.
Is the Bernalillo did the same
thing
total over 50 land grants
totaling 5 million acres.
under the the ownership of this.
grand theft artist
He was one of the biggest
landowners in the late 1800s in
the world.
5 million, he had more land than
kings in Europe.
That's who Thomas Catrin is.
A one theft artist.
former attorney General, former
US Senator Madam Chair.
And uh
the uh
3 lawsuits
and that guy, Madam Chair,
that's giving you hell over in
Laguna El Campo is related to
that property owner that sold
to, to Catherine.
To show you that, you know, this
uh uh uh
Coosa is a um uh um.
oh I forget that scene in
Spanish about, uh,
how
dead meat kind of goes around in
circles and never sees the, the
second thing that I'm chair is
these three lawsuits.
This is most important for land
grant.
individuals and
that and, and elected officials.
of all entities, not just the
legislature to understand.
But there are 3 lawsuits that
were filed by La Coerativa.
de Abiquiu
which was the organizational arm
of the Alterra Maria Langran.
that basically stemmed out of
AIQ.
But they were here.
They were residents, heirs of
the land grant.
and there are 3 lawsuits that
were filed in a 30-year period
that ended in the 60s.
Each one of those lawsuits,
Madam Chair, rendered a
different decision.
a different decision
one decision countered the other
decision.
and that's how it went with
those three lawsuits, but those
three lawsuits did, and I think
one of your heroes was Abeta.
What's his first name?
But, yeah, Bernard Beta, kind of
the
the
the, the hometown self-made
attorney that go around with a
little briefcase, you know, but
he was smart as hell. And that's
what our land grants needed back
then.
People that were smart SL
and a man in chair during those
30 years.
the land grant heirs still
continued using the common lands
Why? Because the owners would
come in.
try to set up shop
and you guys would run them out
of town.
even by arms
by the use of arms
There's one of the owners that
came in and set up a lumber
mill.
brought in these white
lumberjacks from Colorado, and
what did you guys do? You shot
it out with them.
and they head back to Colorado,
and that owner headed back out
to Texas.
Left that property vacant, but
you guys still continue using
that?
Get to the 60s. You know you
lost it in the 1880s.
you know, and you're still using
some of that property to this
day.
You know, that's a testimonial
to the resistance.
you know, that you guys have put
up all these years.
you know, and, uh, and you had
coal mines. You guys had lumber
mills?
You know, and you continue using
them into the 60s.
You could not buy a property in
the Terra Maria land grant.
with title insurance
prior to 1965.
So what does that mean to
outsiders, rich developers?
They couldn't come in here and
just take hold and take control.
because they couldn't get title
insurance because all these
properties are under a quick
claim deed.
And you've got the original de
you know, still in your heart
and in your mind. And lastly,
Madam chair, the three
game refugees
We tried, we ran some
legislation
about 6 years ago
and naturally we got help from
from the um, the fishermen and
the hunters.
But what we were asking was that
those 75,000 acres of those
three refugees
the Humphreys, the sergeant, and
the Rio Chama.
Um
be transferred back to the land
grant.
because
they, it lend the, the, the game
and fish does not have clear
title to that.
They bought it from people that
had quite quick claim deeds.
and there's a discrepancy there
and I think that those, that's
the last big chunk of property
that is real vulnerable, I feel.
Why?
Because the, the, the three
lawsuits that told
what, 300,000 acres almost.
those three lawsuits
and you, and, and you, you
identify him as El Bosso.
or the other two?
Yeah
And so, Madam Chair,
so I think it's our duty and
obligation to work with this
land grant.
even though we tried it, but I
think we've got to try other
strategies.
possibly a similar suit, Madam
chair, that happened in the San
Luis Valley.
where the Langrann heirs of the
of the Sanga de Cristo land
grant filed a lawsuit against
Taylor.
the landowner of the common
lands.
I think 80
90,000 acres.
and that took about 25 years in
the making.
Madam Chair, the heirs won.
because they were contesting
that the Commons
can never be given or
transferred or sold to anybody
outside of the airship, and
because these lands were to be
held in, in, in common
for perpetuity
in perpetuity forever.
in southern Colorado proved
that.
and I think we can maybe attach
ourselves to that, but I think
you need resources, not only
from
the land grant Council from
you know, attorneys that were
kind of pulling out of the law
school, with the community
governance.
uh attorneys.
with the AG
uh, but also in terms of
resources coming from the
legislature as to how we kind of
make that happen in regards to
these three
uh
wildlife
uh um game refugees.
and uh
and Madam Chair, uh, so that's
upon us
to kind of continue
making it right
you know, for this community,
these communities in this land
grant.
you know, is that this committee
and a lot of legislators have
not abandoned
that cause
of winning back these land
grants, these common lands that
were sold
you know, unjustly
uh taken from
from you. Thomas Cara, Madam
Chair.
was a key attorney in that
lawsuit.
on the Tirra Maria
And who was the attorney for the
land grant?
One of his associates
who was Spanish speaking, and
this or that, so that, so damn
if you do, damned if you don't.
If, if Catherine would have won
that and he did. He got all the
comments, and he were last, they
still would have gone part of
the Commons as payment to the
attorney and defendant the land
grant. So you could see the
hypocrisy of the judicial system
in regards to what happened
with the loss of the lands that
Thomas Catra was involved in.
It was the government itself
that was corrupt
and that led to the, to the,
the, the stealing of these
lands. So a manager, you're
welcome to
address any of those points, um,
Steve, but we, we've had this
conversation
and you know that, uh, well,
I've had it with all your board
members.
and, uh, but we still want to
continue
kind of uh pushing the needle
on.
getting back those properties
that the game of fish currently
has under their possession.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, uh, Representative
Garcia. Madam Chair, uh, I would
like to add that the
the heirs who received ihula
were 130 heirs. We have record
of that.
and that one family
was only sued for the Terra
Maria Langren. What happened to
the other 129
uh heirs due process was not
served.
so that
that's a big discrepancy in
itself right there, I believe.
But yes, we want to pursue those
other common lands on uh game
game and fish possessions that
they that they have.
So we'll be looking at that
again. We had a a lot of
information on that.
so we will be pursuing that.
Fortunately right now we've been
working with our uh commissioner
county commissioner, and
commissioners, uh, for Riouba,
and they've been, uh, grateful
to hand over properties to us,
uh, as intergovernmental
exchange, which is great because
we don't have to pay for it or
go to lawsuits.
So, um,
thank you again, Representative
Garcia. We've always helped us
and advised us and brought light
to our struggle and uh we
appreciate it.
Thank you.
Representative Hedera
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Steve, and, um, uh,
I, I do have to recognize, uh,
Representative Garcia. He's
really is a leader in the in the
house, all things slang grant
and uh we looked to him for his
leadership and his knowledge,
and it is deeply appreciated.
Um, I would also just like to
add, I know I know you're doing
the thinning project, but I
wanted you to know that the uh
soil Rio Reba soil and Water
Conservation District also has
money to go in and remove um um
Russian olive trees along
rivers. So if you don't know
about that, they send in a crew
and they have one of those.
huge machines that take them out
by the roots and then they grind
them all up and they, you know,
grind up all that stuff, and if,
if you want, if you want the uh
uh, whatever you call it, mulch,
thank you. If you want the
mulch, you can keep it, but
they'll also haul that away. So
that they're also doing that
right now. So I just want to
tell land grant members, I know
a lot of you have property along
the rivers, and, and that
species is just really hard to
get rid of, so if you can, um,
if you can take advantage of
that now too. They got a big uh
USDA grant to do that. So I want
to make sure all your members
know about that too, and that's
all I have, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Exc
use me, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Herrera, is that
only hold for uh Russian olive,
uh, we know that cottonwood and
willow in our portion of, of uh
our country here, uh, they
absorb a lot of water. Uh, they
absorb their, their, uh
they're really uh uh taking over
ourseass. If there was a program
where we could get rid of the
willows, especially.
uh, they're creating a habitat
for beavers and the beavers are
building dams and eroding. They
make their their dens along the,
the, the, the banks of the, of
the Aseass and uh we had a a
trapper come up and it was
working really well, but game
and fish told us that they were
protective species and we
couldn't trap them anymore, so
it's costing the assecas up to
100 to $125 to hire a backhoe to
take the
beaver dam out, but overnight
they come in and and build their
dam again. So it's costing me
aseas a lot of money to, to have
that control. So if we can get
rid of those, those willows
along the ditches and that way
the the the beaver can go back
to the high country or back to
the rivers instead of the
asseass, that would be very
helpful if there's a kind of a
program to deal with that, I
would like to hear from that.
I am, Madam Chair, I think it's
just right now for Russian
olives, but you know, Marco
Valdez could tell you that, just
give, give him a call and I'll,
I'll, I'll ask him now while
we're on, uh, I'll, I'll ask him
now if it extends and yeah, you
don't have to tell me about
beavers. I once planted 30
aspens, and they took them out
that very night, that very night
was, I mean,
there are lots of talks about
beavers in the north, let me
tell you, but if you're on an
Aseia and you have
they're, they're always
attacking the Azteca. We we have
the same problem in Dixon and
they're on the other hand, you
know, they can go into the
rivers and create a, a watershed
system that really protects uh
our rivers too, so there's
two sides to the equation, as,
as always. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Lloyd, thank you.
Just real quick, I want to say
thank you first and foremost. I
always love listening to your
stories because I learn
everything from you, Ripsson
Garcia. So, thank you. Um, Madam
Chair, also, I, I just to add, I
was reading about this Kater
gentleman, uh, who is one
political party, then switched
to another political party to
run for office. I think both
sides should just say he doesn't
belong to any of us.
Uh,
I should,
um, he was also involved in the
teapot scandal, which is the
biggest scandal that ever happen
on the federal government level.
People were actually arrested
and it was one secret oil deals
were going through, so there was
a lot more to this man as far as
scandals. Um, which I think is
very interesting is I've just
been reading this since he
brought it up. And also, there
was also a uh in our budget,
there was money for beaver
preservation. So I'm sorry to
tell you that, that I don't know
how to get around that. I think
there should be some exemptions
when they're doing damage. You
should be able
to trap them and move them or do
whatever you need to do and
where they're doing good work
with them, I guess, but I
understand what you're saying,
so thank you. It's all I'd add.
Uh, excuse me, madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord, uh, I
called the game and fish on the
beaver issue and I spoke to one
of their representatives there
and they said they were gonna
refer somebody else to come up
to our seca and trap them and
relocate them. I haven't heard
from them
So
we, they need to collaborate
with the Aseass because they're
costing the Aseas a lot of
money. Well, I think, uh, Madam
Chair and and maybe that's
something we should address
because it is an issue. I think
in anything when you're dealing
with animals, it's common sense,
right? If we look at this area
and they're good for this and
they're bad for here and you
need them moved that's very
important if it's damaging your
property and maybe we should all
write a letter on your behalf
saying, Can you please address
this issue? Thank you. It's all
I have.
Thank you on that point.
Um, Representative McQueen. So,
uh, on that point just for
what's worth, there is an
existing seat statute, um, the
Department of Game and Fish is
tasked with, uh, managing
nuisance animals. There's a time
frame in the statute for them to
respond, and they have to like
propose two or three different
potential resolutions. So if I
mean if they're not responding,
uh, I think you might wanna
refresh your memory on that
statute. Uh, excuse me, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
McQueen
do you have a, a statute that I
can refer to? Uh, Madam Chair,
Miss Prolaco, um, or you could
send it to me? Let me see if I
can find it. OK. I'd appreciate
that. And Mr. Palco, um, uh,
McQueen, if you could work with
the staff, the staff can also
get it to, uh, Mr. Pillaco as
well. We can assist to that as
well. Um, I think we all, you
know, as expressed, want to be
our allies as much as we can in
these efforts, and, um, you
know, we appreciate all the work
you guys are doing on this. So
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you, and, uh, viva la
Terra Maria, and thank you for
coming to
our home, our land, our company.
everything,
uh, and I wanna let you know
what Terami Terra Amaria means.
terra terra means land
and
uh Amaria means yellow. So this
clay up here is yellow, and our
ancestors, when they first came
and they built their homes, the
first homes they built were
jacaes, where were, uh, posts of
cedar posts uh on uh a cedar
post in the bottom that was,
that was in a V shape and they
would stand them up and they
would plaster mud up on there.
And so the women wanted them to
be pretty.
so they would go to these, to
the area where they find the
clay and then we mix sand with
this clay, which is yellow, and
they would stucle there with a
wool. They throw, put the wood
up there and then they get a
wool piece of wool, and they
would dip it in water and once
the men had the clay up there,
they would go around in a circle
and just make it really pretty
and, and it, it still exists.
These, these, these bluffs
around here and even if you dig
past the topsoil, you get to
that to that
cla y color. There's also a a
blue color, but the Amarillo is,
is, is the most common and, um,
a lot of people call one of our
peaks up here in the Ensenada
Mountains. Penasco Amarillo,
because it's got the yellow.
and that's for Terra Maria came
from.
Thank you. Thank you for
everything. This was a wonderful
presentation about the, the
history of the background and
also the future and how we can
be supportive of all of you guys
in the in the future. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we
appreciate all the help and
resources that you can help us
with, uh, we'll, we'll put it to
good use and we will, we will
see Adelante.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next up we have
with us, um, the San Joaquin del
Rio de Chamalan grant. Uh, we
have Leonard
Martinez, uh, Monica Rodriguez,
Gerald Chacon, uh, as well, all
presenting, uh, with them. We
are running about 30 minutes
behind, um, we will hopefully be
able to catch up a bit, but you
know, a lot of that was just
logistical issues. So, um, you
know, there was a wonderful
conversation and I think very
informative for all the members
and really good engaging, uh,
conversation.
And, and just so folks know
those handouts from, um, uh,
Tierra Maria or right outside on
the on the table as well. Thank
you.
It looks like the hand that's
been passed around, so if you
all, whenever you're ready to
begin, thank you.
Good morning members of the
committee. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you for your time and for
letting us present here before
you.
Uh, my name is uh Leonard T.
Martinez, president of San Joa
Kendri Chamalanren.
I've been on this board for
21 years
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, good morning, Gerald
Chacon, Secretary of Land and
Water for San Joaquin.
Good morning, committee, Madam
Chair. Thank you for having us
here today. I'm Juana Rodriguez.
I'm the secretary for the San
Joaquin de Rio de Chamo land
grant. I also sit on the land
grant Council and the Community
governance attorney Program. I
also work for the New Mexico
Aseki Association. So thank you
for your time.
Madam Chair, we're going to
start with a brief background on
the land grant, and then we're
going to go into our projects
and tasks that we're, we're
doing. So we're going to start
with that. I will do the
uh, some direct to my like brief
history is this one right here.
Uh, and, uh, we will move
forward from there. First, a
little bit background on myself.
I've also sat in the excellent
Grand Cols over 12 years. I was
also president of the mixer Lare
Consejo.
uh, the mix of Lared my cer
consejos for 7 years.
uh, and like I said previously,
I've been on this board for 21
years.
and, uh, all land grant board of
trustees know that when you
serve on a board, it's 10 to
life, so, so we, we've been here
for a while. Um
on August 1st, 1806, 28 families
when they were granted by
Governor of Joaquin Island,
Kansas to San Joaquin Deno
Chamalangram.
The procession to formalize the
Marseille was done by Alcalde
Emanuel Garcia de la Mora de la
Canna de Santa Cruz.
Our descriptions of our
boundaries have always been, uh,
how would I say, um, when you
describe the land grant back in
1806, and you know one of those
it was described. It wasn't
written on, it wasn't defined of
a how to say Anglo-Saxon was it
means means and bounds. Uh, so
it was from the north to the
Savoya Valley.
to the east, the boundaries of
the Martinez Gran to the south
the couple, the Capulin River,
and on the east and on the west,
that's Sajita Lanka.
and that will be a poten uh a
potential and later on on
presentation, it was um a
contentious point where that's a
de Blanco was, and I'll get to
that.
In 1832, Juan de Jesus de Chacon
filed a petition to the Governor
Antonio Chavez, ask him to enjoy
calent town of Aqui from my
victim.
Then from the lands upon which
they settled in 1830. It seems
that El Calde Jose Maria
Martinez had allocated and place
Chacor and two soldiers in
position of certain tracks
located within the Kao
Chamalangrant as colonists under
the colonization law. However,
the original grantees are
protested in the Calde of the
town,
uh, Abiqui Juan Antonio Gallego
had taken a position that such
action was illegal and they were
trespasses and intruders. The
question referred by the
governor of the Attorney General
of New Mexico, Antonio Barrello.
Hope they got that right, who
made an extensive investigation
into the matter, and on May 6th,
1832, held the Kanonda Chambelan
grant was valid and
distributions made by the
college should be annulled.
This is very important because
down the road in the US for
Sandoval. It was stated by the
attorney, uh, the CLPC, which
was the Court of Pri Land Claims
that we were not a valid grant,
and it was in this case by the
Nixon government saying that the
land grant was a valid land
grant. The grant is continues to
occupy it and use the grant
except for a number of occasions
when he was temporarily
abandoned to do to uh Indian
hostilities in spite of the
immense size of the ground, only
an airstrip of landline within
Canon de Chama was cultivated,
but lifestyle was passionate and
up upon adjoining mess.
By 1861, that grant was owned by
more than 400 persons who
claimed under the
through the original grantees
on July 3, 1861, the claimant
submitted a petition to the
survey General seeking the
confirmation of the title,
uh
to 184,320 acres.
which were estimated to be
embraced within the boundaries
of the grant
Survey General James K.
Proffitt.
after carefully considering the
recommended to recommended to
Congress on December 7th,
18821872, that they, they grant
be recognized and confirmed as a
community grant.
A preliminary sur of the ground
was made by the dipping surveyor
Stephen McCroy in 1878.
McCrory surveyed to the
surprise, I once showed a
470,000 acres.
uh, plus we're embraced within
boundaries for set forth in the
grant papers between 1870 and
1880, Thomas B. Catron acquired
most of the interest in the land
grant.
We call that a big iske up
north, so we,
that was what we call it, uh, in
1886, the Survey General
Proudfoot questioned the ability
to land grant beyond its
individual allotments.
which were the sartes, that's
what they were called inside.
Uh, in 1887, John Potter and
Valentine Welburn, chapman of
England entered an agreement to
buy the interest that realignal
and Company Limited, owned by
Thomas B. Catron.
Mr. Potter stated his ambition
that he had already made
improvements to the land grant
to the land and attendant
farmers on his property,
sharecroppers, just all, all
that means.
The CLPCcor of Pra Lanka's
claims on September 24th, 184
citing the year for Sandoval in
1897 stricts a claim to
individual allotments. So we're,
we're just restricted to the
1500 acres under the US versus
Sandoval.
In 1901, the individual laws in
the current Chamber were
surveyed to 1,499 acres.
The patent of a 1400 acres was
issued to TD Burns from Parkvie,
New Mexico, just down the road,
um, close associate of Thomas B.
Catron, not the land grant.
The San Joaan did the Chamberla
grant Committee's Pueblos are
within its boundaries were at
the office of 1887 where the
canyon de Chama.
Capulin, Yarre,
which is was Costilla and uh and
to the Landgram Regina, Jose
Tapascito Sevoa and Ojito, uh,
we will meet it for some reason,
Gina should be in there also,
OK.
That's something we can did the
Chamberla Grant maintains,
maintain a board of elders from
1897 through 2006 and until the
Grant became a political sub in
the state of New Mexico in 2006.
Based on GI Acres held are held
by the federal agencies,
USO For Service, uh, the Carson
and Santae maintain about
281,428,000 acres of our former
common lands.
Western made it to 59.65% of the
grant.
The BLM holds about 36,532,000.
acres estimated uh a former
common land would be about 7.74%
of the grant.
State lands were not state lands
of New Mexico were not added
into question or private health
properties.
Uh, I'm not gonna take care of
it for this most of this work.
This was done by the Mixa land
grant council. You put your hand
out and I just extract it from
it and I did help with the sound
walk can do the chamberlain Gran
historic map. Uh, these were our
communities within the, within
the, the 472,000 acres.
and then uh we do have a map,
uh, survey map of the Kada Chama
agriculture irrigation project,
which we'll get to in a little
bit.
Before we move on to the
presentation, I want to just
thank everybody here, uh
I've been presenting here for
since 2004 to this, to this land
granting to committee, uh.
there was a former chair,
President Miguel Garcia at the
time, and Mark, who still loves
my mom'supper,
uh,
and, um, and I also like a big
thanks to Lisa. I've been, when
she was at BLM also helped the
land grant and um getting a we
requested a foyer and it's not
in our, in our, in our
presentation here, but on the
ejita Blanca just to point it
out.
that was a contentious point of
the land grant boundary,
reasoning being cuz the billions
of dollars of gas and oil have
been extracted from that area,
and none of it, none of those
royalties come to the land
grant.
uh, within that all those are
managed at BLM.
Uh, so there was a big reason
why we were not
allowed to have it that portion
of that grant, but we know where
how much has been extracted.
It was more of them. Gerald.
do
So right now for the project
list
or you
I can do. Go ahead. OK.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, if on page this
next page, they're following
that map. You'll see the project
lists, um, that some of the
major projects that we're uh
taking on with the grant.
Um, the first one and probably
the largest project that we have
is the Canon de Chama irrigation
project.
We are currently uh
working with the Santa Fe
National Forest and the the uh
Department of Justice with their
help in order to develop.
um a lease, uh, of the of the
farmland that exists in the
canoe, the Chama so that we can
try to reestablish the farm
that's there.
Uh, it's
and then also the uh we also
have the San Joaquin Community
and Economic Development Center,
which we're trying to work this
as part of
the buildings that we have at
the headquarters there that the
um
that can be used for that sort
of purpose. The youth
conservation Corps, the YCC, I
have a group of young kids each
summer that we're working with
and trying to um
engender their um
themselves to issues of the
grant and also for work and, and
agriculture and other kinds of
things that they're exposed to
through the YCC and through the
land grant.
Of course, uh, the Las Mercedes
Unidos Event Center, uh, with
Tierra Maria and Juan Bautista
Valdez.
We
are also trying to uh finish
developing our South annex, we
call it, it's in the building
that's there. We have had uh
quite a lot of work that's been
done to that. And I think Monaco
maybe touch on some federal
appropriation that's trying,
we're trying to receive in order
to complete that project.
We have a historic school
building the Esculita, and of
course the morada that belongs
to the uh grant as well.
and have uh spent considerable
time, uh, re-establishing and
and uh
remodeling basically some of
those in order to protect the
integrity of those buildings.
Uh, for many, many years, uh,
the grant has worked with the uh
Forest Service and has finally
obtained a
a lease uh in order to, in a
right of way in order to
maintain the cemetery that's in
the canyon de Chama.
Uh, that has been fenced now and
we do maintenance on that
regularly in order to preserve
the integrity of that cemetery.
There are other cemeteries that
are within the original grant
boundaries and we're working
with uh the Forest Service in
order to try to reestablish and
acquire those those grants,
those cemeteries in order to
take care of them properly as
well.
Uh, and of course, as always,
uh, acquisition of the former
common lands is a major issue
for uh for, for the grant.
The, I mentioned the, the canyon
de Chama irrigation project.
um
there's a substantial amount of
irrigated land that was farmed
by the Air,
uh, and was later farmed by
individuals who landed up with a
1500 acres. It was an active
farm up until the early 60s and
then it was sold to the uh to
the Forest Service, but we're
trying to under
a memorandum of understanding
with uh with the Forest Service
obtain.
uh the a uh
special use permit in order to
re-establish the farmland, the
Aseas.
uh, the, uh
all the infrastructure that's
required in order to reestablish
that farm.
There's approximately 294.69
irri irrigable acres.
and the state engineer's office
has has total diversion acre
feet of 442.
acre feet of water, so it's, it
could be a substantial economic
development, um,
program for, for the heirs to
the grant.
um, there's, of course,
there is the community where,
uh, Grantas lived and we want to
protect and, and develop the
historical and cultural and
natural uh resources that are
there.
um, including the historic
plaza, the cemetery, uh, there's
uh, the remaining orchard that's
that's there, Aseka
infrastructure and other,
especially the archaeological
sites
The main thing that's, that's,
uh, really important to do is to
prevent the loss of the
irrigation rights for from
non-use
and uh I think the Forest
Service has been cooperative
with us and understands that if,
if we're allowed to get this
special use permit that, that we
can protect the integrity of
those water rights.
Uh, we want to grow crops of
various types, uh, there is a a
definite shortage of forage
that's available for livestock
of, uh, that belonged to the
heirs. So we're hoping that uh
we can establish those fields,
uh, to their, their former uh
uh status and develop uh
whatever we can as far as
resources and also to provide.
uh areas that want to have uh
gardens or or uh fruit trees or
orchards of themselves, acreage
that can accommodate those kinds
of interests as well.
Um
on the, the next page,
is the uh you you can look at it
probably easier on that chart
later on here, but this is a
a.
piece of work that that was done
by um Chris Chavez, who surveyed
the entire grant with the help
of Leonard and myself and
others, and
I found all of the points of the
grant and reestablished those
and also uh trace the Aseass,
the individual fields, and other
major components of the land
grant and put that into a map
with a lot of historical
information that goes along with
that.
Uh, it's, it's really a
wonderful piece of work that we
had help from Mr. Chavez to do
that.
and I would encourage you to
look over that
uh, when you have an opportunity
uh, but we also with that
farmland wanted to try to
develop uh demonstrations in
look at other types of crop
opportunities that we might be
able to use that maybe be more
um economically conducive to
helping the heirs of the grant.
and of course there are
permittees that are on the grant
now and the aftermath of the
forage that we have could
provide some winter grazing as
they pass through the farm
ground.
Uh there are airs that have uh
old seed and and different
varieties of fruits and
vegetables and things that they
have saved we'd like to continue
protecting those.
and uh re-establishing some of
those old varieties that are
well adapted to that to that
environment.
Uh, we'll talk about the fires
in just a little bit here, but
there is potential for
considerable amount of flood
damage that could occur on the
farmland as a result of the
fires that have have happened
there recently, and we have to
do something in order to
mitigate that potential damage.
uh once if we, if it ever rains
again, but uh we we know what's
gonna happen at some point that
we'll have some significant
flooding there, and we need
something to uh structures and
other kinds of things in order
to protect that.
And those, that farm has not
been farmed since the 60s and uh
we have a lot to do in terms of
developing and improving the,
the soil health and uh we'll,
we'll use common farm practice
or practices in order to do
that.
We have some tremendous
resources in the uh.
in the land grant there because
of its location within that
canyon
and there are some Ojitos, some
springs that are there that are
really important to the uh to
the integrity of the of the
grazing program and an and
important for water, clean water
resources for drinking, and
we're going to protect and
develop thoseojitos and uh make
sure that they're used for
beneficial use of the airs.
I'm gonna speak about the youth
conservation Corps that came
about with a partnership with
the Hemes Mountain Public
Schools and because we heard
from a lot of our communities
and areas that they were losing
the labor force. There's no one
to clean the, do the Olympias
for the Aseas in the spring. Uh,
there's no one, that's raising a
community garden anymore and
then so one or two generations,
a lot of the traditional, um,
savimiento or wisdom or history
has been lost and so we've been
able to put together
youth conservation core um,
we've hired 7 to 8 kids. Last
summer. This is our 2nd season,
and we've be able to teach them
a couple of things. We've, um,
do one of the main components of
the conservation corps is and
this is uh let me go back it's
funded through the Mnert,
through the Environmental
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department and there's several
throughout the state, including
ours, but ours is focused on
land based, um, principles,
meaning Aseas and land grants,
tradition
al agriculture, and we've also
been able to teach them about
community governance. They've
attended our, our meetings and
understand how that process
works and how we, um, came to be
in our history. We've also
taught them about culture, food,
vocabulary, and history. Every
day that we have them, we, we
brought a new word to the, to
the youth and asked them about
it. Most of the students we are
working with do not speak
Spanish anymore. um, one
understands it her grandma still
speaks Spanish, but in one
generation we've lost our
language
so we thought it's really
important to, to incorporate
that into to our programming.
We've been able to, um, create a
community garden and last year
we had a pretty good harvest.
This year there is no water in
our seca when we started. We're
in a severe drought right now
and so we resorted to what our,
our grandparents did. They, we
planted stuff that we know will
grow without water. Mostly, um,
Calabasa Mexicana and, and Chaco
and Chico corn. We've taught the
kids about fence construction
and repair,
Um, we've done erosion control
and last uh couple weeks ago we
did an assets inventory as our
responsibility to the land grant
we want to make sure that we're
doing proper inventory control
and the kids helped us with with
that process. We're teaching
them land stewardship, and we
also use them to remove willow
and hara. I know somebody asked
about that. Amazingly enough,
they really enjoyed that work,
and it's hard work. You have to
squat down, you have to get down
to the root of the the jara, and
you have to pile it high, but we
had a lot of volunteers to do
the
thejara removal, so they've been
a really good resource to us.
Beyond that resource on the next
page of this uh on slide 7,
they've grown friendships. These
kids, uh, grew up together, but
I don't know that they've spent
time together because of
geography of our communities
they've been able to learn how
to collaborate with one another.
We've brought a lot of um
concepts of leadership,
responsibility, and job skills,
one of the youth graduated last
year was a returning YCCer. He
got a job with the volunteer or
the fire department, um, what is
it?
New Mexico DOT and he was a
little bit worried to tell us
that he'd gotten a job and he
doesn't have to leave the
program early and we were so
proud of him and said this is
what it's about. We're preparing
you for the job force and to
take on a job like that, and he
guess what he's staying in the
community and that's what it's
all about.
but the other things we bring to
them is respeto umulidad i or
guilon, which means humility,
um, which is a concept that was
very well known to us of a
certain generation that our
elders had a wisdom and that we
had to give deference to that,
to listen to them and respect in
our language and how we speak to
our elders and how we move
through the world, but also that
we have a pride in where we come
from and that we have a history
and that we have a wisdom that
that will take with us no matter
where we'll go.
And we're gonna bring it back
next year, as we transition,
then it's gonna talk about this
and uh because I work for New
Mexico Sequez, we also have a
YCC through the New Mexicoque
Association. It was, uh, their
2nd year as well, and we're
talking about how we're so
similar even though we started
on different paths. We're
basically in parallel and
teaching a land-based
curriculum, um, they're doing a
lot of watershed restoration
through the NMAA and so we're
talking about how do we take
this to scale how do we put
other YCCs into land grants or
other um.
uh, entities like Asea's, uh, to
bring the same resource to those
communities.
you want me to talk on this one
or do you wanna do that one?
Yeah.
Um
and the some community and the
economic Development Center,
we've been on
OK.
One of the big things that Madam
Chair, that that's happened is I
know this committee in the
literature wants us to complete
our projects and that's that's a
piece asked for our liquor for
our community. Uh, we've been
slowly funded for the for the
sala. We've been able to put a
new roof, stucco, new windows,
new doors. We got a new heating
and cooling system
But we can't, we can't get to
the end. We've been dragging it,
dragging it, dragging it to get
it to the, to the end. And
that's one of the things. One
thing we've learned is
where we're at in Capulin in
Gina and Coyote, there's no
community center.
There's no place for people to
meet. There's no place, and we
have a small scolita that's
another small that used to be
the head start next to it, which
we use as our headquarters.
That's not conducive to
meetings. Mark's been there.
It's been, it's, it's, it's
quite small. It's a little bit
bigger than this, but it's still
tight. Uh, when we had when we
hosted these meetings. So that's
one reason we, we haven't hosted
this this this this committee
because we don't have the
capacity to the space to to host
it.
The sada is big enough. I know,
um, Mark and Rubinson and Garcia
had been there and looked at it.
It's, it's, it's big enough, but
we just don't have the need to
finish it.
Um,
we want to complete that
renovation. That is our main
goal to complete that sala and
and.
we're looking to finish it. It's
gonna cost about, that was 3
years ago when we had an
architect come in and design the
inside design what's going to go
outside and he would do the
he would get the contractor to
manage the process because we're
as border trustees, we're not
contractors, we're not, we don't
know how to do construction
projects. He would handle all
that for us, and he asked for
that was back 3 years ago was
605,000 $65,000.
uh, and
that is a big ask for even for
this, even for this, we
understand that, but that was
what we take to complete the
sala, uh
for future proposals for the
users for local government
office. We've learned that now
as we go into the into the into
the fire in a minute. These past
two years have been really eye
opening to the Langret.
One reason is when there's an
emergency in our communities,
there's nowhere for them to
turn.
to do
work, do faxes, do emails, do,
because we have no cell coverage
in Guayna Capoli.
That, that's another thing
that's, that's, that's holding
us back. So they, they, there's
our saladass have all that
thing, but we don't have staff.
So if we're not there, nobody
can get into the building to do
the work that needs to be done.
Copies, even simple copies.
and they got to go all over
espanola or or to the school if
they can get in to make the
copies.
Uh, we want to do a business
incubation programs, uh small
business, small business
support, farmers' market, um,
agrobusiness, recreation
business, we want to do the
commercial kitchen within that
salon.
A high speed Wi Fi, student
drop-in centers, so people with
the kids because there's no like
I said, there's no cell coverage
there. Kids don't have a place
to go and do. If you live in
certain places of our, of our,
of our community. There's no
WiFi. There's no internet. You
gotta be in that state road 96
to be able to get access to
that, that WiFi.
um, senior sen senior center,
uh, the counties reached out to
if the, if we finish that cat so
they could do the elderly
program to feed the elderly and
distribute the food from there,
or have them come into Tsala and
eat there instead of at home.
Um, cultural events, genealogy
center, early childhood,
Education Center, and it's not
raining here, but one of them
that we need to have in there
is.
our communities have a real
problem with
drugs
and it needs a place for them to
come in and be able to do their,
their medication and stuff that
needs to be done. And, and we
don't have nearest place is E
Spinola and Cuote. If that's at
the clinic doesn't get taken
away from us now and with these
budget cuts, so
we've asked for funding, um,
I'll let, uh, Monica talk about
a little bit of the future
funding from the Greer
delegation. Sure, so we're
looking for the resources to
finish the sala and um some of
the history of that sala was it
was a dance hall. It used to be
salon de Soisson and before
social media, that was where you
met your wife or your husband or
your friends, and, uh, everyone
came out and the bands from all
over the crest, the state would
come and play there. And we
wanted it to be that again. We
want our community to have a
place to gather, to throw a
birthday party, and all of these
other things
that they deserve. They live in
rural communities and they don't
have access to some of the basic
things that people in the city
take for granted. So this is
what we're asking for. We've
gone through the congressional
directed spending process. We
did that last year, and we got
almost to the finish line and
then we got a new president, and
he asked the budget bill. So it
was very close to getting signed
and it didn't. Um, so, uh, we
went through that process with
Senator Luhan's office, and his
office reached out to us and has
been very supportive and asked
to
submit our application again.
And we did. Currently, it has
made it through committee
and it has a ways to go, and
we're hopeful that it will once
again make it to, um, the point
where it'll go to the
president's desk and that he'll
sign it. And so if that happens,
then we'll get the $605,000 that
we've asked for and be able to
move forward on those
renovations fairly quickly.
We may also need some capital
outlay to finish that up, um,
like we said, the estimates
were, we've been in this process
for over 3 years and so that's
what it takes, but we didn't
have time to update those
numbers when Senator Lawn came
to us. They just said, just
submit what you have. So that's
what we did. But we still may
need some capital out later to
finish that up.
You want to talk about Las
Marcelos Unilas.
Uh, Madam Chair, you heard from,
uh, Mr. Polaco earlier here in
regard to the Las Mercedes
Unidos Event Center and uh it
just this next sheet is just a
summary of that same, uh, issue,
the, the big problem that we're
going to have is that, well, uh,
there is apparently a naturally
occurring uh water quality, a
problem that's that's there, so
we're hopeful that with the new
well that we dig,
uh, that we can get to a better
quality water and, and, uh, that
certainly is going to make that
whole facility much more usable
as far as uh some of the
concepts and some of the ideas
that we have for um for an
economic development project
there. We have to have a really
good clean source of water, uh,
and hopefully we can hit that
with the drilling of a new well,
so.
I'm gonna talk to you guys about
the fire because it impacted my
family probably most of all, and
I emailed I several members of
this committee, um, some of the
photographs that, that, uh, I
took on the day that we were
notified that the fire had
jumped the allotment.
Right now it's uh 28,000 acres
and counting. It's still not put
out, um, and that includes
17,450. That is continues to
grow and the 11,000 acres from
the Indios fire last year. And
just to put that into context,
the city of Santa Fe,
representative Serrato is 33,280
acres. Imagine your whole city
burning down.
The city of Farmington, 21,760
acres.
Espanola, 5260 acres.
and the South Valley
representative Garcia, 18,572
acres. Imagine the whole South
Valley completely burnt.
And we were talking about
caption earlier, so I looked up
to see what Ketron County it's,
uh, acreages, it's the largest
county in the state, and it's
4,478,000 acres.
That says a lot
But why I'm here today is to let
you guys know that the US Forest
Service has continued to
demonstrate an inability to
manage prescribed or controlled
burns. They're telling us that
this fire started with a
lightning strike. That's true,
and they could have put it out.
immediately, but they made
deliberate decisions not only to
let the fire to continue to
burn, but to drop accelerants on
the fire as a control measure.
Those, they're about this big. I
saw them.
cause they ask us, engage in the
US Forest Services community
meetings. I went to the
community meeting. Several of us
went to that community meeting.
We asked them our questions of
concern.
and it was like jumping through
a hoop. It was like, OK, we had
our meeting, but we're just
gonna do what we're gonna do.
and anecdotally we heard that
um, the men that were in the
helicopter or the men and women
from the helicopter dropping
those accelerants, saw the cows
down below. And because they're
not ranchers, they said, oh,
they'll, they'll run away. The
cows will leave.
The cows did not leave
The cows do what cows do. They
stayed with where they know
where they've been going for
hundreds of years.
Generationally, my family has
been on that allotment since my
great great uncle got it.
and he's been, we've been
ranching there forever.
And so they're gonna stay where
they know and they did and um
and in that process we lost a
lot of cattle and I'll get into
that, but we advised the US
service not to burn.
Why? Because Somos gente de la
tierra where people of the
earth. When we have a difficult
decision to make, we look to
nature, and we look to the earth
and we look to the sky and to
the water to tell us what to do.
and this is what the sky in the
water have been telling us we're
in a 20-year drought.
The monsoons are not reliable.
They haven't come this year. It
has not rained in Guyena once.
There's no measurable amount of,
of rain in Ghana this year. The
remain the winds remain strong.
The winds picked up that July
11th at night and took the fire.
The grass regrowth in the middle
of the summer. How is the grass
gonna go back in June?
There's no way. And why would
any cattleman agree to let all
of their grass burn to the
ground.
Not no, no sane cattlemen would
ever allow that to happen. What
are they going to feed their
cattle till October. They depend
on the allotment to get them
through the fall.
The damage to the seca
infrastructure and watershed. I
was assured I asked that
question the night of the July
3rd meeting, and they assured me
that the fire was far away, and
they knew exactly where the,
the, the resa was and where
everything was.
I did not bring the picture of
the fire, but I can show it to
you later. It's within miles of
our of our Preza and when the
water comes and the rain comes,
it's gonna blow that hole a
second infrastructure out.
Um, water is scarce, and what
are we doing using it to put out
fire. Where did the water for
the fire to put out the fire
come from?
Where did they get that water
That water should have been used
for agriculture or for other
purposes. You know the Rio
Grande is dry.
Um, there's a shortage due to
other fires in the US. This is
wildfire season. Why
deliberately start a fire when
you know there's gonna be others
that you have to go and and put
out.
um, some of the things that are
so happen that we don't talk
about is reduction in tourism.
People aren't able to go in and
camp or do the things they
recreate. I woke up to smoke on
countless nights, um, choking
because the their quality came
down when we met with our YCC,
we made sure that each of them
that needed an inhaler had it
and that we checked the air
quality every day. So it
impacted our day to day lives
for several months and continues
to.
and it has long term impacts to
traditional communities. The
photo that you're seeing here is
just one of the photos that I
took of the mini cattle that
died on that day.
And you'll see my uncle in the
foreground. He's 78 years old.
That's my ihuan
And he probably will never see
his cattle come back.
He will not be able to pass that
on to my son or my grandsons
will never go into La
Guadaluppita that I went with
with my grandfather or drink
from Leandro Springs. It's me,
Erecia, so more than just
grassland was lost and cattle
allotments or deer and insects,
and the threat to the watershed,
but my recia was lost, and
my trust in the US Forest
Service was lost along with a
lot of my community.
And it's interesting, but the
mile markers in my life now are
fire, fire that the US Forest
Service deliberately started. I
know exactly where I was at when
Cerro Grande started. I know
exactly where I was at when HPCC
took off, and I will never
forget my cousin knocking on my
door, waking me up early in the
morning to say, get up. Our
allotment's on fire. Come help
me find cows.
And so I don't want that to be
the Orencia that I pass on to my
kids. This is a responsible
and it needs to stop
Um,
some of the impacts of the fire,
as we know, cause we know fire
very well in New Mexico now.
is that the inevitable floods
will come.
and there's gonna be cascading
events for years and years just
like in the HPCC there's gonna
be soil loss, there's going to
be detriment to wildlife and to
the watershed, but another big
thing that's happened is there's
gonna be higher rates or no
insurance for communities like
ours.
And so currently the land grant
is unable to acquire insurance
facilities because we're now
designated a fire or flood zone.
And I know the governor has
raised some, some, uh, the topic
of a state funded insurance
program and I think that's a
good idea. Land grants need
support in that area. We're
building everything to to make
sure we're doing it responsibly
and part of that responsibility
is making sure that we have
proper, um, insurance for the
things that we're building.
We're not coming to you just to
tell you all of our problems.
We're coming to you guys also
with remedies. These are
remedies we also shared with the
US Forest Service remedies like
where is the funding for
seeding? How is that force going
to be receded? Where is the
funding for seedlings? Is there
programs to do that? And the
resounding answer was there was,
but there is not anymore.
And there hasn't been any
deliberate or process to reseed
after fire.
and uh we, the fire that burned
just behind my house where I
live now, uh, my son remembers
it very clearly. He was about 8
years old and so it's barely now
starting to grow back, not with
big trees, but with scrub and
oak and some of the, so it'll be
another generation before that
grows back, so we need to help,
um, get that process moving
forward.
The other thing that we're
asking for is for technical
support for the community. It
was, um, thank goodness my
family was mostly impacted and
lost over 100 cattle on that
day. Um, it's very organized and
so we just shot into action, but
there's a lot of community
members that didn't have the
resources that that we had or
enabled to organize in that way
and we want to be able to
support them with with technical
support, um, that includes
emergency alerts and management.
This is my job.
I don't know.
All right, sorry guys, and uh
removal of green one-seeded
junipers. So all this requires
funding and uh some of the other
things that we think needs to
happen is we need more manual
thinning. We need to reduce the
hurdles for Leneros. We need
more fuel wood programs. There's
one in Taos through the uh Good
Neighbor program that that
works, but it's a drop in the
bucket, right? Um, we need
community led thinning and
timber projects. There used to
be multiple
um, uh, lumber, um, lumber
companies in in New Mexico that
were run by N Nuevo Mexicanos.
That's what we know. That's part
of our DNA.
We also need direct
communication by the US Surface
to land grants and the reason we
had some of that communication
is because those USFS on the
ground, the local guys are our
cousins, our neighbors, our
friends, but the policy making
in Washington DC ties their
hands, and they're not able to
to make decisions that are best
for the community. The other
things that we're asking for is
a review of the NiA process. We
realize that it's an analysis by
paralysis and it delays projects
forever and uh things don't
move forward. When you ask, you
know, why isn't that project
moved forward Nipo is one of
the, the, the impediments to
that. We need to increase the
capacity of local infrastructure
for forest thinning, meaning we
need to buy the, the, we need to
be able to support, uh, leneros
or people that were in the
limber and timber business to
buy the infrastructure in order
to run their own, their own, uh,
lumbering systems, and this is
specifically for the Encino
Project, which is a 10-year
project that's gonna thin the
USFS Santa Fe, um, but there's
no one in the local area that
can bid that
project, even though there's the
ability to do that, who can do
it? They don't have the
infrastructure. All of that got
destroyed in the 1980s and um
most of the people in our land
grant have someone or themselves
that served in the timber
business before the 1980s.
There's none of that left
anymore.
And so also to review the
process for timber harvesting to
reduce the number of small
diameter timber because fi in
its current use is destroying
our ecosystem, and fire has
always been our friend, but um
it's now a weapon. It's not a
tool anymore. It's become a
weapon.
and then by
Before I go to our, to our Asa,
you know, we've learned over the
past decades since we've, since
we hosted this committee.
2015, am I correct mark because
the last time I think you were
out in Capoin. That's the last
time, and during that time, I'm
surepent McQueen can also attest
to this.
with.
our capacity has grown
When your capacity grows, other
things have to grow with you
I mean, and that includes
funding, wherever it comes from,
whatever we can get.
uh
we are taking on bigger projects
that is irrigation project in
the Karachama. It's 15, the, the
original 1490 acres. We're
talking about major pumps.
uh, orchards, reinstating our
our capilla, our plaza, um,
meeting with the BLM. It's been
endorsed by almost every major
organization in the state.
Uh, so right now, as soon as I'm
done here, I'm taking off my
jacket, shirt. I got my change
of clothes and jacket. If you
look out there, there's a flat
bed.
That flatbed has 300 gallons of
water. There's a pump. There's a
uh generator, two chainsaws, and
I've got to go to the country of
Chama to do some work on our
land grant.
That's where we're at, uh, the
board of trustees is becoming
overwhelmed in what we're doing.
It's just, it's constant work.
It's good work, don't get me
wrong, it's good work what we're
doing is building our capacity
and what we're doing. The Forest
Service sees what we're doing.
The state agencies see what
we're doing,
uh
and, and we're, and we're
heading in that direction where
in 30 years, the language could
be totally different. This MOU
that we're doing for the
segregation project for the
Forest Service.
is going to outlive this board
It'll tie the, the ourix's
board.
for the next 30 years
Uh, we will, we will create a
comprehensive uh management plan
that we have to a site plan for
the 1500 acres.
And we, we know that uh this,
this lady has
given the CES out of Albert
money to do engineering plants
and stuff. We're going to take
full advantage of that.
because we're gonna create a
whole new site plan for that to
develop that whole area, uh, to
deal with the BLM with the with
the with the the hikers on the
continental er, the rafters.
uh.
we planted our first olive tree
in the in our land granted 200
years.
OK.
It's taken a beat in the summer
because there's no rain, no
water. I'm going out there to
give us some more water today.
And our orchards we're down to
one tree.
Representative Garcia, you've
been there? So we got one last
apricot tree out there.
that's, that's left of our
plums, apples, and apricots, and
we're trying to keep it going
until we can re replant, uh.
so, uh,
we're, we're asking for that and
we're asking for the merceinidas
also. It's a very big project
for us and we're just gonna, we
need to acquire some of our
former Commons Lives. We're
running out of room. We've got
equipment for this project. We
have a grader. We have a
backload that the county donated
to us. We have multiple
equipment. We have tractor brush
hog dump traders, uh, were ready
to start on this, on this
project. The Forest actually
wanted us to start last week
on this project, start clearing
the brush, get that water
pumping into the fields.
Um, the forester doesn't realize
that there's upstreamers and
downstreamers on thattaseki also
other sekis.
So we need to notify them before
we start pumping water.
OK.
And we need to let the water
master know that we're going to
start pumping also into the SAS.
So it's not like we can just
start next week, but that's what
they want.
We're asking for uh $200,000 to
increase the migrant capacity to
provide technical assistance to
the community.
We reached out to a different
organizations for technical
assistance.
and we, we can never get anybody
to
to help us with that.
We need, we learned to this this
crisis is now with the Laguna
and the Indus fire.
that our community needs us
and there's not an emergency
plan for Conilon Sevoya, Coyote.
Gina Capulin.
Mosi places don't have cell
coverage. We need to have some
sort of
orange or something where
there's a major fire.
to get out
There's no place for them to go,
like I said earlier to do
emails, faxes because we had no
cell coverage in certain areas
where dead spots. You just, it's
just when you live in rural
northern New Mexico, that's what
it is.
but we must, we, we have to help
our ears with the best we can.
We need a land grab manager
basically. You're looking at the
land grant manager right now
also. I'm gonna head out and go
do some work. I, I am the land
grant manager slash president.
Uh.
so we need somebody to deal with
these projects. These projects
are going to take time.
We need somebody to sit there
and go with the, with the
project with with whosever doing
the site planning for the
engineering plan, that person
has to be out there.
and we're going to need uh
we spoke to the metric
Department of Justice on
on the assessorseki project.
Most Asekis need a Mardoma and a
full board.
There's only gonna be one
parentte on this, on this, on
this irrigation project and
that's the land grant.
There's nobody else
it's just us. There's not
another project like this in the
whole country. It's the only
one.
And the Forest Service, the
Department of Justice and
ourselves are, are trying to get
ahead of this and how we how we
create the MOU to the site plan.
and for that we need technical
assistance.
We need better relationships
with the federal partners,
including the BLM and the United
States Forest Service.
We have a pretty decent
relationship with the BLM, the
Forest Service, we're getting
there. It's, it's, it's, it's
it's one of those that we don't
trust you, we don't trust, you
don't trust us. It's been one of
those contagious relationships
for years, but it's getting
better. It's getting better. Uh,
we do have some differences on.
on how do you thin, burn, uh,
we, we, we're the land grant has
been for the past 10 years on
full suppression of any fire
between March to September. Full
suppression. We don't want no
fires. It's not gonna, it's not
gonna work. It'll just, every
time he tells us we can contain
it, it jumps the lines.
and 27,000 acres plus later.
we're, uh, we, this board will
never see those those those
mountains with those full trees
stands again. They're gone.
We will never see it. My
grandson might see it.
No, but we'll never see it.
Uh, we need to work on that
bridging better relationships
with the state partners like
Game Fish.
and we should add it in there
the state land and state
forestry. I think we need to
have a better relationship with
them.
uh,
including the land grants and
rule-making process, only a
little process our dependence on
Hunts increase E+ and public
less during the season.
The Ok is beating our eating our
our our ears out of the out of
out of their
their their fee for the for the
cattle and sheep. It just, by
the time they get there to the
high ground.
Ek already mowed down
Uh, that
the deprivation needs to be done
a little bit better, managed a
little bit better within our
allotments, uh which is our
former common lands the helos
need to be managed better than
what they are right now.
Support and pass line grant and
the safe infrastructure Fund,
which was 2025 HBL 330. That is
a priority for this land grant,
especially for this project
coming up in the Kaunna Chama.
Uh, that is going to take quite
a bit of resources to get it
done.
Um,
so that is what we're asking. I
know, let's say the prerogative,
that you said budgets, we
understand.
but that is what this land
grant, our land grant needs.
and we stand for questions
Great, thank you for the uh
presentation. uh, Representative
McPeon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
great presentation, great, uh,
progress and work, and I
appreciate all that. Uh, I just
had two quick comments. The, the
first is, um
in my opinion
we're not in a twenty-year
drought. We're in a permanent
drought
You know, the weather patterns
have changed. The all the
projections for New Mexico are
hotter and drier, and the heat
makes it harder to rain and
makes the, what precipitation we
do get evaporate faster. So
we may get occasional wet ears,
but, but we need to adopt a land
use planning that, that takes
into account that reality, and
that's gonna be difficult, uh,
especially I think on
agriculture.
Um, second thing is, you know, a
few years ago we got the land
grants assistance fund, uh,
passed.
uh, and in working on that bill,
you know, one of the arguments
for that bill was, you know,
here we had political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico, governmental entities
that had no funding, you know,
no tax base, no GRT, no property
tax, no nothing. In fact
many land grants have been
paying property tax.
You know, that's a separate
issue.
Um
but we got that we got that, uh,
passed and it
a start, right? So it's like 50
75,000 a year, I think in that
neighborhood, which is much
better than nothing
but I think that's the kind of
thing you can, you can build on,
um, especially when you can go
to the legislature and say, look
at all of our successes. Look at
what we've been able to do with
the money that was provided, and
now we're ready to take the next
step. So, you know, my hope is
that that can be expanded in the
future, you know, I, you know,
I'd sort of toy in my mind like,
is there a way where the, uh,
the land grants could share in
the GRT or share in the property
taxes. I haven't really figured
out, um, how
that would work, but we have
this structure in place, uh, and
I think we can build on that. I
hope we build on that in the
future. Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Ward. Thank you. I'll make it
quick because I know we're
running a little bit behind.
Thank you for the presentation.
I always like to hold out hope.
I mean, I know we have water
issues. I'm very severe in my
district right now. Everybody's
running out of water. Um, I, I
always look to the Grancouver,
which is in my district that in
1660, everybody left because of
drought. Thousands of people
died because of drought, and I
want to be hopeful.
that maybe it'll come back and
flip around like it did back
then. Um, one of the issues I
hear your pain with the fires
because I live right at the base
of the Cibola National Forest,
and I've written letters to the
forestry department and they
won't do anything. I've asked
them to come in and please cut
the trees down and run cattle,
run goats, do everything you can
to clear it out and uh I would
be, I'm I'm going to be sending
another letter. You don't know
that yet, with Senator Ant
Thornton. OK, I'm going to send
another one because I wish she
would have told me because I've
already sent one.
that they do need to do that.
And when, uh, Representative
Harlan Vincent and I did it was
for statewide, that they can't
keep letting the forest be
overgrown and they can't come in
and do the things they've been
doing.
because even in, uh, it was in
Monzana, right? They had a,
there was a fire out there too
that they started, forestry
department started. So I'm not
hating on them. I just wish that
they would do things a little
bit differently. So that's all I
had to say. Oh, and the Wi Fi
that you need, is that for the
kids or is that for the, uh,
it's in here
There was a need for high-speed
WiFi was set for children or was
that it'll be for everyone.
It'll be a drop-in center. So if
anyone needs to use WiFi, they'd
be able to come to our center
and be able to tap into that
sort of technology that they
don't have otherwise. OK, so the
children in this district, do
they have high-speed WiFi?
because I know they passed
something that they had to. OK,
at the school. The school closes
at a certain time, um, but some
of our kids live in very rural
areas. Yavve extremely rural,
um, Lyndreth extremely rural,
um, Mesa de Poleo
extremely rural. I live in the
East Mount, so I had to go to
Starlink Mountain chair and
represent just because I could
have because I couldn't have
solid connections. So anyways,
thank you, it's all I had.
Thank you for the presentation.
I have a number of questions,
but I'll follow up with you
later on this, Mr. Rodriguez.
Oh, I apologize and uh
Representative Verrera.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for your great
presentation and, and basically
for all your work. I know how
hard you work up there. I know
how difficult it is, um.
I, I, I just want to make a
statement and I, I
you know, I'm on the, uh,
federal funding stabilization
Committee, and, you know, even
though we have a reserve of 3
billion in this state, and we're
lucky to have that.
Uh, we could spend that all on
Medicaid and not even help
people, all the people on
Medicaid. I'm just telling you,
we are facing as a state a very
dire situation. So, and, and I
have said in that committee,
well, it can't all be Medicaid
either. I, you know, we've got
to really look at that and see
what we can do. Uh, so I'm just
saying as, as much as I
understand, uh, uh, the
pressures you're under, I just,
I just wanna say it's, it's a
tough year. It's
a tough year because of the
current administration we have
in Washington and, and as you
know, a lot of the top Forest
Service officials are gone. So
you're really looking at, at
people at the lower kind of
baseline, uh, entry level
positions in the Forest Service,
and uh they need those jobs.
Their families depend on those
jobs and they're not going to
push for decisions. It, it is a
very tough time, and, and I've
seen this in every committee
that I go to, so
as you know, so we're gonna,
we're gonna see what we can do
with Capital LA for sure. Um,
and I, I guess I'm, I'm just
looking at a bigger picture and,
and trying to tell you as much
as if this were, you know, 3
years ago, it would, I think we
would have had a different story
and a different line. I've been
through a lot of these fires in
the north, obviously. I, I know
it's not what happens at the
fires, it's what comes after.
that you just, you just hold
your breath. We're still
recovering from the metanalis
flood that happened two years
ago. What I do want to tell you
is we have organized meetings,
uh, on the 4th Thursday of every
month, you're invited to it at
the soil and Water Conservation
District. It's 2 o'clock 4th
Thursday of every month at 2
o'clock. And what I did is
pulled, uh, federal, state, and
local people together to talk
about how we're gonna, how we're
gonna, you know, everybody's
working in
these silos and nobody's
talking. So we have uh federal,
state, and local people working
together. We are solving some
problems, some money, just got 3
million in from USDA for some
work on the Metanollis area, but
I would invite you to have your
Langgran people come to that
somebody on your board and just
listen to what, uh, what's
happening. I think we're, we're
trying to figure out how we
solve this, uh, with a group of
people and, um, you know, it, it
takes a while, you know, I said
it will take about 6 months
before it's really on
everybody's calendar, but we're
getting really top people from
the Interstate stream
Commission. we get good people
at this meeting, so I would
invite you to come to that, and
it's at the Soil and Water
Conservation District. I also
wanted to ask you about the, um,
uh, the $600,000
bid that you got on
reconstructing your uh Sala. Did
that come through an engineering
firm? It came through an
architecture firm, uh, an
architect by the name of Jeff
Sears.
and was sat out of Albuquerque.
Out of Santa Fe. Out of Santa
Fe.
You know
getting a bid is, is a difficult
thing too in northern New
Mexico. I know that. I'd, I
would suggest the soil and water
conservation can also take bids
to work on private property.
They're the only state agency
that is allowed to go on private
property. So, uh, you might work
with them, you might work with
Marcos on that and see if you
can get a local bidder, then you
could hire local people to do
that work, and they probably all
know how to do it and they
probably need the job. So I
would, I would just check with
Marcos on that too. I think I
hate, hate to keep throwing
everything in Marcus's lap, but
he's probably the that we
probably have the best soil and
water conservation district in
the state with the best local
leadership. I would use them if
I were you guys, and I would
have them do a bit on that and
see, see what they come up with
and see what you could get, um,
because
you know, over the course of 7
years, I've watched a lot of
engineering companies come in
and go and come in and go and
sing what they did and what they
didn't do. And if you can keep
that effort local. You have a
much better chance of one, a
lower price and faster
completion. So I would, I would
just recommend, I think that my
advice is free, so you know
what, I absolutely appreciate
that and I was going to say it
speaks to exactly what you're
seeing. We're looking at helping
ourselves help
ourselves. So we're creating
local economies. And so that's
what the whole point of this,
um, sala and Economic
Development Center is, right?
And so that it creates its own
economy and so we will hire
local and when we can, we do
hire local folks, but just to go
back to the capacity building,
it's like asking the city of
Espanola to run their city
because we're being asked, we're
being all those demands are
pulled on us. You see all the
projects that we have to
basically have their city
council run all of those
projects. That's what we do. We
were at our sala last night till
10 preparing for this. We run
that YCC as volunteers 2 days a
week. We don't get paid for
that. Plus, we also do all of
our governance stuff that we
have to do and we're seeing it's
not tenable anymore. It's not
sustainable. And we don't want
to be failures of our own
success, right? We don't want to
be so successful that we can't
continue to sustain this and
continue with the good work that
we're doing.
No, and, and Madam Chair, I
totally get that and, and it's
one of my
one of my problems throughout
the district, you know, um, this
land grant is no different from
any other land grant and thank
God we got at least $50,000 a
year for you, and that was a
credit to a Representative
McQueen and and certainly
Representative Garcia over the
years, but, um, I think we have
to tackle that and see if we
can't, uh, up that a little bit
to just give you sustaining
money.
Sustaining money where you can,
you know, I don't expect, I, I
don't want everybody to work for
free. Of course, we all work for
free too, so we get it too, you
know, uh, but it's, we've got to
take our state to a higher
level, and these, your, your
input is invaluable and in
letting people understand how
important it is that we figure
out how we're going to really
sustain rural communities, uh,
you know, when, when, when most
of the money goes to Albuquerque
because
that's where most of our people
are. It's really hard and
Espanola and Rio Riba have the
same problems. They're small
towns, Chama small, uh,
Riorribus' small rural
community. They don't have
enough money to provide the
infrastructure to help you. So
it, it is just kind of a
circular motion that that we can
all get sucked into and, and I'm
always impressed when we have
people like you who've worked so
hard and so long to make sure
that they uh that they improve
their
community. So I just want to
thank you and, and suggest that
you really do talk to, uh,
Marcos about that. Maybe and
come to that meeting.
Thank you, Madam Chair, can I
add to that real quick?
Um,
a couple things, uh, we have
been working with the soil and
water conservation on the
engineering plan for the
irrigation project in the
Kanatajama.
Uh, we've had some setbacks due
to funding to the soil and water
conservation. Uh, we've been
working with Tomas Gonzalez to
do the engineering plan.
to be able to get the water back
into the thicket and be able to
uh irrigate those fields. So we
have been reaching out to them,
uh, but it's like anything else
funding.
another thing is we have been
working the Forest Service, and
one of the problems that they
don't have any attorneys when
we, we spoke with them.
uh, we've been graciously, uh,
uh, the New Mexico Department of
Justice under the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hilgado division has
been assigning an attorney to
help us with the MOU and uh with
the Forest Service to get this
thing done, uh, the project
there in the Kanochama, uh, so
the Forest Service is actually
leaning on them to do some of
this work for them because they
don't have an attorney right
now. They're going to get one.
They, they got a newbie or a
brainy shiny, I guess, uh, just
at the beginning of the month.
So, uh, so
they're going to be working with
that attorney to get this MOU
project done done. um
and, and you know, and, and I'm
gonna throw it in your lap, uh,
North Central economic
development.
we cannot get a meeting with
those people to get the canal
assistance to save our life.
so
their job is to help entities
like ourselves to have technical
assistance.
No, we, we tried 18 emails over
2 months going back and forth,
and we could not get a meeting
with them to help us with
technical assistance,
uh,
Yeah,
and they got more funding than
on top of what they got already
so
they're, they're supposed to be
helping our some like our NEDC
and and we're, we, we've
we have to say something. If we
don't say something, they, they
won't move. uh, so just to let
you know, they have not been
able to help us with this
irrigation project, which we
need their, their help with it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, presenters. Uh, I'll be
real brief
Um
you know,
um,
I remember the first time we
met, uh, there in Gaina.
and uh
uh
I was coming in and Jimmy Hall
was following me
We touched base there in
Espanola, and we kind of, uh,
walked into the hall, the sala
for that first meeting
and I had never met you guys
and I saw you guys coming
towards me.
And I said, oh, these, these
might be the leaders.
and you guys went and greeted
Jimmy Hall, who was behind me. I
said, what?
I said, what's going on here,
right? And I kind of realized
that Jimmy Hall had been working
in this area during the for his
uh his banking experiences with
the uh Farm Bureau. So he kind
of issued a lot of loans, you
know, to a lot of you farmers
and ranchers, you know, in this
area. So that was that that was
kind of a a a a real milestone
in terms of understanding that
here's a member of our
committee, a Republican.
you know, that kind of has this
this base with the communities
in here.
especially in Prior Rio County.
Not only that, Madam Chair, but
Jimmy Hall came to be one of
your best funders in Cato Alley.
You know, and he's got a
Northeast heights of Bourqueke
district. Unfortunately, he, he
lost
and, uh, but that was a big loss
because he was a warrior.
uh, for our land grants, and he
was, well, I turned at, uh, I,
I, I, I, I, I uh identified him
as kind of the Republican
enforcer in the House. He makes
sure that the Republicans were
going to support these land
grant bills.
but, uh, that's what we need. I
think we, we kind of need, uh, a
concise capital outlay.
plan that is, that we can depend
on. That's why we did House Bill
330.
and we're trying again, uh, to,
to do it this session. House
Bill 330 basically does a 1.1%
on the severance tax oil and gas
severance tax.
uh fund
for infrastructure. So it's a,
it's a land grant and a secia
infrastructure fund and its
structure, madam chair similar
to what we already have in the
books
which is the tribal
infrastructure Fund at 4.5%.
and the um colonial
infrastructure Fund, which is
structured at 4.5%. That tribal
and that colonia are bringing in
$85 million.
to the tribes and colonials, and
here we are with a 1.1% bringing
in 19 million for starters.
We work with the governor in
terms of Chi putting it on her
call. She'll be doing that.
So that's a plus for us in that
it'll be on the call that this
imprint land grant and a second
infrastructure fund will be
Britain in her call.
as one of her priority pieces of
legislation.
So hopefully
if we don't run out of time, we
can kind of make it happen.
The other fortunate thing is
that we have good buying by the
Senate Finance Committee.
That's a big hurdle, but because
of the efforts of our land grant
leaders or Aseia leaders.
you know, and this core group of
legislators, we were able to
kind of make headways with
George Munoz and Senate Finance.
So that's a plus
So I just wanted to kind of let
you know that.
there's still hope in terms of
building capacity regarding our
capital LA needs.
The other capacity that you guys
raised is what with
kind of uh operation
and we're still a long ways to
go, and I know the, the
assistant fund, you know, that.
that are uh um uh Rose McQueen
kind of carried for us in the
house.
has made some headway, but we
still need to kind of go beyond
that and seek other means of how
we can generate
operating monies. And I don't
know if we're gonna have Madam
Sheriff junior funding this
session.
But if we do have junior funding
this session
I'd be willing to contribute to
this 200,000.
uh for uh capacity
land grant capacity with their
new grant.
And lastly, Madam Chair, on the
600,000
for the sala
You guys have to have a plan.
And let me tell you what, Lalos
Mejla's land grant did. It was
their first shot at getting
capital.
They became a political
subdivision in 2023.
and in 2024 they came to the
session asking for like 1.1
million.
and they, they did an eight
month
plan.
where they identified about 12
legislators.
and
they made 3 contact calls during
that eight-month period and
during when the session opened,
they followed up with each one
of them in person.
and they asked them specifically
for
$80,000 each.
And once they got a commitment,
they would tell the other
legislator, look, Representative
Garcia committed a 1000. Can you
do the same?
So you have something specific
that you're asking. You just lay
in not saying, can you help us?
No, can you help us with
$80,000.
And you get 7 of us.
to pitch, pitch in what, you
know, 80,000.
or
um close to that, or 10 of us to
pitch in 60,000.
you know, and
and you've got
you've got a head start
but you have to have a plan.
you know, of action in terms of
identifying your legislators and
having a systematic way of
contacting them at least 3 times
before the session starts. But
again, your presentations were
outstanding.
You guys did excellent
You know, I just wish we had
more time to kind of really get
into a lot of what you
presented. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thanks again for the
presentation. Um, we'll move
forward to the next presentation
on rural healthcare facilities.
It's something that, um, uh, Mr.
Martinez, you mentioned earlier,
just some of the health, uh,
situations that we're seeing in
our rural communities that are
directly affecting, uh, some of
our communities.
Um, and so we want to make sure
that our, our land grants, we
have a better understanding of
how, you know, they're working
with our communities and the
health outcomes. Um, we are
about an hour behind on our
schedule, and so we will be
taking a, a short break for
lunch, more like 1015 minutes,
and then doing a working lunch,
just so everybody knows. But if
we could have, uh, James Kaiser,
Len Ho Horan, uh, Matthew Propes
all come up and, uh, present
today on rural healthcare
facilities in our communities
here.
And go to, I have that you all
in is uh James, and Lenn and
Matthew, but whatever order
y'all want to go in, I'm, I'm
good with. Thank you.
Oh
showing red, um, Madam Chair,
uh, honorable Legislative land
grant Committee members. I'm
James Kaiser. I'm the hospital
CEO at Holy Cross and Taos, uh,
Representative Herrera
represents much of Taos County.
It's good to see you. Actually,
you could give this
presentation, you almost did
there in your comments earlier
with some of the concerns the
state has with Medicaid.
um
free enterprise capitalism is a
great market force leveler, but
it lacks morality, and what I
mean by that is it leaves a
segment of society behind.
Um, I think you are well aware
New Mexico has approximately 44%
of our population dependent on
Medicaid.
Um, it is estimated at Tao
Um, it is estimated that Tas
that approximately 19, almost
20% of our population is
undocumented. Um, Holy Cross,
our heritage compels us to care
for poor and vulnerable
populations. We care for all
people regardless of their
ability to pay.
were not owned by some out of
state for-profit corporation,
um, we're local independent. The
county owns the building. They
own the land the building is on,
and again we serve all people
regardless of ability to pay.
Um, we hope to be able to
continue that promise. We have
since 1936 broaching almost a
100 years, um, however, um, as
you've probably read in many of
the press across the state, um,
we're at
risk of closing because of that
dependency on Medicaid. 75% of
our patients, our Medicare or
Medicaid.
Um, and even as a critical
access cost-based reimbursed
hospital. um
we operate at a loss, um,
Medicare and Medicaid reimburses
below the cost of providing
care. So how you have to make it
up regardless of which facility
you're in is through those with
commercial health insurance.
So we could not, as most of our
healthcare delivery safety net
across the country could not
withstand to have a greater
population of un or
underinsured.
um
and, and so are we at risk? Of
course we are. Um, the one
so-called one big beautiful or
one big ugly Bill is um
the cuts of 880 billion across
Medicaid for the country.
Um
rural America feeds the world.
and it deserves a healthcare
delivery safety net.
Um, not only are we at risk, but
we cannot be all things to all
people. Our hope was when you
approved the healthcare delivery
Access Act, which was a Medicaid
supplemental payment that would
have paid closer to an average
commercial health insurance
rate. Our job was going to grow
services. We, we have a
catchment area of 50,000 people,
35,000 in Taos County and then
we serve a portion of Colfax
County.
Um, we should be much more for
those that we serve.
There's a huge risk for our
population. We don't even
provide cancer services, and
that's something I publicly
committed to
We need to expand cardiac
service, services, and others,
um, in New Mexico we don't have
a good access to data.
Um, but I'm not sure if it would
change many things. Um, it, it
in other states I've worked in,
we have comparative data, comp
data that shows what from what
zip code to what zip code for
what diagnosis patients went. So
we do have a lot of
outmigration. Um, but even
looking at Medicare data, it's,
it's at least directional, but
our numbers are low.
and the only thing I've surmised
is that much of our impoverished
community doesn't even seek
care. We don't have enough
primary care and access to, and
I think for several reasons
they're fearful or uneducated,
unknowledgeable, and they
expire, they die.
And so we don't even know how
many patients are going without
care.
The number one request on our
community health needs
assessment was access to primary
and urgent care, and we're
trying to address that. There
are space limitations that we
have.
We added um, one, primary care
physician and two advanced
practice clinicians or physician
assistant and nurse
practitioner.
and almost the first week, 650
patients signed up for
appointments, and already now
they're backlogged.
and when I approached some of
the end independent
practitioners feeling they may
be threatened as we tried to
grow primary care.
They, they said, we welcome it,
we cannot keep pace with demand.
And while I'm preaching to the
choir, you know that health care
is a right and should not be
treated as a privilege.
Um, we're doing our best to try
to meet our core values response
to need, and we're doing our
best to respond to the needs of
the community. Um, with these
proposed cuts, um, I don't know
how we can hold, hold, hold the
safety net together.
and
when, when we, while we cannot
be all things to all people,
even the urban hospitals are at
risk.
um
when we our, uh, emergency
department doctors tried to
refer to Santa Fe or
Albuquerque. There's not room at
the inn
and it may not just be a matter
of, of beds, but staffed beds
with the national workforce
shortage.
Uh, we're fortunate in that we
can, uh, we're living a
naturally beautiful area with
outdoor recreation. We can
recruit talent from across the
country, but we have to pay
competitive wages, salaries and
benefits at a national level.
And so again, our hope with the
healthcare delivery Access Act
was to be able to grow services
and be able to sustain that
safety net.
Um, we operate an average loss
of approximately $2.5 million
annually. Um
that we county gives us one
meal, which is approximately 2
million, that's been able to
cover it.
This past year, we operated at a
loss of 4.5 million. We've had
to adjust, um, payroll
compensation benefits for our
healthcare professionals working
with our unions, and we have a
great working relationship with
our union and uh uh again again
it's all part of the model.
Um, we, you know, a philoss of
this past year, 4.5 million
Myriad factors, but we were able
to get, uh, as based on your
approval in the second half of
2024.
um
with the healthcare delivery
Access Act, we were able to fund
fund that cover that loss.
Um
there was,
I think it was a US Senator,
first of all, Congresswoman, uh
Ledger Fernandez visited our
hospital two weeks ago. Last
week, Senator Ben Lujan heard
from Senator Heinrich's office
locally. They're very concerned.
Senator Luhan said he's, he's
worried.
Um, as, as you articulated, um,
the risk at the current
administration at the federal
level.
Um, I think it was US Senator
McClosky in Alaska, a
Republican. She said that
they were gonna um allow 25
billion over the course of five
years for rural hospital
stabilization.
She held out her vote to get
that to $50 billion.
but I don't know the answer to
that. I do know that of the
6,000+ hospitals across the
country, over 2000 are um
critical access hospitals
and so it does that help? I
don't know, but I know past 5
years, it doesn't help to
sustain that, that healthcare
delivery safety net.
It's 200 rural hospitals are
closed across the country in the
past 20 years.
and evidence will state that
when the rural community
hospital goes down, the rural
community goes down.
Um
we have received some help
supported by you. Um, we, I
mentioned lack of space, so
Senator Roberto Bobby J Gonzalez
has helped us through some
capital outlay to look at a
primary care clinic in our
community, um, and help with
that stabilization model.
um
I'll be brief and wrap up here.
Uh, our concern is that not only
across New Mexico, but across
this country that this will
implode this healthcare delivery
safety net, and it won't be able
to rebound.
And um any infrastructure and
we're, we're a public service.
We're no different than law
enforcement or education.
um,
uh, economic viability of any
community is impossible without
health care.
You're doing your part again in
preaching to the choir, um,
Senator Lujan said something to
the effect they needed 4 votes
on the, on the public and Senate
side. They had to, they needed 2
more so that Vice President
Vance could not be a tiebreak as
he was in the Bills as it was
initially.
um
that's gonna be a challenge. He
said you could see as they
walked into the room that they
had been strong armed and
intimidated to vote.
Our only hope is we through our
advocacy efforts across the
country, we can educate them on
the, I wouldn't say unintended
consequences. Sadly, many in
this administration do not have
a conscience. They don't have a
soul. They don't have a heart.
and um, but this, this country's
going to have to step up and
make some difficult decisions,
but, uh, be a bit defiant, so.
um, I just know you're
supportive and just thank you
for support. I would ask that
what can we and particularly in
our industry do more to support
you.
I was asked to come here by the
land grant committee via the
Mexico Hospital Association for
those that serve in tribal
communities.
We now have designated position
on our board for indigenous
people, uh, Eileen Lujan from
our Pueblo serves on our board,
and we're really strengthened on
our working relationships. She
and the tribe are, uh, are very,
very concerned as well.
With that I'll be happy to field
any questions or hear any
thoughts that you have now or
later, so thank you. We'll hear
all testimony and then, and then
we can ask questions. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I thank you for
inviting me, uh, to speak a
little bit like about La Clinica
del Pueblo, the Ria Riba. I
probably had one of the shorter
commutes, um, our office and our
clinic is about 1 mile that way.
So, uh, you guys get up extra
early, I, I could sleep in a
little bit,
um
the history of La Clinicca del
Pueblo deririba started in 1969
as La Cupertiva. It was by the
community for the community,
they started uh raising crops,
peas, potatoes, for whatever the
community needed. And then later
in 1969, they added a dentist
and they bought a little uh
building and by 72, they had a
behavioral health. So, um.
that's where we started and as
needs uh were identified,
services were added. Today we uh
provide uh healthcare for an
area covering about 1700 square
miles, uh, towards Ches Pedras
in the east to Lumberton in the
Hickoria, uh, reservation to the
west to the Colorado border, and
down to Pedro Lumbre, the ghost
ranch area. Those are really
big, um, area. uh
We see about 2000 patients,
10,000 encounters per year. So
relatively small. We have two
buildings, one in Tierra Maria
and one in Chama. We have a
mobile unit and we're very
involved in our student-based
health center at the uh at the
middle school and high school,
supporting all the Chama Valley
schools.
uh
like I said, we provide medical,
we write dental, behavioral
health, uh, emergency services,
and physical therapy. We're the
only federally qual federally
qualified health center in New
Mexico to offer physical therapy
and also to run our own
emergency service system in the
entire state of New Mexico. Uh,
and we did this because we have
a really unique place in our
community. Ours, our, our
members, our citizens have to go
an hour in each way for these
services. So they kept coming to
us. You need to have physical
therapy and so
last fall, we opened our own
clinic. Um, we footed the bill,
we made it profitable. We're
actually a physical therapist is
booking out till 2026. So don't
get a knee replacement NTA
because you're, it's gonna be a
while before you see our
therapist, but that's how
successful it's been. Actually
other communities will call and
check our availability for
physical therapy. Uh, we run our
own bedroom. uh
we're looking to expand our
pharmacy. It's a midroom now,
but based on community needs,
again, they have an hour commute
each way. So, um, uh, we're
gonna expand that. So we haven't
felt sorry for ourselves. Uh,
we've added services that have
been financially solvent, but
also good for our community
members, uh, and one of the
things I'm most proud of is that
our medical director, Doctor
Jody Casados, is, she was born
about 2 miles away here in
Ensenada. She was, she's a
medical doctor, highly talented.
She serves her community. Doctor
Levi Maas is from Canyon. He's
another full-time medical doctor
serving his community. Our
dental director, Margaret
Martinez, I was born in, um,
Ensenada. She's our, our, uh,
dental director. Our behavioral
health director Caitlyn Mature.
She uh, grew up in Plaza Blanca,
which is a, uh, maybe 5 or 10
miles on the other side of Los
Als. Uh, she's our behavioral
health director, uh, physical
therapist, Doctor Teraterassas
She was born and raised in
Chama. So all of our providers
are from the community providing
services for the community.
Uh, and then other employees
obviously our HR director was
actually born in uh, in our
clinic.
Uh, not recently, not recently,
um.
and her finance director is also
from CAMA. So we, most of our
employees from Nick Link, we
didn't recruit from outside. We
were luckily enough that these
highly skilled, and these aren't
just people that we put in these
positions. These are medical
doctors that went to UNM, um
we were recently named the 2025
Visionary site of the Year for
New Mexico.
Um, to put that in perspective,
the, um, the facility that was,
uh, won the award last year was
Chris' Saint Vincent. So that's
pretty tough competition where a
little health clinic is
competing with major hospitals.
The year before that was
Guadalupe County Hospital. So
we're really proud of that
Um, so the things that we need
are represented, uh, Herrera,
uh, she helped us with our, our
ambulance last time. Her and
Senator Jamio and maybe it was
Senator Bendelendoendo.
They helped us with the
ambulance.
It already has 60,000 miles on
it based on our 1700 square
miles, if we go on a call, it's
going to put a few 100 miles on
that ambulance. Um, it takes 3
years to once you order an
ambulance to get it here. They
cost about 375,000. Uh, somebody
had mentioned different uh
representatives and senators put
some money together. That's
what's, uh, Representative
Herrera helped us do, and we
were so grateful that you could
help us with that. So now we're
going to be coming again because
when after 3 years
that ambulance is going to have
250,000 miles on it. So when
you're out up on 64 this past
weekend, we had a, a pretty
major uh ATB accident and you're
going down those those roads,
you can't afford to break down
or have an equipment
malfunction. Um, so those are
the things we would ask for. The
physical therapy, we want to
expand that. There's other
services our communities need.
They need occupational therapy,
maybe speech therapy. We have
the talent in our clinic. We
have the energy and the passion
to add those, but we need
infrastruc
ture and a building. We
converted the old Dunham clinic
in Chama, um, into, it's half be
health and half physical
therapy, but we're, we're, uh,
we're expanding outside our
seams. Um, we provide physical
therapists to the local school.
We have a contract with them. We
provide behavioral health, but
we need more space. So that's
why I would come to, um,
legislature to help us with that
infrastructure, those buildings,
um, that so we can expand the
services.
Uh, another area that we've, uh,
we've started was, uh, community
outreach again. As I said, we
started out as a community
outreach, uh, place for the our
citizens, but we just are
reinitiating that, a place for
young families and get diapers
and formula and things like
that. Our elderly, which is a
really big part of our, our
community and growing, um, have
a, have a need, um, kinship and
grandfamilies, those, those uh
non-traditional families. We
have so many of those families
they're raising, not their
biological children, um,
brothers and sisters and a lot
of grandparents are raising. So
we're, we want to be welcoming
and provide them services also.
So I invite any of you to come
visit the clinic at any time.
I'd love to, to show you around.
It doesn't show that well on the
on the highway, but once you get
inside, most people say, wow,
you guys are really doing neat
things in there. Um, again, rep
Herrera has been in inside
certain lots of times, um, but
we have a state of the art
dental facility. So, uh, from
our standpoint, we provide a lot
to our community. I know there's
a lot of questions on the
Medicaid. Our percent is about
21%, uh, Medicaid patients, and
they represent a big source
of income for us, and they are
one of our higher paid, uh,
other person said that, that,
you know, they don't cover the
costs and that might be true.
But for Medicaid for us, that's
a big funder, even at the 21%,
it really has helped us meet
physical therapy, uh, go. We
haven't seen anything
specifically from the
government. They both held
funds, but, you know, as we all
think it's, it's just inevitable
when that percentage goes down.
So with that, Madam Chair, I
stand for questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
community, uh Matt probst. I'm
uh I'm gonna do my best to hold
back emotions, but just when I
drive over that ridge they're
coming from the south and and
see the Brazos this is home. I
think only this committee could
have brought Mount probes 3
miles 33 hour drive to uh uh
give a a quick presentation and
head back in the middle of a
fall soccer season because I got
a team to coach tonight, um, but
you did it, um, this place did
it.
um, I'm director of rural
engagement for New Mexico and
health care through the
University of New Mexico Office
for Community Health.
You know, on my left and right
here you have with the topic at
hand, healthcare facilities, uh,
as your topic and uh.
and you've got the two staples.
You've got rural hospitals and
federally qualified health
centers. So what else do you
need to know about? You need to
know about public health
offices. You need to know about
IHS services and, and the
clinics we have in places like
Dulce.
uh, you need to know that
there's still some renegades
that try to do private medicine
in rural.
and survive that standalone docs
that are that they're stubborn
because there's no money to be
made in the country and their
currency like ours is not
dollars, it's health.
Uh
that all being said,
as the legendary Dr. Art
Kaufman, who is now also not
just one of my main mentors and
Jodie's and Levi's and the, the
folks you heard about, um, would
tell you, and it's well proven,
80% of healthcare happens
outside the walls of our
clinics, whether that's at the
school-based health center,
whether that's in the hospital
or in the clinic. That now is
called social drivers of health
previously called social
determinants of health. And so
the
topics that were spoken about
earlier by the by the Mercer, by
the land grant, uh.
healthcare is food.
water, job training, uh, youth
mentorship, proper, good
education, all of those things,
um.
so,
yeah, so my primo here to the
right is, is one of the smartest
guys I know, but pales in
comparison, I think he would
admit to to Dr. Mariano Olivari.
Uh, his, his better half in my
first cousin who we we rode
horses around here, um, growing
up together. And, um, and her
and I and Levi and and and Jody
and Margaret, the head for
dental, we all went to school
here together.
and realizing that
that that's, that is the cream
of the crop.
You do not have to recruit
nationally or anything else,
those, those are some of the
most brilliant minds
in this state, maybe in the
nation.
that made a very educated
choice, keyword educated, it's
not uneducated, educated choice
to come home and serve for their
querencia.
And so, uh, this is the greatest
example of a program now at the
University of New Mexico, you
have the article in front of you
about our heroes program and in
the Office for Community Health
has adopted, uh, I'm the
founding director for, for a
grow your own health
professional program called
Semias de Salud.
Uh, it's a national award
winning uh way to, to grow our
future healthcare workforce
right here at home. There's no
greater example in the state of
New Mexico than Tierra Maria
right now.
with uh with this and uh and I
know that both Len and his
predecessor Darrin Diapu, the
CEO of El Centro, who also
operates a federally qualified
health center and then the
primary care.
uh component of that in Taos,
in, in, in the Holy Cross area
and Penasco, uh, that, um,
they'll tell you that the
success of these organizations,
whether it's a rural hospital, a
public health office, a
federally qualified community
health center, a school-based
health center, a private
doctor's office, uh, uh, any of
it, uh, is, is the providers.
It's the people
Uh, it is the people just like
you said, so while
Representative Herrera that make
that happen. And uh back to the
culture and, and uh we know that
the needs are greater than the
data shows, as my partner to my
left here said so well.
When you create a culture of
this is the perfect, I've never
presented to this committee
before. I presented so many
committees, legislatively. I'm
so proud to be in front of this
committee, but when you create a
culture of inaccessibility? What
do you expect?
People only go to the doctor
when they're dying or they're
spouse makes them go. That's it.
You don't, you don't go other
than that. That's how ranch life
is. And when you create a cult
and when it feels foreign and
they don't speak your language,
they don't acknowledge who you
are. They may come from other
places that don't honor your
erencio. They have no clue, and
they call you those people
instead of my people.
then you wonder why they don't
come.
When you have people like
Doctor Maes and Doctor Casado
and and Margaret.
it's, it's immeasurable what
that means to a community and
the amount of access that you
can provide. And it goes well
beyond the doors of the clinic,
obviously, because in a little
place like this, you see them on
the sideline of the football
game.
and that Henry's true value and
that any other place you go
around here at the post office
and the other few places there
are where people congregate at
the Marcel. You see them and uh
it's a 24/7 commitment.
Uh, so that being said, I want
to put that out here. Heroes,
I'm excited about to be a part
of now and our health extension
regional offices, it's very much
founded in the culture of um
extension and and agriculture
and everything that we're
talking about, um, here, uh, in
this committee, um, you know,
Agg extension was the start of
it. And then that, you know,
became an idea. Well, if we can
have ag extension through NMSU
through the University of New
Mexico Health Scientists Center.
Can we have health extension and
that piece.
And, uh, you know, I would, I, I
said earlier it's the providers,
but that definition of what the
providers are, if you read the,
the uh article. I am now not
just, you know, for the state
director of her own engagement
to try and find the resources
needed to
before the disaster, uh, expand
access to care in rural New
Mexico. Now it's just, can we
survive in rural New Mexico is
the reality of that situation,
but um, I've now been assigned
to be a hero. It says in here,
heroes who don't wear capes or
stethoscopes. Well I do wear a
stethoscope.
I am a physician assistant by
training in 20 hours a week, I,
I get to provide care,
particularly in school-based
health centers in uh in a model
I designed called the New Mexico
hub and spoke school-based
health center model that
provides access to many frontier
communities that otherwise have
no clinical access.
So I do that now for Mora
County. And so I'm actually a
hero for Mota County. Um, I, I
want to point out that uh the uh
the idea that yes, you need a
license to practice medicine and
to get a license to practice
medicine, you need to be the
best of the best and and have
very high test scores and, and
great to make it through very
long programs, but community
health workers have become key,
and I wanna uh commend you all
in our legislative body for
taking
that importance of community
health workers, also known as
promotoro promooras to take, to
bring healthcare to these
communities. And the role of
being the extension of those
services, medical, behavioral
health, dental services, uh, for
us in the communities. And so,
uh, you know, certified
community health workers who
again understand our community
socially, culturally,
linguistically can connect to
people and trust, right?
Because it isn't a lack of
education. I, I, I hope you, I
got to read the article from our
local paper with my
Tiamiboillibari, my mom brought
home a a copy from me from her
visit here a couple of weeks
ago, um.
super educated.
um
it is a lack of trust. There's a
culture of inaccessibility and
there's lack of trust and I
don't have to speak to this
committee on land grants, where
that comes from, can only get
taken advantage of so many
times.
So, with that being said, we
have a fighting spirit. We have
grit, we have, uh, genius. We
have um
uh innovation
and I want to leave it on that.
Yes, there is the doom of gloom,
and what more can we do? um,
with that, but um
in the greatest times of trial,
I, I once had the opportunity in
school to interview my grandpa,
uh, Ernestolivari, uh, aired
this land grant here in TA and
uh the the assignment was to
speak to, uh, to someone who
survived the Great Depression.
And uh my grandpa Ernesto said,
every time I, and this is all in
Spanish, every time I would, uh,
start reeling him back to the
great depression, he would start
speaking again about El Indino
Malo
El Indierno Malo
and uh it was a horrible winter
where half of the livestock
froze in the positions they were
standing, people had to
neighbors had to help neighbors
to survive. Um, that horr
ible winter, and when I would
try and point it back to the
Great Depression, he'd kind of
be like, oh yeah, I kind of
remember vaguely something about
that.
One good thing out in rural and
at the ranch, those major
economic impacts and things that
happen on a global and national
scale, we have reprieve from
some of those things here,
because we, you know, what was
happening, I would try and
explain it, you know, it's in
the textbooks. People had to
live off of papas and, and
frijoles and rice and
we always lived off papas and
frijoles and rice. You know, I
think we're gonna eat some of
that here after this uh
presentation, right? And we're
gonna enjoy it, um, together,
and so, um, so my point on that
is that we're survivors
and we're going to get through
this together, uh, we do need
your help, uh, but more than
anything, we need that fighting
spirit and uh and, and we will
endure. Thank you.
Thank you presenters for uh all
of the context and everything.
Uh, we have, we're starting with
questions I have Representative
Collin first up. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So I had a couple
of questions. In reference to
your, your clinic and you're
really having these physicians
come back and work here within
the community. Um, which is
great because you see a lot of
times when they go off to
school, they go somewhere else.
So my question is because I've
been trying to work with the,
uh, UNM. I would like to expand
the BAMD program in
which really brings him back
into the rural areas. Um, so do
you know if that is one of the,
the things that they.
your physician had attended
because did she go to UNM? OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, uh, those two,
the two medical doctors, both
are, are you and M grads. Uh, so
they came back and that's who
we, uh, were named the visionary
site was from the UNM Alumni
Association. When we were
looking for, uh, providers, we
did reach out to them. So we do
have a connection with their
classes that are coming out,
but, uh, to, uh
uh supported the, the point
earlier is we do have to offer
competitive wages and benefits.
It's not that they would just do
this at the kindness of their
heart. I, they love it and they
want to do it, but you can't,
you know, they also understand
their worth in the community, so
that's why everything else has
to line up really well with
billing and collection and, and
payments through Medicaid,
Medicare and private to, to make
it all work. But, uh, to answer
your question, are, are two
medical doctors are UNM alumni.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Collin, this was pre-BAMD era.
I'm a, I'm like a weird dinosaur
and we're getting to be that
that age of of providers now
with, with the three, with, with
them as physicians and myself as
a PA, so that was prior to the
BMD, so yes, UNM absolutely, but
there are many routes through
UNM including BAMD. Right, yeah,
so thank you, Madam Chair. So,
really, I'm trying to look at
how we can keep these physicians
here. It's, um, you
know, we know we've been
struggling, you know, there's
some recent articles that have
come out in reference to um
reasons why doctors are also
leaving. Um, so there is, uh,
quite a big issue that we need
to kind of dig into, but uh the
other um question I had in
reference to Holy Cross Medical
Center. Um, you were, so I just
wanna make sure that you were
saying that you were running
typically at a 2.5 million
deficit and then last year you
were at 4.5 million deficit. Is
that correct? Yes. OK. And madam
Chair, um
and what is the reason is that
because your Medicaid
reimbursement rates, or what is
the reason why, uh, you saw
significantly more increase. It,
it, it, it, it's convoluted, but
the 2.5 is an average over time.
The 4.5 was a bit of an anomaly.
Some of it was coupled with, uh,
you know, you talk about
environment and environmental
factors, no snow.
The ski valley were very
dependent on orthopedic
procedures in our community. It
only in hospitals, only 2
services reimburse at a profit
margin. Currently diagnostic
imaging, MRI and CT that may
change it's to be reimbursed
below the cost of care.
and, and same day elective
surgical procedure from a
patient that has commercial
health insurance. Everything
else operates is not
self-sustaining, and its mission
community services lab.
Um, without that, you can't
provide healthcare services. Um,
so, and then there's some uh uh
anomaly or or orthopedic program
is uh fellowship training
program and historically they've
covered call, uh, for orthopedic
procedures. Um, they come to
Santa Fe and Los Alamos, also
orthopedics Institute, and of
course TAS.
and those three fellows that we
typically have only one
qualified for US medical
license. They were all foreign
trained
and so we had to spend $4000 a
day to cover call. That's why we
lost that much money, so a
little different. Again, I think
the point is it healthcare is
expensive, and you had a very
good point. Uh, we're hospitals
don't
provide healthcare. You said 80%
of health is outside of the
settings, and that's true. Only
10% of a person's health is what
we do. We provide sick and
rescue care and of that, the
United States system is the best
in the world. We don't have the
longest longevity because of our
lifestyle choices, but we do
provide the best sick and rescue
care in the world, so, and we
need to be able to continue that
so long answer.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters, uh, for
your presentations, uh.
kind of really, um
really kind of high level
emotional kind of.
situation that
kind of triggered uh some
thoughts in me, uh, but, uh,
quite, uh, I have a question for
James, um
what is the status of your
of your detox
at the hospital? The county, uh,
the town donated a building
adjacent to the hospital for
detox, um, obviously like the
nation, we have huge uh
substance abuse issues, mental
health, behavioral health
illness issues.
Um, and under met need and I
think I have a colleague that
may be speaking to that here
shortly after lunch.
um
um, what it was the build
facility was in need of repair.
And so the county's struggling a
bit with coming up with the
funding to repair that building.
Um, in fact, at the initial
meeting when the town was giving
that building one commissioner
held out because they inherited
a bad building from the town of
Taos before because they had to
put a lot of money into it. So
that's, that's the status. The
need is just as great or
greater. And I, I've had
pressure and I've tried to
educate
our community and our board.
I've been in other communities,
larger communities. I've had to
close psych hospitals and
chemical dependency hospitals
because sadly as a society we
don't recognize mental illness
as an illness and so we
underresource it and the
reimbursement was so low that it
would have imploded our medical
delivery system and that's part
of that safety net for the
community, so.
Thank you for that, James.
Um, you know, Lynn, uh, um, I'm
real familiar with your clinic.
The clinica del Pueblo.
Hetero Maria fact, me and my
ex-wife would come to their
annual retreats.
there at the Tierra Muuerte
site.
and um
and it was really um
it, it was really kind of uh
invigorating.
and mainly because the majority
of the people associated with
the clinica and with the board
were La grant activists.
You know,
Bell Armirachuleta. I haven't
seen him here today, but
he was one of those guys and he
dedicated his life
to that clinic in terms of its
viability and its growth and
potential
and um
you know, uh
your physical therapist
uh, in 2024, we passed a bill.
that I carried for 9 years
It's a real health care
practitioner.
um, tax Credit Act.
So $3000
PIT
credit
um, physical therapists were not
in the loop, seeing that we
passed the original bill in
2007.
Uh, pharmacists were not in the
loop.
Social workers were not in the
loop.
Behavioral health workers and
therapists were not in the loop.
Registered nurses were not in
the loop, and certified midwives
were not in the loop.
and that's the core of our
professionals in terms of the
really grassroots level. So and
I'm sure, you know, the bill
initially basically looked at
the higher level
physician
uh categories, and some moments
were at 5000 credit.
And I hope that your staff has
taken advantage of that because
of 2024, they can take advantage
of the $3000 credit.
And it's money in their pocket
that the state does not collect.
you know, and, um, uh, and last
year, this past session, 2025, I
try to include some other
practitioners that we left out.
you know, occupational
therapist.
emergency technicians
um
occupational therapist. So we're
working on that one.
and hopefully we can get it done
next session.
Um,
this thing about um
your staff
the local Chicano and Chicanos.
grew up here, rode horses up and
down the royos and the ritos.
you know, and kind of went off
to med school or
um, uh, and, and became
professionals, health
professionals.
you know, and how they have this
capacity.
kind of a real
uh, holistic
view of their
delivery
of, of their service.
You know, it's just not
you know, center for center uh
delivered in a way where you
just kind of look at the
straight center.
It reminds me of this individual
in my community in Erisco
Valley.
Um, Michael Montoya.
he got, he went to UNM
um
uh, medical school
Uh, did his, his residency in
the Hatch Valley.
and came back to the Arisco
Valley.
and
he, along with another Chicano
from Tucumerri.
um
Gay Martinez established the
Numito Hispanic Medical
Association.
Why?
To give Chicano Chicano America
technicians, physicians.
a place at the table, and be a
voice for these technicians and
these practitioners.
you know, and that's why it was
created like that.
And his graduation and again
at your staff is similar to
Michael Montoya, but we have a
lot of your staffs throughout
New Mexico.
you know, um
Doctor, uh
Michael Lopez, Las Vegas, where
this brothersanna headquarter.
40-year practice
came out of Stanford, Madam
Chair.
during COVID
working 14 hours
There's only one other physician
in Las Vegas. In 2003, Madam
Chair, 24 physicians in Las
Vegas. Now Gos
During COVID
14 hour days
even on weekends.
You know,
and, uh, Michael Montoya I'm a
chair.
during graduation
cap and gown
He's the only one that had his
cape and gown in his hands.
He didn't put it on
Sowena, he went up to get his
diploma, madam chair, and he
tells the president
I want you to fill this cape and
gown with another Chicano
and another Chica
and give him the same
benefits, the same opportunities
that you gave me
to become a med
a medical doctor.
You know, and, uh, so these guys
that you have working for you,
and they're dynamite. I can just
see, I can just see them, you
know, and their commitment to
the community and the future
growth of medical services in
this community, and they're not
going nowhere.
You know, they'll probably
retire here, but they're role
models
It, it, it wears on people to
see people like that.
to kind of step up.
and and and take on those
opportunities. Um, you know, if,
if my neighbor can do that,
heck, I can try doing it as
well. So there's more to it, you
know, than what we, what we
envision, so
and naturally, you know, Matt.
he's one of our warrior.
Chicano health
warrior
you know, in our state, and
there's quite a few of, of
people like Matt.
You know, if we kind of really
lump them together, and we're
grateful for that
because he initiates a lot of
initiatives
that are lacking that need
addressing.
and sets the ball in motion to
make those initiatives happen.
you know, so we're grateful for
that and taking the time to come
up here to this kind of
ancestral landholdings. So thank
you all. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much,
Representative, uh,
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Colleagues, and, uh, thank all
three of you for all that you
do. Um.
I
I, I'm just very curious about
something we go to tell I, I,
um, uh, James, I have to tell
you, we go to Holy Cross and uh
your hospital saved my husband's
life at least 4 times in 2019,
and I'm not kidding. And today
he is walking, uh, he goes to
the gym every day for an hour or
plays golf. And he could barely
even walk, uh, 7 years ago. So,
uh, his healthcare and his uh
his health. I mean, I mean, you
would have
saved him, so
uh it's healthcare, like the
most important thing, yeah.
because without that you really
can't do anything else, you
know, so I, I'm deeply
appreciative and just a personal
story and, and I'm, I'm just
curious about, you know, you
know my doctor Elina Benjamin,
um, is aligned with Holy Cross
too, and I, you know, when I see
her, we always talk about
legislation. So I, I asked her
what's, what's been your most
difficult problem, and this was
coming off COVID, and she said
behavioral health.
The behavioral health issues I
see in my office are
overwhelming, and so I would
like for each of you to kind of
just talk about that from your
perspective and also about, you
know, we, we, we've put a lot of
money in, uh, but it's still in
a trust, you know, it will, it
will come, uh, but the first
year it's only like 100 million,
but we're just starting to work
on these uh these regional
efforts through the court
system, which I, you know, when
I first like the deal was
done by the time it got to my
vote. So, you know, I wasn't
going to change anything, but
I'm very curious about how
that's working, uh, in each of
your, um, in each of your
situations. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So for the Office for Community
Health, we're a key partner now
in coordinating these regional
meetings with our heroes and uh
the community health workers and
our trusted people, you know,
reaching out and bringing
stakeholders to the table very
early on here as things form.
Um, I will just tell you that
some of the preliminary concerns
that I've heard. So again,
there's, here's hope, there's
funding, right? But they're all
this also goes back to trauma
and whether it's generational
trauma and for those of the of
us that have
worked in healthcare long enough
to know what happened, you know,
why we need this behavioral
health reform, um, is
uh, I, I, there's so there's a
couple of things, um, the very
first thing I started hearing,
uh, you know, as I supported
this legislation in the session
was, well, the cart before the
horse and the workforce. So
here's funding for, you know,
expanding access to care, but if
you don't have the workforce
and, and the one thing that I
would say about that is that
it's a crisis and every day that
passes, and we know it takes
time to, you know, before
they'll be actual funding rolled
out in programs implemented
people are dying
And so, um, so it can't be the
cart and then the horse. Did we
got to build both at the same
time. So I think that back to
behavioral healthcare workforce
and every kind of workforce, um,
in 2019, I was named the
national uh Rural Health
Behavioral, the rural behavioral
health provider of the year.
which I had never considered
myself a behavioral health
provider as a PA. And so when I
was speaking to the folks that
were giving me the word, they
said, well, Matt, you know,
don't you make a lot of
diagnoses and write a lot of
prescriptions for, you know, a
lot of, um, SSRIs and other
medications for depression and
anxiety. I'm like, yeah, so, so
I think this is one of the other
key things coming up with this
legislation. You know, boxing it
in behavioral health, what we
need to be doing is talking more
about integration of services,
right, as
I sit on the primary care
council for New Mexico and
Healthcare Authority. My guest
is Alex
Alex, Alex on the agenda,
thinking maybe she would be
behind me because Stele Smith,
she's your next presenter later
on. But primary care counsel's
been all about integrating
services and so what is primary
care? It includes behavioral
health and vice versa. So I
think that's going to be
important. Uh, there's two other
things I think here early on
that are coming up, which is,
you know, uh, the, the uh
is it, is the is this are the
resources going to be rolled out
equitably. And OK, well, it's
not going to be population. OK,
it's like uh it is what it is,
right? It's by judicial
districts. OK. So, um that being
said, but there's all different
sites, and then it's not just
population, there's different
needs and there's different, you
know, the big one I heard
yesterday on a on a meeting was,
you know, we're bringing people
to this table. Do they feel safe
going to that table, especially
if they're people, uh, primarily
uh folks that that traditionally
and by data we knew know don't
access behavioral health
services, and then now they're
supposed to go to meetings to
talk about accessing behavioral
health services. I'm gonna
specifically say Hispanic and
Spanish speaking only people,
and you're going to ask them to
go to a meeting to talk about
this, and there's going to be
law enforcement present.
Uh, OK, so yeah, so interesting
things there, so are we
outreaching, are we outreaching
in Spanish? Um, are we making
sure that everybody's at the
table. So, you know, I, I think
that's a very important one. My
biggest concern and, and I've
challenged uh uh in the primary
care council meeting, I
challenged healthcare authority
to really look at this super
supporter of this legislation
and and still am, um, however,
we drafted this legislation
before we knew the
disaster was going to happen.
And so when the language, it
reminds me very much now of
rural healthcare delivery Fund.
When the language is all about
new services, expanding
services, we have programs that
have been here for 50 years.
can we sur, let's make sure that
these agencies that have been in
the communities for a very long
time that they survive because
back to that generational trauma
and making sure history doesn't
repeat itself.
when people packed up last time
and left when the big cherry on
top, you know, wasn't there
anymore and they just packed up
and went back out of state. Who
left here taking care of humans,
the people that had always been
here. And so making sure that
they're valued at the table and
that there's something done
about the language around
we, we got to survive before we
can expand, and we got to take
care of those agencies that that
through the generations have
been here taking care of people,
even though there's.
no profit margins.
Madam Chair, I would echo your
comments, uh, Representative
Ferrero. It is, of all of our
areas, it's the area that's
grown the most in the last 5
years, both within the school,
which they were also COVID
related and affected, um, we've
added other ways to to improve
the delivery of that lot of
telehealth back to Matthew's
comment about a lot of our
population. There's a stigma
about behavioral health. They
don't want to go to a facility
that they may see that same
person at the grocery store. Um,
so
we've initiated more telehealth.
We have uh a a part-time
therapist, um, that, that does
it in the evening. A lot of
people work during the day. They
can't see their therapist, so we
provide services that way. But
then the other comment I would
make is it's the as far as the
financial side, it's a very
hard, um, mode to uh to make it
financially. So we provide the
service is growing, but our
reimbursement rates are among
the lowest in the behavioral
health area.
Um,
a member of our board, Doctor
Trinidad de Jesus Arguello, I
believe her husband may be here,
and will speak about rural
health outcomes, but one thing
she shared with Senator Lowe and
has shared with us often. She,
to her credit, she's very
passionate and asking us to do
more, um, but with limited
resources, but there's just, I
mean she speaks how it's
impossible we don't have a
psychiatrist in Taos with a
large catchment area.
but um
um, oh, the point she made there
was that the overwhelming our
emergency department and how
it's even going to get worse or
exacerbated extremely
with uh lack of Medicaid
funding. Um, um, to what's
already underresourced become
more underresourced and so our,
our physicians, practitioners
are underequipped to manage it.
And then there aren't
alternatives. You ask about
detox center, um
we, uh
we gel mentally ill patients,
and that's not the right
setting. It makes things worse,
but apps an alternatives, that's
what happens. So that's all I
can speak to, but I think others
can speak to it much better than
me.
Uh, thank, thank all of you for
that, for your answers, and
I, I kind of know that we said
we can't, you know, we're not
going to gel our way out of the
opioid crisis, which is what
we've been trying to do. It
doesn't work, won't work. I
helped fund that detox center,
but like any brand new center,
you don't just start something
and it works right away. I, I
just want to tell everybody when
you start a program, it takes,
I, it took Darren's place about
2 years before it had full
occupancy and the right staff to
run it.
And, uh, but I, yeah, I, I
think it'll happen too, but I
think people, as soon as
something gets started, they
expect it to work right away,
and it doesn't, and it's
particularly, I think in
behavioral health. It takes a
long time to build a staff, uh,
that's compensated at the right
level that will do the work and
that knows how to handle a very
difficult clientele. I mean,
let's be honest, these are
really hard cases. And, and then
we have the homelessness, which
is also prevalent and you know
the
governor just put $750,000 into
um uh crime in Espanola, and
when they, they called me and
told me, and I said, well, I
hope you're just giving them
more police because that's kind
of what they need. Both the
sheriff department, that, you
know, you can't talk about
reducing crime if you don't
have, if you don't have enough
police to do anything. And if
you have 10 police spread across
Rio Reba County, which is
practically the size of
Massachusetts. Guess, guess
where, how fast they can make a
call, you know, in, in most
rural communities they have kind
of a crimewatch system where
they kind of help each other
out. If, if something goes
south, uh, you know how to call
your neighbors or some people to
get over there quickly. So I,
I'm just, I, I had a meeting
with the people um
in my community on the
behavioral health consortium,
including people from the hos
from, uh, Presbyterian, uh, we
Los Alamos espanola, and uh
well, Los Alamos Rio Riba and uh
uh
uh Santa Fe Counties. That's
our, that's our
what do you call them region?
That's our region, behavioral
health region. Our our judi
judicial court number one. So I
was very worried about this. We
did have a meeting, uh,
Presbyterian had just got a
million dollars. This happened
like the day before the meeting
from the USDA to do a um a drug
treatment program, and it was,
it's medically, it's a medically
based program, comes out of
Texas, been shown to be very
successful. Uh, they do it with
um
it, it is a medical treatment
program. One physician can serve
450 patients. It's pretty
amazing. It's a program where
the medical, the medically based
strips that they call it, they
can detox at home. So I, I've
just heard about this, but we
got all the players together
from Los Alamos, from uh Santa
Fe and Riary Vietnam was
interesting the right people
were at the table. I was very
surprised, frankly, I, because I
thought, oh my God,
this is going to be a mess and
nothing's gonna happen. I, I,
we're, we are now meeting
monthly with that group to just
track and see that we have the
right players in place, but I
was uh very impressed with the
people that were there, and they
all knew each other.
and they were all working
together already, so that's all
I have to say, Madam Chair,
thank you. Uh, Senator, uh,
Thornton.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Some live in the East Mountains
and, and, and we're considered a
rural community, even though
we're like 30 minutes away from
Albuquerque. It
it if there's an emergency, we
have to go 30 minutes and so
that could be a life or death
situation. So we're also
interested in
getting some kind of rural
support, uh, in our area as
well. I guess the question I
have, and I only have one, but
I'd like for you to each of you
to address it is, is what has
been the impact of medical
malpractice insurance rates on
your ability to either attract
or retain the doctors and
medical practitioners or
practitioners that you already
have, and so I'd like each one
of you to to address that.
I certainly can, and I, I know
it's challenging fact that in
Mexico Hospital Association
every year has um
chosen not to make this uh a
legislative session issue
because they know it will not,
they will not be successful.
Um, Holy Cross paid over $10
million in premiums in the last
3 years. That could have gone to
take care of people.
1% of society's harmed. Should
it happen, of course it
shouldn't, but we're putting the
care of 99% of the population at
risk by these exorbitant
premiums and, and, and what has
been labeled an interesting
nuclear settlements. Um
when you talk about recruiting
and retaining healthcare
professionals, um.
they're deterred by the poverty
levels of New Mexico? Can they
make a living if they come from
elsewhere?
And so those that have such
passion for their area they're
from are very admirable,
obviously, um, but then coupled
with the medical malracus rates.
Right now we're having to use
some locum tenants physicians,
and the group we're working with
wants us to cover the
malpractice. We said no, they
go, they will do in other
hospitals across the country.
and now they're well they're
wanting to leave because they
can't afford it. Um, I shared
with the hospital association a
monthly member meeting and we
can't match the trial attorney's
campaign contributions. We
simply can't.
And I think you may be aware of
the lawsuit. I can't remember
the name of exactly the group,
the not for profit group, um
something to the effect of group
for patient safety.
and they, pardon?
Safety over profit, that's it.
and they, they they had to
disclose who their members were,
their contributors, all of them
were trial attorneys except for
one paralegal that worked for a
trial attorney. There were no
patients on that group.
and as you heard the governor
say, she agreed with the
Republican caucus on this
matter. We lost physicians. I
heard 750 left the state.
Um
I made the comment we were to
meet the governor. She didn't
make it, but a group of us, Dr.
Siriharamio, our one of our
hospitalists, um, Doctor Steven
Lucero, a urologist from Santa
Fe, Cyris from Berlin and um
I said, you know, there's going
to be a point where there aren't
hospitals, practitioners to sue
and then there's gonna be a
point where the trial attorneys
don't have anyone to care for
their family, but they don't
care because they're from out of
state.
and um so it's not a crisis and
um
if we want to hold the
healthcare delivery safety net
together, we're going to have to
reexamine our own conscience.
I mean, that's, that's my
perspective, so thank you. Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Thornton,
we're in a little different
situation as a federally
qualified health center. Uh,
our, anything that's under our
scope is covered by what's
called FTCA, Federal Tort
Claims, uh.
and uh and so malpractice
insurance is covered under that.
The, the Chea areas that we
operate that are not under our
scope as physical therapy and uh
emergency services, um, physical
therapy is in the process of
coming under our scope, which
we, we do pay extra for
malpractice for those two areas.
Uh, so it doesn't affect our
core business, uh, so.
So, um, that I think that's a
perfect contrast again. I just
realized I'm a provider sandwich
between two CEOs. So I will be
the provider voice. So it was
said earlier, um.
healthcare providers deserve to
be valued, and there's been a
very clear statement.
Attorneys are valued more than
healthcare providers. And that
statement is clear, not just to
the healthcare community. That's
cleared to the generation coming
behind us that are deciding, do
I want to be a doctor or a
lawyer?
So
uh, that I'll leave it with
that.
Thank you all for presenting
today. We really appreciate
hearing from all of you. Um, I
think we've heard from folks, so
I'm gonna go ahead and we're
gonna take a break for lunch.
Um, we're gonna have 15 minutes
to grab lunch and then be able
to have a working lunch so that
we get back to it and can hear
more about rural health
outcomes. Thank you, everybody.
