2 minutes in. It's gonna be a
long interim.
Um, go ahead, Representative
Chandler.
Good morning, everyone, um,
representatives, um, happy to be
on this working together, so
thank you.
Good morning, everybody. It's
good to see most um Nicole
Chavez, state representative for
District 31 in Alberta.
Good morning, everyone.
Representative Jennifer Jones,
District 32, the southernmost.
Good morning, Madam Chair. House
District 51 Representative John
Block. Good to be here from
Almogordo.
Ah, good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Kathleen Case
from District 44 is all across
the northern part of Albuquerque
in the unincorporated area of
Alameda. Good morning, everyone.
Eleanor Chavez, I represent, um,
House District 26, which is the
west side of Albuer. Good
morning, committee members,
Madam Chair, Senator Harold Pope
Junior. District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque, Bernalillo County.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Antoinette Zedil Lopez, um, a
senator.
From uh District 16, and uh
that's pretty much the UNM, CNM,
Southeast Heights, um, area, and
um I just also want to mention
that Senator Lopez is here with
food, um, and Senator Lopez, the
reason I say that is she would,
uh, the chair was bragging on
the fact that they seem to be
more House members than
senators. I just want to remind
the remind the group that there
are more.
members and senators.
Um,
but, um, I'm very happy to be
here. I think these issues are
really important for our state
and something that um we just
really have to deal with in
order to have the kind of state
we wanna, we want, um, good
morning, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Linda Lopez, uh, state
senator, District 11.
We'll go back
to the senator.
Just an introduction.
I know.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair.
Uh, uh, Jay Block, uh, District
12, um.
Happy to be here. It's good to
see some old friends.
I'm Liz Thompson, a little
intimidated to chair this
committee for stepping into the
shoes of the famous uh
Senator Ty Pino. And when I
realized that he was really
going to retire for about a
month. I went to bed every night
thinking healthcare in New
Mexico is on your shoulders and
didn't work real well for a good
night's sleep, but so Xandra, do
you want to thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, so I'm Zander Dawson.
I'm the lead staff, um, and
then, uh, my colleagues from the
LCS we have uh Andrea Lazarro.
She uh is a staff attorney or a
Bill Balderramas. She is a
proofreader with the LCS and
then we also
of our colleagues from the LFC
over here. So we have Harry
Rommel.
And uh I know he's, he's, this
is your first interim with the,
the LFC correct? And then we
have Ruby and Esquibel, who I
don't know how many intros she's
done with LFC.
So thank you for, so just a
couple of um
Housekeeping kind of things, um,
for those of you who haven't
served on the committee, um, we
Cover a lot of very emotional
stuff, a lot of really deep
stuff and we can, in the past we
have run to 10 or 11 o'clock at
night, um, and we don't wanna do
that anymore, so I'm, I am, um,
very tight on time, and I know
that everybody has a lot of
questions, um, you can always
get with the presenter or
someone else, but unfortunately,
none of us, we don't have time
for any of us to get all of our
questions answered, um, and then
in addition I
I want to apologize for you all
not knowing the dates of our
meetings, it's
It's, it's kind of a weird um
time space continuum thing that
it can't be publicized until
legislative.
council approves it, and they
had their meeting on Monday. So
it's been approved, but it still
isn't up on the website. I hear
it should go on the website
today and and for future
reference, I know it's too late
for this year, um, if, you know,
if
If you want to know the dates
of, I'm gonna ask if we can do
like LFC and LESC since we have
an extra 5 days if we can
schedule before the rest of the
committee's just so people don't
say, oh my God, we have a
meeting in 2 days in Santa Fe.
So again, I apologize and if
you, if you, um, in the future
get stuck and need and need to
know about a meeting next year
or whatever, um, don't hesitate
to reach out to me. We have a we
have a tent.
that we can, they don't like us
to spread it far and wide, but I
can share it with you. So I, oh,
and here's, here's the second
half of the Liz caucus, I'll
let.
Good morning, madam Chair, and
uh vice chair uh list ofanic
District 39. OK, thank you all.
Um, and we will start with um.
Item number one, recap of
legislation endorsed by LHHS
during the 2024 interim, so that
will be Xander and Andrea.
And depending on how time goes,
we may may allow the sponsor of
the bill to have a minute or two
to talk about their bill, um,
like I said, we, we're trying to
stay right on, on schedule, and
I will make an announcement
today that lunches are provided
all week.
Um, cause I know that if you
leave the capital, getting back.
In a reasonable as we do
lunches, I will announce the
lovely sponsors, but I have to
especially thank Juliana Kub and
her assistant Sarah Kubob. I
asked them on Monday to get
lunches so much appreciation.
So whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
feel like we just introduced
ourselves, but it doesn't hurt
to do it again. So I'm Zander
Dawson, staff attorney with the
LCS.
And my name is Andrea Lazaro,
and I am Xander's colleague, um,
I am a build drafter with LCS.
And, uh, you know, before we get
started, we got to do this pink
sheet thing, so, uh, Madam
Chair, I work for the
Legislative council Service. I
am here for the sole purpose of
providing technical assistance
on the matter before this
committee, and I do not appear
in support of or opposition to
the matter before you, um, just
got to say that because we're
gonna be talking about a lot of
bills that were heard during the
session. Some passed, some
didn't.
So, uh, we'll go ahead and move
to the first slide, uh, after
the title slide.
And um so it kind of just gives
an overview of, of what LHHS did
last year with its endorsements.
So um there was 29 pieces of
legislation considered for
endorsement, uh, 27 were
endorsed, um, 25 bills and just
one sec, who's who's doing the?
Slides, um, I guess.
I guess Grace can when she
passes, OK, so maybe we can wait
a second.
you
Yeah, I, I just wanted, yeah.
Cause I'm gonna start getting
texts. We can't see, we can't
see, so.
Trying to be proactive. OK, go
ahead, sorry to interrupt. No,
that's all right. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. So, um, yeah, 25
bills and 2 joint resolutions
were endorsed, um, 24 of those
pieces of legislation were
introduced during the session,
um, 8 bills passed and were
signed by the governor, and 16
pieces of legislation either did
not pass or or were not signed
by the governor. I think in the
endorsed pieces, there was only
one bill that I was vetoed by
the governor, but we'll go
further into that. All right, so
what I'm gonna
to do is, um, I'm just going to
go through this Xander and I are
actually going to take turns
going through this list, giving
you the very basics about this
bill and then if the sponsors
are here as Representative
Thompson said, um, they can
speak to the policy issues or um
any questions related to that.
So, uh, House Bill 54 is a
pretty straightforward bill.
This would require all schools
in New Mexico to have an
automated external
defibrillator.
And um also create plans to
respond to any cardiac um events
that occur on campus.
Um, and then, um, moving on to
House Bill 56, this bill is
about parity and equity, um,
there's only at this time to my
knowledge, one, licensed birth
center that's operating in New
Mexico and um those birth
centers and the staff that work
there were not being compensated
at the same rates by Medicaid as
those uh individual.
um, who work in hospitals. So
what this would do is that it
would direct the director of HCA
to request a waiver to ask that
those rates um be uh provided on
par with those that are being
provided to professionals in
hospitals who are
And then House Bill 66, um,
approaches the um workers'
compensation statute, and Sandra
and I were talking about this
earlier, um, this aspect of it
hadn't been amended for years
and years. So what this does is
it increases 2 caps, it
increases the cap, um, and, and
the increases uh phase in over
time. It increases the cap um on
uh the amount of
Discovery costs that the
defendant or the employer has to
provide, um, when, um, a
worker's compensation cap
compensation case is being
litigated and it also increases
the cap that um the plaintiff's
attorneys can
Can be awarded uh in such a
case.
All right. Uh, so, Madam Chair,
uh, moving on to the next slide,
um, we have House Bill 117.
And so House Bill 117 really
started off as endorsed as a
bill that would um really just
allow physician, um, it was a a
gap that the committee saw um in
a hearing in Silver City last
year where nurses were able to
uh certify desk, doctors were
able to certify desks, a
physician assistants weren't and
um in some communities, that's
all they have. And so it was
really setting things back. So,
uh, hospitals 117 sought to uh
allow physician assistants to
certify them. But then, um,
Also, the Department of Health
kind of jumped onto that bill
because they saw an issue with
too many cases getting um
referred to OMI because um.
Previously, if you hadn't been
seen by a doctor within like the
past 7 days before you died. The
presumption was that your case
needed to go to OMI. So it was
really creating a backlog at the
medical investigator's office.
So now, um, House Bill 117 makes
it so if you've been seen by a
doctor within the last year and
um the doctors easily able to
ascertain why you died, um, the
um.
The case is no longer required
to go to OMI. So hopefully it'll
help with that backlog that
they've been seeing.
Uh, moving on, we have House
Bill 149. Um, so that was
enacting the supporting,
supported decision making act.
Um, that was providing a legal
support process that's less
invasive than guardianship or
conservatorship.
Um, that kind of had an
interesting, uh, final few days
in the session, and so, um, it
did pass, um, but uh it didn't
end up making it all the way,
but it got glommed on to a
Senate Bill 5:35 and uh Centervi
535 was signed by the governor.
So the supported decision making
Act will. And then House Bill
171 uh was uh a bill that allows
detox facilities, um, to
basically stock uh medications.
To, uh, treat withdrawal and,
and there had been some issues.
I know, um, what Phil Houston
from the lighthouse, he'd been
bringing that uh Lifehouse in
Carlsbad. They've been running
into issues about not being
allowed to stock, uh, medicines
for, uh, medical withdrawal
management. So this uh really
just makes it explicit that
they're allowed to do that.
Then moving on to the next page,
um, we have Senate Bill 1, and
as you can see by the list of
sponsors, this bill um was um a
bipartisan effort and what it
did was it created um the
behavioral the behavioral health
trust fund and the program fund,
which is um akin to what was
done with the early childhood
education and care, um, funding
a few years back.
And it provided $100 million to
the uh from the general fund to
the Behavioral Health Trust
Fund, and, um, later on, I think
it's tomorrow, we're going to be
having um representatives from
AOC talk about their plans, um,
that are going to be presumably
funded by uh this model, and
then um Senate Bill 122, um,
what this does is it allows
Different kinds of entities to
receive prescription drugs um on
a donation basis and also to
distribute those drugs. So, um,
it, um, is helpful um in those
situations, um, where, um,
Um
facilities might not have the
particular budget or inventory
to provide those kinds of drugs.
All right, so that was the good
news. Those are the bills that
passed. Now we have the list of
bills that didn't, um,
unfortunately or fortunately,
however you look at it, it's a
much longer list. Um, so House
Bill 40, um, it would have been
enacted the uh traveling with
dignity Act.
And, um, the idea there was that
um any public buildings or
buildings that house uh programs
that are publicly funded, they'd
be required to install universal
adult changing stations, if they
have um
The, the correct bathroom. That
bill did end up passing through
uh the House Health and Human
Services Committee and the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, um, but
just didn't end up getting hurt
on the house floor.
Then House Bill 55, uh, it would
require the healthcare authority
to set a minimum fee schedule
for the reimbursement of
personal care services. Um, and
it also had a provision that at
least 70% of um money that went
uh that was reimbursed for
personal care services was
required to go to direct, uh,
care workers. Um, that bill
passed through House Health and
human house health and human
Services Committee, but it's
stalled in HAFC which will be a
a very common um that uh.
way that these bills die.
Uh, yeah, yeah. Uh house Bill
57, um, it would have given
indigent victims of domestic
violence, a right to legal
representation in legal matters
related to the domestic
violence. So like, uh, maybe
divorce proceedings or custody
proceedings, anything like that.
But it didn't end up getting
hurt in a committee, but uh
there was House Memorial 34 that
uh the state Supreme Court is
working on right now. Uh,
they're convening a task force
to study what gaps there are in
the legal services for victims
of domestic violence and trying
to fill those gaps. So, uh, I
think that's probably something
the committee will hear later in
the. OK, and then um on to the
next, um, the first one that I'm
gonna talk about is House Bill
58, and um she's not here today,
but one of the sponsors.
of this was representative
Herndon, a member of this
committee, um, and what this
bill was, was, um, it was an
appropriation that was focused
on behavioral health, um, for
young people, it would have
appropriated $300,000 to suicide
prevention initiatives, um,
training for those in public
schools, and it also requested a
$1.75 million appropriation.
To support operating 14 mental
health rooms in schools around
the state, um, this bill, um,
again, um, got sold in House
Appropriations, but if you look
here at the bottom, um, there
was $9 million appropriated to
DOH to expand suicide prevention
and uh behavioral health.
And then, um, House Bill 74 also
has um um uh behavioral health
bench, what it would have done
is it would have um allowed
local and regional first
responders, um, to train as peer
support providers for their
colleagues, um, and that passed
the house, but didn't make it
through Senate Judiciary, and
then um house Bill 75.
was another appropriation, and
the request was for $43 million
to be appropriated to county and
tribal health councils, um, and,
um, what ended up happening was
the DOH was um uh the, I'm
sorry, um, $4 million was
provided to DOH, um, to provide
uh these health councils
specifically with
is a transition to allow them to
provide behavioral health
services, um, and so, uh, there
was, um, eventually some money
appropriated to accomplish the
goals of that bill.
All right, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
the next one we have is House
Bill 77, um, so that would have
required the ACA to develop um
they they're called snap
outreach plans. And basically,
they're they're things that
states can do to um get extra
federal funding to go out in the
community and sign people
assistance programs, um, that
bill did pass, um, but it was
vetoed by the governor. The
governor put out a message uh
and basically the message said
that the ACA
does a lot of probably
duplicative and and not
necessary in the governor's
eyes. Um, then House Bill 116,
um, it would have required DOH
to pay licensed boarding homes,
about $200 per month, uh, for
each resident of the boarding
home that was discharged from
one of the state mental health
institutions. So, um, this is uh
one of those ways that that you
guys are trying to explore how
to get these, and right now
there's not great mechanisms for
it. So this was kind of like a
carrot and stick, uh,
Approach to get
Uh, House Bill 152, uh, it would
have prevented substance use
treatment facilities and
juvenile correction and
detention facilities uh from
restricting the use of
medication-assisted treatment,
uh for uh minors in those
buildings. Um, there had been a
similar bill that was for adults
that passed, I think like 3
years ago, that's been
implemented. Um, and so this was
just trying to expand that, that
protection to minors.
It passed through house health,
uh, but yeah, another OK and
moving along, um, housepis 266
and 267 were sponsored by two
members of this committee, um,
and this bill actually, um, I
guess you could say speaks to um
licensing and scope of practice
issues again for physician's
assistants and Xander mentioned
in the bill about the
certification of deaths, there
are certain parts of the state
where um there are no
physicians.
practicing, so people in those
communities rely solely um on
physician assistants to receive
their healthcare and what this
would do, um, oh, and, and most
importantly is that um these
professionals are um required to
practice under the supervision
of a physician, and they may not
necessarily be in the same
building or, you know, um, that
sort of thing, but at the end of
the day, there is a physician
who
Supervising the work of that um
physician's assistant. So what
this would have done was it
would have expanded that
supervision role so that um
A physician assistant who was
experienced could um supervise
and do.
Um, physician assistant.
Therefore, um, you would have,
um,
No, you would not, you would not
actually need a doctor to
supervise the physician
assistant, but rather an
experienced physician assistant,
and this one did not pass. Um,
and house Bill 375 um is another
bill that was uh looking to
expand um the population of the
health of behavioral health
providers in the state would
have enacted a scholarship act
to provide free uh graduate
level education
to people who are studying to
become behavioral health
professionals, um, as you know,
um.
A master's or a PhD is not
required, but, um, you know,
The higher their level of
education, the more that they're
allowed to do and the higher
they're reimbursed by the
insurers. Anyway, this one did
not pass.
All right, uh, so, Madam Chair,
onto the Senate bills that were
in the Senate Bill 62, it would
have required a pharmacy benefit
managers to charge a flat fee
for services provided, um, you
know, this is an idea that's
been floated around a lot where
PBMs make a ton of money off of
percentage-based, um, and, and
spread pricing and all types of
pricing mechanisms. So this
would have just required them if
it to only charge a flat fee and
it would have been in any other
type of fee for their services.
But, uh, that film was uh Senate
Bill 118.
It would, uh, it started off as
a pretty long bill, uh, that
would have required all types of
license applications. So like,
if you apply for a gun license
or any of the professional
licenses, you would uh have an
option to sign up to be become
an organ donor, um, but
It ended up getting really pared
down to just an idea where um or
taxing rev, their motor vehicle
division would uh put out flyers
and stuff that would just say
this is how you get signed up
for organ donation. Um, that
ended up uh passing throughout
the Senate, but stalled in
house.
OK, and the last um pieces of
legislation that we're gonna
talk about our joint resolution
OK, and the last um pieces of
legislation that we're gonna
talk about our joint resolutions
and um
I think the first thing I want
to say about these is joint
resolutions, um, are required to
be passed to allow um,
To, to allow for um
Voting, uh, in a general
elections, um, to, to allow, um,
proposed constitutional
amendments to appear on those
ballots, and we had 2 of those,
one would have put a question on
the ballot in the next general
election, that would have
allowed uh people to determine
whether there should be a green
amendment added to the state
constitution, um, and this one
did not pass, and then um the
second one was sponsored by
of Chavez, who is right here in
Representative Thompson and
Representative Herndon, this
would have placed a question on
the ballot in the next general
election, that would um allow
for a constitutional amendment
to fundamentally change the
structure of the CYFD, uh, so
that there would be a commission
created to oversee the work of
that agency. And, uh, this one
did not pass. So what that means
actually is that in, um, you
know, unless there's new
legislation that the next time
we have a general election,
we're not going to see these
questions on the ballot, and the
other thing I just want to add
for people's edification is that
if something like this is on the
ballot and it passes, um, then,
um, the legislature has to
usually, well, not usually, they
must pass enabling legislation
to make it happen. So these are
usually written
more specific statues in the
future, but neither of these
passed.
And, uh, Madam Chair, let me
just say that House Joint
Resolution 5, you know, that was
one of many avenues that the
legislature looked at addressing
child welfare, um, and we're
gonna be covering tomorrow, um,
more specifically what child
welfare legislation was passed.
So, so we'll go deeper into
that. I think that's it for us.
So we stand for questions. OK.
Unless there's a sponsor who has
a burning so we'll start with
Representative Kates.
I thank you, Madam Chair. I
would just like to, um, briefly
just update our committee as
well as um our viewers on House
Bill 40, which did not make it
to the, um, this is to provide
adult, uh, hydraulic adult
changing tables to make us
understand that the sex
department has rolled up under
uh grant program in that
department called Destination
Forward that it will allow.
public spaces to be able to get
grants from $5000 to $50,000 to
be able to make and if they have
a um a uh a a gender neutral
bathroom so that we can make
sure that all for everyone, um,
and our first one, the ribbon
cutting. Thank you.
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
really quick on HD.
R 5 commission.
Um, I, I
Everyone has been, I'm sure,
paying attention to the news
he's a death in a foster home.
Um, there continues to be
concerned. I'm very concerned.
At the secretary level, um, and
other levels as well, um, with
the experience in child, we
continue to have a tremendous
vacancy rates, uh, and continue
to hire, which I think is a
problem. Um, I think that
there's a direct correlation
between the increase in meltria
assessments.
The other piece, the other
reason why um it would create it
would have created a situation
the secretary would
In that um job, who would be
able to work in there. So, um,
I'm continuing to work uh on
other uh social workers is able
to prevent child abuse, um,
decrease the amount.
Thank you, Madam Chair, with
with regard to House Bill 55,
um, the minimum fee schedule
forimburse, um.
I hope that the committee or or
I asked the committee on about
their wages.
Um, again, um, I know we've done
that in the past, um,
They fear the backbone, um, and
just
Seems so and not come when, when
they don't compensate
adequately, the people who um
who actually provide the
services. So I asked the
committee for that presentation.
And then with regard to House
Bill 57, are we getting a
report? Is that scheduled to, to
have a Madam Chair, Senator
Sadia Lopez, uh, yeah, they uh
were requested to have a report
out, I think by October 1st, so
we'll hear that later in the
interim, whatever. OK, because
this is another, um, I guess I'd
like to mention there was a task
force that was created now 4
years ago, that that um updated
the domestic violence, the
because it's so large.
Um, and it, it's, it's only
large because it had so many um
little tiny changes, so it looks
like a bigger building than it
is, um, but it couldn't get past
judiciary, Senate Judiciary. It
was just like overwhelming. So
the recommendation from the
chair of judiciary was to divide
it into 3 bills with the 3 major
um pieces.
That um that it changed so that
it wouldn't look so
overwhelming. So that is
happening. We've got, we did
that or the the the drafter has
done that, um, and I think that
this might be uh something that
we could fold into it or
something that or at least um I
hope that we can hear those
bills because um there, there
are problems with the act, and
one of them is really important,
and that is to satisfy
constitutional.
in with um in a definition of
credible threat so that firearms
aren't removed, you know, so
that we can satisfy the, the
Supreme Court if it were ever
challenged that we have a clear
definition. So I, um
I think this the domestic last
year maybe we didn't, I don't, I
don't remember it's so huge. And
we, the, the update of the
family violence.
Ma,
I don't believe that, um.
That one was, um,
Yeah, maybe, maybe Senator
we can't remember why we, we, we
would want it to be endorsed. We
can check on that for you, um,
but I, I don't believe that was
one of the bills that came in
front of the committee for
endorsement. We can, we can look
back. I recall, I don't even
think I attended. I was unable
to attend that committee, and I,
I think perhaps um that felt
through the cracks. I think it
had been endorsed before.
Um, Senator, if, if you, the
staff presents it, you don't
have to be there. So if it was
up for endorsement, the fact
that you weren't there.
I'm just I'm just saying if it
was on the list, we would have
heard it. OK. I, uh, I take
responsibility for, for it not
happening, um.
I know it had happened in the
past, and I think it's just
frustrating, um, and but we are
trying to work on it so that we
and this would be really
relevant, um, to that, that task
force was um
Preparation, the, the
What is the CBR crime victims
reparation commission. Yes,
thank you, um, and they're the
ones that led that task force
and represented it was a really
comprehensive thing and I, I
just hope that we can get it
passed. It's, it's beyond time
to update the family violence
Correction Act.
Um, and I'll pay more attention
this year to, to making it just
wanna maybe make a correction or
that that in terms of the the
the bill for direct care
providers. I don't, but in my
experience, the corporation that
they're not corporations, the
companies that are hiring these
people are not getting rich.
They're barely making it, so
it's not like we're giving them
a lot of money and they're not
paying their staff, we're not
giving them a lot of money and
they are um
Really, you know, spit tape and
love is all that's holding them
together. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate the
correction you're right, and a
lot of more nonprofits and a lot
of more for-profits and they're
barely making it, but what
bothers me and and I think it's
on the state, um, to make sure
that we
Provide enough money so that
they can do it. And that's a
better way of stating it. Um, so
I appreciate the correction and,
and I, and for those of you who
are new on the committee, we get
deep into the weeds and if
you're ever really just like I
have no idea what's going on.
No, I mean, we can't always go
back, but, but, um, and I will
say that part of the issue is
that when you say that 70% must
go to direct then that, you
know, then if we do a raise and.
And the insurance costs go up or
what it, it's incredibly
complicated. It it is, but I
think it's our responsibility to
provide enough so that they,
they can do it, and I appreciate
that every time we get a
presentation about how, uh,
what's happening with the direct
care workers. We also get a
presentation from the owners of
these businesses about how they
can't do it, which is incredibly
frustrating, um, so I, I like I
said, I appreciate the, the,
these are not your standard run
of the.
mill corporations giving to
shareholders. I, I agree with
that. So are, are there
questions from the committee,
uh representative um and OK, so
we'll start with Representative
Blan.
Quick question or maybe a couple
of questions, 2 and 3.
I think the appropriation was
stripped down to 100 billion, I
believe. Can you tell this bill
will now function.
If it doesn't have the two other
components to not be mis,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Black. So, um, hospitals or, or
Senate bills 2 and 3 also, you
know, are, are.
In inextricably linked with Cen
one, yeah. They, uh, Cent Bill
One creates the funding
structure and then um Senate
Bill 2 makes um like some
specific appropriations, then
Senate Bill 3 is the
programmatic bill that like
we're going to be hearing a lot
from A of what happens in Senate
Bill 3 today, actually, this
afternoon. Um, and so you you'll
get to hear more about how that
works, uh, later today.
And, um, I'm not sure what you
mean the other two funding
sources. What, what, what did
you mean by that?
OK, so I just know the bills are
linked. So we've 100 million,
which is sounds like a lot, but
it's not a lot in state
government terms. So I'm just
wondering when it comes to
those, how are we going to, are
we going to even be able to use
them since the two other bills
did not pass, is what I'm the
presentation from AOC today and
I'm guessing that they will go
deep and they're just presenting
on the bills, they don't have
the.
The deep down LFC, um, so
Senator Block
thank you Madam Chair, um, I
think to make it simple and I
understand they're gonna come uh
brief us, but Senate Bill 1 was
the finance piece of of uh using
uh some market value, like 5% on
top of the money that we set
aside to help fund that and 2
was 2 didn't make it through,
but 3, to come talk to us.
That's really the problem.
in the guard rails in the
recommendations that they are
supposed to provide every year,
uh, to us to let us know, hey,
is this working or not so we can
decide what different courses of
action, we're gonna we're gonna
go down years to come, uh, to
see if we're going to be funding
maybe this program versa so I
think that may have been, I
don't want to speak for um
Representative Block, but I
think that may have been what
you were trying, or I don't want
to speak for you either.
But I think that might have been
what you were trying to say.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Senator Block. Yeah,
that that is what I was trying
to get to. Thanks for saying it
better than I did. And and just
as an aside, on Monday, the
executive Committee for Senate
Senate Bill 3, met for the first
time and I am very happy to say
that the former chair of this
committee said is one of the
members. So we know, at least I
know that the legislative um
Part will be reassured that he's
good they will um
They will keep us up to date. So
our signature block, thank you,
sorry, I, I think one of the
things that um I'm interested in
because these 3 bills were very
important to me, uh, I'm very
interested to, um, if AOC is
listening or whoever is gonna be
giving us to breathe to, to
really kind of get into the
weeds on um how the AOCs are
going to be reaching out to
different organizations around
the state, um, not just within
those judicial districts, but
one of the things that
Lopez and I worked on was to
make sure that
You're not bound by the judicial
districts based on capabilities
or services outside uh those
boundaries. So I think some of
us might be uh real interested
on how they're going to do that
and what type of metric inform
us as the legislative.
So we do not have our next
presenter, I will say that we we
are ahead of schedule. Don't get
used to it. It's, uh, it's not
how it happens, um, and Senator
Lopez, Vice Chair Lopez brought
donuts and fruit, so if you want
to take a little break, don't go
far as soon as Alice stick stick
close but go get a snack.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
