I'll ray folks will go ahead and
restart with our superintendence
panel so
jessica please
good afternoon mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is just a halfway and I am your
deputy director for the
legislative education study
committee is all of you know we
have a standing superintendent
panel as part of our interim
this year where every time we're
in a community we will ask
superintendence from around that
region to respond to a few
questions that a line with
priorities that you all have
identified for us that includes
literacy math at the funding
formula and any funding changes
and instructional time so I will
get started on our
superintendent panel the first
question should be the easiest
for everybody please introduce
yourselves and share more about
your experience becoming a
school superintendent and will
start with superintendent mother
right here and then move down
the line
good afternoon with your
chairman members of the
committee
and martin madrid superintendent
of senators are consolidated the
schools i'm in my seventh year a
superintendent actually forty
years the senate rules the
schools though i'm a student
graduate of center or schools
and but don't have twenty seven
years with center of the schools
and as I stated a seven
superintendent five as principle
at fifteen as a teacher to
include elementary a high school
coaching all the works ed all
that stuff so yeah glad to be
here and thanks for the
invitation.
Good afternoon mister chair
members of the committee
again i'm a list of sound of
astra printed for las vegas
schools I am starting my twenty
eighth year in education my
fifth year as a superintendent
three years prior in pinosco and
completed my first year at last
bigger city schools are priority
that associates with intenant
for task minister schools for
seven and a half years
and
principle and assistance to
print it in pinyasco
for twelve and half years and
then of course says to bring
tenant for it for three prior to
my may rain here and be asked I
mean i'm sorry it last speakers
and
i'm excited to be here thank you
for having me again.
Hello mister chair and members
of the committee my name is
deborah sent a holton
I am starting my thirty first
year in education I
spent fifteen years in the
costume as a bilingual fourth
grade teacher at peckles by a
ten years as a principle to pick
us elementary and I just
completed my fifth year as a
superintendent i'm also proud
graduated pickles as well so my
unique experiences i've spent
all my time at peckles and i'm a
proud panther
thank you
hello mr chair members of the
committee of again crisis
superintendent westlast biggest
schools
so a little more on my journey
ninety eight graduate actually
robertson high school
went into premade here at new
mexico highlands university
started being a message tutor
robertson high school for about
four or five years and decided I
I noticed that students were
actually learning math better
from me than from their teachers
so decided to change my path in
my last semester a premared and
went into education for general
science for secondary teachers
eventually got my math
endorsement again top for nine
and a half years at our
alternative school to family
partnership
all sciences and all math so as
I was the only math and stones
teacher for that school
and then eventually got hired as
a middle school principle at
westland so you guess middle
school stayed there a year and a
half became interim
superintendent for about half a
year applied for the job didn't
know if I would like been a
superintendent and I liked the
torture and I decided to become
the superintendent and this is
my tenth year as superintendent
for west last week school
thank you.
Thank you all very much as you
can see we have a really
excellent panel superintendence
here who bring collectively so
many years of experience to the
conversation that will happen
today so really excited and
think you are for making time
i'd be very miss if we also
didn't extend a quick
congratulations this is our new
mexico superintendent of the
year and superintendent madrid
from santa rosa to on something
he didn't say it but I knew I
would have to okay so we'll
start down on the other hand
superintendent of the it is with
his first question
but the state has made a really
significant investments and
structured literacy over the
last five to six years that's
included some policy changes
required training for teachers
increased funding how has all of
that influence your literacy
instruction in your distract and
what additional supports would
be helpful as we continue to try
to improve reading outcomes for
our students
well thank you mister chairman
members of the committee
with the letter's training I
believe it's a good training the
hard part for it would probably
be funding and time for a
teachers to actually complete
the training
with their schedules of actually
educating students and and
getting them to learn all
different subject areas and
elementary on top of having to
to do the hours it did take a
lot of this home and to do it so
I would say probably funding I
know it are districtor
they don't give stipends or
anything to complete at the they
do but they do have to complete
it
and and again it's just I
believe the time.
Thanks and will work our way
down the safe you want to go
next thank you
mister chair members of the
committee
i'd love letters I was a pre k
coordinator so I participate it
with letters after the precape
program so when I took over a
superintendent that's when the
letters training was mandated
for elementary teachers so it
was during covered so we had a
little flexibility for the
training because they were able
to do it online and there was a
lot of flexibility and I will
concur with a superintendent
good head as the time issue is
really difficult for our
teachers
and finding substitute teachers
when they're being pulled out
for these trainings
for my district we have a
shortage of subs so we have to
be very creative
but I think letters is paraphone
and I think it's an important
investment for our teachers and
that's I think it's a meaningful
powerful professional
development for our teachers and
i'm excited about secondary
being part of that so I think
it's a great message.
Mr chair members of the
committee
similar to my partners here are
a do believe that letters
significantly are important for
our teachers it enables them to
bring in strategies and and
tools to the classroom to teach
literacy to our students as
mentioned earlier this morning
what i've seen and art district
are is that the teachers who are
letters trained are the schools
and where we are a spotlight so
I I believe that's a testament
to the to the work and
engagement of our staff and the
followed through
what we are doing in in my
destructive I did mention
earlier this morning is we are
applied for the comprehensive
literacy grants which enables us
to have coaches in our schools
so that'll be an expansion for
our district are in addition to
the the additional letters
training for our intermediate
and high school staff that will
be coming up
but it is a significant
challenge with regards to the
timing of for this training
because there is some training
that requires
the the face to face and then of
course the online component and
somewhere to miss senators and
when you are short on
substitutes
the instruction is sacrificed to
try to get teachers why other
double enough classes are and
you know it's not the best in
area so if we could figure
something out with that that
would that would be great.
Mister chairman members of the
committee I echo pretty much
everything that they they talked
about as far as the the
positives and the challenges if
I may add the what I do want to
add that it at a positive note
it is something that is very
much needed and and the teachers
within our district that are
letters trained are you know
we're seen significant gains in
their classrooms
you know because not everyone
comes in with an education based
up that are teachers right
they're not all reading teachers
not to come through the
traditional program you get the
reading training and and and
everything else that comes along
with that but in this day and
age we have a lot of all
certified teachers as you all
know being educated some of you
and this is important because
the teachers teachers not and
how to teach reading now just to
teach reading correct so it's
important and end i'm excited to
see it start filtering up
through the middle schools in
high schools and because reading
is just not the language arts
teachers job it is everyone's
job in a school to teach reading
correct
some of the things that we face
also are similar to them you
know the time of things however
are district is a little
different because we do have we
are on a four day school weeks
we have the friday's to provide
this
is training for them and then we
have extra winning money that we
use to provide statements for
teachers who show up on their
days off to get this done
because in order to get it done
you do have to show up and and
could contribute your own time
to it otherwise you're but still
different people to pay parent
taking teachers out of the
classroom and have you know sub
in there and it just just
doesn't work right that's what I
would have to add to it though
so.
Thank you all i'm gonna throw
you on more question that's not
on your list if it is related to
literacy and because I think
it's important whenever you
always a legislature funded
letters training the idea was
let's start with kindergarten
and move through each grade and
we've done all elementary grades
at this point and now the
department is moving on to
secondary but we know that
there's turnover in teachers we
know that folks move we know
that there are new folks coming
into the system you don't all
have to answer but can any of
you speak to that like ongoing
part of it in terms of what
you're seeing how many teachers
are still having to train each
year
how that implementation is going
and then another one if anyone
wants to speak to it as what is
the science of reading kind of
implementation look like for
your english learners you don't
all have to answer but i'd be
great if anyone wants to add on
those two points.
They all said earlier that they
would call you to it hopefully
we're just
so he'll go and give them a
chance to make a reput the first
part of the question yeah
absolutely so with
implementation the idea was that
we were trained by each grade
level and that you know we've
done that we've gotten through
all of those greets but what
does it look like to maintain
this and an ongoing way how many
folks do you still have coming
in how many teachers are you
having to train even though
theoretically you've gotten
through elementary we know that
that's not necessarily the
experience well
you know we're gonna have quite
a few teachers to to continue
training now that it's going to
be implemented in secondary um
you know so will have offered a
kind of a program within our
forty school week to get this
done at the hard part in the
cumbersome part I guess is when
you have a teachers you train
them up and then they leave and
then you have you know either
with an all certified or a
teacher who has no letters
training so then you're having
to play catch up with them and
and and bring them back up to to
speed with things and and that
takes time as well also just
like with anything in education
it's not going to happen
overnight it's going to it's
going to take several years and
you hope that the teacher sticks
around after you invest all this
money into them uh but sometimes
that's not always the case right
and so you know it it's it's for
it's quite frustrating at times
but you know I I guess that's
what I would have to add to that
is this it's a commerce summit
to have it's a really heavy left
I guess
for a lack of a better words.
I'm gonna echo a superintendent
madrid said it's frustrating are
when you're playing catch up
when you train people in your
excited and then they leave and
then you have to play the catch
up game so
it's it's just a frustrating
cycle
when you have everything in
place and then you get those
resignations and then you have
to start planning those pd
cycles again and you have to go
through that home cycle so it's
very very frustrating
and building up so when you
start gaining a moment on and
then you have to take a step
back and they hear we go again
so it's a constant um
cycle for especially for my
district
of rebuilding reloading.
Mister chair members of the
committee to to speak under flow
of of letters it's
when it first started it was
kind of rocky i'm going to see
you have a lot of your veteran
teachers that were pretty much
saying in order it's just
another thing they're making us
to well the
partially did it and then when
they saw that it was something
that needed to happen we were
paying catch up with those
teachers and then it had finally
after the first couple of years
the the ball got rolling better
and then yes after echo what the
what their stating when you have
those better and teachers that
decide to retire in your hiring
new teachers and kind of garden
and first rate already went
through through letters training
were playing catch up on these
new teachers that are coming in
and
and and I have noticed honestly
a lot of the the newer teachers
coming fresh out of college are
are more ready to do letters or
and and it's probably due to the
fact that I know here at
highlands and do the state you
do have to have a reading
classes behind your your degrees
in out there a little more in
tune to to work in through it
and and understanding that they
need to get it done.
And I will tackle I think the
second part of your question are
regarding el students.
I I think that that letters
again is is is a a great avenue
with regards to tools and
strategies
to teach reading how about
however a you know when we look
at yl students in in my
experience not all of our e
students are necessarily their
their home length which is not
necessarily a language other
than english it's it's a lack of
academic language so I think
what letters teachers
supports all language
developments are regardless of
the subgroup of students
and you know when we're looking
at the for domains of of
language and you're that looking
at this need speaking
comprehension and reading of all
that this is supported through
through letters training so you
think a the the frustration that
we have and we would hope that
if we have teachers moving from
one district to another at least
that the elementary level that
most of them if they been in the
system already are already
letters trained
but unfortunately that that's
not always the case so you know
they're I think there'll always
be some catch up
but
the planning and and the
the the necessity for for
districts on the state to work
out together to come up with
some some perhaps better
schedules or ways to to
implement the training I think
as.
Think you also mention so I
definitely hear a common thread
that there's an ongoing
maintenance to how we actually
implement this training over
time and that it will take that
reinforcement even if you have
better and teachers who have
gone through the training now
but it's that practice element
that has to be embedded to
sustain is what i'm hearing from
you all
okay onto math and and we
actually have a mouth panel
tomorrow it's a big focus of our
last biggest meeting and so
it'll be a really fun panel for
you all to hear but similar to
literacy new mexico like many
other states has been looking
for an approach to do something
similar whether that's teacher
training thinking about a
comprehensive state policy
that's been a little bit
complicated by the the science
of math does not necessarily
exist in exactly analogues way
even though we do know a lot of
fundamental practices that work
for math instruction so little
bit of a preview for tomorrow
but just on mass as they're as
lawmakers are considering what
they might do to kind of think
about how we train and support
the system what are some of the
most promising practices or
obstacles that you've
encountered and improving math
and what further guidance or
investments might be helpful and
I will start with used to intend
to match it
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee I will
start by saying um.
A math teacher a good about
teachers work there waiting gold
and and
that's for all start app because
we we can have math teachers
and enough in the the
content note the master of the
content knowledge doesn't always
necessarily translate into being
a good teacher right because
there's a lot more that goes
into that you can know all the
content in the world but if you
don't have a classroom
management to know the
strategies of how to deliver
that and all the job of your
head into their head you know
it's it's just not going to work
so
the biggest obstacle we have is
finding good math teachers of or
be honest with you
good matters that can do those
things I just talked about
their hard to find and people
that can do that or a really
really good a matter of making
way more than what a teacher
makes even a level three teacher
so I don't know what the answer
is I really don't I I appreciate
that there is a focus on you
know bringing mathem and putting
that at the forefront
but I I don't know what the
answer is to bring good quality
math instructors into schools
other than growing your own and
and hoping you could keep and
but other than that you know
those the obstacles that we face
and
you know our reading scores do
okay and senator but our maskers
have been pretty horrendous the
last few years and and and and I
believe it's due to that you
know they come in and then when
they get to high school it's
just.
You know
yeah you know I I wish I had
other
answers for that but I I don't
maybe these other experts do.
Again a concern with a
superintendent madrid
and I touched upon it a little
earlier this morning with regard
to
some dedicated professional
learning for our teachers as
similar to letters
but I I do believe that a along
with the strategy needs to be
some more content development
understanding of the standards I
think that the instructional
scope that has been developed
and it was kind of developed
during covered I I think is
definitely worthwhile
however you know when we're
looking at programs and we're
investing tens of thousands of
dollars in and textbox that's
just one part of it it's more
about the strategy and the
implementation how do you you
know because math is is
somewhere obstructed with the
students are our teachers need
to be able to effectively
communicate and be able to apply
that and understand how that
that works so some sort of
training again I don't have the
answer but you think some sort
of of training similar to
letters would be less to get our
teachers are trained across the
board and think in time we would
see that are developed because
in as a former math teacher I ic
math you know building a while
you have you built a one piece
at a time and are if they're
lacking in their foundational
work they're going to.
So
that that transition will take
some t.
Mr chair members of the
committee pro to cover
established a coaching a math
coach program and pickles
participated on that and it was
very powerful established at the
elementary school so the math
coach was hired and really
helped their elementary teachers
with math instruction
but it lasted one year and of
course the district couldn't
sustain the funding for that map
coach but it was powerful it
helped our elementary teachers
improve math instruction and it
are scores reflected that.
I think that is something that
needs to happen just like
superintendent sound of all
mentioned we need to help our
elementary
teachers improve math
instruction because they're not
math teachers
for secondary I will tell you I
will echo her superintendent
madrid said it's hard to find
mac teachers because they can go
to los angeles and I have last
amazing teachers
to us almost cause they will
drive to las almost and make a
lot of money instead of seeing
the package.
I offer stipends to my math and
science teachers and it's never
i've tried everything to try to
keep the
so it's inconsistent math
instruction that hinders us
every year and it's I get
applicants all the time
but it's trying to find that bet
and they'll come in and then
typically don't last because
they don't have all those
characteristics that super
kenned madrid described
and it's a disservice and our
kids have to take e twenty
twenty which are online classes
and that's unfortunate because
we're not an online school and
it really bothers me when they
go to college sometimes they
don't test into the classes
and it just it reflects badly of
our school and bursted and it
makes me sat but I think it's
inconsistent i'm getting I mean
we're paying our teachers more
which I think is amazing III
love that for our our teachers
but we need to do something
better for arm to attract math
and science teachers to new
mexico and improve the
instruction for our elementary
teachers because i'll i'll be
honest
elementary teachers aren't
comfortable teaching math
mrperiod chair members of the
committee.
So few things for math being a
former matter we touched a
little bit on this this morning
we talked about vertical and
horse on tour line at when it
comes to our math curriculum we
need to be able to know where
those transitions are
be able to use our common court
to be able to say okay we're
going from first grade a second
grade or third rate of four
three and fifty six and eight
two eighth to ninth grade and
those alignments so that we know
what we have to end up at the
end of the year within our
correct line together that's
that's probably one of the
biggest starts that districts
have to do
another thing professional
development I agree with uhm
superintendent sinner holton.
Elementary teachers when I
higher elementary teachers are
on looking at moving elementary
teachers around for some reason
all of them are afraid to teach
fifth grade math fifth grade
masters is they say is the
hardest math for an elementary
teacher to do and it's hard to
find fifth grade teachers to get
in there because of the matter I
think more professional
development maybe almost like a
a letters type of program but in
the math aspect of it which of
course a lot of these things
will come back down to to
funding or when I need funding
for the districts to be able to
get these professional
developments and get these
teachers trained to the area to
be able to
get those students to learn at
those levels of math
last thing I I think I talked
about this this morning math
coaches I agree that math
coaches is one way it's kind of
like what I did in by lingo
really people or teachers don't
get the by legal endorsement
anymore
the the culture of the language
that there's there's a lot of it
that been last throughout her
our generations I had I was
losing about five hundred to
seven hundred thousand dollars
in by lingo flending alone when
I first started I hired up by
legal coaches which helping they
could teach with the teachers
that don't have their billing
endorsement and working with
highlands and a tool kit where
we're trying to to move forward
to
co teach with teachers so that
they're comfortable enough to be
able to take the test for by
maybe that's the direction you
need to go with these math
coaches they could teach with
these teachers
and they help them understand
the math creek them better so
that the rable to be comfortable
enough to to teach it to our
students so that they color.
Think you are very much I heard
a couple of you with the very
beginning say we don't have the
solutions we don't know but as I
was taking notes I actually
think there were several
solutions and all of that so I
just want to summarise a little
bit what i've heard and also
previewed tomorrow's mouth
conversation a little bit but
there were some really content
or concrete things around here
particularly coaches that came
up across nuber numerous
superintendents those are folks
in the school building who can
actually support other teachers
with knowing how to bad
instruction get feedback on
their lessons I heard that some
form of standardized training
could be really helpful and
improved consistency in practice
I heard high quality
instructional materials not just
having those but having teachers
who know how to use those and
make sure that there's that
vertical and horizontal
alignment across the curriculum
I also heard elementary teachers
particularly the content side of
all of this in terms of actual
math knowledge and then
secondary teachers the patagonia
how do you teach the thing i'm
not just know the thing and then
I heard some structural pieces
in there too funding time
I think those are the two big
ones actually funding in time
within the day to do this and
then that kind of embedded
ongoing support that teachers
would get through culture so
just wanted to meer back to you
all I think there were several
solutions actually and there and
given the duct of expertise on
our panel just wanted to
summarise those for everybody
okay i'm gonna move us to our
next question but with changes
to instructional time and recent
years and there's growing
interest and understanding not
just how much time students
spend in school but how that
time is used in this actually
does relate to math and letter
see quite a bit so I hope you
see it as connected but could
you describe your districts
general schedule and how much
time students are spending in
core academics versus specials
those may be you know
arts or music or any other type
of class that is things that
really get students engaged I
know that looks different
elementary middle to high
school.
So you can pick one of those
groups but help us understand
what the actual day is locking
like for your kids and the move
to teachers next and i'll start
down at the end of the rental
and good to add us please.
This.
Thank you mr chair members of
committee
so i'll start with elementary
let's look at elementary when
we're looking at our scheduling
and the difference have been a
no
core academics versus specials
in our elementary settings right
now or or our schedule is
developed to have a hundred and
twenty minutes a day in reading
an english and then ninety
minutes in math a day
and then the rest of the time of
course we're teaching reading
within our other areas as well
as our by lingual hours that
were teaching with their are
specials
secondary.
Let's look at middle school
they're looking at fifty five
minute classes of every single
subject area so they do have
there they're basic
so my middle school right now we
have we do have reading
interventionists so the
depending on their level they'll
get an extra fifty minutes on
top of their regular education
and reading
math we don't have any math
coaches at that level
if they are students with
exceptionalities of course
they'll get their education
within their their regular
classroom when it comes to their
grade level math and great level
english and then they'll do
hours in their special at
classroom to to focus on their
their goals if if it's in sld
and in.
Mr chair members of the
committee i'll start with
elementary as well
we do ninety minutes of math
hundred twenty minutes at
of english excuse me
we also every we do specials at
elementaries which is pe music
are fine arts and we do library.
So that's forty five minutes so
they rotate
and we do bilingual a delivery
and middle school
metals on high school they have
fifty two
the flat road between fifty
fifty two minute
classes at the metal score and
high school they have their
penther power hour which is
their intervention which could
be
either their working on math
reading or sell um so that
rotates you're in the week.
And teachers at all sides have a
planning period based on a bell
mentioned the forty five minute
at the high school metal sports
fifty.
Mr chair members of the
committee for that speaker city
schools at the elementary level
reading instruction is ninety
minutes a long across are three
schools we do provide a reading
intervention a paid through
title one funding
and that's an additional thirty
to forty five minutes dependent
on the need of the student
and as mr potentia's mentioned
you know we do have that layer
or tier three intervention
for a special education as
students as well
math instruction is sixty
minutes across our schools
and are specials
run anywhere between forty five
to fifty minutes
two to three times a week
dependent of feds math or
art we do have some code in
classes in there and then of
course our spanish language arts
so those are those are embedded
throughout their schedules at
the middle school in high school
what we did at this year we
shifted from a six period
schedule to a seven period
schedule and what we have done
as we've added intervention
blocks for that receipt and for
math boss
and students will cycle through
dependants under short cycle the
assessments
through those and you know it's
not a lifetime sentence if you
will scoring out anything one of
the things that I we've seen and
and we've seen in the past has
been is that sometime students
not take these test seriously
are so if they know that there
is maybe some sort of
a catch to them not performing
while they're not doing their
best that you know there is a
possibility that they would be
placed.
And our intention behind that
our focus areas are of course
our middle school better our
freshman in our softmares at the
high school so we can we can
catch them early if you will and
and close that achievement cap
is as much as possible
and down you know with with the
seven period black schedule
there's there's various
courses as far as elected.
And then what we have also added
at this year is our at a school
time we did apply for funding
for that and we were able to
receive at a school time funding
and will be
shifting what was an after
school program that was.
Activity to more event
deficiency based tutoring to
support the the read.
As well as the fun activities
that go on with that but that's
that's what we've done
mr chair members of the
committee will our schedule is
fairly similar to last figure
city schools we do the ninety
minute blocks of our language
arts
along with math and we do have
embedded intervention during the
day for as she stated students
who are not up to power on their
under you know interim
assessments so at that
middle school and let me point
out before I want middle schools
are we do have a seven and a
half hour day been that we are a
forty school week so try to get
all that done in the morning and
then the afternoon reserve for
specials and you know enrichment
and things or that sort of on
the kids are not filling filling
the strain of the long day so we
try to catch them under fresh in
the morning but those course
subjects and that are mid school
levels we have a fifty five
minute class would you have what
we call the community similar to
her panther power hour and I had
to power our name actually we
call our community and this can
rain from intervention to
say at the high school and
medical level when you do
when you have a
student council elections and
all the stuff that comes along
with those those days like at
that when it's reserved for the
act on certain days and and then
also one of the biggest things
that that community our does is
it these kids are in that class
with the same teacher all you're
long and they're in their in
their their strategically paired
with these teachers that that
they get along with and that
they care about and that we
teachers can check in and out on
them and you know if they're
struggling in the teacher will
know about it and other teachers
know who to come to during that
hour to check in with this kid
because it's very important you
know we often forget what all
goes into the schooling right
it's not just you know we're
going to learn math and reading
and you know kids come in
struggling some days they come
in hungry and and all the other.
You know travesties that happen
with our students and we're here
to pick up the pieces as
educators and and this community
has been really impactful for
some of these kids because they
build that strong relationship
with this teacher and they know
uh at least there's one person
in the school that they can
trust and come to when they are
struggling or you know they need
that additional help or
sometimes they just need a break
and go to this teacher and bent
in in order to get it off their
chestnut they they continue on
with the rest of the day right
so so yeah our schedule you know
we purposely build that in and
then and it's really been
impactful for our students to do
that and them because you know
it while bath and science are I
mean math and language arts and
science socialists are really
important it's also you know
we're gonna think about the
whole.
Thank you all as you can hear
from their descriptions schools
are incredibly complex places
i've always felt like the folks
who do the actual master
scheduling of figuring out how
all of these courses come
together how much time you spend
in one exactly what time of day
you offer it it's an incredible
amount of work to figure that
out and then across great levels
and there's a lot of factors
that go into their decisions and
so related to that and I will
just so I don't pick on the two
starting the same time over
since you mention this
superintendent center hotel i'll
start with you on the next
question then we'll work this
way but in that what does teach
your time look like do teachers
in your district do you feel
like they have enough time to do
the things that research really
shows are quite valuable like
planning reviewing student data
collaborating learning and how
do you feel about the
sufficiency of that time and how
much time do they get for that
thank you
I
mister chairman members of the
committee
honestly I I think there's never
enough time honestly
as we had our board retreat last
night on and we met with our
district cabinet and the board
and we talked about the specific
issue and how can we make sure
that
our teachers fill the their time
as honoured and we don't bombard
him with business stuff
it's forty five minutes for
elementary it goes by super
superfast it's not a lot of time
so we need to be really
intentional on how we use that
time and respect their afternoon
and working on meetings and all
of that
that's why it's really important
to when we are planning
professional development and how
we're gonna use our data to
drive instructions that we as
administrators is the word
everyone that were really
intentional and when we plan and
have everything in place
because we want to respect that
time cause it's secret.
Forty five minutes like not
even structured my team like
let's not take that time away
from teachers
because it's so important for
them to use to plan
to play interventions to look at
data
because I remember it's been a
while
but when you're a teacher you
need that time
secondary
staff
at a small district their
islands they don't always have a
team to meet with
so for them it's having that
coaching opportunity with their
administrators to meet with um
and really have those
conversations to improve their
instruction and to be able to
have someone to have those
conversations with.
So it's it's been really
intentional and respecting
teachers time on because I know
where you ask teachers distinct
questions are going to always
say there's not enough time.
For last vehicle schools are
elementary as staff have a
little over four hours of prep
time.
In our secondary staff have
fifty one I must buy the hours I
guess so little over five hours
a week for for prepping
that time also includes some
collaboration.
Rplc's looking at data having
those conversations regarding a
students who perhaps h.
Struggling for whatever reason
in the classroom.
Uh one of the the challenges
that are I have seen and in
three different districts that I
have been if I may be candid is
the the difficulty sometimes of
trying to remain within the ram
on the collective bargaining
agreement and not being able to
have additional time
for you know staff meetings or
you know even some some training
so that that's where we have to
become creative and you know you
you pay out of title two finds
our title one funds for maybe
some additional time that you
need to do some
it intentional planning behind
that I am partial in that in
something that I hope to move to
next year would be a black
schedule of the incorporates a
collaboration period in addition
to the prep period and will be
in from e seven black schedule
actually to an eight black
schedule
and having that embedded in
their i've seen that work in the
past
where if the clab reason time is
structured well it's very
powerful in the yields.
Data analysis and a shift in in
tiny and implementation
but you know right now what
we're going to be working with
the schedules that we have and
then continue to shift.
Mr chairman members of the
committee all echo what they say
but a superintendent send a
whole inside enough there has
never enough time right there
isn't every teacher will tell
you that
but I will go on to see you know
as a superintendent typically
i'll make my rounds in the
afternoon and the buses are
really seen and doing the rounds
and you know and that may lead
you when everyone's gone but the
successful teachers are the one
that you see their cars are
still in the parking lot you're
not after five o'clock they're
going to make it happen and and
I wish there was a lot more of
those are usually the non
successful ones are the kid
they're almost running over the
kids on the way out right there
leaving just as soon as the kids
are leaving and so but there is
never enough time out of speak
from experience as well III
thought elementary my first five
years of of my career to second
grade loved it wanted to stay
there my whole career until I
actually moved to high school
and also wow and this is a lot
easier right because elementary
teachers work there behind off
and and they don't have enough
prep time they really don't they
if they get if they're lucky
they get specials right to get
their library time their p time
that is their prep time.
And by the time they have to use
a restroom and take her copies
and whatever else those are gone
so that you have there never
really is enough time but but I
will I love to honor those
teachers that do put in the
extra time and stay after hours
and and do what they need to do
is to the kids are successful.
Mr chair members of the
committee with west last vegas.
As we know there there was some
new calendar uhm there's a new
calendar rubrics that was
presented to a superintendence
to develop our calendars.
With that west last biggest
prior to this calendar
elementary teachers were given
into the bargaining contract
five elementary prep days.
And didn't get any other prep
during the year besides those
prep days.
Except for as we know as
teachers we we stay after hours
we find weekends we do
everything that we have to when
we have to.
Uhm so now with this new
calendar we have built in with
her with our activity teachers
doing a rotation calendar where
el mentor teachers will get a a
fifty minute prep every day for
this year this will be the first
time was last week is has ever
done that
uhm when it comes to secondary
they've always gotten a fifty
minute prep
uhm every day.
And and again it it is true
there's there's never enough
time as a teacher to find time
to print papers great papers to
care very thing that's needed to
to be a teacher.
Student data clab reading
claboration we do with our
bargaining contracts we were
able to need at least three
hours a month and we utilise
those to do our plcs and other
things that we need to and take
care of a business and in some
teachers will put in the extra
time somewhat booked for the
majority of our staff they they
do see there there are their
cars after hours sometimes there
till nine o'clock at night
grading papers are doing what
they have to get ready for the
next day
thank you.
Thank you all so very much lots
that's to chew on there I think
in terms of what we know matters
for teacher practice and what
that does to actually impact
student outcomes ok so they'll
let us lead your also updated
the stead legalization guarantee
this last session which is the
state's public score funding
formula making changes to three
parts of it at the states at
risk index creating a standalone
factor for english learners in
changing the factor for
secondary students to include
six grade students and then also
increasing that factor for all
of those secondary students
agreed six through
I will start with superintendent
sand of all on this one and then
will work guess backwards this
time
how have those changes impacted
your district do you have any
initial ideas on services
programming or student supports
that you might change or bolster
as a result of those funding
changes.
Mr chair members of the
committee
four of our speaker city schools
where the funding formula
did it increase the unit value
and its intention was to provide
more funding
because we
have been facing it in if you
see the the document that was
started with you this morning we
have seen a continuous downroad
down word as by what spiral with
regard to twenty roman so you
know this year I did have to cut
a little over one million
dollars in and funding so
where it it would have a
positive impact
I have had to make a budgetary
decisions to reduce
art or staff size
and have larger class sizes
and and what i've done as i've
i've touched i've tried it I try
to touch everything but the the
classroom
and the reductions that it made
if individuals left the district
they just didn't ref.
I merge those together
I will say however that with
those changes are nf we can stop
our or enrollment bleed if you
will
I think that the the impact of
having additional funding for
career technical education and
some additional training
for our staff are that's
embedded in their community
schools work
you think there's a value to all
of that
but it works when you know
in a district that is not fixing
the issues that that I am right
now.
Mr chair members of the
committee
my story is very similar to
superintendents and a lot of
we're excited about the changes
and funding however my district
is seen declining enrollment so
we have to cut almost half a
million dollars to our budget so
we last one teacher and we
absorbed that position so I
didn't have to
lay off anyone.
We just absorbed that position.
So we were excited about the
funding changing changes
especially the secondary funding
changes.
But declining a roman
has impacted our district.
Before copen so it's
a battle where battling every
single day.
Mr chair members of the
committee for west last vegas
we've seen an increase in in
enrollment.
When I started
back in two thousand and sixteen
our budget was about
twelve point five million as of
today were at twenty two
point eight million
I see it as an increase in and
of course the seg formula as
well as increasing in students
from last year to this year last
year were
nineteen a little under twenty
million nineteen point eight and
now we're at twenty two and.
But some of these extra fundings
were were looking out of courses
of course we're getting more
students so we're looking at
more teachers
other things that we're looking
at and do to covered
fires flooding everything that's
happened here and last vegas.
Looking at general ad social
workers and psychologists are
one of my goals is of course to
have to look at the student as a
whole and before we could
actually educate students we
have to work on those other
aspects and and I learned this
coming from an alternative
school there was many things
that I had to do as a teacher
before I could actually get
students to learn.
And that was better counselor
sometimes be their parent make
sure they've eat and all those
different aspects behind
actually education
in right now I I feel because
our social workers in our are
psychologists of course our
pater idea be so the only
students that they they're able
to focus on our students with
exceptionalities that have ips.
So our other students and and
the generate population are
needing these services and we're
not able to provide yes we do
have our school based health
center but they're only able to
do so much with their staffing
so so we're looking at moving in
that directions that's been a
plan that we've been working on
since last year and and pray
moving forward with it this year
now that we have the actual
funding available.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
see actually and and I don't
know if there was a cut off on
involvement but I know i've been
the president of the
supernational association as
well and talking to I know a lot
of microdistricts were
negatively impacted by
this seg
change however speaking for
santa rosa even though we last
about ten students from last
year our budget actually
increased to the seg formula
chain switch it positively
impacted us there one of the
things that we do in santa rosa
and you've heard we talk about
this if you've heard of you talk
before you know center is a it's
kind of an anomaly when it comes
to absolutely staff social
workers things of that sort we
we are fully staff to social
workers we have a ft one point
five for speech therapy we have
our own psychologies to
agnostician and and this is is
it's going to help bolster the
act and I make ensure that we
can you know year after you're
have those are people in place
to help the students the needs
of the students that they're
coming in in our specific mental
health needs with social workers
I do have a regular at social
worker and I have two actually
have two regular social workers
and a special at social workers
I have three social workers on
staff to cover that but what
these changes is actually going
to help and hopefully sustain
that yeah but I don't know what
the cut off was on that that
the numbers or what but I know
some schools are negative
impacted and some like mine were
positively impacted even though
I last about and students last
year so
but III think it's it's really
good that that it was changed
i'll speak for myself
but yeah I think it's it's a
positive impact for our
district.
Think you are very much amanda
for I think for the committee
you're funding formula for
public schools has over a twenty
discrete factors the changes
last year impacted three of
those but it didn't impact for
example the way that we
calculate funding for enrollment
and so districts who experience
that enrollment loss even if
they experienced an increase
perhaps an at risk funding
because of their student
population or because they had
more six through twelve students
it's still a formula that
balances out so just wanted to
add that for a little bit of
context very last question for
me before I pass it out to you
to to you as a committee what
keeps you up as night as a
superintendent and what do you
really want the committee to
know about your work in your
community and i'll go ahead and
start with you a superintendent
madrid
mr chairman members of the
committee what keeps me up at
night what doesn't keep me up at
night right
lots of things I mean you know
first and foremost esco safety
you know that that keeps me up
gives me ultras I have two
old buildings that are in the
top fifty that need replacement
they were bill in a time when
this was not even an issue.
So now we're having to to you
know modify and retro fifteen to
try to make them save and they
were built tom with a classrooms
that are stand alone out there
where there there's easy access
to them and it at the time it
was it was fine but that keeps
me up at night you know and and
as they say it's not a matter of
if it's a matter of when so you
always have to be vigilant to a
fat and and provide that
training
you know one of the thing that
keeps seen up a night is is in
on my attract students you know
I think the state in your other
doing a great job with you know
providing funding for ct
programs and for in a workbase
learning and and this is
something that really has had a
positive impact on on our school
on our school district because
kids are showing up now and they
have a purpose when you show
these kids that unless that's
showing up and then you send him
out with no vision or no focus
not worth their showing up they
know what they want to do they
may not do with the rest of the
life but at least they have a
general idea what they what they
do what they want to do when
they get out so now they're
showing up and they're learning
with purpose and almost set in a
language arts reading mass its
meaningful for them because you
can they can correlate it to
something that they're going to
do later on whether it's
carpentry whether it's welding
whatever the case may be so that
uh keeps me up at night because
it's all done basically on grant
basis so it's year to year
correct so if we lose that
funding or we don't get the
grant or whatever
you know then we also have to
cut programs that are making a
real big impact and not and i'll
finish with this.
If we lose those programs then
we lose some of those students
because these are re engaging
our students our graduation
rates are are ninety plus in san
rosa are attendant for reads are
over ninety percent of santa
rosa in its to do with this
because kids are one of shop to
school they're having fun
they're doing stuff that's
relevant to them and I said they
may not do it again but you know
I would really ask you to
consider to figure out a way to
get these
this fundamental primary.
Hi mister chairman of the
committee I think similar to mr
a madrid
I would save finances and
taking action it's always easy
to have a plan have an idea
what something on paper but the
execution of that is it is
always a little bit more
difficult shifting the culture
and ensuring that
what we are planning for is
actually
in literally taking place in
their classroom poor yields
results for our students are so
what keeps me up at night
currently is a with the cuts
that I have made a having a
basically at a rookie team I
have
several new administrators our
brand new administrators are
individuals in new positions.
A is really ticking on their
mentorship in that this team
that is very
eager to learn and and step in
to these rules
that as a leadership team that
we can effectively support our
teachers and find the time to be
in the classrooms beat the boots
on the ground and be present
because I think that really
makes one of the biggest
differences is
being that resource and money
can always help us helps us at
programs it hopes as become more
competitive as I have in a
stable flow of dollars obviously
helpful
but the the human capital.
So what keeps me up as night is
making sure that what we have
planned for.
This year and and.
Mister chairman members of the
committee
school safety
as huge for me it takes
forty minutes for a state police
officer to
arrived on campus at package
that's huge I have one security
guard
who's not armed we don't have
any
we don't have a local shire.
That scares me
and school security keeping
cancer
that keeps me away at night
I have all buildings and I do
banding repairs all the time
because we were at number sixty
for funding and we'll move to
eighty because I did bandit
repairs because my groups my
roof we're linking and I had to
replace
a gem floor and they said you're
not going to change your
rankings but I went from sixty
to eighty and they changed
my case deserve nice facilities
or keeps nearly going
those those students who are who
have changed since covered
they're not engaged their kids
that are just not motivated I
feel like
we stracker brains trying to get
a motivated and I agree with
superintendent madrid the ct
programs I will keep in kids and
gate we have so many of my kids
and that a participate in ct
programs with sound of it coming
caught the door out credit
program which have been has been
amazing but we depend on that
those funding that you're to
hear
but a lot of her kids drop out
and it's hard to catam reengaged
and that keeps me a week at
night
it's it's hard
we're battling I I battle
between losing kids to worse las
vegas
and the sanity but the biggest
battle is online schools because
their requirements are very
different than what we have
their teachers don't meet with
kids daily like our teachers do
they have they meet with them
once a week
and so I battle losing kids to
online schooling and the
requirements are very different
than what we that.
Oh we're required so those are
the things that keep me up at
night
mr chair members of the
committee would keep me up at
night well as
as my colleagues here have have
stipulated we we pray never
sleep.
And and she in
sprint in its inner halton's
rate you know the kids that we
do lose to other districts or to
to online online schools at at
least when they're in our
buildings being seen by our
staff in our teachers we know if
they're okay and we're able to
work with those kids that need
the help.
Usually the ones that are
leaving our districts to these
online schools are
somethings happen and we've had
to enter either intervene using
other state entities to get
involved to help us with
situations so these parents
decide to take them out of our
districts and take them
somewhere else else because they
don't win us
been those helicopter teachers
making sure that our students
are getting what they need and
and and that's when we worry
about are they really safe for
the really getting what they
need on these online schools are
they really getting what they
need at home.
Other things yes facilities and
and I see it even sometimes when
you make the rankings in the
facilities sometimes the process
to get the money and to get the
work done for your facilities
is.
Is
just an act that it takes months
I I could get funded for a
capital outlet project
a perc project in for a specials
system type thing in by the time
we jump through the hoop sort of
the people on the other side of
the computers say it's okay or
you're gotten the assets you are
your two down the road and
you're burning getting your your
building up to parents which you
need and sometimes we do as
superintendents if we have our
bond money in certain monies
that are set aside we have to
use them we have to make sure
our facilities are up to par and
ready to have students in their
men
heating a cooling I think has
been my biggest thing that i've
been trying to work on that
that's pretty much work with the
big complaint has always been
now our summers are summers
aren't or the summer used to be
with our earth rotation and
everything that's happened the
ec the heat that's going
you're in august year november
and you're still having hot days
so we don't need as much a
condition and at as we did ten
years ago so we're working on
heating a collinant and allowed
our building third roll old
buildings there past nineteen
eighties before the nineteen
eighties they were they were
made so it's pretty one of the
biggest ones i've been.
Yeah mr chairman just to think
you are to our superintendence
for being here I hold a lot of
respect for the difficulty and
the challenges of what you do
alongside a lot of admiration
for the importance of it and the
vital role that your workplace
in our society so a lot of
gratitude for me to you all with
that mr chairman members will
turn it over to you off for any
questions you may have already
first my list represent bucket
thank you mister chairman thank
you for your presentation it's
going to be wrong administrators
because I guess we're all in
some mex rate
mister chairman so they brought
up the area or you guys brought
up about school safety okay
what are a couple of
can a broad you know ideas that
would help
with school safety not just in
your district but around the
state.
And mister chair members of the
committee well with less less
biggest in school safety
so what i've actually done is I
have a resource officer now
armed resourced officer
when security positions have
become available and open to the
public we've moved forward with
hiring
retired police officers they're
actually still certified to to
carry and in all those different
aspects that we would try to
find the staff
that will help us if there is
ever any type of event that we
we wouldn't want to happen but
we want to be prepared for
if
if there would be anything so so
we work on our staffing to make
sure that we're prepared for it.
Mister chairman members of the
committee I would echo what
mister
said down the at the end
it's funding so we can
equip these positions right I
have one
truncy officer he's a former
police officer but we we class
firm as a choice the officer
you know cause if customers are
srow then it's all the sudden
it's going to cost a lot more
money to to you know hire him or
to keep him on a but one is not
enough I have campuses that are
all over our community they're
not all on one campus you know
we're in the process of trying
to consolidate all our schools
into one campus in our community
and that way we can have it
safer and then we only have need
one or two resource officers or
trency officers in there but as
it is right now they're all
within you know two miles of
each other and then I have a a
satellite campus out here not on
chicago between las vegas and
santa rosa which is forty miles
away and and just to echo work
you know superintendent senate
holton said our response time
out there is probably about an
hour I would see you know i'm so
just more funding so we can have
that in in we we've gotten craft
you don't get me wrong in a way
we've
got an email you with our
sheriff's office for we pay for
part of a their officers to hang
out at the school they're not on
chicago at east half a day and
you know they kind of stagger
that and they don't have a set
schedule so that we people don't
know when they are there when
they're not so we've gotten
crafty but it's also working
with partners but we also have
to put that out of our
operational fund to help support
just site I would say more
funding for us
thank you chairman thank you
because you know
school said is more than just
armed personal or security staff
it's also in software programs
that are able to uh despires
provide safety measures for our
schools even including the
anonymous reporting cell
the misretrieved my next is
about a new.
I'll talk to about it is your
capable outlay for your
buildings rate
many of my colleagues mister you
know sit on the finance
committee as well and we have a
log jam of about six billion
dollars five billion dollars I
see so if as I can be happy down
or probably be there
how is that impacted your
ability to
complete projects with your
school districts and also your
match because mr chairman what
are the things that we run into
and our county.
Is we had a a bridge project
that one was first bid was about
a hundred and ten million I
think now there are some around
hundred eighty two hundred
million so can you briefly talk
about
the construction costs and what
kind of burden that places on
i'd say kind of medium sized
districts are not the micro
districts but.
The.
I can speak to that
some of you may know I have the
built the the satellite school
out here not that she goes ten
years old but the building is
failing so it's it's it's up for
a rep it's up for a replacement
right so my point being though
is that it's
a twelve twelve million dollars
I believe it costed ten years
ago when it was completed now
it's close to forty million.
To rebuild that building a and
for those who may not know what
happened there is there was some
are failing in the soil they did
didn't
correctly place the soil underdo
so they built it on clear and
when a claim gets wet and
expands and when it drives or
vice versa now which one but
it's like built on a bola yellow
right and so it's cracking and
it's far it's about to fall down
I would say bought to fall down
but it's very ugly building and
it's not good for kids and but
it's taken ten years to that
other point to get that done and
I know in a lot of it I blame
one word the building is located
if it is down in the middle of
nowhere I often told psfa and
and and other people that have
this building was in downtown
real anti when the take
continues for it to get replaced
right but it the the process is
is very conversation to your
question mister bucker
to get through this and jump to
some hoops and you know it just
it's it's a lot of bureaucratic.
Ah it's a mess
I represented a buck up I would
give it example I received a
quote for to replace the aspect
of my track in twenty twenty one
it was two hundred thousand
dollars and I was turned up all
the assault and at the time I
didn't have the money I just
received a quote
two days ago and it was almost a
million dollars from the same
company that's how much it
increased and I don't need to
replace it it's something I need
but that's how much it's
increased and they I didn't see
me money happen like them
always saving money for
thank you mister chairman and
thank you because that's really
my my point of it is.
The other thing about with
capital outlays and where time I
produce fashion as they don't
help build things like gyms
athletic facilities band rooms
quieter whatever even some of
our other programs so I think
mrperiod chairman i'll say this
is as a as a legislator as a
government appropriate body
part of our responses we need to
start investing into these other
types of
areas that we haven't done
before right it's a different
student and investment in these
things that's going to help
bring our students to our doors
my last thing briefly mr
chairman is about leadership
we talk about teachers license
teachers being at a premium
the other thing at a premium is
administrators
so mr chairman and you know what
are the things I want to say is
leadership matters besides the
classroom teacher one of the top
indicators on student
achievement and success is
leadership not just
administrative but also teacher
literatures what types of
measures have you done in your
district.
To
improve the leaders of your
district to meet the meet the
needs of our students.
Mr chairman representative
bucker
what are the things that that
i've been very intentional with
and then this is starting from
our educational assistance or
education fellows
all the way through the
leadership ranks is is growing
our own
leaders from within our
community people that are going
to stick around and not just be
there and use santa rosa as a
stepping stone you know get a
couple years experience and then
bolt for albuquerque real rancho
or whatever the case may be so
have been very strategic and
building that and and you know
building that leadership
capacity right now I have an
initiative where I have kind of
my mid tier teachers you know I
told him since last year start
getting your administrative
licenses working towards those
get your masters
and they did and we have about
four or five or six people
because in santa rosa in the but
the next five years ago have a
complete turnover in leadership
including myself and probably
all my principles my director of
program is you know we're all
within we're all at retirement
asia within a couple of years of
retiring so I I knew it was very
important to start building that
leadership capacity from within
but I think you know for me it's
building that local corer of
leaders that understand the
community understands the people
because it's you know every
communities different and
bringing in what someone can you
know and small communities get
very territorial like you know
an outsider come in in you know
take some a while to ingrain
themselves in the community but
it's even more painful when they
come in you train them up get
him a few years express and they
take off right so that's
something that i've been raised
strategic in doing and and and
trying to maintain that
leadership capacity within my
district
mr chair members of the
committee when I first
I guess became a principle of
the personal please
share with me that I always when
I became administrator always
look around and
figure out who's going to be my
replacement he said an eight say
you and i'm heme entered me.
And I have the same philosophy
so I always look around and I
see who's going to replace me
so this year
my new high school principle is
someone who isa potentially five
years ago
so we grow
so I knew she had that
capability and we mentioned her
and she was in the system as you
know she's a full in the full
time high school principle I
think it's important to grow
your own we have two teachers we
just hired a new fifth grade
teacher who went through the
process she was an ee and now
she's a four fledged teacher one
of our pre k teachers graduate
from package wanted we helped
her get her degree now she is a
teacher so I think it's
important to grow our own
because they will stick around
um and it's important for our
community to see that and it's
also in perfect students to see
that are they see themselves in
those people so right now we're
mentoring to other individuals
my high school counselor why I
see that potential to become an
administrator because I am in
the same position or
superintendent madrid we're
seeing that
you know I want to retire one
day.
And i'm seeing like who's going
to step up so I think it's
important to grow on.
We find those potential leaders
I may add mr chair members of
the committee
with me and leadership that's
our own transparent so I drive
into las vegas about an hour
twenty minutes one way.
Um to to work here one of the
benefits that I have I abelieve
i've had is that I have worked
at different districts different
sizes of districts and have been
able to learn the good and the
bad
other leaders
and I think that mentorship and
exposure is critical
but not only within art
districts so what I like to do
with with individuals that I
have worked with in the past are
some of them go through the adl
program or alter program through
c s
some of them
I have the privilege of working
with a non profit three rivers
that paid for
administrative internships and
they they would pay students
believe it was eighty and eighty
thousand dollars salary or a
statement and it was a year long
internship and I had several
employees who worked with me
under those programs and they
saw the day to day and they they
participated
in meetings and you know a the
mentorship is more than you know
go and can put in duty for a
basketball game or what happened
there there they were involved
in sat meetings they've lead
smart committees and someone so
you think that engaged in
engaging and on what we do every
day
builds their confidence and it's
easier for them to take over in
it in a place where they already
have buying a knowledge of what
they have.
And then another big piece that
I that i've done
also is worked with the center
for transformation leadership
out of sanity
and that has helped in
the emotional intelligence and
the communication that as the
other approach because I believe
like teachers you know we can we
may have all the now knowledge
and degrees.
But if we cannot effectively
communicate and get people to
work alongside us and with us
then that's all they are or
degrees.
Are communicate not only with
art with our staff but with our
boards are with our community
and they're able to see that and
be exposed to that mak.
It's my app to stay in in a
stronger.
Mister chair members of the
committee
when it comes to leadership
I agree it's building your own
and also building a a team that
you can trust and knows there
for the now that they're there
for the kids.
You need a team that said for
the kids my first year is a
superintendent
I I had a team I was interim
superintendent so I had a team
that was built by somebody else
and I had to come in and and
work with these people and then
figure out if they were the
right people in the right
positions
when it came down to contracts
for the next year I did release
on my administrators and I had
the reapply for their positions
because I felt there was some in
some positions that probably
needed to be in another
position.
So I moved people around and got
new people and then through the
years of the sustainability of
of even keeping a superintendent
as we know superintendent
sometimes it's a three year span
within districts and then you
have board sure getting new
superintendents.
What i've seen with west last
vegas and being able to be there
or for twenty one years but ten
years as a superintendent you're
able to build that report and
build that team that's there for
the kids to be able to educate
students and get things in there
that's needed so that it could
be educated and lead them and
then eventually those students
come back and want to be part of
that team I just hired
six west last figures graduates
that graduated probably a little
between two thousand and
eighteen and two thousand and
twenty
and now they're going to be
teachers for west last figures
cause they want to come back and
be part of that team that they
were part of while they were
students.
Mr chairfamily had one
i'm i'm gonna have to reject
because we only have ten more
minutes
and so I have seven people on
the list so we're gonna go back
to the five minutes per member I
had mentioned at the beginning
of the meeting there are tell
chairman sold that but we're
actually going to have to do it
now because we have to start
raining it in so members that do
have questions please make sure
they're pointed if they're at a
particular superintendent please
do after that five minutes
i'm gonna call in the next
member alright
so represent get.
Thank you mister chair thank you
for your feedback and thank you
superintendent sanable for
mentioning the importance of
literacy coaches
and interests of time i'd like
to know how much when you're
just drink adopts mouth adoption
how much do you look at pd and I
am speaking as a coach you as a
student as a beginning teacher
the turkmouth program was
incredible and training
we did stepping stones coaches
and teachers got training do you
get any training from your
adoptions of your mouth
curriculum.
Mister chair representative
garrett
that is something that I always
are request and part of that is
initial implementation of the
program
because we don't have math
coaches
one of the requirements that I
have of my staff is that our
principles that we make sure
that they're sitting in on those
trainings and our support staff
are better a program's director
of instruction
that they are familiar with with
those programs are required so
that when we are working into
the classrooms and conducting
observations and walk through
but we know what it should look
like so we can help redirect one
of the benefits that I have had
while I worked in house and in
pinosco was a tapped into the
support that ces provided are
they do provide the district or
get the districts
six three days of training are
and at that point in time I
eutilized a trainer by the name
of abbey winter and we provided
training and coaching so and
that was a round math and we saw
we side changed so it wasn't
just a one day event but where
she did while she'd like that
are our program and if she
wasn't familiar she her soft
trained on that and then she
came in and supported our our
staff members and and that goes
back to the content through you
know going in observing the
teachers observing the
implementation and then also
supporting the the administrator
because they are not obviously
not there every day
what should it administrator be
looking for and we are suff.
Many of you have some things in
the vehicle to add it at it
otherwise i'll ask
okay my second question is as I
note that the northeast regional
education cooperative serves all
of your districts are there
specific things that you only
get through them how
how effective has that been
support.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I am the chairman of of the rac
here in the northeastern area
region for.
When it comes to the services
that we get we do get a lot of
special it services indicator
thirteen indicator sixteen.
They do do trainings for of
cpi
we have asked we got a new
director now and we're asking
for some new things that need to
be done with general ad when it
comes to math coaches and
helping with reading
interventions those aspects.
When it comes to the six
different districts that are
that are in our ec.
Like for myself i'm i'm a one of
the bigger districts east last
vegas is one of the bigger
districts so so we trader help
him and guide them to help the
smaller districts that aren't.
Don't have the staffing behind
it to be able to hire some of
those positions so we work on
those different areas and
trainings and and try to push
them more towards the smaller
distr.
Thank you
all right represent me to one
world
thank you mr chair thank you so
much I have a just one quick
question mostly for us
superintendent sender
something that you mention that
you're hopes here in the future
as far as you're scheduling
parked my interest as a teacher
especially
but when you said that but I
kinda want to know a little bit
more about it because you said
you've seen it done before so
what is that them I think you
mention that you're gonna have
like a prep time and a
collaboration time every day
you're going from us sevens are
black to possibly an eat by a
class block what does that look
like because as a teacher that
would be amazing we have an
eight block schedule in them in
my district and um and so I get
definitely to two perhaps a week
sometimes three depending on
what the other things but one of
those perhaps is always plc so
it it's it's very frustrating
when half of my preparers is
done and sometimes you feel like
you're just kind of chewing the
same bond
and nothing is really I could be
doing so many other things
that you know but so so having
those that dedicated time and
not taking away from my prep
time would be amazing so please
what does that look like
a mister chair representative
more as so this was a model that
we ran into house
and it was an even odd schedule
as so it was an a block period
at students had eight percent
periods of course but our
teachers taught six or every
other day the way the schedule
was developed was for example
mondays and wednesdays that was
when the teacher had their prep
time
on tuesdays and thursdays there
was a a common collaboration
period by department in that
district we had
in probably most great levels
are anywhere between six.
To seven teachers per either per
great level or or per subject at
the middle school in high school
so they had common planning time
out of fridays we called them
skinny day so they ran through
the whole through the whole
cycle
the ends are teachers had maybe
a forty forty five to fifty
minute luck
but what we did was excuse me we
tried to cycle are instruction
collaboration periods where that
was a that that was the the
conversation with the team right
they were looking at you know mr
yet it's has talked about the
vertical articulation and the
horizontal alignment with it
within curriculum so they were
looking at that they were that
they would do their own internal
trainings
because at that point we had to
believe it was over about two
hundred twenty teachers so there
was no way we could send
everybody out and we couldn't
have effective training coming
then app for it for everyone so
are within their own departments
they they train during those
collaboration periods or we came
in and we did maybe some
administrative stuff with them
and then they're there are prep
times were secret and and that's
something that you know I want
to look at here for last bigger
city schools is because as as my
colleagues have mentioned no
there is not enough time for
teachers to plan in prepare and
you know in some cases we just
said you know here's another day
there's there's nothing
structured for you during this
call that time you know go ahead
and utilise that as you as you
see better but there was always
a dedicated eighty minute block
for them to do something.
Thank you
mr chair and and superintendents
and of all that that sounds like
heaven to be honest with you umm
but but only because
even those those teachers like
myself there is a department
head you have those extra that
those other duties but when do
you do them yet that you usually
not given an extra prep you're
usually not given extra time
you're doing you know you're
doing things
so so to be able to have someone
I mean I think I think that's an
excellent from a superintendence
to outstand point that you can
value that that that they're
prepared secret
you could get a lot bigger buy
in from your teachers because of
you value their time b will then
value you as a leader so I I
think that's that's amazing so
hopefully hopefully a lot more
districts go to that.
Represent conservatives
thank you mister chair and i'm
proud to say that i've had
opportunity of working either
professionally or legislatively
with all of these fine
superintendents in the schools
and their school district
very good to my question also
want to send a a little shut out
talking about them she got
earlier there team along with on
their teachers miscakes on just
represented uh said the measure
the national engineering design
competition so a little team
from the school he was talking
about does just do a great
things but
my question is getting maybe
into
cte and career preparedness I
know from working with that you
as some have some get really
robusty programs although we've
half ways work based learning
capstone projects some are
starting you know t pathway some
do I know it's package you do
very intensive concrete romance
or even just offering elective
courses with cte with the
changes to the graduation
allowances I should say putting
in cte the changes to the
requirements taking out that
requirement for elder ratio for
demand smath course working
maybe some of that do enrollment
course work we just had this
questions about math
preparedness talking about the
shorters of math teachers
at that secondary level although
a firmly believe in you know CTE
and I think that's been that's
that's making big movements
towards graduation required
towards graduation rates my my
concern or maybe just my ask is
maybe how are you looking to
fulfill that voice to still make
sure our students are college
ready to are trying to avoid
those repeat courses once they
get into any sort of secondary
education and that they actually
come out with math skills you
know given the flexibility and
course work thank you mr chair.
Mr chairman representative guns
all us
one of the things that we focus
on I guess
I guess that we've had to accept
is not all students are going to
go to college we understand that
right um so the ones that really
are on that pathway we ensure
that they take the ozbour to
they have their you know a
robust math uhm pathway but also
we're not discounting math for
these other students as well I
think it's just a more relevant
math to them you know cause we
have kids that you know
I have just and through all with
our welding program right and
then in before you know what
they're doing john mctree and
they're doing it all kinds of
measurements and they're doing a
lot of construction maths what
they're doing without even
knowing they're doing it.
Right so so I think that is is
is the hook for some of these
students to ensure that they do
have a math background on the
math that the actually going to
need and then it's irrelevant to
them this old now I know why
need math right
I
I you know and of the financial
literacy is also something that
we we are gonna ensure that we
have every student has before
the exit center was a high
school because that is also a
relevant bath toward students
you know they're not going to
hopefully not go to go out and
get you know ten credit cards
and maximum and then you know
they're struggling for the next
twenty years of their life
trying to pay those off so those
are some things that
we are doing there but you know
back to the question is it it
it's were ensuring that each
student is is an individual and
they're getting the the math
that they need for the future
that doesn't mean they're not
going to go to college
eventually what they could.
Uhm mr chair certainty and I
want to thank you for that
um I know your district does an
extra extremely well job of you
know your c t course work that
you've had that you've put
within your students you know
just just trying to capture you
know all of the students in and
I think it's a particular
challenge for rural schools um
when you are lacking teachers
you know particularly mass
certified teachers that you are
trying to offer all these things
to possibly a smaller population
but you still need a mass heater
you still need certain teachers
to teach these things and so
just throwing it out their rate
serving all the rest of the
students and just I applied all
the work that you all are doing
so thank you thank you mister
chair
and your center is out.
Mrperiod chairman thank very
much appreciate yours inferred
on the questions that have been
asked I want to address mr
madrid of a superintendent
madrid you said that your school
day is seven and a half hours
it's a four day week
and I my question is when.
What month and date do you start
school
mister chairman saturday zero we
start
we start on august fourth.
Mr term and I have concerned
here
why in the hail are we starting
our schools in august there's
the hardest month of the year in
new mexico I know what utility
car sorry I am a member of
central belly electric and excel
energy and thou so the highest
months for any utilities that
there is
why are we not moving that date
back where that's money can be
put to may be hiring somebody
else to help prip teachers for
reading a meth it only makes
sense I am I have been
confounded by that from the time
my kids started screwed that's
absolutely crazy.
But it does just be okay
safe some money they're put it
towards your teachers to be able
to retired them but that's my
part of it.
I've lost one of my notes here.
You say that the use of time is
very important plus the school
safety factor I understand what
you're getting out a lot of my
schools are out in the rule
areas of the state even out
where I live it takes.
Over thirty minutes for the
sheriff get out there I do I do
get that and we do have mental
problems that have developed
especially with the course of
copied here to get everything
else I think it's very important
that these kids are being
evaluated by their teachers for
their own will being I and I
can't tell you enough how much I
appreciate the jobs that charles
do missed chairman I will keep
it very short but I am going to
ask one thing in anybody on the
panel can answer if they would
like and you don't have to feel
okay
whatever happened to course you
variety.
Mister chairman members of the
committee.
Actually at west last biggest
we're bringing it back
we noticed throughout the year's
christ of writing disappeared
out of our current
I was seen students as a high
school teacher you I total
friends excited class and I was
teaching number signatures then
and those different aspects
behind friends and science so
i'd have them write their
signature and they printed.
When I became super intended I
talked to the elementary
teachers and and we've decided
to bring crisis back so we've
been working on it since.
First grade.
Thank you very much for doing
that if I students can't right
or read currency they cannot re
read the declaration of
independence and to me that's
very important besides that most
of these kids there printing
looks like hindscratching to me
and it was very important I know
for lots of these teachers that
are older to be able to teach
nice cursy hand writing where
that looks professional instead
of like a birthday grader might
have done it so thank you for
making their food on bringing
back that's on mr chairman
I was waiting to hear that
sending her as well
one of your greatest ****
alright i'll bring it up already
with a representative of common
thank you mister chair and i'll
keep this really short.
So within the decline in the
role meant i'm from a larger
school district to be of course
have experienced the kind of
enrollment um we know birthrates
are kind of in a bit down but my
question is this set and have
two part are you see more on the
online going to online school in
to charger home schools or they
just mainly moving out of
district and do you fill that
the attendance policies impact
it at all and what I mean this
is that
we were at the hunt institute
retalking about people who
children that sometimes are have
health related issues I am are
not you know out of school and
then the reported to cyfd at
that point if I was apparent I
would probably move my kid to
online school or home school
lane
if I think i'm going to get
reported because they have a
serious health issue and now
with these really stringent
attendance policies so I know
that we have children that are
just not attaining just because
their parents are making them go
but we also are seen impacted on
some health related issues so if
you can have let me know your
thoughts on that thank you.
So the first firm mister
chairman and representative
calling up to the first party
requesting in as far as center
of declining the roman rates.
I don't think it's online kids
aren't really necessarily going
to online a schools and they're
not really moving out of the
district I what i'm seeing as
it's a lower birthrates in our
community you know we're
graduating classes of of forty
five to fifty kids and run
rolling out kindergarten classes
that are thirty thirty five so
automatically that's
big dip in a romant right there
and in on and i'm seen at some
of the older and I say older my
agent and you know that that
have older kids you know there
there's families at four five
kids three four five and now
it's one maybe two kids are at
that and i'm in it and as far as
the attendance of policies I
don't think they're driving kids
out either um.
People in my community if
they're not sending them to
school they know that CYFD is
not going to do anything to them
gpo and there's really no teeth
to all the tendence policies in
the and that's frustrating you
know of itself I feel as an
administrator and I know my
principles fill that as well
it's needed but some of the
things that we do do and we do a
good job over you know like I
said I had a lot of social
workers in the get to those
houses the the principles are
after picking up students and
bringing them to school and you
know an argument of parents and
time get get there behind the
school and so that's what's up
to our attendance rates is just
you know the legwork and the
actual hard work so.
The.
Um.
Same issue birth rates I have
graduated class of forty five
and i'll have a class of twenty
three kindergarten students.
That's impacting a roman.
There are no houses
no apartment complexes and
packages so there is no place to
level we used to have rentals
but everybody became a in a
vacation rentals.
So there's no place to let us so
people graduate the go off and
they're all moving to real
router albuquerque for where the
these drops
if they go to college or two
you know i'll become a mechanic
they're going to move away I sit
with my own children there wants
to graduate cards there more
than likely not going to return
to pick us.
Um
that's what we're seeing and our
district for us I know their
online students because they
still want to play sports in my
school
so I know they don't offer
sports for the online school so
I have all a large amount of
kids that are on a tent online
schools and they play sports.
Thank you represent mobile
coming in
thank you mr chair and think you
are very much it's always great
to hear from your.
I am sorry and heard that school
safety a few of a couple of you
can actually brought up school
safety.
And it a current to me
and then a rebuild either my
like are liking to visit local
restaurants or just being.
With whatever the word
eves dropping on conversations
but it occurred to me.
That I we've been here in las
vegas we like they have been
going to hill crest restaurant
family owned and then allen
canto found me off and while
we're sitting there in those
restaurants it's very important
to listen to the conversations
that are going on because
there's grammar in the kitchen.
Um and then daughter and then
grandchildren all interacting
with the people that are coming
in in the conversations always
around.
Savvy ludia.
Wisdom coming from the elder and
um and then conversations about
well in my day we would do this.
In my day you know we would do
this or we wouldn't allow this
and they are all I have to do
around
the children young middle
schoolers that were either in
the park.
Practicing something today or
some some something maybe the
bikers rally that's coming up I
don't know whatever the
conversation so it incurred to
me that
mr chairman my background has
been to be involved with lulac
league of united latin american
citizens and endouble acp
there's a two larger civil
rights and oldest civil rights
organizations in the nation.
They were founded in nineteen
twenty nine and there still
existed and going strong.
Ninety six years later almost
reaching their one hundred years
and I bring this up because.
The foundational the reasons why
they both were found it in
nineteen twenty nine.
Think of nineteen twenty nine
what was going on in our
country.
And internationally was to build
a community based on further
heard sister heard.
Neighbor taking care of neighbor
family family everybody was into
a connective and the whole idea
was even during the depression
error and looming world wars.
The security was knowing that
you had a collective a community
group taking care of each other
even if you had to get up and
leave to go fight the war of
whatever you have to do it of
comfort level was.
They were taking care of each
other but the founding principle
for both was education
education.
Education.
Are we need to insure is that
our family so a young children
get a good education because
with a good education arm.
Anything and everything can
happen their dreams will come
true.
So my when you brought up
a few of your school safety.
It caused me to ask and and
there was also a discussion
around leadership in mentoring.
All these are connected keywords
and it caused me to think about
um.
How you are less superintendent
in within the school.
Um the school arena cafes really
schools and churches for in
communities together and
restaurants till um.
How have you been able to engage
with civic community
organizations
not necessarily just low like
random acp but whatever other
organizations.
Um to help.
Around the area of all the
things that we talked about
today attendance schools safety
arm leadership building
mentoring the next generation of
administrators.
Um.
And tynion to the natural
community leaders the natural
community leaders are the
grandmothers.
The elders in the community.
Um.
And in
mr chair it's important
then I asked this question
because.
We forget that those were what
kept us together and are strong
cultural traditions of ours
community cultural traditions.
And then it's sometimes the
answers are right there in our
community so the concept of
cross generational.
Influence and how important that
is and how valuable that is in
order for us to keep our
communities together but bill
for the next generation.
Is critical to education to the
foundations of education
representative hours five
minutes so if we could get to
their answers
so that.
Have you been able to engage
with those kind of natural
leaders those concepts and arm
maybe civic organizations and
you don't all have down through
if you have you haven't just.
Whoever wants to answer that.
Mr chair representative cabinet.
Unfortunately due to covered a
lot of those
civic organizations never
resurrected in santa rosa in
order talking about rotary and.
Lions club those types but some
of the things that we do try to
do as we take our students from
high school in middle school
sometimes an elementary and we
do have senior centers there
where they go and they help you
know them they're not part of
learning their do their phones
and things like that so they
interact with these leaders that
you said the most important
leaders in our community and and
and it's a joy to watch because
you know to see them interact
and you see you know two
separate generations interacting
with each other so you know
which we try to do things that
got it and one of the things
that we're going to try this
year you know I sit on the board
of future focused education and
they do a youth civic
infrastructure and we're
applying for that grant and and
one of those things that we're
going to do is we're going to
uhm in attack try to tackle food
and security out in the option
check our area but that's going
to be come from the students you
get them thinking civic mindedly
ah you get you give them a task
and they have to come up with a
solution for it and and so that
that's a civic mind said that
you know you're still in demon
and as well as ever important
critical thinking you know for
them to come up with the
solutions and what knocked
because from what I understand
there used to be a commodities
distribution out there but then
there was no help out there in
that area so you know we're
going to try to resurrect that
well the students are going to
try to resurrect that so that's
just one idea of how to get that
civic mindset reinstituted and
as well as.
Anyway all right thank you thank
you mister chair.
Thank you
so I had one question for you
all.
To use my five minutes high
school graduation requirements
so you all have alluded to it in
some ways I was wondering what
the two district
credits that you are have
implemented in just a little bit
if you could touch briefly on
what your process was in terms
of getting ready for the
upcoming freshman class.
The.
Mister chair members of the
committee after last vehicle
city schools what we are looking
at are capstone courses.
Ah for our students so we've
developed a five paperweight so
far so what we want to do is
close out at those courses
either with.
Are internships or or capsed on
classes.
And then also
we are looking at
earn southwest studies course to
address our history
so we will be embedding in new
mexico history and to our us
history courses by offering
southwest studies course are
that can time more so into your
project based learning
and incorporate some of the work
that he talked about a little
earlier this morning so so
that'll be at one of the aspects
that that were working on
I think that that will tie
closely with the graduate
profile that we recently
completed
so that's the direction that
rem.
We're looking at individual caps
don't projects and looking at
latinos and actions
projects tied into the cabstones
based on individual student
interes.
The.
We are asked to you know we do a
lot of work based learning and
our ct program so those are also
cap stones that were looking at
you know then level our
financial literacy as I
mentioned earlier is going to be
one of those requirements
offered this incoming class but
I I one of the points that I do
want to make with the graduation
requirements.
You know one of the things that
the legislature or p d.
You know what we talk about
innovation right we talk about
wanting to be one in schools to
be innovative in and doing all
these alternative things and in
alternative pathways to
graduation and cap stones one of
the things that's being left
behind those there's no
innovative assessments there's
no innovative accountability
systems were still been up held
accountable off an old model.
You know through a standardized
testing you know we we talk
about differentiation but then
we standardized test everybody.
Then I think that's what's not
been talked about.
So if we're gonna do these
innovative approaches and have
these alternative graduation
requirements.
Then we have to have an
innovative accountability system
I don't know what the answer is
but I think it that there needs
definitely needs to be some work
because if you look at at high
schools.
There judged off on college
interest exam that's it that's
it that's a one shot one day.
And you either go to bad based
on that day.
You know that that just blows me
away and a lot of our content
isn't even the line to the soul
you know I think so that's you
know we're doing a lot of good
work with graduation
requirements thank you for that
but I think this is what needs
to happen next as well.
Right so senator thorton I think
I inspired you on your next
questions
thank you mister chair just a
one very quick question you
several you'd mention school
safety as being an issue.
And i'd just like to get your
feedback on how you would feel
about allowing concealed carry
of someone who has a confident
career license a teacher to be
able to carry on campus in the
order especially in the rural
areas where delay time to thirty
minutes could be life or death
for many individuals but i'd
like to just get your opinion on
that going forward
me personally I would support a
could still carry on campus on
one of my campus especially out
in the after two query or the
response time is.
Is a lot cause a lot of damage
could be done in a few minutes
much less forty minutes
I would support it.
Ah I personally would not think
there is a high risk of you know
the
aa guess I could envision
individuals taking over and you
know you know that the person is
likely responsible the person
who has the conceal carry but
you know what what is the the
risk of students you know
overtaking these individuals or
someone getting a hold of of
those weapons are so
I think if if
that would be something that
would occur there'd be have to
be.
Development on awareness around
them
without that I would not support
them
mister chair members of the
committee
I would say I support it
I don't know if in the teacher
aspect I I would support it
hiring
officers
because they have been trained
and gone through the
there's also a mental thing
behind being able to consider
carrier when you're in one of
those types of situation fighter
flight type of scenarios.
What our teachers that are been
an education of these years be
able to be
able to protect students in in
these types of situations so I
agree that have to be very good
training pretty much police
officer type of training for
these teachers which in turn it
makes it easier like in my point
of comparing ex officers every
tired and and want to come work
for west last vegas.
Still carry well they have the
background they have the
knowledge leave bent through the
different trainings and they're
keeping up with their with their
certifications to be able to
hold these like.
I come from a hunting community
i've gone up around guns and
all my life
and i've also been in an active
shoe dear shooter situation
and i'm conflicted with this
question because
I agree with superintendent good
headaches I think when you're in
that moment there is a lot of
things that go through your mind
and I think
I don't think our teachers
or hired for that drop
I think that
we need to have professionals
who were hired to protect her
students and our teachers I know
I didn't go college to have a
gun
and to do that
and it's scary.
Um so I that's a that's a really
hard question you asked
and I i'd I just see all the
losses that happen after a
something like this.
And how is the courtyard is
going to trial because he didn't
do this right or he can do that
and I just feel it liability and
I I just don't think a teacher
went to school to carry a gun
and protect students I mean that
we want safe scores and I think
that's not the avenue personally
but we need professionals not
our teachers
I thankful for that mr chair III
think you see two out of four
favor two hundred for not I
think that shows the difficulty
of that question
as we think about protecting our
children
i'm obviously one who would be
admin about kidding for
something like that but I also
know that new mexico probably
has a most intense could filled
carry laws in the nation in
terms of the price to suggest to
go through and how you have to
go to renewals so people carry
concealed weapons have been
pretty pretty well trained and
mexico is better that than most
other jurisdictions and sell it
something we might want to
consider in the future
but I because that final
decision would come to the
superintendent obviously I and a
but I would think
teachers who borrowing gone for
the training who who know how to
use a weapon and have proven
that should be able to do so and
and and they're only brought out
that they're concealed so no one
would know they're carrying it
so I wouldn't see that as a
potential
someone taking their weapon away
from them they'd have to know
they are occurring in the first
place some that's something that
they wouldn't advertise.
Thank you very much mister
jennings a quick below the
question and see where I live in
anyway thank you all
superintendence.
We appreciate you being here and
providing your input thank you
alright
so move on to our highlands
teacher prep.
Budgeted an hour for this
presentations if we have forty
minutes for presentation twenty
minutes for questions that would
be awesome so cool.
Whichever review doctors decided
to take.
You're for a shot at us please
do.
Welcome thank you mr chair I
start.
And members of the committee
thank you for having us here we
really appreciate some time to
share with you what we do app at
highlands and rat highlands and
so it's a good time for us to do
that
my name is doctor jerry glover I
am the recent interim dean for
the school of education i'm in
week three
my background is actually in
councilling of a professional
counselor and have been one for
thirty years but it was also
taught for highlands in the
counseling program within the
school of education for the last
seventeen years.
That is why I brought my esteem
colleagues with me
are
in the teacher education program
dr valence and doctor rude off
they will be much better at
fielding questions than I will
unless you want to talk about
social emotional learning and
then I can do that I do want to
give just i'm going to give some
facts and figures out where you
about our school of education
where a large school in
in the school in the university
and just to give you a quick
background about that i'll go
through quickly and you also
have it on your hand out so I
don't have to read every detail
that just wanted to show you
their widespread
process that we have here.
The.
Our mission statement is
probably like any other school
of education's mission statement
in the sounds that we
we want to immerse our students
in academics and in the real
world we want to
experience
not only adding education to
their
their playbook but also practice
it practice what they preach
it's really important so we want
immersive
experiences for them.
The school of education is a
credited by the cape
council for the accreditation
for of teacher preparation we
are also as I mentioned a moment
ago the school or the counseling
program is when this within the
school of education as well
think I need to poor firepoint
over here so I don't have to
look over my shoulder.
I did want to let you know where
our students come from we are in
las vegas but our students are
all over the state of new mexico
are undergraduate students
are undergraduate students
come from large cities are large
city of course in new mexico are
albarge real rancho
farmington sound affair and we
occasionally get a student or
two from last crucials but and
then of course we have about
eighteen percent of our students
come from small cities like las
vegas and seventeen percent come
from rural areas so it reflects
our our state as you can see I
noted that we have three hundred
and eight students in our
undergraduate program
only six of those students are
from outer state we educate new
mexico students
our graduate programs we have a
over four hundred and fifty
students in our graduate
programs this is just from this
last year I graduate in
certificate programs only
thirteen of those folks are from
out of state but the percentages
of where those students are
located
by
you.
The percentage of similar for
both are undergraduate and our
graduate students
don't think I do both of these
things at the same time.
I apologize to be
you just drive this one and i'll
be keeping an eye on it.
I am not finding snot going
forward.
Oh it's a it's a pdf
okay
our students are all over the
state as I mention and in order
to meet the needs of our
students are all over the state
we do have centers all over the
state we have a center here of
course we have our campus here
in las vegas at our campus in
las vegas though our school of
education students we only have
seventeen percent of our
students are here
most of our students are in the
reorange show interserved by the
real rancher center we have
fifteen percent of our students
or by the center in santa fe and
then eleven percent are set are
served by farmington we do have
what we call distance students
in the school of education those
are students who don't live very
close to a center however our
teaching has turned into
distance teaching we do not do
much of the traditional uh what
people consider online teaching
where everything is a
synchronous we do live teaching
real time teaching using zoom so
our students and our faculty
interact with each other all the
time
we do have an online program
specifically for alternative
licenser
at just quick as any buddy
probably still knows
teaching continues to be
dominated by women and we have
in our undergraduate group over
eighty percent women are
graduate also eighty percent are
certificated problem just under
eighty percent we only have
really about forty seven
traditional students at
highlands those are students who
are here on campus they live on
campus they are here from all
parts of new mexico
we have in our undergraduate
problem two hundred and sixty
one non traditional students are
non traditional soons are our
traditional students are average
twenty one our non traditional
students.
Are thirty six
our traditional students living
on campus they do mostly stay in
new mexico not necessarily in
las vegas our non traditional
students are already established
in their communities they
already have families they have
jobs we are training them and
they are staying put right where
they are at
our traditional students this is
their first career
our non traditional students
this is their second their third
or maybe their fourth career and
knowing that they tend to be
quite dedicated to whichever of
our degrees are following
the average age of our graduate
students who are also
nontraditional we don't have any
drinks or graduate students
almost forty now and our the
average age of our certificate
students is app just just over
thirty eight
hour soon body reflects new
mexico
definitely northern mexico
are undergraduate students sixty
five percent are spanic identify
as a spanic
sixteen percent as white our
native american population for
undergraduate students eleven
percent
and then we have some
international students and then
a smattering of other folks are
graduate students it's a little
bit more even between the
hispanic students and the white
students had kind of shifts back
and forth between forty percent
depending on which year we're
talking about native american
students just under ten percent
and etc we really really want to
train people to go into the
schools go into clinics etc so
that the population are working
with recognizes who they're
working with they want to see
people who look like them
we have a variety of degrees
minors concentrations and
certificates you can read the
list
we I wanted to just kind of
share a few.
In an initiatives that we are
doing we have the institute for
culturally linguistically
response of learning and
teaching I c l r which takes a
while to get that off your
tongue
this is a grand funded and it
was a big process between our
faculty in the school of
education and administration and
finding grants to
create a research institute here
on campus out where we can go
out into the into the
communities into the school
districts and
you talked about this in the
last discussion be mentors for
teachers be mantors for
administration we have those
degrees and we we know that once
people get into their school
situations
bringing in innovative programs
and things can be really hard to
do while you're also teaching a
class and so I was being able to
use these fines and use these
grounds to go into the school
districts and ask what do you
need
and help them with that
innovative teaching some of the
projects are the technology
connected communities are
indigenous knowledge road map
which are focuses on native
student learning are bailey by
linguist education tool kit
which is a collaboration with
west las vegas schools helping
them to become a model by
lingual multicultural school are
district are leaders rising
program you talked about looking
for mentors are for to replace
yourselves before is there the
superintendence or we're here
and speaking earlier this is for
people trying to get people
already work in the schools to
consider being administration to
consider being school counselors
to consider being social workers
we have many partnerships with
schools across the state but in
particular in northern new
mexico and around las vegas.
And then we are this particular
institute also provides funding
for people to come to summits
and talk about her problems a
practice figure out ways to
develop culturally relevant
curricular they come to las
vegas we have I think quarterly
summit so four times a year
to continue doing learning for
them to work in their own
schools
just a quick thing one of the
that first item I was talking
about on this little talking
about
technology we participated in a
program which allowed us to
distribute laptops to college
students we worked together with
luna community college in sixty
distribution cycles we put out
two hundred and fifty laptops in
the followed to twenty three
eighty six laptops were
distributed to highland students
and in the spring
fifty laptops to luna students
this program also allowed us to
distribute laptops to high
school high school seniors who
are about to finish and we were
able to work with um
maxwell package robertson and
west to distribute sixty three
laptops to those students and
another forty adding similar on
and mortar
the
results of a survey that was
done with these students was the
pine the biggest change for them
was having the access to
technology that worked as
opposed to some computer that
they found in the closet
it lord their stress levels so
much that it impact their
ability to learn having good
equipment actually really makes
a difference and that impacted
their learning and them being
able to feel comfortable moving
forward with their education.
We also have the center for
education in study up for
diverse populations this has
been around since nineteen
ninety three it's another
community outreach type program
we have our offices a field
experiences
that's why doctor rude office
here he here's the associate
director of that office if you
have questions about where our
students are on what they're
doing in the field in this is
our list of the schools that we
worked with last year and that's
always a changing list
we have the teacher residency
program which is fairly new you
guys know about it shb thirteen
it's been legislated it spent as
it's designed to improve teacher
quality
and improve at k twelve student
performance it is one year
clinical as opposed to if any of
you were teachers you might have
done a semester of student
teaching this is a year long
process their prepared with a
mentor teacher and they have
financial support these guys
know the amounts more so that I
do but financial support so that
they can really spend a year
preparing to become teachers at
this full year in the classroom
prepares them where they get to
experience our other semesters
that they would be are going
through and now with portfolio
being a way of evaluating
teachers they spend a lot of
time with their mentors and with
their mentor faculty learning
how to put together a good solid
portfolio.
Explain and shares what the
teacher residency program does.
Okay there.
The.
I know that your previous
speakers talk a lot about
mentorship and thinking about
the time wasted when a first
year's teacher gets into the
classroom there is a light I
mean I was the first year teach
way back when and my sister was
first you teacher my brother is
a first year teacher that first
your teacher that first year is
tough and you lose a lot of
ground being able to be at first
your teacher with a co teacher
and while you're learning and
while you're focusing on
learning it will impact how kids
are taught and what they learn.
You think after twenty years
dignited each nanking.
But actually it's i'm giving up
my giving up my floor to my car
league
doctor elizabeth fell ins while
I shall introduce herself and
also share with you what we're
doing what you really came to
hear are how we're trying to
impact reading for kids a little
bit on math but primarily on how
are we teaching our teachers to
teach reading and be successful
with it.
Good afternoon mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is elisabeth violence so I
learned i'm an associate
professor and also department
chair for the department of
teacher education here at new
mexico highlands my background
is in bilingual education so i'm
gonna be speaking to you
regarding just
everything as been happening
within the department of
curriculum instruction which is
the department that overseas the
reading courses that are
required of our preservice
teachers and also those that are
in the alternative teacher
preparation
program here at new mexico
highlands doctors park and
doctors why and doctor white
were not able to be here so i'm
going to do my best to just
share with you everything that
they've been doing their
departments and the work that
they've been the trainings that
they been ten you know
sorry I just got back from from
a trip with actually teachers
from here from what west last
speakers to mexico so I was away
for two weeks and now i'm back
and been meeting with students
in advising so I apologize if by
my loyal
little off so anyway in twenty
twenty three we got a new mexico
highlands the president as well
as are dean at that time
received a letter from the new
mexico
education secretary regarding
you know the training or other
faculty that we're teaching
literacy or the reading courses
at in a teacher preparation
programs be required to to take
the letters training and so what
i'm going to share with you is
what has been happening around
the way new mexico highlands and
specifically the backlead and
curriculum and instruction have
you know have been incompliance
with everything that has been
coming from the public
education.
The department in regards to the
science of breeding and how we
are implementing the science of
reading the training that
they've received into the
curriculum for those reading
courses that students are
required to take
and so you'll see
the science of reading
professional development
activities so again all the
faculty in the department of
current common instructions have
completed the letters training
and have been implementing that
in their reading courses so what
they have done is that they gone
through the when you are
training but also as they were
going through the one year
training through their monthly
department meetings there were
also revising their cell and by
there were also you know adopted
the textbook that you know was
recommended in terms of the
letters training and so all that
has been happening ever since
they've been since they started
with the letters training I
think again you know they've
revised that celebrate to make
sure that they're including the
reading of the science of
reading standards
also they've participated in new
mexico pets pilot study the tpi
uscs o literacy and high quality
instruction on materials the
reviewing that framework going
over those modules making sure
that the utilizing those modules
in especially in this past this
past semester spring of twenty
twenty five m you know really
using an as you know
participating that pilot study
incorporating that those modules
into their older the literacy
courses that worked hot
in the spring semester so one of
the things that the I am pdp
workshop aren't that they've
also
participated in is improving the
quality of literacy preparation
and experiences.
Again to embed high quality
instruction on materials in the
science of reading
up the signs of teaching reading
correct into their courses also
you know there have been reviews
that measure the extent to which
the epp course work and the
school system partnership
support educators took back like
effectively use high quality
instruction on materials to
facilitate rigorous great level
instructions for all students
and so again you know this print
spring semester new mexico
highlands the reading classes
implemented the foundational
letter sea skills modules and as
well as well as a hqim modules
to support knowledge building
and so what you'll see here in
the next line is a graph here
that talks about the way the
cheapest students performed in
those courses for the pre and
the post assassinate and so what
happened is that there were
provided this modules the the um
the professors implemented those
in the reading courses before
the of course at the beginning
the semester they took the
pretest and then of course after
the closer to the end of the
semester that's when they took
the post
the post assessment and so here
you see just as a quick
snapshot in terms of just
specifically looking at
additional literacy skills and
health students performed across
those horses in their priest ear
in their pre
pre assessment and also their
post assessment and you also see
that the breakdown based on
module one two three four five
six seven combination of those
and so
this was dent extensions a pilot
study
the the students had to go to a
particular website and and do
the pre assessment and also the
poster sessment and then the the
the.
Experts that they were working
with where the ones who provided
this data so this is not data
that came from the from the
professors themselves it's from
the company that's working in in
with the professors here at new
mexico highlands
and so you see that there was
improvement and there was gains
made and you know I think one of
the things that you can see from
this is that
the modules were being utilized
in those reading classes and so
therefore you see that there was
a growth correct there's there's
a growth there from the pre to
the post and so so that again
you know speaks to the way in
which are professors were able
to effectively support students
in
with what the
skills and knowledge required of
those modules the next slide
that you see there is
in terms of using the high
quality instructional materials
to support knowledge building
and again these this was also
part of what was the modules
were also integrated into the
reading courses in the spring
semester so what we have here
since this was only dumper
spring twenty twenty five this
is the data that we have for
twenty twenty five based on on
this pilot i'm study that was
conducted and I believe doctor
park shared with those that it
was enemies you and you and them
were the only two universities
that have participated in this
pilot study okay the next light
are the next few slights we're
gonna talk about the alternative
teacher certification program
the etc here at new mexico
highlands and so
what doctor why too is the
director of the etc house I hear
it's just earned some highlights
in regards to the program
so in terms of output an
endorsement areas over the last
three corporate since.
The portfolio was implemented so
we have so we're talking about
spring twenty twenty four fall
twenty four and spring twenty
five
sixty two teachers have attained
their license for upon
completion of the curriculum
instruction etc program so we
have graduated twenty five
elementary teachers sixteen
secondary
ad teachers and twenty one
special education teachers
the next piece here you are well
see is in really insuring that
are teacher candidates correct
or the candidates in the eighty
cp have competency in math and
reading and structure and so
again the program is really
designed to support and to
support students in building a
strong
math and
reading expertise correct so
that they could be able to so
the course work is able to do
this but also through the
mentorship and also through the
way
that is demonstrated in the
performance and so one of the
things that
I just want to mention before I
continue is the teacher the
alternative teacher license for
program or certificate program
so the teachers are already
working in the in the they're
that they're the teacher record
so they have a level one license
in order to be in the program
and so they're already in the
schools working with students
and also so it's the course work
that they're getting any mexical
highlights but it's also what
the districts are required so as
you all know is it mister
chairman members of the
committee you know teachers are
required or teachers are
required to go through the
letter's training so they are
getting that also as well as
they're going through you know
art course work here.
For are undergraduate
students are pretty service
teachers or preservice
candidates
I would say and we can probably
look at the data that over
ninety five percent of our
students that are coming into
new mexico highlands to get
there
in either elementary education
in early childhood education and
special education in dual
elementary special ad they're
all have been in schools for
many years their educational
assistance and many times there
have been as permit substitutes
in classrooms so again they're
very well familiar in terms of
the literacy and the mouth
requirements and the curriculums
that are being due to license in
the particular districts that
there they're coming from
so I would I just wanted to
mention that as before I
continued um so and in terms of
the mouth program there you'll
see that again the instruction
of four framework really
emphasises conceptual
understanding procedural fluency
and real world application and
when again when you're looking
at this through the
the etc
channel gets bear utilizing
those mouth of the mouth
programs that their districts
aren't required them to are that
the districts have adopted for
the particular schools
i'm also there is a really great
collaboration they had that we
have university supervisors that
are really supporting them and
are
constantly in
in conversation and dialog with
them but they're also doing
multiple observations and then
based on those observations and
also based on what the
candidates feel they need more
support and there's also very
targeted coaching that's
happening in in um in the
program
again you know in terms of the
reading.
You know we're been in
compliance with what the states
you know but everything that's
come down from the state
regarding the science of reading
and sold again there's the
explicit instruction as per
science are reading that covers
again barney so to make a word
explain see but category
comprehension so here it says
highlights from the reading
courses that you have there and
so the courses it students are
are taking in elementary
education or that are year
towards you know
in wanting to get their
elementary license when they're
finished their program is early
literacy diagnoses in teaching a
breeding so six credit so those
are required horses and so those
are taken by our undergraduate
students and bowl in elementary
and in our dual program which is
elementary special education and
then
at the secondary at level they
have a course that is reading in
the content area for all those
that are going aren't pursuing a
secondary education
so again all those courses that
are listed there that I just
named they all integrate the new
mexical science of reading
framework again you know so that
stood to the are candidates are
able to develop this extratease
in regards to evidence based
literacy instruction again the
five components that you're all
aware of
also in for our early challenges
education
under a graduate students one of
the things is that new mexico
highlands again over ninety five
percent of our students that are
in our early childs her
multicultural education
ba already come to us with an
associate early childhood
education which means that they
have taken those foundation or
courses at the community college
and so the majority of our
students come from CNN.
Are also santa fe community
college and
someone so they've already taken
some of the like the intro to
language letter see in reading
is taken out that at the lower
division course that is sticking
at those community colleges once
they come to us and they
complete their
further ba to complete their ba
there is a concentration so the
concentration is either birth to
age for or h three to grade
three and so are students again
taken emergent literacy course
for those pursuing a
birth to age for concentration
for those that are going to be a
working with soons each three
degree three the take a the
teaching and learning of reading
and writing course and then also
there is another reading course
that they can take and they have
the option to choose from some
of the reading courses in our
curry killing an instruction
program or many times what I do
is also encourage them to take
the emergent literacy course
which is under our early
childhood education program
because it it meets their their
needs there
and so again you know
next one on the slight you're
you'll see the comprehensive
literacy skills across across
greed levels and so just what I
spoke to you in terms of early
litter sea elementary reading
the secondary letter see and it
also the extensive aren't build
experiences that I said really
are supported with our
university supervisors in
offering the target instruction
so
also the reading courses are
better the early literacy and
the diagnosis then teaching of
reading also require students to
a complete a certain amount of
lab hours that students are also
so they're not just I mean that
you know they're there being
engaged in terms of the material
that but also been.
In terms of how this you know
how to how to do this in the
actual classroom
call continued to the next i'm
slight here where we have
diagnostic and reflective
practices again
teachers are our teacher
candidates are
required eller and also train to
administer interpret and report
a response are you too
diagnostic assessments to meet
the diverse teacher learning
learner needs including english
language learner's students with
dislexier reflective assignments
and interactive discussions
fuster ongoing professional
growth connections between
theory and practice so that's a
very important for us to be able
to have that bridge that theory
to practice also in terms of
really culturally responsive and
inclusive instruction we really
focus on again because I think
one of the other things too was
as in run dean collaborate was
mentioning if you look at who
are students are our students
come already with a lot of
richness in terms of their own
cultural and linguistic
backgrounds so we want to make
sure that we honor those but
we're also in terms of you know
that we're supporting their
needs in terms of our student
population here in new mexico
which largely is comes from
culturally linguistically
diverse backgrounds the cap
stone assessments also in terms
of you know she assessments such
as letter see you less than
plans
web quest and perform your
components also in terms of
really
design to make insurer that are
students are implementing
literature instruction that is
aligned with the science of of
reading principles
also
you know through the data
analysis
and also would be design of
lessons.
The relt not just their course
work but really specifically
when they're getting close to
the to the completing their
program where they have to
create that perform you the
performance is all around our
cheap standards but also
the artifacts presented on that
come from the classroom from
their teaching.
Next thing there so again you
know going into in terms of
point number three there are
highlight number three candidate
competency and perform your
completion so again
you know a hundred percent of
our candidates complete the
final perform your successfully
there you see a breakdown in
terms of the number of students
that have completed and and
passed the perform your sense
twenty twenty three so we're
looking at twenty twenty three
with that first cowport and then
the performance
really last spring of twenty
four was when the state started
to use the perform as a way to
be able to get there that's you
know get the license they're
teaching license
you see there that says ninety
eight point four past on their
first attempts so those students
that do not or struggling there
is support from the office of
filled experiences so they set
what students they really coach
students they walk them through
everything so we we ensure that
our students are successful just
the way we want our educators
our future teachers correct to
be able to be supportable all
students in their classroom
so program growth and
projections so the program
disappeared that twelve students
will graduate with the twelfth
co
covered this
so you have there the breakdown
so the eighty cp programs
started new mexico highlands
back and followed twenty
nineteen so that was the first
time they'd we had the that was
our first court
and therefore covered thirteen
which is for twenty twenty five
the program has twenty six
students accepted as july
eighteen twenty twenty five with
more pending m admission and so
you see their the breakdown in
terms of those
and so one of the things that if
we go on to the next slide here
that there's two things that I
just wanted to to mention before
III I talk about the data.
So one of the things and I
really this last legislative
session III spoke about this
regarding the appointments of
the science of reading really
taken into consideration
the way we bilingual teachers in
our states in or by linguist
programs and relief
it's very centered on english
literacy and so we really need
to
consider
what it means in the impact that
it has in our teacher
preparation programs for those
students that are going to be in
bilingual classrooms it or and
also I would say not just by
linguist classroom for those
students that are a future
teachers that are gonna be
working with bilingual
multilingual students the way
you develop by litter c is very
different and there's many
components that need to be taken
into consideration and I would
just ask mr chair and committee
members to really consider that
I haven't had the opportunity
but I just know that there was
the meeting
that
with the secretary of education
the billing will multiple
education advisory council has
gone over all the modules that
are are you know that pete has
put out in terms of by literacy
and by linguines a bilingual
education and so I haven't had
the opportunity to look at what
came out of that so they went
through all the margins and
identified areas of need because
we hear this from are teachers
and I will be honest it is very
sat for me to hear and twenty
twenty five the same thing that
I heard when I first started
teaching twenty six years ago
where is just do it in spanish
here's the material just go do
it in spanish.
So you know it's it's it's
that's not the way it is end so
we really need to think about
that and then the other thing
that I would say is the we know
the connective benefits of by
linguistics and multilingualism
and so we also have to really
consider what we do when we're
denying students those
opportunities to develop their
full picture their full
potential and so I will end with
again this but I just presented
to you is the ways and which new
mexico highlands faculty are in
compliance with everything that
has come from new mexico pet in
regarding in regards to the
science of literacy and the
willingness of the faculty to be
able to take the letter's
trainings to look at their still
about always ways again where
modeling we will always want to
improve for our students correct
so as faculty we have to be
willing to be able to
do what we need to do to make
sure that we understand what is
coming down from the public
education and they impact that
it's how being on our teachers
and also our students in a
public schools into we're always
open to that but this just talks
about how we've been in
complaints and the way the
effective way that the
professors have been able to
implement this modules and their
in of course is but if we don't
have data from the the state in
terms of how many teachers are
getting there license that are
coming out of our programs and
how many have passed the reading
exam then we don't know if we
are being effective regardless
of what we're utilizing in our
classroom and so I know that
that's something that are we are
trying to work where then terms
are being able to get that data
I have access to that data also
really looking at like as
mentioned over ninety five
percent of our students are
already working in districts and
school districts here new
mexico.
We would like to be able to see
if they have continued to be in
those districts as well as how
many are stained in the
profession after five years so
with that I will
just hand the microphone over to
our in rome dean glever and I
think you mister chair and
members of the committee.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I would like to double
check with doctor rude off and
see if he had anything he wanted
to add to what we've shared
today
thank you mr check so
working off of what doctor
valence wheeler just shared with
us she talks about the eighty cp
the alternative program really
serving uh non traditional
students so the uh the field
office officer feel experiences
and undergraduate missions uh
the officer I find the associate
director for for the last three
months works with traditional
students so those students again
their doctor valence will point
it out that are going through
the undergradual system getting
their batteries agree and so
those are the students that are
primarily in the residency
program and we we always have a
couple of students that are
already graduated and our
technically graduate students
working through their eighty cp
that are getting there coming
through our residency program
but mainly we're serving the
undergraduate student so I think
that's the one make difference
but it's the same goal you know
trying to get teachers mostly
from
different parts of northern new
mexico to become teachers into
stick round and you know
teach the youth of new mexico
thank you.
Thank you doctor rodoff
mr chair arm were open for
questions
alright thank you offer the
presentation so members still
have five minutes or represent
concerns
thank you mr chair and and I
just want to think my
my local university faculty here
during my detailed my office is
in the school of ad so very near
india to my heart and I want to
point out I know this was passed
out you know what a gem and I
always get these initials and
super culturally in band
linguistically because of their
looking at teaching at the
moment but you guys do a lot of
great work in all of our local
schools and programs and support
it just want to thank you for
that my question is more and you
did mention it here in your
presentation that you were
either thus elected pilot or a
selected pilot for the
implementation of the finance of
reading specifically you know
teaching here at the higher
level and
when that legislation did come
through I spoke at length with
deen your previous dean eric you
know just getting some feedback
from the higher education side
from the implementation side and
thank you doctor balance all I
know you are also very big in on
that payment program and yes
maybe just an ask you you you
you touched on maybe some
feedback from there but as this
is getting ready to implement
and some forum maybe and ask is
if you all have any sort of
reports or format of your formal
recommendations being that you
were on the ground all of the
faculty adapted there's you all
have implemented this you really
took a lot on your plate as as
faculty to really work with this
and I know there was some
recommendations they may not
have been captured as well as
was hoped maybe sharing with the
committee you know what those
recommendations were directly I
think that would be very helpful
and implementation as some of
the concerns were mentioned but
maybe you know some of the
concerns later just an
implementation with this and
with your first hand knowledge
would be extremely benef.
So that is just my request that
my ask and think you again for
all your work you did with that
and you're continued work and
well and just just accepting
that big role and that was a big
task so thank you so much
thinking mister.
Thank you senator thorton.
I think you mister chair just a
couple of questions the first
week for a doctor lover
he had only surprised
so I I liked the teacher
residents who program it you
mentioned it seems like that's a
really good start off for new
teachers and stuff I guess my
other my other question is
regarding your faculty
so the packaging education
department how many of them
actually go in go back to a key
through twelve setting and
actually see what's going on as
a practitioner do you have that
opportunity to sing them back to
school and actually go when
practice in the key to travel by
most of that they can understand
what the cripping needs to be
done as times have changed now
to keep them current to make
them relevant is is that
something that you've considered
in the past or so something you
actually do now
thank you mister chair thank you
representative
oh senator okay
i'm not the best person answer
the question i'm sorry
I know that we do have
opportunities for our faculty to
go back into the schools it's
one of the things that with the
supported by the icl
their research faculty that are
there working faculty who work
with our research faculty from
the institute and I do
mentorship and mentor work with
them
i'm not sure how many of our
faculty participated in that
this last year but we have the
opportunity participate again
this year and we will definitely
encourage our faculty to get
back out into the classroom of
course we are faculty who are
faculty supervisors of our
working with cooperating
teachers there's communication
that goes on there as well and
faculty supervisors go in and
observe the students that are
their teaching cell.
Are we have a fairly solid
rotation I believe of current
faculty going into the
classrooms then i'll go back to
teach but they definitely go
back in to mentor and to arm and
you do observations
I thank you for that and one
other question I I guess it's
social more of a thoughtful
question for the alternative
certificate if if a person
has had a long career it's
different since as an engineer
and worked for twenty years once
a teacher physics are math in
high school what do they have to
go through and you to become
certified to be able to teach in
new mexico.
Mister chair and senator
thirteen so the alternative
teacher certification program
requires that those that
participate already have a
ba or even masters or sometimes
even AP d correct so for the
secondary education track
or focus or emphasis area they
are required to take eighteen
credit hours.
Because at the same time they're
in the classroom already with a
group of students so some of the
courses that they take our
orientation to the teaching
profession seminar internship
one two three four effective
teaching one curriculum planning
assessment and evaluation
content methods for secondary ad
reading in the cut and reading
in the content area so those
would be the courses for someone
who is
in teaching physics as you as
you mentioned so they would be
teaching physics at the high
school at a high school and then
they would be taking the the
this course work at the same
time yes
and the course in they also have
a university supervisor and so
they're still you know like I
said they're being of their
observations happening all the
time there's coaching based on
the needs identify from the
observation but also from the
teacher account so a person
would have to wait for a year or
two before they could start
teaching your saying they could
they would do this can currently
with going it because they
already know the field but they
okay very good that that helps
me I always consider doing that
that's why I
asked
represent others fanoscaps.
Mr terror
first fall I want to say thank
you for that wonderful
presentation and it's so
wonderful to see your beautiful
faces and doctor volunteer
you're doing very well for
having just come back from
mexico because I will have a
hard time transitioning back as
well um
I
I want to think you're I don't
think
a I don't think the martinez
slash it would have been the
same without the participation
from highlands and the cstp and
terms of helping painters are
find their way to our wartina's
last suit arm also want to think
you are for that same centers
work with the lg project they
are second line ground education
project
and for all the things that
you've done over the years um
I know doctor volunteer your
reputation is exceptional in
terms of bilingual education in
your scholarship you research
are teaching and highlands is
very likely to have you and
doctor blubberone that the rude
off as well um
and I want to thank you for the
courage it took to give us the
last part of your presentation
around the challenges that you
are facing and that you are
seeing
with um
the compliance with the science
of reading implementation
I think that you were points are
very important for us to
consider
in the research that's been done
at the national level it's
generally in terms of teaching
reading
how does uh apply when you've
got a group of students who are
just in one language meaning our
english versus spanish and the
research showed that you really
need to teach a child.
In their native language before
you want to transfer it to
english or the results are not
as positive i'm sorry
you have better results if you
teach a child to read in their
native language before you teach
them to read an english but
you're bringing up a point that
is new to research in bilingual
education and that is by
literacy and that is your area
of expertise amount of the area
where you are able to connect
with the billing teachers and
arm
so I really hope that our
committee and are elia see
council will come to you for
that expertise because there are
very few people in new mexico
who have that level of expertise
and I think you for for all your
work in that area
I guess what i'd also like to
request arm of the less sea
maybe arm is that somehow it
would be very helpful to get the
recommendations that were made
by the billing war education
billing or multicultural
education advisory council
that's also a piece of the
martinez last year where the
ones that asked for fall
implementation of that act along
with these spanic education act
in the indian education act and
one of the things that I have
seen and heard from talking to
advisory councils um in each of
those areas is that they make
recommendations and then they
just set their and no one sees
or understands them and so I
would like to see those
recommendations and I would love
for our committee to see those
recommendations as well because
those who the people who
generally arm are highly engaged
in bilingual ever they wouldn't
be.
Burn more multicultural or they
wouldn't be on that council and
so they have had the time to sit
in the analyze and really review
those challenges that you
mentioned and that that super
super important
what i'd also like to ask is
around by linguist special
education because you have a
wonderful billing will add
program and you have a wonderful
special program i'm wondering if
there's anyone in highlands that
is looking at billing will
special education where you've
got the intersection of
disability and special education
and bilingual and
mr chair
mr chair representative thought
is they last guess it's always a
pleasure to see you and which
has gone as yes for her for your
comments and so no we do not
have any when any mexical
highlands I don't think we have
any one in the state of new
mexico that is well you and you
and you and them
we had you correct that unhim
and also actually know that i'm
thinking about it sorry
doctor
is it shell shelver they balance
on a shells like the last night
yeah yeah yeah it and um
but we don't have it a new
mexico highlands and that's
something that we're always arm
trying to to really
took to voice are concerned that
we need
especial education with the
bindling will focus as well as
an early childhood education and
so that is a challenge I know is
mentioned earlier with the
superintendent says i'm also
getting ready to retire them
also thinking and looking at my
students that who is going to
replace me because I again we
don't have the numbers and
billing will live back alter or
not there overall and so when
we're looking specifically
especially education or we're
looking at early childhood
education.
There they're rare and so even
looking at
unm and new mexico state in
terms of students that are
coming out from their doctor
programs they're not and I think
that's it said they were
we haven't done enough to be
able to really support and
really to grow our own because I
think it's important that you
know for me in in in hearing at
new mexico highlands is
important that we have faculty
bad
that come from from our
communities that come from you
mexico that understands
specifically nor their new
mexico so so yes
thank you mr chairman five
minutes for representative that
was five five minutes
representative
thanks mister chart
data belongs we let the my most
painful battle was this whole
thing with the science of
reading and many of us here you
don't have to raise your hands
getting the science of reading
bill down to four pages so it
was simpler there's just a
little bit that the the policies
of my literacy will be included
it was a battle and it just
shows all of us the importance
of the practitioners in the
field the active divisions that
researchers
mixed with a legislator to get
good legislation so i'm sorry we
couldn't do a perfect job but
thank you for yourself in so
many people actually at the
table and out there who
I believe made it less
honor and more research based
sorry we can do better but thank
you for everything you're doing
that's it
sender figure out.
Thank you mister I have just a
couple of questions about page
fourteen or the residency
program so I didn't see numbers
and how many are enrolled in the
residency program how many
cohorts have gone through
and what are those numbers.
Mister chair considered if a
growth so
coming into this school year
twenty twenty five hundred
twenty six academic here we have
a full residence we have thirty
eight and then we have an
additional uh eleven that are
not in the residency but they're
doing one semester student
teaching and last year's numbers
were right around there they're
actually a little less than over
um unfortunately I can't
separate the resident students
from the student teachers last
year but I know that it was
forty five altogether and yeah
so thank you thank you mister
chair that's what I was looking
at then i'm going to reiterate
mr chair doctor release what is
called for data because we need
to know whether those students
candidates teachers completing
residency programs
stay and teaching past that five
year mark at what rate compared
to those students who do a
regular semester of student
teaching and compared to those
sixty two students that you have
in the alternative license your
program what we need to know is
legislators who were allocating
resources is which of those
pathways are producing effective
teachers that stay in the
profession and who and lec and
maybe just a kit could answer
this question mister chair who
is working on pulling those
pieces of data together because
they are essential to making
good decisions about the
resources we have.
Mr chairman is senator for your
hour and we have two analysts
who are working on that any
armatized as well as evidence of
us on our team and we also
regularly attempt the deans and
directors meeting as a team and
that educator pathways bureau at
the department to come to that
as well there are some
partnerships under way to try to
build those data systems and so
will work to get an active
update as soon as those meetings
recondean what the academic here
there are some some structures
being put in place for it no
one's ignoring that we
absolutely need that data but
will get an update on exactly
where it's at soon as those can
be
thanks mister chair thank you
just to go that was my question
not one one follow up and the
residency program does do you
have intentions for it to grow
do you have to turn away
applicants or is it currently
maxed out with people who are
interested
with a new absolutely we would
love to have more and more
students I think what happens is
it it depends on your year just
the interest in the in our case
with the undergraduate program
just how many students are
enrolled at highland so it you
know it all it all works
together but
part of what we've been talking
about very recently is in house
recruiting so looking for our
consideration to highlands and
trying to persuade him over to
you know a teaching crear and
coming through our program.
Senator result.
Missed chairman thank you I
would like to go back and
address a statement that doctor
balance where the move said
earlier couple of questions ago
regarding northern new mexico
and no kids you've revisit that
forming what you intended by
your statement there
mr chair and senator to sell so
what I meant in terms of any
mexical highlands faculty that
come from the community from you
know future faculty that we
hired specifically because new
mexico highlands is in northern
new mexico so really having a
deep understanding of the
history of the writchness of the
language culture here in new
mexico and northern new mexico
okay mr chairman I do get that
doctor balance whale but
as far as i'm concerned with all
human beings we are all new
mexicans that want to live here
in state we check the first
backgrounds and everything else
we have a damn rich area down
there in my part of the state
we're talking about smoking
bearability the card bite sands
trinity site the worlds are the
united states highest golf
course at cloud croft we're
talking about carl's bed
cavern's bottom was like the
first state market stated new
mexico and I could go on and on
bulldog well all the
state championships have
artichable dogs have worked as
well cause I am a
or teacher how grad to it.
But
why are we just singling it out
for this area up your wire we
not trying to expand to get more
students up here from the other
areas that state or why are we
going north bring students down
to see what we're experiencing
down there and that's my concern
mister chairman
I just really have a hard time
trying to different check
between this group of people
that have their own customs in
this group people that might
have a totally different when
yet we're still all ingrained
love about new mexico I don't
like to show any differentiation
between any races that on mr
chairman
thank you thank you offer the
presentation they did just want
to say in reference to a
representative request is that
we are going to have
failing wall friends center in
our october meetings
so it's my understanding that
staff has requested i'm all the
information that you would ask
for to start compiling it and
looking into it for october
but thank you all so much we
appreciate it and they said at
the beginning thank you for
being with us but you're here we
should be thanking you all for
being with you also thank you
or a members owned so that is
our meeting for today
I did want to announce that
members and staff are invited to
a dinner tonight at buffalo hall
and cowboy cafe five twenty
eight
grand avenue at five thirty p m
so hopefully we'll see you are
there
thanks
okay i'll see it so both low
hall and cafe and cowboy cafe
except five twenty eight grand
avenue
thank you mr chairman I can just
make a.
Just a local warning if you guys
get a little dean on your phone
again our normal had a more week
but today seems extremely bad
with a rain as you guys can tell
if you get a warning safer that
burns guard some of those other
communities that's not a worry
here the one area that I would
be concerned with if you're
crossing over is the bridge if
it gets really bad going out to
choice the plaza that's in other
ways stay safe drive say we
should be good here in town
should stop welcome to
everybody
i'm not sure
I think i'm going to go better
to get to any next time
