it's great to see everybody
mildly sad to be this is the
last day at such an incredible
facility with really a wonderful
meeting and agenda can want to
think lc director in staff and
all the members have been able
to attend we've had great
opportunities to not only hear
but of course see first hand so
many important facets from the
gateway center uh tell the
sub-committee presentations
yesterday and really excited to
dive in today with mister lamba
evaluations team madame
secretary thanks so much for
being here think we all get to
see so many of the fruits of the
work that's gone in the higher
education that you've been part
of and that's what we're excited
to talk about here today so with
that will go to clinton lamba
for a program evaluation on our
higher education
thank you mister chair
good morning mister chair
members the committee my name is
clayton loba and i'm a ah one of
your program a valuators with
lfc staff
today my colleague just chapter
and I will be presenting an
evaluation about higher
education endowment
appropriations it should be in
your binder under tab I
first I would like to thank the
higher education department uh
the council of university
presidents the new mexico
independent community college
association and the new mexico
association of community
colleges I would also like to
thank the multiple academic and
financial officials that we
spoke to for this evaluation
so mister chairman was the
committee if you would please
turn to page one of the report
for a summary
so lfc has consistently heard in
the past that one of the
barriers to growing the state's
work force.
In high demand fields is not
having an a faculty to grow
college programs today's
evaluation focuses on one
hundred and seventy million
dollars that you the legislature
dedicated to creating endowments
to help colleges higher
additional faculty and grow
program enrollment capacity in
nursing teacher education and
social work programs this
approach was intended to turn
non recurring windfall money
into long term investments that
could help grow college programs
you appropriated this doubt
endowment funding to the higher
education department who
distributed the money to college
is based on applications and
enrollment this evaluation finds
that while there are some bright
spots and some progress has been
made the envisioned program
growth from these appropriations
has not yet materialized while
some programs have been able to
use and down earnings to higher
faculty such as you uh unam's
teacher education programs e n m
use social work program and c n
n's nursing program other
programs have not deployed uh
the endowment earnings for
faculty salaries the endowment
appropriations were sufficient
to support about eighty seven
faculty
but so far are only supporting
about fifty two.
There have been some bright
spots and some initial impacts
from these appropriations but
also some delays and
implementation issues the delays
and implementation issues found
on this report suggests that the
higher states higher education
system has limited capacity to
absorb large waves of
appropriations and may need
monitoring and coordination for
implementation going forward.
And now mr chair and members of
the committee if you would
please turn to page three I will
now turn things over to my
colleague josh to go over the
first part of the report
thanks clinton page three shows
new mexico currently has about
twenty two thousand nurses
twenty three thousand teachers
and about forty three hundred
social workers if you turn to
page five the report shows that
degree production false short of
future work force needs the
state would need to graduate and
retain over twelve thousand
nurses eleven thousand teachers
and three thousand social
workers to address the
anticipated job openings over
the next seven years as shown on
chart six projected degree
completion in these fields falls
short of anticipated demand the
higher education system
obviously plays a pivotal role
in addressing these needs
as a strategy to increase back
alternate expand enrollment in
nursing education and social
work you appropriate a hundred
and seventy million dollars for
endowments to add faculty and
expand these programs figure one
shows how endowments can
generate investment earnings to
find additional faculty and
graduate more students if you
turn to page six the report
shows hed allocated most of the
funds through a formal
application process but some of
the social work funding was
distributed based on and roman
the legislature appropriated
this funding over three fiscal
years but most of the endowment
funding was appropriate for FY
twenty three as shown in chart
seven fifteen different
institutions received and down
at funding if you turn to page
seven you'll see the programs
receiving endowment funds have
collectively had flat enrollment
and increasing degree completion
since FY twenty three.
These trends aren't really a
reflection on the endowment
appropriations because
endowments do take time to
implement and hopefully the
endowments will help increase
enrollment and degree completion
going forward.
Mr she remembers the committee
on page eight you'll see that
because of underspending
colleges are not fully using
state and down and funding to
grow program capacity assuming
investment returns of at least
five percent and spending at
that level the funding should
have been able to support about
eighty seven additional faculty
positions however they're
currently supporting about fifty
two on page nine the report
shows colleges and universities
earn ten point seven million
dollars and investment gains
from their FY twenty three and
down an appropriations but we're
only able to spend two point
five million on faculty salaries
chart eleven shows that the FY
twenty three appropriations
alone could have supported an
additional seven seventy three
faculty positions but only
supported fifty two in fy twenty
five
these back of these fifty two
faculty did have an impact in f
twenty five teaching three
hundred and twenty six courses
and reaching almost five
thousand students these are
promising signs that some
colleges were able to use the
earnings to hire faculty.
If you turn to page ten you'll
see on table two the top five
programs who used endowment
earnings to support faculty
unm's education program social
work programs that you know you
msew and highlands and c n n's
nursing program used endowment
earnings to support twenty two
faculty and over thirty one
hundred students in twenty
twenty five.
This represents a breath but
showing how college programs can
leverage and down at earnings at
the bottom of page ten the
report shows how colleges are
increasing their budgets for
nursing education and social
work signaling a promising
intent to grow programs however
as shown on chart twelve the
programs have underspend their
budgets in the past
if you'll turn to page eleven
the gray text box describes how
this pattern isn't just limited
to specific instructional
programs in fy twenty four state
colleges and universities
collectively spent three hundred
and sixty four million dollars
less on instructions and general
purposes than they collected in
revenue leading to one point
eight billion in fund balances
this underspending suggests a
structural lack of capacity to
fully deploy available resources
and with that i'll turn things
over to cleating to go to the
rest of the report
thank you josh mr chair and
members of the committee are on
page twelve you will see that
colleges and each days
management of endowment funds
had delays an implementation
issues which post bond serving
more students if you'll look at
chart thirteen you will see that
while hd distributed most of the
endowment funds quickly hd
distributed about a third of the
endowment funds in an end timely
manner delaying the impact of
some of the endowments staff
turnover at the department may
have contributed to some of
these delays
if you would turn to page
thirteen and look at chart
fourteen you will see that
despite some of the delayed
funding colleges were able to
earn investment gains on
endowments in fy twenty three
twenty four and twenty five
eg has distributed the vast
majority of the one hundred and
seventy million dollars however
as i've mid twenty twenty five
eg had not yet distributed five
million dollars and FY twenty
four social work funding hd
reports that plans to distribute
the funds to behavioral health
care organizations.
For clinical supervision
services this is an allowable
expense if the clinical
supervision services are for
licensed social workers
at the bottom of the page the
report describes how at some
colleges investment earnings
have not been expended on
faculty salaries and instead
accumulated in accounts for
example if you turn to page
fourteen and look at figure too
you will see that you and m
received eleven point five
million for nursing programs the
nursing endowments earned one
point four million n FY twenty
five but did not spend earnings
on a faculty salaries unam
reports the lack of spending was
due to high staff turnover and
recruitment issues
on the second half of the page
the report discusses how you and
m applied for and received a ten
point five million dollars
endowment for social work and
twenty twenty three
and u and m is currently in the
process of establishing a
masters of social work program
this will be a positive
development for the state when
the program is created however
unm does not anticipate
completing all approval steps
for this new program until at
least fy twenty seven the gray
textbox on page for team
describes how enemy was able to
receive all internal and
external approvals for a new
masters of social work program
within two years you hired three
point five faculty with a nine
million dollars endowment and
plans on graduating fifteen
masters of social work students
nfy twenty six.
Mr chair and members of the
committee a page fifteen
describes how northern new
mexico college received five
point five million and
endowments but did not
distribute earnings over almost
a three year period
on page sixteen you will see on
chart fifteen that western new
mexico university received over
twenty two million dollars and
endowment appropriations since
fy twenty three
yet the university has made no
distributions from the
investment earnings on these
endowments to pay for faculty
salaries.
Starting on paid seventeen the
report shows how some colleges
used in down and funds
differently than legislative
budget language instructed or
intended
for example new mexico highlands
university received money to
create an endowment for
financial aid social for
financial aid for social work
students however despite
appropriation language and
guidance from hed which is shown
on figure seven
highlands distributed one
million dollars directly to
students as scholarships rather
than creating uh endowment fund
to support financial aid in
perpetuity
on page eighteen the report
describes how san want college
reported it would use a nursing
endowment to hire two faculty
but the money was instead held
in a contingency fund in case
a local partnership with a
hospital fell through.
Now this partnership will be a
positive development for the
state and will increase its
nursing enrollment capacity by
fifty percent.
However this partnership was not
in the college is original
application for funding and was
the reason for the delayed
spending from the endowment same
one college reports that it is
now ready to higher additional
faculty with earnings from its
endowment funds
mr chair and members of the
committee if you would now turn
to page nineteen figure nine
shows how over the past three
years and msew spent more of its
earnings from endowments on
foundation operations than on
faculty salaries
nmsu and it's done and a branch
received thirty four million
dollars and endowments since fy
twenty three which earned six
point four million and
investment gains
one point two million of these
gains were spent on the
operations at the end of your
foundation while only seven
hundred and ninety five thousand
has been spent on faculty
salaries since the unless you
foundation did not have to fund
rays for these appropriations
then need for general
administrative fees on these
appropriations distinct from
investment management costs
questionable
mister chair members of the
committee if you turn to page
twenty figure turn figure ten
shows that UNM and its gallop
branch received forty two
million and endowment since fy
twenty three earning about
fourteen million dollars in
investment gains one point nine
million of these gains were
spent on operations of the union
foundation while only nine
hundred and forty two thousand
was spent on faculty salaries
now if you would please turn to
page two at the beginning of the
report you will see some of the
key recommendations for the
report listed and this report
recommends that colleges use
their endowment investment
earnings on faculty salaries and
other allowable expenses and
also renegotiate fees on funds
received through state
appropriations and out mr chair
and members of the committee
with your permission all turned
things over to secretary
rodriguez.
And then will all stand for
questions please thank you
madame secretary
good morning mr chairman and
honourable members of the
committee I am stephanie rather
guess and I am the cabinet
secretary of the new mexico
higher education department the
department has provided a
response to mr lowballs program
evaluation today which should
already be at your desk it looks
like this i'll be referring to a
lot of the data and tables and
charts in this document today we
appreciate the time and effort
that went into the legislative
finance committees independent
analysis of a endowments and we
appreciate the opportunity to
respond on behalf of the
department and the sector now
the department's presentation as
we can all attest the state of
new mexico via the executive and
legislative branches of
governments are working to
strengthen a high demand and
high need work force areas in
the state of new mexico
therefore in twenty twenty two
the legislature rolled out three
priority areas and higher
education for work for scroll
the new mexico you'll remember
that nursing teacher education
and then of course social work
and as the lfc noted in the
response to address less you
appropriated approximately a
hundred seventy million dollars
and endowments for faculty
positions and student financial
aid in the three noted critical
areas the appropriations from
fiscal years twenty twenty three
to twenty twenty five to each
higher education institution
within is within our responses
on page two three and four for
you to see the lfc's program
evaluation notes on the very
first page that the department
had unnecessary delays and
distributed a third of the funds
in an untimely manner over half
way through the fiscal year
however looking at our official
memos award letters and public
announcements we issued the
funds in the following time
frames and well before the six
months period fiscal year twenty
twenty three endowments which
are laid out in page two.
The request for applications
were due to the department on
august first twenty twenty two a
words were announced in
september for one hundred thirty
point five million dollars of
the one hundred fifty million
dollar appropriation the
reasoning for this and has
cleated a mr loba had noted was
that nineteen point five million
when two three institutions that
applied or thirty point five
however there was a shortfall of
nineteen point five million
therefore I personally went to
two higher education
institutions to figure out
capacity issues and since then a
social work program in the
masters are in it at eastern new
mexico university has been
established in approved by the
state board of finance and the
university of new mexico hell
sciences center who is present
today has also been working too
get in a credited masters
program off the ground looking
at these funds now I would have
recommended a fifty million
dollar appropriation for nursing
since those programs really know
how to do and downloads and do
endowments well and probably
only thirty million dollars for
social work because they need
more capacity and more program
building amongst thirteens and
their faculties hence why we
have the center of excellence
for social work lead by dean
nelson over at new mexico
highlands university who is
working on that let's move to
fiscal your twenty four on page
three the department received
ten million dollars for nursing
endowments we had experience
this time the rf I was proud to
issue it before the fiscal year
started a applications were due
to the department on july fifth
and an award announcement was
actually issued in august before
the governor and many of you
came to this very building two
break ground which was really
exciting also in fiscal year
twenty twenty four you will see
that we also receive twenty
million dollars and funding for
endowments on student financial
aid and social work for
scholarships and paid practice.
And masters level programs and
memo for only fifteen million
dollars toward the endowments to
support financial aid was issued
in july now the five million
remaining was a very unique
appropriation opportunity for
our department the funding was
intended for scholarships and
paid practice for students who
likely i'm sorry paid practice
only for a students who already
graduated and we're entering the
work force therefore the funding
channels of our higher education
institutions didn't make much
sense we began the work with
momentum for the five million
dollars appropriation convenient
professionals and constituents
groups for social work and
mental on behavior or health
fields across the state to frame
the scope of work for these
funds and we originally aim to
do these funds on our own how
without a third party
administrator however we
recognize there was a very
specific need for sector
specific expertise and we're not
the experts and social work or
mental and behavior health so we
are now partnering with falling
colors and organization already
trusted by the new mexico
behavioral health collaborative
to ensure funds are delivered
effectively and with fidelity to
the original intent of the
legislation
and last on page five we
ventured into fiscal your twenty
twenty five with ten million
dollars for and down faculty for
and financially for students
pursuing bachelors a master's
degrees these funds were issued
in october three months after
the start of the new fiscal year
which i'm not happy about but it
happened now lets talk about way
in your analysis from the lff
cuc the appropriations later in
the quarter scholarship
appropriations are a little bit
different than money out the
door in the summer when the
fiscal year starts you collect
those appropriations at the end
of the semester and that's how
we do those types of programming
hence why you see those quarters
later where the appropriations
for scholarships and paid
practice at a later day versus a
day in the summer but our words
were issued in the summer.
I want to note that mr chair and
committee members that this year
the department has learned and
grown we have a lot of stat we
had a lot of staff turnover
which I appreciate the program
evaluation understanding and
adjustments within our agencies
with institutional finance
financial aid and our service
the administrative services
division however we are fully
staff divisions now i'll funding
and guidance for higher
education institutions for
fiscal year twenty twenty six
has already gone out the door as
I said before you today
additionally to avoid any
miscommunication and
misunderstanding all of our
departments are words are also
shared and coordination
collaboration with the lfc via
my colleague conner during so he
has been looked into all of our
memos guidance and distributions
that have gone out the door this
month.
Before we dave into the data I
want to discuss these funds from
a higher education sector
perspective although the roll
out of these funds may have
appeared slow many colleges and
universities have had to develop
new internal structures to
manage and deploy funding
especially or smaller rural and
front here institutions since
these funds were brilliant new
concept for these small
communities some particularly
those without prior
infrastructure did not have
expertise and managing
endowments of this scale or
access to the financial
institutions in their own
backyard that can support
endowments within their local
communities which required
additional time to fully
implement the awards in those
small community colleges and
branch campuses which you'll see
in the report additionally the
term endowment carries a very
different meaning and higher
education than what is assumed
in the evaluation we have
explained the differences of
endowment in a traditional sense
with our faculty members versus
endowment appropriations on page
one of our restaurants now let's
diven to my favorite part the
data typically programmer
valuations have significant
amount of data as a baseline to
their analysis some of which is
in the program of valuation that
we saw today however that
official validated data from our
department is missing so I want
to bring it forward to you today
within a response you have
enrollment data on page five and
completion data on pages six i'm
sorry pages eight and nine for
nursing teacher education and
social work programs starting
from academic year twenty twenty
one to twenty twenty two the
year before the implementation
of endowment so you can see that
progression through time three
positive takeaways from each of
the data sets today that I want
to bring forward to you under
graduate student had caught
across all three subject areas
has increased by twelve point
six percent from the twenty
twenty one to twenty two
academic year to the twenty
twenty four twenty five academic
year.
Graduation among students and
teacher education and
alternative license or programs
has increased by approximately
nineteen percent over the past
four years and nearly every
awarded college and an
independent analysis by our
department has seen an
enrollment increase in either
undergraduate or graduate
programs or both and every
single subject area brought
forward to you and the priest
brought forward in the end down
it's so let's start with our
agencies enrollment analysis on
page six as far as nursing is
concerned six of our seven four
year university is and sixteen
of our seventeen community
colleges including branch
campuses have nursing programs
the two largest programs are
here in alba cookie new mexico
the university of new mexico or
we're sitting today and central
new mexico community college
down the street over all
undergraduate enrollment and
nursing programs has increased
by twenty two point three
percent over the past four years
and there is a type of in your
booklet don't get mad at me but
on page five there was an
increase not a decrease in those
student and credit hours of
seventeen point five percent
once again and increase not a
decrease however the graduate
level has seen a small decline
if we break this doubt it down
by institution though both
eastern new mexico university
and new mexico state university
have increased enrollment in
their graduate nursing programs
and new mexico highlands
university developed a doctoral
degree in nursing which was
approved by the state board of
finance this past year as well
doctoral degrees as many of you
know in nursing our critical to
filling gaps in rural and
frontier community state wide
for and our universities are
working to address that as we
speak now for a teacher
education ninety two percent of
our students are undergraduate
students and our teacher prep
programs and that's a lot
undergraduate enrollment in
teaching increased by one
percent since twenty twenty one
twenty twenty two academic year.
However graduate enrollment grew
by two point five percent and
six percent in total student
credit hours there are two
things to consider here are one
salary increases for educator so
think you legislature think you
state of new mexico new mexico
has one of the highest teacher
salary averages in the region at
sixty eight thousand four
hundred forty dollars in the
twenty twenty three twenty
twenty four school year
additionally pursuing a graduate
certificate degree of a graduate
certificate a graduate degree
and microcodental allows for
teachers to be eligible for
higher pay through the levels as
we know and to the teacher
prepare teacher affordability
act was amended in twenty twenty
three two include teachers
pursuing graduate degrees hence
why we're seeing those increases
that are graduate level now
let's switch over to social work
although there is a growing need
for individuals graduating with
a master's degree in social work
their number programs at the
undergraduate level that are
critical and preparing students
for enrollment at higher level
graduate programs it is
promising to see that in twenty
twenty one twenty two academic
year undergraduate enrollment
are since then has increased by
thirty three point four percent
and total student credit hours
by thirty three point five
percent this tells us there's a
growing level interest in the
field and it could potentially
lead to an increase and graduate
programs within the coming years
I promise i'm almost done mr
chair and members i'm gonna jump
through completion real fast
although there have been
straights and enrollment across
all higher education programs in
the seat of new mexico the
ultimate goal as we all know is
increased completion meaning
graduation these data sets are
on page eight and nine there
have been increases and students
graduating from teacher
education programs but
completions and social work and
nursing have remained relatively
flat we recommend across walk
approach to reviewing and romant
completion in license
requirements in these fields.
The states board set the
professional requirements but
working in collaboration with
higher education institutions
i'm selves are crucial for
alignment like we did for
nursing and twenty eighteen I
want to reiterate that increased
enrollment and undergraduate
programs is a sign that there is
an interest in these fields and
is growing and can lead to an
increase and graduate programs
in the future academic years
however it takes time for
students to progress through a
program as you know and these
were implemented in fy twenty
three the data due for a twenty
twenty four twenty twenty five
academic year will be available
in september and it may show
increases in the data that you
see today so enclosing mr
chairman members the higher
education department will
continue to review data
pertinent to nursing teacher
education and social social work
excuse me I additionally we
welcome conversations and
collaboration as a higher
education sector and legislative
proposals and budget
recommendations for the app
temporary and thirty days
session that can really move the
needle for new mexicans and
joining me today is deputy
secretary but three seater
health chief for staff and
finance officer during honey
academic affairs and policy
director marches and our
colleagues doctor bret channel
see joey like the couples thank
you joy and that's my friend and
i've known them for years and
they still can't see that and
adila or the is and last since
the program evaluation has a
heavy focus on the higher
education institutions
themselves we have the directors
of the three associations
director marks avidra doctor
vanessa hocker and then
representatives from various
colleges and universities and I
did not see doctor mavina but I
know she is okay doctor missing
that is here as well and once
again think you mister chair for
the opportunity to speak to you
and present and I will yield the
floor back to you thank you very
much madame secretary things for
having your team.
Here will jump right in the
questions serving with
representative
thank you mister chair president
I appreciate the information uhm
I think these are great things
and and these endowments will go
towards helping not only instead
of new mexico but families pull
out some poverty perhaps those
who are attending school for the
first time
i've appreciated
send one we've had some
negotiations with hospital and
so therefore funds weren't spent
but we're as you said we're
cranking it up for fifty percent
more so we're looking forward to
that mr chair that they don't
really have a question I just
have a request that i'm i'm a
trades again as well and we've
allocated funds for that for
four years now and I would
request that we continue to
allocate those funds if
anybody's ask for a plumber
electrician
go ahead and wait till your next
grandchild comes because that's
when they can insure up so
anyway I think we need it thank
you great thank you for that in
that we're going to go to
represent a vincent next
thank you mr chair
I keep hearing the house short
we are on nurses and social
workers.
And yesterday I heard eight
thousand today her twelve
thousand.
Is the line is it still climbing
when do we ever see the line
flatten out have is there any
projections because we have some
you know we had a great tour
here yesterday and I was really
pleased to see that there is
twelve hundred nursing students
enrolled and if we're enrolling
that many people
here and then across the state
why does that line keep going up
mister chair.
Up mr chair members of the
committee thank you for that
question part of this is that
you know it's a it's a moving
target to estimate these and
project this out are not only on
at the supply side in you know
degree production and work force
available
on the demand side with the work
force demand but also on the
supply side with workers
available another aspect
you know those those types of
questions this report uhm
doesn't quite get at
the work for a full work force
pipeline a study looking at
employers how many students
migrate how many graduates
migrate out the state etc so
there are a lot of moving
components of that
thank you mister chair and the
other question I had was
do we ever feel like we're
faculty heavy and I know since
you're with lsc auto just like
it is are we faculty heavy and
do we have too much faculty and
are not enough enrollment or is
it balanced out pretty good mr
chair members the committee at
this report doesn't quite answer
that question about an a couple
of things one this the fte data
that was available through
operating budgets and through
financial reports of actuals
we saw areas where that could be
improved so one of the
recommendations in this report
more of a mo- uh minor
recommendation not really the
focus but in order to get it
those kind of
questions
there needs to be some
quality control on the fte data
in the reporting and and
collection
past lfc reports have identified
areas where there could
potentially be opportunities for
increasing class sizes i'll
reference a online higher
education program evaluation
from twenty twenty four.
Where online court some lower
level online courses could have
their class a sizes you know
potentially increased they are
the
ma'am secretary to do anything
that yeah I do and think you
mister chair to to answer your
question depends on the program
rate says there are some
programs that we see that may be
faculty heavy but when it comes
to these three areas were not
seeing that especially and rural
frontier communities it's really
hard to recruit a nursing
professional nursing professor
and for example carls bad we had
a really hard time finding
somebody so it it really just
depends on the program and the
community itself and somebody
that you can hire and also pay
them more than their local
hospital or another entity
thank you mister chair and you
know I know that was a pretty
long presentation
can you
give me the the real simple fact
of why we can't get the money
out the door why can we not
spend the money.
Mister chairman members of the
committee I think
a short summary would be and
maybe some
some timing delays are from uh
the department but also within
some institution programs
turnover and recruitment are
also a factor um approval
processes so with while some
programs were able to roll these
funds out quickly other programs
are had delays in some
implementation issues.
Thank you mr chair and when they
have delays secretary rodriguez
is that your do you get to have
the overall authority on that
what if what if I ran a college
and i'm late and I i'm not
getting my my money spent.
What do you what are you going
to be telling me mr chair the
answer is yes unfortunately with
this we didn't do a quick
analysis like we typically do
because of the staff turnover at
our agency but I think the
legislative finance committee
put a fire under us to release a
he let's take a look at these
and see what's working and not
working and how we can improve
processes at the institutions
themselves and when we did that
analysis that's only understood
that some of our small community
colleges don't have the banking
institutions and their own
backyard to actually get these
endowments up and running and
had to do research and that so
we're going to be better about
figuring out those capacity
issues similar like we did with
social work we didn't get all
the money out the door we worked
with institutions to build their
capacity and set up programs to
do it but we need to do a better
job with that on the front and
to get those done and smaller
rural frontier communities which
we will deal
thank you mister chair and my
final.
Do you offer
do you after offer assistance
with somebody that struggling
getting their money spent do you
give them do you send somebody
down to give them directions on
that how to spend the money and
maybe get him on the right
parcel they don't do it year
after year mr chair the answer
is yes so we actually started
doing sight visits to higher
education institutions three
years ago they stopped doing
them and I was like we got to
get these up and running are
institutional finance division
and our data shop actually go to
institutions we've been to
eighteen of the twenty nine
within the last three years to
provide that one on one
assistance additionally we have
a higher education technical
summit that we have run every
year for the past two years
where all of our business
officers across the state of new
mexico actually attend and we
can go through what are some of
the issues that you're seeing
where some of the breaks of arts
let's go back to those issues
and work together and then we
set up more sight visits based
on that technical summit
thank you mister chair
thank you very much representing
events and great questions next
we have senator opened here then
when you are video thank you
chairman and thank you for the
presentation thank you secretary
and and all the presenters and
all the folks from higher
education everyone's I know work
and really really hire tonight
i'm i'm so excited about the
data and the focus and on social
work I brought this up at the
last time that we met are we
taking a proactive approach
madam uh chairman in in madame
secretary really to ting all of
the pieces of the continual of
the social work you know
fabric of our state here are we
out you know pd's
days cyfd
public schools pd what are we
doing to sort of like tie
everybody together so they're
sort of a continuoum on on how
we need we have such a I heard
eight thousand to twelve
thousand I think it was a
representative one of the
representatives and other side
there mentioned that I hope by
noon we don't need fifteen
thousand so what what are we
doing to sort of tie everything
together.
Um because of generous mrperiod
chair thank you for the
questions senator because of
generous support very little
legislature in government or
michelle lu hunger show we've
had established a center of
excellence for social work
because we understand there are
so many gaps in faculty students
graduating the board exam is
also a really big issue for us
right now when it comes to our
students cause sometimes they
can get better jobs in other
areas and then don't take the
examined don't become social
workers but the center of
excellence has been this
epicenter for all of us to meet
it together and really
understand how can we improve
social work in the state of new
mexico the senate excellence is
actually met with the new mexico
public education department the
new mexico children youth and
families department and the new
mexico aging and long term
services department to build a
certificate program for people
who currently work within those
systems to get a certificate and
then become a social worker so
we can get more social workers
and those programs working for
the state of new mexico that
certificates completion is
hopefully by the end of this
fall semester so we can get it
rolled out rolled out the next
fall semester but we have had
those conversations internally
as a state and not to add too
much data to your head right now
senator but it is concerning for
every one social worker in our
public education system they
have to support approximately a
hundred thirty four hundred
thirty eight students within the
system so that's not working
right now and we need to do
better.
I think a chair in them but so
thank you for that response in a
one last question i'll ask you
then as are we maybe maybe we
can work with pd
to priorities where the social
workers get placed in the school
districts because it seems to me
like you know where some of the
issue that lands and see why
these lap is there is social
services needed for some of the
more that the more challenging
you know populations within the
schools and and that might be a
better for the finite amount of
resources we have now have you
thought about maybe talking with
some of them on that or your
colleague at the pedi mrperiod
chair i'm a lot of times our
superintendence will go well the
seg address is that and we get
to decide what we have to do but
if you want more leverage to
decide what you want to do with
those dollars I actually
recommend putting it in ped his
budget not the pss budget or the
seg i'm sorry not the sega
because you can then say we need
to put social workers and high
need free and reduced lunch
areas and the state of new
mexico versus la
you know so really thinking
about that and putting that
money directly and pedestal
budget vs the budget for all of
the alliance to make those
decisions to either higher or
not higher social workers in
their communities alright thank
you chairman and again really
appreciate all the work you all
are doing just keep up the fight
and keep the focus and keep
coming back to us and tell us
how we can help you thank you
they are so far vice german
thank you ma'am secretary do you
have the number for the state
please.
The.
I mean if you look at some of
this it's just robbery right you
look at claims report on page
nineteen and misuse and down.
Then down that money was spent
for for the foundation
operations right that's not our
intention.
It's not any legislative
intention at any point in time
intention was to create.
Nursing and social workers and
then you go to farmington and
you look at that two million
dollars that they got and where
they thought they're done with
it
if if you're not going to use
the money correctly don't ask
for it.
Would you agree with that ma'am
secretary.
Mr chair i'm equally concerned
about the foundation dollars
that were spent and that is
something that we're actually
working on so are chief of
finances here will be looking
into those institutions and why
they spent those moneys within
their foundations versus the
faculty and what I will say mr
chair if I can when it came to
the endowments there were there
was no prior conversation with
the department on what the
endowments would look like how
they would be spare it was more
so of a conversation during the
session however the legislative
finance committee you mister
chair made it very clear how you
wanted these funds to be used
and spent which I appreciated
that guidance and we will be
following up with the
institutions that have money
sitting in a bank account to
figure out why that's happening
and then money is that we're
used for foundations versus
actual faculty and it's
financial eight yeah and I think
during the next session we're
gonna overwork over these
endowments and they're going to
have to pay they're going to
have to pay in advance and
they're going to have to send us
a debit we're not going to front
any more money
for their foundation work or
their foundation operations.
And let me ask you one thing
when you ask for that could you
ask for an audit of of every
universities foundation all
their audience on every single
thing they spent in their
dollars in their foundation
money on since they put our
state money in there I think we
can now request that open up the
floor for.
Seen what the foundations really
spend their money on mr chair
our frustration has been our
university foundations and light
of the issue that happened at me
salents community college so the
community college itself was
very helpful and providing this
documentation budget information
where they spent money where
they didn't spent money the
foundation were refused to share
that information with us hence
why the state auditor forward a
piece of legislation in this
passession to say I get your
restriction to look at
foundations and how they're
spending their money moving
forward because we had those
issues that mason but i'm gonna
have gerald touch on the actual
statute rules of regulations in
place that somewhat protector
foundations from that.
What but may actually want more
a question for free answer that
if they coming or steep money
within a foundation.
And they caming or phones I
think that gives us the
opportunity to look at all the
money spent because you can't
track one dollar from where it
went to the other they may see
it went into the certain bracket
but it may not have but think
about that as you answer that
question.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you so much and everyone knows
for the question so so there are
several things that the hard
education department has been
working on um as the secretary
mentioned that started with one
particular institution and we've
been working closely with the
office of the state auditor as
well in that is opportunities
for discussion about uh auditing
not only foundations but also
other component unions of higher
education institutions we have
not historically gotten involved
as an agency specifically in
foundations but as a secretary
mentioned one of the things that
we are focused on now as a
result of this report and we
thank you all for for the report
in the findings is how do we
engage more appropriately with
foundations and how their
funding is being utilised we
also understand that there's a
need for foundations to provide
support to institutions
we understand the need for
fundraising at first we also
understand the need for uh
supporting them in scholarships
and and and and those types of
funds as well and so so we'll be
looking at this more closely and
mystery chair my came over judas
and reminded me
just kidding mark you're not and
reminded I only call them that
when he cancels lunch on my
no he reminded me that the
auditor did announce that he
would be looking into all higher
education institution
foundations and we're working
with him on that.
So I mean I mean
we determine we have this work
for shorters in new mexico and
we say we want to want to
improve the faculty we want
pay for more tuitions and in
then our money just seems to
disappear but let me get to
another issue where are we with
the worth the the funding study
and how much plated universities
push back from as i'm hearing a
lot of chatter
in
we could go to zero and start
over and then really see where
they scream it what where is
that study today thank you
mister chair thank you senator
minus for that question you know
we're really excited at the
department in order to have had
an opportunity in order to do
this type of study it's
something that has not been done
in new mexico um ever I think
when we're looking at at base
funding for high red
institutions so to answer your
question quickly the study
itself is complete
the involvement that higher
education institutions had uh
and were proud of this effort is
we really wanted to ensure that
we had stake holder engagement
throughout the process so we did
invite higher education
institutions there cfose our
presidents of institutions but
more importantly uh their data
individuals in order to
participate in multiple working
sessions throughout the study
one thing that I will mention is
that all of that information
that was compiled you know was
utilised by end who was our
organization that that did this
thirty four hours but their
recommendations are a hundred
percent very recommendations on
how they feel that new mexico
can improve on or change what we
currently have in place for
funding of hire it institutions
the study itself as I mentioned
is complete we expect to have a
final report ready for
distribution within the next
couple of weeks so that way
everybody has an opportunity to
look at that.
Uhm moving forward and mister
chair and the legislative
finance committee will have a
copy of that before it is
officially published will be
working with mr jorgenson on
that
well it's gonna be interesting
to see because how we're going
to base where we're headed with
universities right and and then
you know this is just a black
I
think this we said it had been
endowment to higher more
effectively to pay them better
and to do things in they just
used it however they wanted.
If I look at some of your stuff
member secretary mean.
You look at western new mexico
about two million dollars only
spent three hundred thousand of
it
on a monitor's intended purpose
right and and I understand it's
hard to build a program but if I
remember right in eastern
correctly if it cost us roughly
eighteen thousand dollars to get
a nursing eastern and I think
maybe send one the same in it
costs a sixty thousand dollars
to get one that you and then.
Where's the most paying for
about great it's in in those
other schools where we can get
three times amount of nurses for
the for the same dollars
there's a higher cost at union
then there is other places on
what it is animation I think
only the gather nursing program
but I mean.
I I think we've we've done it
the wrong way I think we're
gonna have to pull back.
And we're gonna have to take
this endowment of ones and then
they're gonna have to spend
their foundation money which
they already have of our money.
And then come back and ask for a
reimbursement when they get the
program stood up
it's only way to put them in
line to make sure that.
They get the the work done
because prefunding it is is just
an absolutely nightmare.
In it in so I I just.
Don't see in other ways you're
going to have to we're gonna
have to give us performance
before we're going to pay you.
Because it's not working.
I mean.
At enemish or an inemish use
interest on the money we gave
them was two point one million a
year so when we asked for that
refund.
We're gonna ask for the interest
on that money from from the
foundation
and that's only fair cause some
other school eastern san on
gallop.
I had grandsted and have a grand
says a smaller sim program may
need that money and and they're
not getting it rather than a
bigger universally just taking
it investing the money and then
holding it for their foundation
uses whether they buy feel for
their plane or or what they're
doing with the money is gonna be
interesting to find out
mr chair if I can and I know
that was a comment so he do
apologize but what what I can
see in the future when it comes
to any funding for endowments I
think we need to work in each b
two and in the guidance rolled
out from the agency to be very
clear that endowment use cannot
be used for administrative costs
whatsoever and it's money in the
think to grow the endowment so
it can be used for salaries for
our faculty and these high need
areas we do need faculty we're
losing faculty we need a recruit
faculty and these endowments
have done that for over fifty
faculty members on the state of
new mexico but your right we can
do more and we need to do better
by that but the two point one
earnings from miss you was not
used for faculty and down it was
it was held in the foundation
so.
You know in the same page right
if we're going to give you money
to grow your deal but now we may
just have to do it their reverse
because they're not doing what
they told us when we agreed to
do and what the legislature
agreed to do I I don't know how
we're going to get
enrollment up and in nursing it
in in social work because you
know a student wants to be
whatever they want to be right
they want to be an engineer
there'll be an engineer if they
want to be a social worker
they'll help to that field you
know there's people that I know
and make sense or the young age
would they are working at
agencies and are getting their
social work degree and then
seeing while i'm not going to do
this I am done.
And that's the fall out of a
pushing money towards one
industry or another
the nursing insurance is just
it's crazy and it's going to get
worse cause the amount of people
that are retiring the baby
boomers is the largest
population growth and that's
gonna grow and then
the rural hospitals are in in
such bad sheep and in trouble
across the state are how we get
people to recruit their mean if
you go to any emergency in
western new mexico they probably
have contract yard doctors and
it come in and come out in so
you you don't get the best of
the best and you don't get
communities that are people that
are tied to the community
especially when you hire
traveling nurses or traveling
doctors rate in what we're
trying to do is grow in your
communities and grown in the
state so they stay within the
state so they're best and then
they have better care
in that seems to not be working
out but.
I don't know how we're going to
get this under control but
again to bring a look at it very
hard
prior to the session in we're
gonna look at these dollars did
that the auditors say when he
was going to start to audits
or should be asking universities
the voluntarily give us their
audit before we require a for
insight got it.
The.
Mister chair center when yours
so the auditors we had we have
had recent meetings with the
auditor about this and their
plan is to build it into their
audit plan for a fiscal year
twenty six but they haven't
given us a definitive data when
they plan on starting yeah that
that made me a little too late
so
click note I really appreciate
this right I mean this this
highlighted.
How were funding things and then
how things aren't getting done
in and so
maybe we just do it differently
because we've done this how many
times giving them money in soon
and the money speaking about
universities
we're given people money and
said okay this is what we want
out of it and in it never gets
done in in or we don't get the
performance we want or
but the study is pretty click
and I can read it all real quick
but I mean the stuff I glanced
through in the stuff that that
hit me right between their eyes
were were large numbers where we
targeted things that we wanted
done this day and they don't
seem to think in done ma'am
sector one last question you do
have any recourse on these
universities with holding funds
until they bring us those audits
voluntarily
is there any recourse while
doing this allowing from the
foundation because of misspent
money abuse endowment with
disallowance applying for that
money
thank you mister chair thank you
said everyone else for the
question so there is language
within house bill to that gives
the department some authority in
order to uh to uh
withhold funding from higher
education institutions we'd have
to look at that a little more
closely to see if this
particular situation allows for
that
um other areas that we have are
are just opportunities in order
to work with the institutions in
order to get more information
about the applicability of the
funding how they're foundation
is set up and that's what we're
going to do
but but as far as specifically
we don't have
in any any oversight on that
piece mr chair there are two
components in house bill to
where we can withhold money one
is if they're not doing common
course numbering in the second
as we can hold up to fifty
percent of their budgets if they
do not implement the science of
reading and structured literacy
that was put in by the
legislature in house bill to.
Uh three years ago and then this
year for structured literacy as
far as with holding funds we are
going to look at the foundations
and see how that money was spent
and then we're going to work
through our legal to see if
that's money that we can have
come back to the state of new
mexico or if we need to put
stronger language and house bill
to in the future when it comes
to institutions not applying
funds with the full and ten of
the law other there will be
stronger language in house bill
to
the exec agrees to it or not
we're gonna take up the language
and in
they put their target on their
own back.
They didn't spend the money
correctly.
I mean if you look at you and m
right here and I didn't know
this and when I went to college
and I know what mark went to the
same place we had to buy parking
passes students right but we are
funding education in the state
in the mexico higher education
and they're coming back in their
charging fourteen hundred
dollars a year for parking pass
rate well if the student is now
much trouble to to get through
school why are we charging for
parking right
why did they increase the fees
on for to students for atlantics
rate they're funding down other
revenue streams when we're
already paying for university
and in their using opportunity
to pay for that I can download
as a fee that's not what I
intended was that what you
intended madame sector.
You might have say no for the
record
mr charles turn on we make no
that was not the intention
although we don't want any
tuition and fees on our students
because it prevents them from
going to college we are
reviewing that language in our
rural and we will be rolling out
a new role come next academic
year
do you want this we have to keep
yeah we'll keep going through we
have a number of other folks on
the list i'm gonna rather break
here but but I mean at the end
of the day when we agree say hey
we we want more kids educated we
want to give everybody
opportunity to go to college
right and and then this happens
and then this is just I mean the
pelgrant and the federal system
is changing to so that's going
to add another layer that we're
going to have to look at in so.
I want every kid the opportunity
where they graduate or not to go
to college it's it just helps
them in life later on in but
that opportunity has to happen
in when we do things like this
they don't get that opportunity
and that's what can it irk smear
gets under my skin.
So thank you mister chairman
thank you very much chair and
great points we're going to go
next to senator to biased and
then center the near
center device thank you mr chair
i'm secretary my first question
is about staff turnover and I
don't know that i've
specifically heard the reason
but it's been implied that your
staff turnover is do primarily
to salaries that correct.
Mr chair III didn't hear the
question I truly apologize
senator to buy a some can you
repeat it that's okay I think it
was implied especially when you
are speaking to senator munios
but I didn't hear it's
specifically a staff turnover
primarily because of salaries mr
chair it's a combination of
reasons i'll tell you with our
finance people you're going to
see in state government they go
agency the agency the agency the
agency especially and then
administrative services division
because there's fifteen there's
ten percent or fifteen percent
increases to their salary so
we're recycling a lot of budget
people all the time
salaries in the state of new
mexico there was a study done in
collaboration with the
legislative finance committee in
the department of finance and
administration they are
addressing salaries in the state
of new mexico to make sure
they're more reflective of the
type of workers that we have
especially in our budgeting
officers we have actually been
able to increase salaries for
our budget people in
institutional finance financial
aid and the administrative
service division and that's
actually allowing us to retain
people as we speak so we lost a
lot of people but the last two
years we've increased salaries
and increased a little bit of
the responsibility is to do that
too to keep those people in
those positions
mister charles and thank you
secretary and i'm i'm speaking
of specifically professors like
yeah so
I mean I have been specific
enough sorry no senator you know
I had pregnancy brain a couple
years ago and now I don't have
an excuse so I apologize mister
chair I don't know if any of the
associations want to address
that I think they would be
better suited for that when it
comes to faculty turnover.
The.
To chair members of the
committee to buy some marks of
other what the new mexican
counts universal present so the
faculty is a recruitment issue
when it comes to being
competitive with faculties that
is one thing that we mention in
our responses and so it is her
the competition that we have
nationally with fabulouty that
as to turn over compensation
tends to be something that lead
slaters have to support
the lvc's recommended
compensation supplementals to
the higher situations because of
to try to give support and in
our annual report we do show
that in terms of where we're
compared naturally with other
faculty then that also is a
challenge as well
and so when it comes to the four
year institutions are faculty
there is really a high level of
competition when it comes to a
national international
competition so that those tend
to be done tend to drive and
then partly else valuations up
starting right so it's a good
point is you have to get to
faculty and then you have to get
it going and that's why in our
evaluation we also respond that
a pre planning meeting with the
signals along with the
legislature to work out work
this all out in the beginning so
when we recommend in our
response as well you can discuss
faculty turnover you can discuss
the endowments or tricky they're
challenging fact there is a
number of us at the beginnings
it said this might not be the
way to go when it comes
endowments it's like a general
location bond in s t b one to
take time to tell those parts to
get the money compared to direct
appropriation to be and then
they're shovel ready sending an
endowment has gone there they
have to be invested the
investment has actually turned a
return so there's other
challenges that with as well and
then there was a lot of
misunderstanding of the intent
of these funds as well and
fabulty is something that also
is more towards retention of
students and quality of
education than in rome and two
degree and then finally such as
the faculty it's that you have
this disconnect of but it was
mentioned by senator by the you
have these agencies have a need
for social workers.
This also workers are burning
out they're not getting paid to
love lining a per now public
defenders days courts they all
need him there needs to be that
whole is the connection there as
well and so fabulous just one
part of that i'm mister chairs
there are devices thank you
please ever brief passport but
thank you very chairman small
senator to send vanessa hocker
on the executive director for
the new mexico independent
community colleges.
Our colleges are spread
throughout the state and so
there are different challenges
in hiring and retaining faculty
where we really struggle are in
our specialised faculty if you
look nursing a very very easy
for a nurse to work in a
hospital in a clinic and get
significantly more pay there are
people who it speaks to their
heart that they want to be
faculty members but yet is are
they willing to give up the
compensation in order to do that
the partnership that is started
about sam on college with their
hospital with their regional
hospital paying a statement to
keep qualified good faculty in
the classroom I think there's a
phenomenal step forward but it
really is a an institution by
institution a challenge in
really with our highly
specialist faculty welding
faculty definitely a challenge
thank you thank you very much
there back to you serving to
and thank you for that mister
share so what is the nursing
professor make for example and
just curious
and is it commenced to it with
what other professors at the
universities and community
colleges make
mr chair it depends on the
institution for example the
average salary in our
independent community colleges
and role new mexico is fifty
five thousand dollars are
nursing staff can be anywhere
from five thousand ten thousand
dollars more than that and
communities where they're having
a hard time retaining that can
be even higher at our for your
institutions the pay for nursing
faculty is a little bit higher
than that generally speaking
when it comes to our health
degrees and professions average
salaries are actually not that
high do you have the answer
chairman sender to buy chairman
senator to buyers and.
Of four sand one college nursing
faculty it's between sixty five
thousand and sixty eight
thousand per year
with as with ten thousand
dollars statement additional.
Right okay and thank you for
that so i'm just trying to make
sense of
i'll go down the road that
senator munios went down but
just the moment a girl which
we've got millions of dollars
sitting in these endowments is
there something that i'm not
aware of because you know i'm
kind of new here but are we
capped at what we're able to pay
these professors or were just
not we've decided not to be as
competitive
so we've we've made mister
shares secretary somehow a
collective decision that we
don't want to be competitive
even though we're struggling in
these areas
mr chairman members of the
committee the legislature
appropriates funding to the
higher education institutions
and then within a higher
education institution their
governing
there there administration and
governing body developer
internal budget so it's a self
made miser chair it is that a
self made problem then
so and I think what will will
ask sort of the feedback from
lfc and heddy if there are
additional sort of clarification
points will need will be done in
it at last crucials in a month
there might be additional need
for information on this
go ahead secretary
mr chair thank you for that
clarification
and when I was going through to
finish that the average salaries
like they said it was very
similar to and as I had said for
the community college but for a
research institutions the
average salary is ninety one
thousand comprehensive seventy
four thousand and the overall
average is eighty one which is
great and i'm just gonna jump in
i'll go back to center I think
that it's a great question the
question is based around.
How can we recruit and retain
faculty we know faculty are
essential to be able to support
students the context that will
need a madame secretary along
with the institutions is who are
you competing with for that
faculty and who is trying to
take that faculty from you and
what are they offering so that
to the senator is really good
point how were able to recruit
and retain faculty because that
sounds like a high number but if
somebody at university of
arizona is paying you know
twenty five thirty percent more
obviously there in a great
position to to have that back to
you
thank you mister sharon yep so I
have lots of questions centered
around this but we'll see that
for another time i'm I just want
to go to and the lfc
recommendations in questions
here because I see that there is
tuition increases but it's
unclear whether those increases
are paid by the opportunity
scholarship
mr chair members of the
committee
so the opportunity scholarship
does cover two wishing but
it could is there a specific
question related to somewhere
i'm within the report
do you have this the letter
my can you help me with
the activity report from this
week okay
thank you i've got the
information but you don't
it it's just unclear in rachel
am I
answering a question that they
ask in a question that they can
answer office moments
in this area.
That's just tuition inch and
general so not I shouldn't
I mean they deal with tuition
you can
rate
that's a general question on
tuition
so i've got a general question
on tuition but since you all
deal with two shm maybe you know
i'm showing increases at ten
percent at UNM
five percent at msu just i'm
just curious because we're
talking about
questions about even parking
rate increased parking fourteen
hundred I can imagine pain
fourteen hundred dollars for my
child to park at a university
that's in sanity to me
especially when the opportunity
scholarship is paying for my
child to be here
so i'm just looking at
increases in tuition in general
and I want to make sure because
we're unclear from an lfc
perspective if that if those
increases are actually covered
by the opportunity to
scholarship in are we making it
in my world in the business
world are we making it easy to
buy are we making it easy for
students to buy these programs
continue through graduate and
then actually work right here in
new mexico whether it's in
albuquerque or are rural areas
when I see all these little
pieces together i'm just
wondering and then if I see
turnover as a student if I see
constitutes consistent turnover
with faculty as a student am I
as bod into the program am I
going to finish is something
else going to lor me away and if
I see that my own professors
aren't happy probably with what
they're making were not
competitive we've got the
endowments from what I can tell
to make ourselves very
competitive we've got millions
sitting in accounts which is
incredible what are we doing to
make it easy to buy for the
students and easy to buy for the
professors and are we making
sure that as things increase.
That were not ribing peter to
paypal here
mr chair if I can answer the
tuition piece of this average
tuition increase this year based
on preliminary data is actually
three percent amongst all higher
education institutions senator
munios actually sponsored a
piece of legislation I had not
this passed legislation
legislative session but the
session before where the higher
education department sets an
average for how much
institutions can increase their
tuition and fees based on a
national model that we call
happy so we have been doing that
so part two of that what fees
are recovering we're covering
students centered and course
specific fees what are we not
covering we're not covering
capital outlet or entered a fees
such as a parking structure that
an institution wants to do so
they put it on the backs of
students we don't allow for that
but we do allow for health care
behavioral health student
activities are core specific
fees when it comes to books and
materials I sometimes there's
lab visiting do cover that with
the opportunity scholarship as
the chairman when yours had
mentioned earlier co chair
we are looking at those rules
again to make sure it doesn't go
towards athletic fees from the
future if there raise
astronomically so we are looking
at that but yes the opportunity
to ship covers tuition fees but
it's very specific for what it
can be used for
thank you mister charlie i'll
leave the rest of my questions
for another time but I am very
concerned especially when we're
talking about faculty that we
are doesn't sound like we're
competitive and i've heard
sovereign of you say that
they're getting lord away to
other universities out of state
then we should be looking at
that with the millions we have
sitting in funds just gaining
interest we should we should
talk about how are we more
competitive and I love the idea
of the cooperation with san one
hospital in that county um.
If that's part of the
conversation I think that's
phenomenal it keeps them in the
system which is really neat but
we need to be doing more for
sure so thank you very much
thank you mister chair thank you
senator vice and great questions
and we'll look at and further
agenda item later this year in
response to a lot of the bigger
issues that you've raised we're
going to go next to center the
near then sarah
thank you mister chairman good
morning panel
clinton I want to start with you
i'm i'm begin to oversight and I
appreciate all the work he did
and
and I appreciate you reaching
out to those colleges in
universities to get first hand
information I mean that's one of
the things that I think is very
very important but and
it's gonna look like i'm just
talking about send on college
because that's where i'm from
but you know we talk about any
of the rule
when we put this money in the
end down
what is the time we expect them
to be able to spend it
mister chairman members of the
committee in terms of specific
language there was not specific
language in the original like
appropriation or the
the guidance setting time lines
recognizing some variability
across institutions and sectors
around it a year to january
investment earnings and the
higher faculty as mentioned in
the report some programs were
able to roll out these
endowments and higher faculty
and start teaching supporting
faculty and students other
programs had delay is for
reasons that we've discussed
such as our recruitment and
retention etc so around a year
but that has i'll give a
coverage of wild very ability
across that alright thank you
and mister chair so when we
so like someone college.
But when we're in our rural
areas we have to work with other
entities so someone regional is
a good example they also have
boards they also have people
that they have to answer to so
do we a lot for a little more
time for them to work those out
or do we expect that in that
year
mrperiod chair members the
committee that the the
lank
the appropriation when it went
out and was distributed out
didn't have a specific date but
in terms of
a date of expenditure but in you
know
doing this report and checking
in on the rollout and
implementations of these
endowments this report reports
on the status as of the writing
of this report alright thank you
claim and mr chair so
I kind of go back to reprison
vents at when when he was
talking about just because you
hire
educators doesn't mean the
students are going to come so
it's kind like the what comes
first the chicken or the egg
how do we how do we navigate
that
in a way it went on hire too
many teachers and not get enough
students but then we don't want
to come out of enrollment day
and have you know forty eight
students enrolled and we only
expected thirty
mr chair members the committee
that has definitely
it's definitely
something when scaling up
programs you have to take both
of those things into
consideration these endowments
were to address a concern
highlighted in the past
regarding scaling up these
programs are acquired a
additional faculty case in the
case of nursing sometimes you
have very
you have regulations at
determining you know eat
students for a one faculty for
super.
Field supervision so faculty and
students are very connected in
terms of scaling up a program
but if there are if the student
recruitment and retention are
our other pieces of the puzzle
these endowments were addressing
that one faculty component but
it doesn't as you point out
addressed the student specific
brickroom and component right
thank you and I mean we're
recruiting much chairman we're
recruiting twice for if trying
recruit students and you know
some of us are having to recruit
educators too so so I hope
there's some flexibility there I
think that's important and again
you know I want to give someone
college in just like senator to
buy a son of saying it's a great
little program and if you work
together things just
they're just better for
everybody it just make take a
little bit more time so so I
appreciate that in your report
mr chair and madame secretary
and morning
we we do have to be
mindful of oversight and when we
we do have these universities
that it it does appear and i'm
not going to make the accusation
but it does appear that
they said on that money for a
period of time because it's an
investment for them
so I I think that's something we
need to really honey and on and
pay very very close attention
because I know as as a business
man
that's our ideas to make money
so
so I want to make sure that
we're watching them and when you
compile that list
to audit for the articles I
think that'll be very helpful
for us and mister chairman this
may be a question for you
if if we don't get that
information is there a way we
can suppeana say those
universities
thank you center yeah but we
have subpoena power will work
through.
There's a number of
representatives here today but I
think this is highlighted the
need for
a great deal of information
and follow up from a number of
the universities
that are part of the report so
that some will get the
information I expect we'll get
it without the need for a super
but if we need to go other
routes then that's something
that we can do alright will I
appreciate that much chairman
and I appreciate the panel in
all the hard work you guys do
and set the take on fire today
on all these questions thank you
thank you santa le near senator
gonzalez is next.
Thank you all mister chairman
and good morning and thank you
to them twelve of you for your
information report clean none of
your report or not on page five
on charts six
oh
two how there are five year
five year average I guess how
five year cummer two
what percentage factors then of
retirement
individuals leaving
mr chair members the committee
so those numbers for that these
on chart sex you have the
projected job openings from from
the department of a labor and
then you have a five year
averages of degree production
from the institutions and then
the red bar is the gap between
those two so so benefits doesn't
really a quick into this chart
however the percent of benefits
used to estimate faculty
you know faculty fte for this
report as the twenty seven point
eight
that are outlined by different
requirements in statute and
federal law
so mr chairman went up when you
look at it as like for either
one you know nurses or teachers
the number looks big you're like
four thousand but then when you
look at it for an average hole
for
there would have to be seven
years it comes down to five
hundred and seventy one
you know it's still not good but
I mean it's not as like but
you're just looking at it on a
per year
the only part that I just want
to mention that up I think we
all should be very cautious off.
And we should all work towards
the it is that
on
our retirement benefit is
something that really helps with
our recruitment and one of the
that brings individuals to our
state which it is a good plan
and when you look at
your retirement of which we had
on the investment pension
committee just their slight
sweep yes you have a a point
zero four
of high level leaving which that
set the retirement part and then
you have zero companies or you
have by zero I mean it's vacancy
or you have a very lol coming
into the factor that is being
placed by the contribution by
both the the state and also by
the contribution by the person
they individual employee
on the actual aerials you know
that really hurts the fun you
know it doesn't look like one
year is too much better you
multiply that by ten years and
it becomes a larger percentage
and when you look at all
you know what's going in versus
what's going out we we all need
to be concerned yet or so extra
effort should be really placed
hard you know one thousand
numbers so just wanted to share
that with the with everyone and
the group better
again thank you for your work
and anything that we can do to
improve that you're not
specially in and the number so
far shortfall
thank you thank you thank you
very much they are going to
solve us next week not a
representative chatfield.
Thank you mr chair
mister chair if we have a
problem in madame secretary
if we have a problem with these
eight with these card you're
start spending the money for the
purpose for which it was
appropriate
and or not spending the money at
all
i'm I why do we not just air
mark those funds
leave them held i'm i'm first of
all everybody knows I most
dickler for local control I love
local control but if we're
having this problem why is why
are the funds not held within
the agency within the hire
agency
as an endowment airmark for for
particular
harriet
institutions and if they
want the
show us that they have intention
of spending that money number
one spending it number two
spending out for what it was
appropriate
then we released the funny why
do we not do that
mr chair thank you for that
question it wasn't set up that
way however
the higher education department
doesn't have any endowments in
any of our accounts whatsoever
we do have funds for various
programs like long repayment
scholarships we've never chat
any sort of endowment and that
wasn't the language lead out in
the house bill too for the years
I had to go directly to the
higher education institutions
however that is something we're
open to if we wanted to have
further conversations regarding
that so much chairman american
sector I suggest that if we
continue to have these problems
that we reset it up I think
where the folks it said these
things up and I think we can
settle up in a different matter
in that will stop a lot of the
problems it we're having thank
you mister chair thank you
represent chaffield and clean
did you have anything that on
that.
Great okay I don't see any other
questions
the
thing
the I guess i'll
sort out clarify in the history
here
is institutions nor hire ad did
not ask for these endowments
which were created several years
ago sort of at the beginning of
the rapid influx of of funds
through well and gas production
mainly oil correct it was a this
has been an lsc let initiative
there's no disagreement still
allowing for that there's not
disagreement amongst the
priority areas nursing teaching
etc those are still
some of if not the highest part
social workers the absolute
highest priority for the state
do we we agree with all that
and so your to me maybe one of
the ways so that i'll look at
this is lfc and the legislature
were looking ahead
and set up I think wisely
endowments that are essential to
creating
more qualifying workers in key
areas for the state there's been
a great deal of turnoil
including at the unit you know
down there has been turn oil
across the number of different
areas and so the implementation
has lagged for various reasons
what i'm gonna ask for one
feedback from the institutions
and certainly welcome higher ad
and i'll see recommendations as
a related specific institutions
we want to hear from them I mean
they think to the points that
committee is raised
clarity
when it comes to the
endowments.
And foundations there's a great
deal of concern around that
issue
we and we want to improve and
and implement better think
there's also been a need to
take a overall look at higher
education which war will
collaborate on doing
a specific sort of
under my saddle I think many
others relates to athletic fees
ma'am secretary you raise sort
of spoke to this briefly the
legislature last year raised I
think by three million recurring
dollars to support athletics
that UNM
it's one and a half four m s u
non recurring one time that was
followed
within a matter of months by the
university of new mexico
implementing a student fee I
think of three million dollars
so doubling that guess what is
funded by the state through the
opportunity scholarship
the so I think multiple ways to
look at that
it is a deep challenge in from
my perspective that sort of
eliminates the need for the
three million dollars at the
stay dedicated recurring if
we're going to be sort of
charged twice it can also mean
that as we've talked about on
the panel there is a need in
detailed budget language and
perhaps in other ways to very
clearly and carefully clarify
intention at you know now that
were sort of really towards the
end of what is over all been
a very productive and positive
sort of re investment in
revisioning within higher
education.
Um so lots of concerns to
address lots of detail to work
through
and as vice chair and others
have talked about we're going to
expect to see a think a number
of changes and budget language
perhaps in line items but we're
doing it at the same time in a
sense that this is key to all of
our future and the success at
our higher education
institutions helps their
communities and helps all of us
as a state and so it's done to
help move the state foreign
without think you are very much
and will look for to see folks
and last cruises thank you mr
chair thank you members
okay we have a programming
valuation update
and I see mister davidson there
members just as a no of course
we've taken care of our official
business so were actually a had
a schedule.
Will go ahead and ask folks to
take the conversations
sorry we're gonna go ahead and
ask as folks need to have
conversations outside transition
out
there
my grandfather would be proud my
hammering available
okay as charles mentioned we're
on tab
and we're going to go ahead
great to see mister de and we'll
start with this rodriguez with a
lisa
for their legacy fund
distribution in uses thank you.
Okay we're ready to go
we're having make okay there it
is great sorry
thank you mr chair members the
committee
as the chairman said were behind
tab you should be looking at a
key hearing issues and it's
titled the legacy fund while
you'll get there i'll introduce
myself and everyone here at the
table I have my name is julie
surreader and I am the lsc and
one of the lfc analysts you're
also and mostly joined by us and
davis and also an lbc analyst
and britney fallen with the
restaurant resource advocates
so you all created the
conservation legacy permanent
fund and the land of and chat me
legacy find in twenty twenty
three
if you're looking at your brief
there's a helpful chart on the
first page and will be referring
to that and in this first chunk
of the presentation
for today's presentation when
we're talking about the
conservation legacy permanent
fund will just refort to it as a
permanent find and when we're
talking about the land of
enchantment legacy fund will
refer to that as a distribution
find
so starting at the top of the
chart the conservation the
permanent fund is managed by the
sic with the same risk of return
profile as the state land grand
permanent find as you can see at
the top of that chart investment
income over five million is
distributed or directed to the
distribution front
the distribution fund is managed
by the department of finance and
administration and they
distribute the greater of either
twelve point five million or
twenty five percent of that
distribution fund balance to
those agencies listed there in
that chart you can also see the
percent breakdown by those
agencies I am all this funding
was to provide recurring funding
for a preservation and
conservation focus programs in
those six agencies
and secretion of the fund you
all have appropriate three
hundred and fifty million into
the permanent fund.
As well as fifty million into
the distribution find moving on
to page two of your brief
we have here the fund balances
for both of these funds some key
things to highlight for you is
the ending balance of the con of
the permanent fund and that's
that third line down as well as
the ending balances for their
land of enchantment legacy fine
so i'd starting in a for twenty
four thirty seven and then
slowly going up another thing to
know and these and these charts
in these tables is the
distribution from the land of
enchantment legacy fund of the
distribution fund to those
agencies and as I mentioned that
first distribution to the
agencies for used was an fy
twenty five and you can see
their how those how much money
was awarded to those agencies
for a total and for twenty five
of twelve point six million
that next part of the brief the
use of the funds has some high
level summaries of how those
agencies use those fines britain
found will cover a little bit
more of this in detail
and now i'm going to pass it
over to austin who will share
someone possible changes to
these funds
thank you so much to lisa mr
chair members the committee I
could turn your attention to two
specific lines on that table on
page two specifically the ending
balance for the permanent fund
as you see in fact twenty four
it's fifty four million then it
goes to three hundred and fifty
nine and fi twenty five and then
it goes to three hundred and
sixty four million and fy twenty
six and you see it's growing by
roughly five million each year
and then you go to land and
chairman legacy fund any balance
and you see it goes from forty
five million and if I twenty
five to fifty one million and FY
twenty six and what those two
numbers are representing is
trapped balances that exist in
these permanent funds and why
that's a problem is specifically
for the land of a chairman
legacy fund that roughly fifty
million is not being invested at
a competitive rate the permanent
fine is invested roughly.
And growing at about seven
percent every year while the
land of a chairman legacy fund
is only growing with interest at
about two percent so the first
recommendation from the brief
mister chair members of the
committee is to transition all
of the balance that exists
within the land of a chairman
legacy fund to the permanent
fund so it can be invested at a
competitive rate and what they
would look like if you turn to
page four specifically is the
growth would change from twenty
six point nine million and fi
twenty six to roughly thirty
million and five twenty six if
the full balance was
transitioned now the second
thing there were also
recommending in this brief is
transitioning the permanent fine
and a distribution funds in
certain ways specifically
changing that distribution fund
to a program fund mimic in what
the early child trust fund does
and in the early childhood
program find it so it would
happen as there's all the
permanent funds that are grown
at a seven percent competitive
rate and then they would be
transitioned to the program fund
and then the full balance of
that program fund is that moving
to the six agencies so there's
no trapped balance anymore
another recommendation from the
brief mister chair is changing
the language for the
distribution as well taking away
the existing language and simply
saying that five percent of the
permanent fund would then move
to the program fund and then it
would be fully distributed to
those agencies and in the last
thing mr chair members the
committee that were recommending
is saying that any funds that
are not spent in those first
years with then revert back to
the permanent fund and all of
these changes are in best
practice line with what we're
doing with the early child had
trust fund any early childhood
program fund on our turn it over
to britain he found to give more
detail about the use of these
funds thank you.
Hi is this working yes hi
everyone I am britney falling
with western resource advocates
and I have the honor of
representing the land of
enchantment legacy fund
coalition today before you many
of whom are in the audience and
I also have the honor of
releasing a first fiscal year
report for the land of
enchantment legacy find that the
coalition at worked with state
agencies to produce and I think
you'll find as you flip through
through this presentation i'll
walk you through it a little bit
but there is a lot of great
stuff in there that we're going
to cover it today
first I want to remind you all
who the land of enchairment
legacy fund coalition is it is
one broad diverse by parties and
coalition I think it represents
the type of collaboration that
you was legislators are always
looking for an advocacy
communities and I wanted to know
how proud I am that this
coalition has built so much
mutual trust and respect across
the isle over the last several
years um not just within the
coalition but also with lfc
staff and analysts who we worked
with really closely and also
with members of this committee
who I believe have gotten to
learn a lot more about each
other's conservation priority is
across the isle and that's been
really enjoyable to see
representative chatfilled
and so in my presentation i'm
going to walk you through
successes in the first year and
some challenges in the first
year and then echo austin in
julysa in some changes that we'd
like to see made ideally in the
twenty twenty sects legislative
session so that the number one
thing I want to say today is
that the legacy fund is meeting
and exceeding the goals that you
all sat forth when you created
the statute and a won't read all
of the numbers on this page to
you but I do want a highlight
what I think is the biggest one
which is that over sixty
thousand acros of public and
private land are being improved.
In the first year of the legacy
fund through various legacy fund
programs and the reason why this
is so important is all of these
projects are addressing
watershed health soil health
things that are going to help
new mexico combat catastrophic
wildfire flooding and drow that
we are seeing and every corner
of the state and I think over
sixty thousand acres in a single
year is pretty fantastic
I also want to know that a
hundred percent of the funding
has been spent in your one which
required a lot of really hard
work on behalf of our state
agency is many of whom were
receiving funding for the first
time and they are careers to
disperse and i'll talk a little
bit more about that later but I
want to think all of the program
staff for making sure that these
dollars hit every single county
in new mexico and every corner
of the state
we also were really excited that
despite challenges that the
federal level with matching
dollars all of the legacy fund
programs were able to leverage
other funding using legacy fund
money and that included federal
private and local matching
dollars and you'll see here that
I quote more than five million
dollars were leveraged that's a
very conservative number because
we only had exact matching
number is from a handful of
legacy fund programs so we
expect that we were able to
bring and much more than that
including all of the programs
I am also really proud at how
much the legacy fund is bringing
people together on the ground
with collaborations between
agencies that receive legacy
fund dollars and also
collaborations with agencies
that don't risky of legacy fund
dollars for example um
is working with cattle ranchers
in grazing permittee is to
protect water sheds and we also
have collaborations with schools
feeth community's small
businesses private foundations
the land office and other state
agencies that are not a part of
this fund.
Um I think it's just really
incredible that you all have put
forth this opportunity for on
the ground collaboration and
expertise sharing I think that
was part of your intent in
creating this fund and it's
working really well
we're also creating jobs with
the legacy fund which is
something you all talked a lot
about when we created it in the
first year alone we had over
twenty sub contractors
supporting the river stewardship
program and the trails plus
projects are expected to create
over one hundred and twenty jobs
we expect the interest and
impact in these programs to grow
even more and now that funding
is reliable every year.
So my next slide is a map of
wear projects were completed in
fiscal year twenty five and you
can see this map online at
enchantment fund dot org where
you can also filter it by
program by your legislative
district and you can see what
the different projects are that
are happening across the state
each dot on this map represents
a group of people that are
rolling their sleeves up and
working together to get work
done on the ground and that is
happening in every single county
in new mexico
so when I presented to in las
vegas in twenty twenty three I
showed you a mark up of the land
of enchantment legacy fund to
sign that we were hoping would
be
possible at every single project
site we are still working on
that but I am happy to report
that last week we did unveil the
sign you see on the left to
commemorate the first year of
the land of chattment legacy
fund at an event in silver city
which the governor and chairman
small helped us to unveil
so i'll talk a little bit about
the challenges now and things
that we could improve and
changes that we'd like to see
the first one will be no
surprise to you all which is
that federal funding freezes are
causing a lot of issues at the
state level and we had several
matching phone grants that were
frozen we have several that are
still in limbo one example that
i'll give is we have some
landowners in sakoro who were
working with the nhca program
who are still uncertain as to
the feet of their nrcs
application and every single
program experienced issues like
that and will continue to
experience these issues until
all of the funding is settled at
the federal level so I expect
we'll be revisiting this topic.
I'm not sure if you recall that
when you created the fund we
delete the disbursement of the
first year of funding by a year
to give agencies time to plan
for rsps to higher staff things
like that it did take them the
full year some of these programs
had never received funding
before some of them had not
received funding a decades some
of them require rule changes and
again I just want to give kudos
to the state agency staff who
had to dust off these old
statutes and figure out how to
make them work for twenty twenty
five new mexico
and
the all of the new staff that
were hired that just hit the
ground running and got every
single dollar out the door in
your one it was incredibly
impressive
we do have some work to do with
buyer occurrency with some of
the applications and we're
working directly with state
agencies on that in preparation
for this presentation I asked
coalition members and grant
tears for her feedback I as to
how what it's like to apply for
one of these grants and I wanted
to share some feedback that I
got which is soil and water
conservation districts are
having a hard time applying for
me river stewardship grants
because they are complicated
applications and most soil and
water conservation districts are
stopped by volunteers so we're
gonna facilitate conversations
to see how that can be improved
to see what support we can
provide for these organizations
and if you also serve on water
and natural resources you heard
last year that the two year time
limit for river stewart ship
grounds is keeping some ngos and
sub contractors from applying
that's something that leader
worth highlighted at that
meeting and we will be having
continued conversations about
that as well
and because some of these
statutes were so old we did not
realize that there were some
problems with them and one I
want to highlight is that tribes
publish and nations are not
eligible for a department of
cultural affairs grants in.
Statue that's something that I
would like to change and but I
do want to give kudos to the
department of cultural affairs
because when they realized that
was a problem they had never
received funding for this
program they worked really hard
to make sure that they were
collaborating with tribes and
one of the grants from the
department of cultural affairs
this year was a clab ration with
the state land office to
conserve foreign naval defense
structures which you can see a
photo of on that page
and finally I think the biggest
challenge is that demand
continues to outpace available
dollars for legacy fund projects
part of that is due to pent up
demand like I said repeatedly
these programs have either been
underfunded are never funded for
their entire creation and when
there was finally funding
available we had a huge backlog
of project need in addition to
the money that the legacy fund
put on the ground we also had
over a hundred projects funded
from other sources for legacy
fund programs so what you see in
the report is only projects that
were funded by the legacy fund
and please know that these
programs are doing more than
what the legacy fund is funding
and some programs received five
times and ten times more and
applications than they had and
money to give and overall we had
over fifty million dollars in
requests in year one across all
of the programs for a twelve
point six million dollars so
let's talk about how we can
improve that
and make the legacy fund work
better for new mexico
communities and here I will just
echo what arsen and juliesa said
for the legacy find and which by
the way I put some projected
balances here what you
originally invested what you
projected would be the balance
and twenty twenty five at the
time of passage and then the
balance that we actually have
today so it's great to see that
both funds are growing more than
we anticipated at the time of p.
And so for the legacy find we
would like to add a mechanism
for the trapped balances as you
heard from austin for the legacy
permanent fund we absolutely
want to bring the permanent fund
in two best practices similar to
the early childhood trust fund
especially making sure that we
are doing a disbursement based
on a average of three year
interest so that there is a
smoothing of any market
downturns and
I think what I would ask as the
representative of the coalition
is that members of this
committee consider those changes
being a partnership with the
analysts in the committee that
is lead by you and twenty twenty
six and we are very willing and
ready to put in the work for
that to happen but we'd like to
fix these and twenty twenty six
or we will have trapped money
that is not ruining what it
should for another fiscal year
which is unacceptable on this
budget environment and that's
also going to impact programs
that are desperately in need of
funding even more so now that
there are set or federal grants
that are being cloud back
so my big takeaways today are
the legacy fund has been a huge
success you should be really
proud all of my colleagues in
the audience who do on the
ground work should be incredibly
proud of how hard they've worked
and also ulfc could help us make
some changes in their session to
make it even better and with
that I will close for questions
and you will see some photos of
field trips that we've done over
the years in our closing slide
to get you all out on the ground
seeing conservation work
excellent thank you very much
miss with that we're gonna go
straight to question starting
with representative chat field
and then senate
will go down the list thank you
mister
I think my first question is for
you and I I would like to know
to in order to pull the balance
from the from the legacy fund
and put it into the permanent
fund.
And is that it might be for
charles does that require
legislation does it
thank great question represent
chat field and I think our sense
is that this would require
legislation
okay
but an actually and thank you
director silly that the some
may be legislation we can also
do a fund transfer in house bill
to this
where we can pull out that sort
of the trapped balance that
folks were time out so some of
this can be just done in the
budget so many chair I don't
like trapped balances so I would
ask your guidance to
i'm not too high on call
meaningling
we will free the balance
in them so with your guidance
will get that taken care of
many of you know that a managed
water shared project for twenty
two years ago mostly
with some water conservation
districts being the the lead
agency but also worked with
twenty one state and federal
agencies are doing that and i'm
looking here at the the
very happy to see that some
water conservation districts are
are participating
in this program a lot then i'm
thinking about my friend
clearly with it who lives in an
area that is constantly
being endangered by wildfire
as do many the other communities
around the state can you tell me
how
is the son water conservation
district and appropriate place
to go for funding from the
legacy phone and also do you
have some other suggestions
where we can go for foresteading
in those types of things
to help.
It's always easier to prevent a
while for other ideas to put it
out in and restore the area that
it just burned
yes absolutely in the first year
alone soil and water
conservation districts funded
collaborations with over thirty
land owners
so that would be an appropriate
place for
the answer to go and see what
the available for it to hear and
a snex question
plan material center
are you guys participating in
the
eighty million dollar plan
material center that's going in
in more county do you have any
participation in that that is
something they have meant to
reforce our burned areas well I
would like to say that I have
all close to two hundred
projects memorized but
unfortunately I don't I do have
a list of all of the projects
funded right here so after my
presentation I can double check
on that one for you I just I
guess only thought on that is to
tell you that it's an awesome
project in you be interested to
go and look at okay great and
one of my colleagues is letting
me know that there are funding
opportunities for this work at
eminered with the forestry
division at anime with the river
storeship program and vs oil and
water conservation districts
thank you thank you very much
for a plan chat field next we
have senator sauce and
representative
thank you mister chairman and
into all three of you that was
really really good very exciting
information
oston or no beach too
when you are going over your
scenarios how many options did
you mention
mr chair senator great question
so the brief kind of maps out
three changes that we'd want to
do in a row to each of the.
To each of the funds so wouldn't
be doing one of them or one of
the other it would be doing all
of them together to change the
entire.
Okay so there was three options
okay I sort of lost you there
for a little bit they're not
when you mentioned one about
five percent what happens to the
other two percent if they were
at seven
mister chair senator that would
stay within the permanent
funding it would continue to
grow in to seven percent is
roughly what the return for the
sic estimates for the growth of
the fund
so mr chairman then now
is the two percent like an
administrative fee or an
investment tool
just faith in there that same
thing
well very well I guess what are
it's an operator I mean why do
we want to have a lower interest
if we can get seven in also
following up on now
representative chatter is so
going into legislation to do
this and if we can do it this
year you know it's very good and
like I see that the whole thing
the whole presentation is very
informative and very exciting
you know that what what's
happening but let me ask just a
couple more questions I know
brutany are not for example like
on on your page on one of them
see for example where you have
like all the noxious weeds so
can an individual
property owner apply for
the
yes it is a grant program in
collaboration words and mda and
it can also be done in
collaboration with soil and
water conservation districts and
I believe this year there were
also collaborations between
state agencies for an accident
noxious we'd remove which is
really nice to see
going back home mr chairman
enough trying to be very
refunded some.
We had a presentation that all
a lot of this comes from our big
trucks and in some states they
do require like a rings program
before they enter
that with something like this
also help
I am not a hundred percent sure
about that I know the program
funds surveys for an axis weeds
and also removal for not trust
we exam both public and private
lands but i'm not sure about
renting does do any of my
colleagues know this.
I will follow up with you on
that okay
oh very well thank you again a
very informative enough like I
see very exciting a you should
have been the first presentation
on the first day
thank you thank you very much
saying themselves we have next
representative of the honest and
then representatives represent
the harm please thank you
thank you offer the presentation
this is you know are the long
time it took to get together but
bringing everybody together to
get this
formulated if you will into what
it is today it's been just you
know a success story I would say
I have a couple of questions
regarding the coalition and the
administrative function that you
have so are you overseas how are
you working with the state and
the oversight of this fund
did you want
it took five years for this
coalition to pass this
legislation and so we are really
invested in making sure that
it's a success and because we've
worked so long to get here so
understanding that the agency is
are really under staffed and in
a lot of cases the staff were
brand new because they had to be
hired and we just wanted to
collaborate with them to make
sure that it was being
implemented both the way that we
envisioned it but also the way
that you envisioned it and so
this report which was put
together by my colleague jake
mccook congratulations on how
beautiful it is and was paying
stakingly pauled together with
information provided directly
from the state agency so all of
the numbers you see here jake
compiled frame statistics that
the agencies themselves provided
they just don't have capacity to
put together something like this
so that's the rule that we
played and then for things like
rollmaking changes that need to
happen for the program the
entire coalition is staying
invested in these because we
want to insure that every single
program.
Is performing the best account
yeah thank you for that and
there is a white masking is just
because we are going through
some in your transitional in
some changes and and the
you mentioned the gaps and the
federal accounts in those sort
of things how are you managing
that with providing that you
know what those gaps will be or
potentially be in that course in
a correspondence that you have
with the state
mr chair representative luhan
this is really difficult and
like I said we don't have a
hundred percent certainty right
now on several outstanding
grants that are warrant process
and now are not like the example
I mentioned where the landowners
in sacorio in that instance we
are trying to see if we can get
more like a sea fund dollars for
that project in the event that
the n r c s match falls through
but it's all happening on a case
by case basis and most of what
we're dealing with is and limbo
and we just don't have firm
answers right now so it's hard
to work toward a solution thank
you I appreciate that and then
with with the court you know how
you're working with everybody
that the prior to
prioritization or is that are we
referring to you through our
agencies and best practices as
you know as this funding is
distributed you know as it is
how are they are managing that
prioritization and are you part
of that
discussion mr chair
representative we are not part
of that discussion all of these
programs were existing ground
programs at the state level so
they already had rules they
already had priorities
prioritization frameworks we
didn't change any of that we
trusted that their agencies
would be able to implement the
way there are statutes and
existing rules allowed and with
a few exceptions where the
agency is realized they're
needed to be a rural change we
have just let the programs
function as they were meant to
thank you so then that goes to
my question mister were that you
know.
As we're talking about the fire
issues and in
all those things that we have
especially in the northern new
max even southern new mexico
right now of course but that's
more federal land but with our
state lands and with what we are
needing to kind of shift maybe
some things are you part of
those discussions and how we are
formatting some of that mister
chair representatives
only at public meetings to the
extent that grantees and
coalition members for example my
attended a four history public
meeting where they're discussing
grounds but for the most part
their agencies themselves are
identifying priority projects
per year thank you I just want
to know because of all the work
I mean all of the entities that
they've come together to really
work at a dressing all of our
issues in our needs around the
state around this
you also messed mentioned mister
charter the leveraging about
their funding how is that how
are you leveraging or how are
you bringing those those funds
together in making you know
making those decisions mister
because that to me you know the
did that pulled into the
previous question I had of like
how that comes into a
prioritization with funding that
art state but really uplift what
needs to be done mr chair
representative this work is done
by the applicants themselves who
bring to bring forward to their
legacy fund application private
matching dollars federal
matching dollars etc and I am
sure that matching dollars do
play a role in prioritization
but it wouldn't exclude any
applicant from receiving legacy
fund dollars yet you've for sure
and I think maybe i'll talk to
you more about that but really
really i'm trying to understand
where those out those private
dollars is outside dollars where
they moving as far as that
prioritization so that we're
getting it right you know and
and moving towards
you know the changes that were
seen in our set and needs mister
chairman.
Thank you thank you very much
for a plan of the hunt next we
have representative dixon and
center woods and representatives
and representatives
thank you mr chair I actually
would just like to request that
the committee make note of the
ofc recommendations since they
do include potential statutory
changes and that they be on our
list for drafted lfc indoors
legislation thank you except
thank you very much will capture
that and now to center
thank you mister chairman
appreciate up to anything today
you said that you have sixty
four thousand nine hundred and
five bakers that are
being improved at me and those
across in the rear door so area
I don't think I know the e
create breakdown from the ticket
but we do have that number is uh
compiled from statistics that
all of the agencies gave us and
so we do have the breakdown of
those numbers I just don't have
them in front of me okay and in
same with the more interest
again
on the
said that you had a a list in us
looking again for the number
better a number of ngos that
were contracted to do work I
would like to have a a list of
those contractors the scope of
their work the amount of the
contract who is supervising
those contract and i'd like to
see pictures of book for an f
mr chair senator I
but I would probably have to
apra the state agency to get
that information it might be
better if the legislature
directly asked for that
information from med you are
referring to the statistics they
quoted about the river
stewardship program.
Okay
and a
mischair I thought that we did
some bills was last year that
gave the saw on water
conservative districts
a permanent funding source did
we not do that does anybody
remember
yeah I think your cinema is
great question we have done a
three million per year for three
years grow appropriations
this is the only sort of
permanent funding that is
available so that the what we
did last year was a three year
grow approach in that in machine
that was to
to get some expertise in those
so on water contribution
district so they take it that's
exactly right yep and working
closely with personal chat field
and many others
leader armstrong and
representative exactly to get
more capacity to to do more and
more work okay
in
the floating in mosquitoe who
recently
is there any
is really money being put on
diversion dams.
And the website so more
contribution different one of
some of their big prijeces but
there haven't trouble
maintaining those dams and a lot
of it's on privately and so
I was wondering
is any of this money
I guess is that an appropriate.
Funding source for that
how would I say that is that
I think that's a mr cherry
senator I think that's a
question for the department of
agriculture I don't think will
be uses with us today and but I
do have a list of the projects
here that we can look at
together it includes all of the
projects funded vs soil and
water conservation districts and
we could take a look at that.
Mr chairman senator all to say
i'll also write down all these
questions and i'll follow up
with you when I ask the agencies
these questions as well okay
in that
only other credit circle that
can possibly have is on your
beautiful pictures here when you
start talking about on the in
the middle of the page it was
talking about one educational
project with the hassle students
at door a high school in potalus
door at high school is indoor
I knew there would be a mistake
like that I tried valuably my
school isn't
after
thank you thank you very much
next we're gonna go to represent
it
mr chair may I also
be
got go ahead if there's
there's a if yes thank you
just let me know mr chair
senator woods that there is a
water shed down in the healer
that was funded via the legacy
fund and soil and water
conservation districts
represent vincent please
and op sorry everyone's filling
me in and director sloane from
game and fish let me know that
there's also water trust word
funding for a diversion
this may be the most watched
here
I think you think you to my
virtual colleagues
all right now we go to
representative
thank you mister chair
mr
first of all I would like to
think my good friend
representative chat feel for
looking out for a rid or so as
well as
woods and everybody else and
there's a lot of expertise in
this room right now and I just
want to give you a real quick
overview of what's happening
there so that if there is
anything that i'm missing.
Where I could go for money to
get my community back on track I
would appreciate it and we have
the root problem which
the united states for a service
did not do their job and they
did not manage our forest and my
communities pay in the ultimate
price for
their lack of stewart ship on
the land danger species fail
policies over and over and over
and not only do we have a forest
that's burned up we also have a
wilderness that's burned out and
all that water is coming off of
those water sheds and it's
unprecedented what's happening
in rid alsoi know that you've
seen it
on tv but you really need to be
there to just see how brutal it
can be
and we have to figure out a way
to rehab the forest
and get some trees planned it up
there and I am a tree killer I
like to finimal not all of them
I like to give it a pretty good
haircut and there needs to be a
few but not whenever I see a few
i'm talking twenty five to
thirty five trees breaker and
some of those places up there we
have fifteen hundred to two
thousand breaker
and we need to go in there in
vegetarian that and get the
trees put back together and
that's on federal lan
secondly we have a river that
needs to be restored
and this river has blown out
everywhere it doesn't really
want to stay within its banks
anymore because of all the
settlement that has come and
that's come off of those burns
cars
then we have another problem we
have a bunch of houses all the
way down the river.
That people own
and
they're flooded completely out
now it's just the shell of a
house there but every time it
floods one of those houses wind
up in the river
blown out bridges
clogging up coverts and when
that clogs the water goes
wherever it wants to go
so
i've i've begged legislators for
money support we have to figure
out a way to do some kind of a
community buy back program to
meet people trade land out
whatever we need to do if we
need to trade stand state land
i'm open for a suggestions and I
don't mean to be long waited
mister chair but you know a lot
of our people are desperate for
same answers and we need to get
that river under control and I
was wondering
on the river stewart ship
program how deep does that go
could be the could we build
these could we build step downs
how how deep could that really
go and if you don't have an
answer I don't mean to put on
the spot but I just want to get
that out there so if somebody
else in the room knows how to
get that done i'm all ears
first of all I just want to give
you my condolences I think like
all new mexicans I watched that
news in horror and I also want
to say that is not the last time
something like that is going to
happen in new mexico and that is
why all of the people in this
room worked so hard for so many
years to create their fund
because we want to have more
money on the ground helping our
forests and water sheds and soil
and rivers stay healthy so that
they can stay and tactim a
couple statistics for you in the
first year alone funded by the
legacy fund over forty thousand
forest and water shed acres were
treated by the forestry division
that's just.
Funded by the legacy fund there
were many other acres that were
treated from other funding
sources also eighty percent of
the projects funded in the first
year of the legacy fund we're
done in rural areas because that
is where we see the most need
for things like wildfire and
water shed addressing those
issues are fantastic state
forester law mccarthy is
lessening right now so i'm sure
she heard your comments and i'm
very sure she is thinking
everyday about redo so and what
we can do to improve the
circumstances there as far as
river stewardship specifically
they receive funding outside of
the legacy fund so the twelve
point five million annually from
the legacy fund is not going to
be able to solve the problems
and router so it is spread
finally across the state right
now that's why we want to work
to improve the investment so
that we can have more on the
ground work but there is also
other dollars through forestry
and through river stewards that
can be used in addition to the
legacy fund in your district and
I would be happy to connect to
you with the program staff at
forestry and the river storage
ships are animed to have more
conversations about that
thank you mister chair and the
last common I wanted to make is
the legacy find
was presented my my freshman
year and because it had some
you could purchase land with
that I was going to vote against
it
and a thankfully I did vote for
it and i'm getting my big piece
of home will pie right now
because
if we can do something without
money on land acquisitions or
whatever I never thought I would
be a land acquisition guy but
here I am and i've got my hat in
my hand and i'm asking for
whatever we can get to make my
community hole thank you mister
chair thank you very much
representative and thank you for
your continued advocac.
See leadership bringing folks
together and also sharing even
in the midst of really such
terrible tragedy and challenge
thank you
ok I think that I don't see any
other questions want to think
that presenters and all the
folks listening here in the room
were excited to continue to go
forward thanks to the vice chair
and and uh dickson and other
suggestions will go ahead and
look at committee indoors
legislation were closely with
our executive partners and look
to make these fine tuned
improvements also look to bring
more resources together to not
only face first face the
challenges that are hitting our
state now and also get ahead and
as many places as we can
okay I think that mister oh yes
we'll go to director silly who's
going to point us to tab
you can take this.
Mr chairman we've gone through
the budget guidelines that are
miscellaneous budget business I
would encourage you to take
those with you and take a take a
look at him will probably
schedule an online briefing to
get additional feedback before
bringing those back for your
approval in august the other
item I wanted to just bring your
attention to his tab as this is
also I would take this with you
this is the program evaluation
work plan and it's a continually
moving work plan as we wrapped
up projects like you saw today
they'll be moving on to other
ones if there are things in the
next priority or the parking lot
or they are not even on here we
welcome a feedback from
committee members you know what
specifically would we be looking
at you know what would the
methodology be looking at we
want to make sure that we're
covering the ground and
answering the questions that the
committee has as we implement
these different projects if you
have any questions about other
ones that in progress feel free
to call me or doctor garcia and
we be happy to discuss the
status of those projects with
you thank you mister chairman
great thank you very much
director sleep
mr children just ask when
questions because
and and I just want to clarify
this can we get a draft since
agency budgets are due september
first correct yes to show this
year
the guidelines that help us
navigate kind of last year with
the exact
not so far off
can we get a draft of the the
guidelines to agencies since
there were going to adopt this
in august in their budgets
renewal in september
to or not in completely
different directions between
agencies and in the legislature
great suggestion will go ahead
and share a draft making sure
that they know it can change but
yeah I I think we need to get in
line with the exact especially
as we had down the road because.
We in the other committee that's
doing federal looking at the
federal stuff they're gonna have
a different idea and the
agencies are going to have a
different idea and forget the
guidelines and get everybody
sing and from looking at the
same time sheet maybe not
singing from a but looking at it
that helps us so when we don't
get to the session we're not
money in the heads with the
executive and the agencies and
they know what direction were
really headed then
thank you
thank you that think that wraps
it up
members thanks so much for a
really great meaning for the
folks here in albuquerque a big
things
are there any other questions if
it was the first time
I yet sorry a tab s has the
program evaluation
budget guidelines or that l
m
for the budget great thanks for
asking
a big thanks to our folks who
have helped host can we give a
big hand to our LFC staff
to lie and you guys over
delivered
next meeting they'll anyway
things please travel safe as
