principal fiscal ana for the
Senate majority. And today
before um the wonderful health
team for LFC dives into the data
and potential um
Like systemic specifics, um,
gaps and opportunities that
exist within the system. I just
wanted to bring to your
attention the behavioral health
finance package that is being
prepared that could.
Serve as the impetus for the
policy development that you all
are gonna.
You know, go into later today.
So, during the special session,
the legislature appropriated
money to the administrative
office of the courts to begin to
look at sequential intercept
mapping and really dive into the
needs and test out a potential
way to address behavioral health
and substance abuse, uh,
substance abuse issues within
Rio Riva County. And um that
work has kind of been really
successful. It brought in
community partners, and it
identified locally in the
region.
The, the needs and the gaps and
developed a plan of how to move
forward. So now that we've seen
what they've done, and in this
interim, we've really dived into
successful models throughout the
country. So you have the Miami
model, you have the Houston
model, you have the Arizona
model of addressing behavioral
health and from all of those
elements, we've kind of noticed
very critical data points. Um,
that create and sustain a
successful behavioral health
system.
So within this behavioral health
package, the idea is, how do we
ensure that we take the best of
the best around the country and
really dive it.
And send it out to our
communities. And in order to do
that, the idea is create.
Different tranches because every
community is unique and every
region is unique. So the needs
of an urban area like
Albuquerque and Las Cruces are
going to be drastically
different from the needs and
Socorro County or in uh Ariba
County or pick any other region
of the state. So
You can't necessarily just say
this is the one model and this
is the model we have to use for
everybody. No, it's very much
needs to be tailored. And the
reality is,
The tailoring of the system
needs to be done at the local
regional level. They know what
their gaps are, and if they
don't, let's facilitate them to
figure out what those gaps are.
So the idea is let's break up
and provide each region. And
this is a policy decision that
you all collectively need to
make.
How many regions, for example,
do you want the local behavioral
health collaboratives, which
there are 13 of those making
these decisions and leading the,
the charge or do you want the
judicial districts, which there
are also 13 and happen to be the
same set of counties as the
local behavior health
collaboratives leading the
charge. Um, do you want to have
multiple judicial districts
working together as a bigger
region to figure out the needs.
So, have them actually go
through the exercise of
identifying all the resources.
that exists at every intercept
for behavioral health that's
within their system, right? So
before 9/11 gets called, what's
available?
Once 9112 gets called, what's
available.
Right? Once they get checked
into a county jail, what's
available. Once they're
released, what's available,
right? So it's like at every
stage, what is there and what is
missing.
And if we learn anything from
Ria Riva, they came back with a
list of about 25 things that are
missing.
Or that specific system.
However, the reality is
Even if all 25 things were
funded.
Implementing 25 things all at
once is not feasible.
So they narrowed that list down
to their top 5, right? Something
manageable. They created a
timeline. They created kind of a
a path forward. It's like, who's
accountable for X? Who is
accountable for Y? Who is
accountable for Z?
So that's the idea. Allow the
regions to create and develop
these plans.
Right?
Based on these plans, they have
their top 5, top 3 items.
And we here at the state have 13
different buckets that will find
basically the whole swath of
possibilities. So, if a local
community that's more rural
needs mobile crisis response and
intervention and outreach units
that can go 50, 60 miles from a
core location, right, to provide
the necessary services.
They can ask for that.
If it's a more urban area, maybe
they need more beds to provide
direct treatment. So how do we
ensure that they stay within the
legal framework to leverage
Medicaid because at the end of
the day, we don't want to leave
any Medicaid dollars and um
The federal rule on that is 16
beds. Any facility that has more
than 16 beds, you're suddenly
not eligible for Medicaid.
So that's the magic number.
Um, for behavioral health
interventions in particular.
If, uh, at the court level, if
it's found that there needs to
be more case management or there
needs to be like peer operated
crisis response or let's say,
That that specific region just
needs a grant writer to help
them apply for federal grants
to, you know, get more services
out there. There's a bucket for
that. Um, if we're looking at
treatment, right? Uh, do we need
facilities? Is there a specific
facility or anchor that can
serve an entire region.
And the reality is, it's like we
can build those facilities, that
is an option.
Uh, but that takes if we know
anything from Capitolley, that
takes time.
There's empty buildings in many
of our communities. Why can't we
just lease those facility like
spaces now and get operations
there within 66 months. It's
like to provide that service
right off the bat.
Um
You know, if someone is in the
correction system after they're
discharged.
How are we transitioning them
into community services, right?
So think of all these different
buckets that can exist.
But the local communities can
only leverage them after they've
gone through the exercise of
creating that regional plan that
involves the judiciary, involves
law enforcement first responders
involves, you know, the active
organizations in the community,
healthcare providers, um,
involves you all, legislators,
you know, it'd be wonderful to
have all of you involved in
those planning, um, motion so
you can actually provide them
with more guidance. And then
also addressing housing.
One of those buckets has to be
housing and transitional
housing. So that's kind of the
idea of the behavioral finance
package that's been alluded to.
And obviously, there's going to
be recurring programmatic costs
that come forward from this, and
for that reason, there's a 2nd
bill that's gonna be heard
before LHHS later this week,
creating a behavioral health
trust fund with the idea of
having it spit out.
Roughly 50 million a year to
fund in perpetuity these
programmatic activities or to
continue the next phase of a
region's plan. So,
If phase two of, let's say
Albuquerque or the Bernelia
region is to now move away from,
oh, we fixed the housing issue,
which, you know, God hoping that
happens, right? But the next
step is more.
Diversion training, let's deal
with training our officers on
recognizing, you know, someone
who might be ODing and things
like that. Now they can shift to
that. So it provides a lot of
flexibility, and it provides you
all more than anything, an
opportunity to hold the local
communities accountable.
Because realistically, if
they're not at the table helping
to create the plan.
How can anything get solved,
right? And then if they give you
the plan, now you know. Well,
here's the timeline.
Here's the phase we're working
on. Obviously, the money's there
because you're putting it in.
Um, what's going on? What, where
are the gaps in the system and
how can we better facilitate um
those needs.
So as you're about to listen to
the LHHS team, think of these
components and think of how let
just, you know, you all can
direct how the money can get
spent in relation to that
process.
So the collaborative was, was
created in 2004.
And was charged with doing that
already.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Armstrong, that
is correct and obviously they
haven't done it, which is why
the success of what the first
judicial district did.
And having the judicial
district, the, the actual courts
taking the lead.
I think it is a really good
sign. Uh, the, the LFC team in
relation to health is gonna
bring to you a few proposals to
fix the local behavioral
collaborative as well. So, it,
it's not a one.
One way or the other way, it,
it, there's a way to make it all
kind of work.
Um, but yes, I completely agree
with you, the, that system has
not worked to date and in part
it's because they don't haven't
had a CEO for well over a year,
and there's other historical
elements that impacted as well.
So that, that's my point, why
would we trust them now to do
something.
That they were supposed to be
doing for the last 20 years.
And, and so I'm, I'm concerned
about that, but I, I agree, I am
so happy that you're at the
table and bringing solutions.
Um, I, I would also just
mention uh health councils, um,
that are in.
Boots on the ground in rural New
Mexico that that really helped
do a lot of those things and and
can help. The other question I
have is capacity.
You know, uh, is it just a
problem with capacity. I, I can
read you 100 emails.
From somebody in Redhill, New
Mexico, that wants to receive
services in Arizona and their
insurance company doesn't allow.
So there's bigger problem than
what we're looking at, and
And uh, but I, I, I, again
appreciate you trying to bring
solutions and, um, and I'm in
for trying to help bring those
solutions and, and we have to
start somewhere instead of
exactly what we've been doing is
just kind of siloing and
depending on someone else to do
it and not holding people
accountable. So, um, that's,
that's really all. I mean,
they've been charged with it for
20 years and haven't done it
yet, so.
Just a problem that I see. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Represented Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
really appreciate some of the,
the
process.
Is it on? Um, I think it's just
really loud.
Wow,
oh, because of this uh system.
Sorry about that. Um, I'm really
just our focus now during the
interim on behavioral health and
really looking at um what we
need to do for our state. I, I
really, uh, these are the, these
are concepts and these are
issues we've been talking about
for, uh, for years, quite
honestly, and I really wanna say
thank you for uh bringing this
forward in in the concept that
you're, you're moving forward
with this. There was one piece
though and I came in just a
a little bit late, Mr. Cha. I
wanted to ask about was that
Samsa, um, grant that we're
going to be receiving that
really kind of delineates how
we, we, we set up
regionalization. If I'm not
mistaken within the language of
that grant, where's that in your
propos your proposed information
today, Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair, uh, at this
juncture, this is all just
The skeleton, right? So that's
the part of the details that
we're going to be flushing out
over the next month or so.
That's awesome because there's
so much more to put together
here and so many pieces and I
really appreciate how you zoned
in on the judicial part as we've
been working during the interim
uh with CCJ and really the
development and the discussions
we've had, um,
That were brought to the the
forefront when we had our
special session this year. Uh,
you know, some of the requests
and I really need the time to
flush, flush out those ideas.
And I think this is, this is
coming to the head of how we're
going to address that. So I
think that uh if we can, I don't
know if we need to
A subcommittee on this or what
what else we need to do now
before we get to session, but
some of the ideas I have, Mr.
Chair, are looking at reforming
the collaborative.
Uh, we need to integrate a lot
of these ideas that you're
coming for, that you're
presenting today because we've
been flushing those for HHS, um,
obviously, you've been taking
all those notes as well. Um, but
how do we do that? And there,
there needs to be a place of
reform in place in order for us
to carry out uh a lot of what
you're talking about and I think
it's through those kind of
reforms that we're talking uh
through Mr. Chair, also with our
uh
our justice system as well.
We're going to be uh really uh
looking a lot of those policies
during this next session, I
myself will be carrying some
legislation, uh, that I've
developed, uh, or started even
last year looking at how the
integration of those two,
worlds come together and what we
have not done and what we need
to do, but I really want to
commend the work of the chair,
the work of this of our
committee and, and where you're
moving with this information.
Thank you for bringing it
forward.
Senator Rodriguez, thank you Mr.
Chairman Adrian, thank you.
You're wonderful. I appreciate
you very much.
Um, I just um wanted to to bring
about maybe a little bit of a
perspective here coming from
local government many years ago
myself, I would think that one
of the stakeholders would be
local governments too because
they are in fact the the
governments that are really
close to their people, to the
people directly at the county
and at the city and um they have
these great challenges that we
can all learn from, but, um,
Adrian, let me, let me just
mention that, um, you know,
Bringing this whole scenario and
this great need and breaking it
into regions. I think it's a
good idea. I absolutely agree
that you can't, you can't do it,
it's not, how do they say it,
you know, 11 size doesn't fit
all, is what I was looking for.
And so every rural community,
even rurals as small as they
are, they all have differences,
right? They have different needs
and so on. So I'm happy that
we're looking at tailoring the
allocations and the work, um,
The collaboration to individual
communities as the need would
present, right? So number one.
Number 2 would be that we would
include the judiciary. I'm happy
about that because that's a
pivotal point right there in in
trying to, to do something we've
been wanting to do all along is
stop.
Put putting people in jail
because they find them that they
have a drinking problem for
example, you know, we just can't
continue to incarcerate people,
um, and it's a revolving door
because they need help, they
need rehabilitation, and they
need holistic services to be
able to conquer these problems,
so I think that all together
here with the judiciary, kind of
like the lead program, you bring
in, but at a bigger scale, you
bring in all these uh
stakeholders to the table.
you'll be judiciary lawmakers,
local governments, and others,
uh, for example, I just thought
of something here too that may,
uh, I'm sure will be brought
into the uh into the picture,
and that's like a program, for
example, with linkages. That's
in itself is a is a very big
program that has been
underutilized because it hasn't
been connected, um, and let, we
don't leverage the, the many
resources that we have into one,
and I think that my
Looking at linkages now, it
provides the comprehensive
behavioral health services,
substance abuse services,
housing, um, case management,
um, for the individual who was
um encountering the problems or
the families, and I think that
we can bring that into the
picture for rehabilitation and
housing, that is housing right
in there too, uh, with linkages,
um, and then, of course, the
trust fund is a wonderful idea,
you know, we, this is not a one
time problem, a one year non.
occurring problem. We have to
face this as being forever,
something that we can depend on
to continue to have an influx of
dollars going into this, into
this area of behavioral health
and the only way to do it is
having a trust fund, um, in
there to spit out the, the
funding and maybe even augmented
if it's not enough with other
additional resources, but I, I
like that and uh I think Mr.
Chairman, I've said it all. I'm
happy that you all are working
on this.
and I thank you very much for
your work. Thank you.
Representative Herman real quick
question so we can kind of get
this is a very thank you Mr.
Chair. It's a very quick
question. So already in the
health and human services
department, I mean, the
committee. I have drawn up a
bill that talked about the
regions for behavioral health
because I wanted to make sure
that you knew that there was a
behavioral health task force
that had been meeting over the
summer, of which Nick Bocas was
one of the members, as other
members of state government as
well as uh the mayor of Hobbs,
New Mexico was also a part of
that.
And the um
Department of the Healthcare
Authority actually had the
funding to underwrite the work
of the, of the task force. So
the bill is there, my question
to you is somebody is someone,
is that bill already been drawn
someplace else because the
framework for it is already
being put together to be put
before the depart the uh Health
and Human Services Committee as
a priority legislation, and it
includes teens because that's a
big area that we've often missed
that are being included. So I
just wanted to make sure that we
know that so that you
know that there's been some work
done and we are all on the same
page. So 13 judicial districts
is perfect for the regions
because they are aligned with
the courts, so that will make it
work smoothly. So as we continue
to work on that issue, I just
wanted you to know that that
legislation is scheduled to be
presented on Thursday.
So, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Herman, uh, yes,
so the idea is, it's like,
here's the finance package,
here's the money.
How you want the planning
portion, that's a piece of
legislation. How the housing,
that's another piece of like,
you know, there's the other
components that will fit in like
a puzzle piece, but we're just
focusing on the money and just
kind of the buckets.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Presenter. So
then the bill that has been
presented could actually work
and you're saying that the money
that is being, um, that needs to
fund that legislation can come
from this discussion today.
Possibly.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, yes,
possibly.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks. You, you know, and
before we go this mental health
presentation it is we spent
what, $700 million last year,
Charles, all combined together.
Behavioral health overall is a
billion dollars, right?
Now there's nothing to show for
it.
I mean, I
Pick a person in the room and I
guarantee you they somebody that
can't find services.
Somewhere in their district and
for me, you know, I just last
week when I was coming from
Grants, there was a veteran that
had a mental health issue and
the city had talked to the city
in depth about mental health
issues, and they brought him in
and said, hey, you need to talk
to this guy and see what he's
going through and how it works,
right?
There's no services.
I mean, everybody thinks mental
health issue or a mental health
crisis, or you'll schedule an
appointment two weeks from
Wednesday. It don't work that
way.
in crisis response teams UNAMA
is working with the fire
department over there.
In in doing that, which made a
big difference and so.
At some point this.
June or July, we started talking
about mental health and where we
needed to really fix the
problems, to stand it back up.
And and to make it work, whether
it's in Albuquerque or wherever
in in.
We kind of test Adrian on the
Senate side to figure out what
does this look like and where
does it go went to Miami a
couple weeks ago.
Uh, in, in to their stuff, but
it's, it's.
It's got to start working, uh, a
billion dollars and we don't
have anything to show.
Nobody can say I got 200,000 or
a million dollars used in my
community out of a billion in
Los Lunas or.
In reserve there, it's not,
there's healthy mental health
issues everywhere inside the
schools and.
And so we're gonna focus on
fixing this problem.
Um
And figure out how it works, the
structure.
Representing her sound like
she's on the same path that we
are with the structure and the
thought process and so it all
come together and it'll all be
teamwork, it's not somebody's
gonna hoard this and do that.
No, we as a legislature, I think
have determined that this year
that we're gonna focus on mental
health issues.
In crime and really grasping
what we need to do and spending
the money correctly. And if the,
the mental health uh
collaboratives don't work.
Figure out a different
structure.
You had your chance, you failed.
Right?
Replace
Do something different.
Get rid of them.
If it's the community house that
in my community, what's the
community house councils and
grants, they're the ones that
are organizing all this stuff.
And so if we need to replace
them with the other ones and the
other ones go away.
On any, not my shoulder.
You had a chance to do your job,
you didn't do it, it wasn't our
fault.
But it's getting worse and it
needs to get better. And you
have the money to make it
better, so let's make it better
so. Adrian, thank you.
You're up next.
Thank you, Adrian.
Eric, can you tell me real
quickly how out of a billion
dollars, can you name one thing
that we fixed in mental health.
Before you go to the gaps.
Out of a billion dollars, one
thing we fixed the mental
health.
Uh, well, as you'll see in my
presentation, Mr. Chair, we have
improved, um, a little bit in
terms of uh adding providers.
Um, the workforce has improved a
little bit, not as much as we
would want, but there are more
providers in the in the uh
communities now.
OK, what tab are we behind?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee were behind tab C.
My name is Eric Shenye, I'm the
LFC analyst for the Healthcare
Authority. And today I'll be
going over the behavioral
health, uh, gaps analysis, and
Adrian must have had some
clairvoyance or something
because
Uh, he kind of covered a lot of
what uh I'm gonna be covering
today.
Um
So I'll go ahead and uh jump
right in.
Uh, I'll be starting on slide 3
there.
Uh, well, let me.
That's this.
The state, local communities,
and federal government um have
invested significantly in the
last few years as we've already
established, putting funding.
Um, for behavioral health in
this state, among the top states
in the country when you compare
that to uh population.
Uh, the number of providers, as
I said, uh, and provider
organizations are starting to
increase. We're, we are seeing,
seeing an increase in providers
and provider, uh, organizations.
However, there is a significant
diffusion of roles and
responsibilities. There are 17
state agencies, many local
governments and local provider
agencies receiving funding, but
there is little planning to
strategically use.
Uh, the resources that we have
more effectively.
When there is planning, it's
spotty.
Uh, in addition, there may be an
urge to take a one size fits
all, uh, approach, such as maybe
building more facilities.
Um, but
These issues need to be
determined at the local level,
and impatient should be used
sparingly and only with uh a
very small group of people, um.
When it comes to stabilization
and other things.
Uh, moving on to slide 4.
I just wanted to take it a
minute here and talk about the
behavioral health collaborative,
we already talked about that a
little bit.
Uh
They, the agency and state
government, and a statute
responsible for doing this work,
collaborating, uh, doing the
planning, uh, bringing everybody
together, having their arms
around this big monster is the
collaborative behavioral health
purchasing collaborative.
Um,
But they haven't met for about a
year now, um, and there's no
director, and as I've reported
in the past.
In the absence of the
collaborative, taking the lead.
And it needs and gaps analysis,
as required by statute, this
report, uh,
Is the needs and gaps analysis,
work in progress. We're we're
kind of starting to work because
of, of that kind of vacuum of
other folks kind of taking the
lead.
Um
Uh, we are working on pulling in
more data, so you might see this
again. I'm, I'm thinking
probably in the spring, you
might see this report again, and
we might, we're hoping to bring
in, um,
You know, more data from the all
pair claims database, which just
went live about a month ago and
more Medicaid data, um, so that
we can kind of
step this up a little bit more
and get our arms around what
exactly, what exactly what
services uh you have in your
local communities and in those
local uh behavioral health
collaboratives, um,
And determine what the needs and
gaps are for you.
In those areas.
Uh, moving on to slide 5.
I just wanted to kind of point
this out. This is um
You know, the structure of our
behavioral health system when it
comes to the state.
If I were to include the federal
government, local governments,
and um other provider entities
out there, this chart would get
a lot bigger, um.
And no one really has their arms
around all of this, and so I
think, I think, uh, what we're
trying to do here is take, kind
of take a bigger step towards
getting our arms around. Um, so
what are the needs and the gaps?
Uh
Here, New Mexico ranks poorly on
key behavioral health metrics.
The number of behavioral health
providers is growing.
A focus on providing more
high-quality evidence-based
services is needed.
And improved data and analysis
will show where to focus our
efforts.
If I, uh, point to this.
table on the right hand side
here showing the rank.
Rankings of New Mexico among all
the other states.
Uh, you'll see.
That first one overall mental
illness prevalence among adults
and children. We actually uh
from last year, last year we
ranked thirty-sixth in the
country. We've gone to 44 now.
Uh, for that next one down,
adult substance use disorder.
Last year we ranked 32nd, now
we're at forty-ninth.
Uh
Youth of major depressive
episode. Last year we were at
42, uh, the 42nd state, now
we're the forty-sixth.
And use substance use disorder,
we've gone from 47th to last on
that.
So, we're not seeing the
improvements, you know, even
though we're seeing more.
Uh, more providers out there,
more provider agencies.
We're not seeing the outcomes.
And it's, it's not changing. And
so that's something to keep in
mind.
As we go through this.
Page 7
Uh, approximately 42% of New
Mexico's population is covered
by Medicaid.
Um, so just one thing I wanted
to mention is, you know, if we
want to really reach into the
population that probably needs a
lot of the services.
Um, for substance use disorder,
behavioral health.
Uh, our big, our biggest lever
to do that is through the
Medicaid program.
Um, and it was 42% of our
population on Medicaid, that's,
that's how we get to them, at
least in terms of funding.
Um, there's about 870,000
enrollees as of October.
Um
And also, just to keep in mind,
this is a huge part of the
state's budget, 10.2 $10.3
billion going to all of Medicaid
and about as we established
earlier about a billion of that
is going to uh
Behavioral health.
Moving on to slide 8.
Uh, Medicaid behavioral health,
uh, spending growth. And so this
is just that one piece of the
pie, the Medicaid part, part of
it. However, there is, um,
Medicaid is the largest payer
for behavioral health services
in the state, um, and that's
true, uh, in most states
nationally. However, there is a
significant amount of funding
outside of Medicaid, coming from
the federal government, um,
which I'll get you, uh, in more
detail here in a minute. Um,
that is not
really tracked at the state
level and it's something that we
need to start, uh, thinking
about more.
Uh, on the next slide, slide 9,
collaborative agencies are
budgeted to spend, it's about
1.1 billion in FY 25, 25%
increase since FY 22, and you
can see from the
The, the red slice, the blue
slice, and the green slice
there, that's, that's your
Medicaid funding. Uh, that's
here about 900.
A million there.
And then
Other parts of funding are kind
of spread out amongst all these
other agencies, so CYFD or early
childhood behavioral health
collaborative.
And so on.
On the next slide, slide 10,
behavioral health special
appropriations. So this is your
non-recurring appropriations.
Uh, that we've done. So we've
appropriated um between 2020 and
2025, about 424 million.
Uh, we've budgeted, uh, state,
that means state agencies have
actually brought into their
budget about 239 million, um,
and we've spent or encumbered
about 46 million.
Now, one caveat on the spending
or encumbered, uh, some of this
might already be tied up, um,
and, you know, or share or uh
financial system might be
lagging and, and picking up on
some of the, on some of the
spending, but
Um, that's what we have
according to our data right now
is, is, uh, that Eric.
Mr. Chairman.
Out of roughly 600 million,
we've only spent 45, 46 million.
Uh, that's probably about right.
I, I think there's
There is more, um, obligated,
but it's not showing up in our,
in our share system.
Um, you know, I know some of the
grants for the rural health, uh,
delivery.
Grants, I know that has already
been, you know, 80 million of
that has been obligated to
different provider
organizations, but we're not
seeing that money actually be
spent through our accounting
system.
So somewhere in this slide,
you're gonna tell us why this
slide deck why the money is not
being spent.
Um
Well, I don't know. I mean,
there's, there's, there are
folks from the department here
that could probably help with
that. OK.
And so moving on to the next
slide.
Uh, as a state, we are not a
Faraday cage.
You can see that there's a
significant amount of funding
coming from SAMSA, Office of
Justice.
Anderssa.
And on your, your handouts, I
actually, it actually didn't
print so well and so up here is
probably the better place to
look, cause you can see.
Um, the different colors on the,
on the bar graph, but you can
see the difference, different
amounts coming from Samsa
they're in the blue Office of
Justice, HUD and Hsa coming into
the state, um, or grants of all
types, and then on the right
hand side,
That breaks it out a little bit
further so you can see how much
is coming in from the federal
government, um, for behavioral
health and substance abuse, and
you can see that there was that
kind of peak back in 2021, but
still coming through on the data
and that's from the um
extra funds that we got from the
pandemic.
Moving on to the next slide.
I wanted to make the point here.
That we get a lot of funding.
Uh, coming into the state from
these federal
Uh, partners, Samsa Hsa Hu,
Office of Justice.
But only about 32% of that
actually goes through state
agencies.
Uh, another 68% of it. You can
see it on the lower right hand
side of that top, um,
That top table there.
About 68% of it goes to local
entities, and those are your,
your local providers getting
grants, um, tribes, nonprofit
organizations, behavioral health
entities, uh, universities.
Um, so
At the state level, we don't
have our arm again. I'm gonna
say this again, gonna say it
probably several times at the
state level, we don't have our
arms around all of this
spending. Um, there's nobody out
there.
Bringing it all together, saying
like,
Here's where this funding is
going, uh, you know, this
organization got this grant, so
we probably don't need to focus
our resources here, um, and not
duplicate the funding for that
and focus our resources
elsewhere, where maybe that
federal grant uh isn't reaching,
so
Um, that's something that we
really need to uh do better at
as a state.
Uh, this next slide, 13. This is
kind of, it's just giving us an
idea of the annual breakout of
federal funding flowing into the
state.
Um
Uh, each year.
Um, and you can see most of it's
for primary care, but there are
other little pieces of it for
substance abuse and behavioral
health.
Moving on to slide 14.
So I'm gonna change gears here a
little bit. I just wanted to
talk a little bit about, um, you
know, what are the actual
behavioral health services that
we're talking about here.
Uh, I'm not gonna go over all
these, but I did want to point
out a few of them here. So
crisis intervention, you know,
that's kind of an important, uh,
Intervention, uh,
You know, we, we, we give folks
support during, you know, when
they're having an emergency,
when they're having one of
those, um, breakdowns, uh,
crisis support can be
Uh, very helpful. And then
there's the supportive housing,
you know, we can uh provide
housing and support to um
stabilize folks, uh, who
Maybe be homeless, um, but are
looking to, uh, you know, maybe
get off of substance use
disorder, uh uh.
Get off drugs or whatever.
Um, medication assisted
treatment, that's a big one.
You know, all the research.
That we're seeing across the
country is kind of saying that
medication assisted treatment,
it is kind of, um,
A great way
To treat substance use disorder
without putting people into a
facility, uh, you know, some of
the most recent Samsa research.
Um, that I've, I've looked at.
Um, is actually showing that
impatient, um, treatment in a
lot of ways because it's an
abstinence only.
Um, form of treatment.
Um
Is actually less effective than
math because
People, when they receive
medication assisted treatment,
they go out, um, you know, they
get support from, you know,
counselors or whatever, they get
therapy, they get other services
along with the mat, and they're
also stabilized in their own
community. They may not have to
leave their job for a long time,
all those sorts of things kind
of help, um,
Maintain stability for for
people.
The other thing I wanted to to
discuss too is that very last
bullet there, Matt and um within
incarceration within 90 days
prior to release.
So the state did get uh
Um
permission from the federal
government to start
Providing that.
Uh, 90 days prior to releasing
people from jail or prison. And
so, we're expecting to see, um,
well, actually the department
made a request to fund this, uh,
for FY 26, and we're expecting
to see a plan on this, how
they're actually going to roll
it out within the next month or
two. I just wanted to mention to
the community, uh, certified
community behavioral health
clinics. This is another big
one, that's really important for
us right now.
Um, I think, you know, the
director of BHSD is sitting
behind me here, um, and he
would, he would also say,
Uh, in the next, I believe it's
in January, um, we're gonna have
7 CCBHC startup, CCBHCs provide
the entire array of services,
um, you know, except for, except
for the inpatient piece of it.
Um,
Long-term impatient piece of it.
Um, the, they, uh, they have
integrated services, community
focused care, care coordination,
the crisis services, so when
somebody first comes in, um,
having issues, they can kind of
stabilize them and then it's
also very outcome driven, so we
did 15 million in growth funds
last year for the certified
Community Behavioral health
clinics, the department's asked
for a little bit more money this
year.
Um, so we're gonna, um, be
looking at that and reviewing it
as we move forward.
Slight 16.
Uh
So these are some of the
recommendations that we've made,
uh, in the past, limited access
to care and high need
communities.
Uh, successful treatment of
substance use disorder often
requires screening, assessment,
detoxification, outpatient and
inpatient treatment.
Medication assisted treatment,
counseling, recovery, support,
and other services.
So, uh, our recommendations on
that are to require Medicaid
funded certified community
behavioral health clinics, which
I, I just mentioned, we're
standing up 7 of those, and I
think the department's actually
also look or the authorities
actually looking at um standing
up more of those.
Um, pharmacies are often, often
limit the types of medication
assisted treatment drugs
available in areas with high
rates of opioid use disorder.
Um, and so our recommendation on
that was to authorize the
pharmacy board and Department of
Health to require pharmacies in
high need locations to make
available medication assisted
treatment.
Another thing that we need to
start looking out more to is to
make math.
Available within primary care
settings.
Currently, providers must become
credentialed for providers, uh,
through each managed care
organization, separately, it
creates a lot of extra
administrative burden. So, um,
We're looking at trying to
require Medicaid to uh
Start single credentialing. My
understanding is, is that the
department is looking at doing
that sometime early next year.
And then working to expand the
avail the availability of more
services such as intensive
outpatient services, functional
family therapy, and transitional
housing.
Uh, now I'm gonna dump, drop
into the some of the data here.
Um, and I just want to mention
here, this is, you can see kind
of the trend on the right-hand
side of each of these uh tables
here.
And
The first one you can see Blue
Cross and Blue Shield. The
second one is Presbyterian.
Uh, these are Medicaid NCOs, and
so all the all the funding that
we bring into Medicaid.
Uh, most of it, not all of it,
goes through uh the managed care
organizations, they, they
actually pay for the services,
um, and this is essentially
showing like,
How many providers are within
these um provider networks
within these uh MCO networks and
so you can see that we've
actually uh improved.
Um, a little bit over the last
few years on bringing in more
providers into the MCOs, you
know, and that's been led by
certified nurse practitioners.
That worked in behavioral
health, um,
And then licensed clinical
social workers have also
increased a bit, um,
Now, the only other thing I
would mention on this is there
are two other NCOs. They just
started this year, so we don't
have a lot of data um on them
yet because of the new turquoise
care contracts that came out.
Moving on to slide 18.
Uh, I'm not gonna go over this
one too much, but Medicaid MCO
facility counts show modest
increases and some declines from
22 to 2024.
Now we'll get back into the
behavioral health collaborative
and the local collaboratives,
and this map here kind of shows
you where each collaborative is,
and then you can see a list of
each collaboratives, uh, you
know, the counties that that.
Collaborative, uh, actually
covers.
Um, and then in a second here,
I'm gonna get into the appendix
and just kind of go through a
couple slides in the appendix,
but before I do that, uh, most
provider types increased in New
Mexico from 2020 to 2024. I just
wanted to
Show that they're on slide 20.
Um, you do see that counselors,
social workers,
Uh, behavioral health
technicians, um, we've actually
increased these providers quite
a bit. And again, keep in mind
when I was talking a few minutes
ago about the actual outcomes.
We have more providers where
you've got more money out there.
But there's nothing, um,
We're not seeing the outcomes
that we would expect, and so
I don't know. So,
I just wanted to point out here
in the appendix, we broke out.
Um, local collaborative areas
for each of the collaboratives,
so each of you guys, uh, each of
the members can look at their
own uh collaborative areas, so
like,
For example, uh, Senator
Rodriguez.
If you wanted to look at um
You know, local collaborative
area one which includes Santa
Fe, Ria Riba, and Los Alamos,
counties, you can see some of
the grants, uh, that they've
received in the last uh couple
of years, uh, 34 years.
76 million went to Presbyterian
Medical Services, and that's a
different organization than
Presbyterian Hospital.
And then Hsa also um got some
funding.
Uh, 30 million went to El El
Centro Family Health, um.
And 2.1 million from SAMSA for
Medicaid assisted treatment.
And then if you wanted to look
for another example.
Uh, Bernalo County, you know,
so, uh, Representative De la
Cruz and Representative Dixon,
you know, we've got, um,
You know, Grant highlights there
for you, and you, and then you
can also see where you've, uh,
you know, those county that
county has actually.
Um, done better, better than
this.
Other counties in the state were
done worse, um, and we've kind
of highlighted a few of those
areas of substance abuse
rehabilitation has decreased,
but um,
You've increased your nurse
practitioners by about 78%.
Um, so that's, that's all I
wanted to, I just wanted to get
you guys into the appendix, so
you can look up your own local
areas. We have a better idea of
some of the stuff that you have
in those areas. Um,
And we're gonna be continuing to
work on this, build this out a
little bit more so that you, um,
see it as more data becomes
available. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, I'll, uh,
Ask it all for questions.
staff for questions.
Senator Rodriguez,
just a quick one. Thank you,
Eric, for all your work. My
goodness, this is very good
information broken down. Um, I
do have a quick question on page
15. Where are these clinics
we're talking about 7 clinics
are expected to be operational,
but where are they? Are they
different regions throughout the
state for behavioral health is
because I know it's the clinics,
the actual comprehensive
wraparound services and clinics
that were missing. So tell me
where these are. I'm just
roughly.
if you can, even by region.
Uh, you know, I can actually
bring uh Nick Buca the director
of the Behavioral Health
Services Division at HCA. He, he
can help you with that. Perfect.
Hi Nick, thank you.
She was asking
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
Senator Rodriguez, uh, so
currently we have 7 that are
online to start January 1st.
They include UNM. Uh, we also
have in uh Farmington
Presbyterian Medical Services,
Santa Fe Recovery and Santa Fe
County, as well as in Gallup,
um, we have, um, mental health
resources in Clovis.
And FYI plus and Donana County
in Las Cruces.
Uh, and lastly, uh, but far from
least, um, Carlsbad Lihouse.
I see. OK. And so the 15 million
that we appropriate and grow
this year, um, it's gonna go to
these 7 clinics. Is that what
we're expected to do. It says
here the legislature, when we
appropriate 15 million of
funding, it's 7 clinics that are
expected to be operational. Is
that specific area for this,
these, these 7 behavioral health
clinics, including the Santa Fe
Recovery Center, which I know I
put in them quite a bit of my
capital outlay in there, most of
it to tell you the truth.
truth, but I just wondered how
much is going in.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Rodriguez. Um, so the $15
million was over a course of a
couple of budget cycles, and
that is to stand up, provide
them with technical assistance.
We've brought in consultants to
um get them going as well as
their cost reporting, and uh to
provide um
a number of services including
the fee schedules, um, and just
as uh an additional point of
clarification, we do have, um,
between 3 and 6 that are looking
to be brought into the next
cohort for the following area,
and we are trying to make sure
that they are diversified and
not just clustered in one urban
area.
Right. Thank you very much for
that information. So I have, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know,
Mr. Chair, we rock along here
trying to solve problems. Every
now and then we hit something
that just absolutely astonishes
me. None of us kind of have the
ability to know what's going on
across the state, but that we
have a collaborative
That has had a billion dollars
appropriated.
Do it.
And it has not met in a year and
it has no
Director, is that what you just
told us?
I didn't tell you that he did.
We've heard it in several other
places
I'm, I'm a start, oh.
It's supposed to get the
director and cause those people
to meet.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chatfield, thank
you for the question. So the
collaborative, yes, has been
without a director. I, I would
say though that we have BHSD
have been engaging the local
collaboratives to inform our
work and how we can best support
them, uh, just last week we were
in Las Cruces meeting on a
regional basis, and this week
we'll be doing the same for the
northern part of the state to
learn what's going on. We have
individuals that do attend local
collaborative meetings as well
as the behavioral health
planning councils, um.
So that we can get that
information back and to see
where some of those gaps are.
Well, Mr. Chair, why do we not
have a director? There's no one
in New Mexico that's qualified.
No one wants the job. Uh, we
don't care. Why, why is the
reason that with that much
funding, we don't have a
director.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Chatfield, um, it has been
posted. There have been
interviews that have been done.
We haven't found the right.
Um, candidate at this point. Um,
one of the things that I would
say about the collaborative
though is that uh 20 years ago
when the statute was
established, this was pre, uh,
ACA and there was more of a need
to kind of have that
coordination, the ACA has helped
us with that some of that
coordination with physical and
behavioral health.
Um, and allows us to kind of be
a little bit more nibble with
that. So I think that from the
HCA standpoint, if there was
something that was introduced,
we would be happy to kind of um
review that and, and provide
input, but uh at this point
currently, um, we still haven't
had a successful candidate for
that position. So Mr. Chair, I
would like to put forth this
thought.
Apparently, the, what we're
doing without meeting for over a
year, and functioning without a
director is not working.
Because where I live, there is
nothing.
Nothing
Nothing.
And apparently in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque.
We have the similar problem. My
car was broken into by homeless
folks last year.
Right here while I was attending
the legislature. You drive down
the street, and the people that
I see standing out there holding
a sign, most of them probably
Neat treatment, and we're not
reaching them.
We're not getting the job done.
Uh, I, a billion dollars and,
and
How have we affected this group
of people that need our help.
That's all, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
You want to answer the question?
Yes, sir, I didn't think you
could.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Chatfield, um, thank you for
that and, and believe me, we do
recognize it. I think one of the
things that we've been trying to
do is, how do we get more
resources out into the rule and
frontier communities, and it is
a challenge when we're trying to
get providers within the state,
I would say that we've been
working very hard. We've worked
with RLD um folks that are
coming into the state and we've
gone from
Multiple months to now folks
getting credentials from out of
state in some cases 5 days, um,
and that's helping get folks
stood up to um Mr. Shea's point
earlier. We do have the single
point of credentialing that's
going to be starting in the 1st
quarter of next year. I think
that's a big uh win for us to
try and get more providers in.
The other part, we did get an
appropriation last year from uh
the legislature, which we thank
you for, uh, for a million
dollars, and we've partnered
with that to do um telemedicine
for medication assisted
treatment, specifically for
rural communities so that we can
target folks, whether they are,
um, you know, in Clayton or in
Eddy County or in certain area
that is underserved because we
want to make sure that those
resources are available to them.
them.
Um
It it it's something that we
work on every day. We recognize
that the majority of our folks
live in uh rural counties and
that it is tough for them to
take time off, but part of what
we're going to do with the
CCBHCs is to develop that
regional model.
So if we have, for example,
interested party and um Las
Vegas that they should be able
to assist in union and Colfax
County and Mota and Harding,
where it is tough to attract
providers there and have someone
that can respond to that mobile
crisis teams will have a 90
minute radius as part of their
response, so that they can reach
out to those areas and not just
the folks that are 5 blocks away
or 2 minutes away. We want to
make sure that they we're
getting.
out into that and integrating
that care there. So, the, um,
my, my long answer to your short
question, sir, is that, um, it
is a work in progress where we
completely recognize that. I
think our linkages program for
transitional housing has been
very successful, um, and we have
had uh a number of uh people
that have found sustainable
housing uh through that program.
Uh, as part of that, and we are
making sure that we're being
responsible stewards of the
dollars for BHSD we had less
than a 1% reversion rate last
year, um, because we want to
make sure that that money is
getting out to providers. We
don't need it to do
administrative stuff for
bureaucracies. We need it so
that it can go out into the
community and they can serve the
communities that you all serve.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I'm not pointing this at you.
You're just who was offered up
to me to answer the questions. I
probably have a lot more
familiar with this subject than
I wish I was, but I, I, some
people don't need to call a
practitioner on the phone and
get another bottle of medicine,
uh, mailed to them. Some people
need inpatient services. They
need uh counseling. They need
their life jerked out of where
they're at.
Put into a program where they
learn to make better choices,
better decisions, and he put in
housing where they can have a
shower, go down, apply for a
job, and have some support when
they come back and as far as I
can tell,
Uh
I know there's a strong push to
not put them in programs, uh,
in, in-house programs, but I
think there's a need for those,
and I don't
I think we have
Very few in New Mexico, if any,
uh, I think we probably have a
few, and they may be full.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you also for the
presentation.
Um, actually, I don't even know
how to ask my question.
That a quart of a suicide fall
into.
Prevention, counseling, or how
do you outreach to that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, um, so suicide is
handled by uh um a few agencies,
the Department of Health does
have the suicide prevention
coalition, but we do play an
active role in that.
Um, so, uh, there are a few
agencies that do meet on a
regular basis. I believe that
the last meeting was just 2
weeks ago.
And uh I guess so, Mr. Chairman
and and to uh our presenters is
um.
Apparently with what happens at
the Rio Grande Gorge Bridge.
To me it's too late, you know,
by that time they have.
Decided to go that route or.
And uh there are some hotline
phones and
DOT has tried different uh
techniques to work with that.
But uh,
Oh
You know, my part is that I see.
A lot of this is coming from out
of state.
And I don't know if there's some
way of, you know, how would you
work with that to intervene.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Senator,
thank you. Um, this is an area
that we consistently talk about.
Number one, we have to make sure
that those phones are working,
uh, and secretary Cerna over at
DOT has really been making sure
that, uh, folks are checking
them on a regular basis.
I don't know how we can stop
folks from out of state other
than to continue to promote
things like 988 and other
resources to them, um, it, it is
very difficult and something
that we do take seriously, sir.
Yeah, yeah, very well, thank
you. Thank you for your
response. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Center angles.
Thank you, Mister Chair and
thank you gentlemen, for the
detail. I'd like to go back to
Pager slide 10, uh, and just
sort of like where the
The chairman was looking at uh
On, on the behavioral health,
the
Uh, monies that are here in
that, in that section,
especially that that has not
been budgeted.
Are any of that for facilities
or is that all treatment?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
very little of that was for uh
facilities. It's mostly, so you
can see there on the right hand
side.
The there's a little bit of a, a
table there, so rural healthcare
grants. That includes both
behavioral health and um primary
care, and that's mostly for
startup costs to uh start.
New services within a certain
areas so that they can uh then
bill Medicaid later on.
Thank for that if I understand
my clothes had to me.
A star that was given to start a
facility and if I understand
right, that's not near enough.
Uh, I like.
Uh, represent Chatfield talked
about we need a place to put
people.
And I know that uh even in
Hobbs, I served Lee in Eddy
County they'd looked at a uh
hospital.
That has been sold now, but at
that time, they're looking for
funding to be able to take that
and make it a behavioral health,
uh, facility, uh, then I had
another question, so on page 14,
you're talking about.
Uh, medication assisted
treatment is,
is that sort of like what um you
guys talked about Carlve
Lighthouse. Is that what they do
is just the treatment of the
mat, or do they have an in-home
facility do they keep people?
Now a surveyed accounting I did
not know they had a facility
there.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Gallego's, um, so yes, uh, a
number of providers can offer
medication assisted treatment.
Carl's bed Lighthouse, I can
speak for that well to to a
portion speak for them. Um, they
do offer a number of these
services including uh medication
assisted treatment both in
person and via telehealth.
Um, and part of that is looking
at if there are services that
they cannot provide. One of the
things that
Our providers are very good at
is working through their network
to say this is where we can get
somebody in to make sure that
they continue to get those
services.
Well thank you for that. I'm
gonna have to stop.
Check out that facility, this
term, and gentlemen or manager,
um, is, I, I understood a lot of
people have gone to Miami-Dade
to start looking at their model,
and I know uh Miss P Hill keeps
calling me about how important
it is to get this out there, so
that we would have the
Long term, uh, facilities, but,
uh, I appreciate your dialogue
and the information you've got.
Huge amount of information here,
so takes some time to digest.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr.
Uh, Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Eric, I was wondering um if
you could talk a little bit more
about the key features or
describe the all of the
government.
Approach, um, that you reference
in the presentation. Um, so all
of the all of government
behavioral health plans similar
to other states and many New
Mexico communities. That's one
of the um suggestions for us to
look at.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and Reent Dixon,
I think, um.
You know, at the moment,
Uh
The state
Does not have a great sense of
where all the funding is going.
Um
Where services are actually
being offered.
Uh, how many providers are in
each location.
Um
And other things like that, and
I, and I think
whole of government.
You know, are collaborative.
Um
Or behavior Hall Services
division, um, are kind of
responsible for kind of getting
their arms around that and
Uh, you know, having an idea of
exactly what's out there.
And knowing
Whether or not we're duplicating
services, whether or not we're
duplicating funding uh in
specific areas, um, and that's
why we're kind of coming back
and looking at these local local
collaboratives because we do
think that there needs to be
Um
Coordination from the state
level.
And providing support to those
local collaboratives for um
Planning
And, you know, providing these
services strategically. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
And so I think my follow up
question would be, um, to Nick
and I apologize that I forgot
your last name.
Nick's just fine.
Um, could so, given, um, sort
of.
The, um, all of government, um,
possibility, what would, what
would it take, you know, for you
guys to be able to
do that more comprehensively.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, thank you for that. I, I
think, uh, one of the things
that we're working on right now
is how do we continue to work
with
The collaboratives, the
behavioral health planning
council to make sure that that's
informed. We don't want to use,
as was mentioned before, a
cookie cutter approach. We need
it to be contoured.
To what communities need, I
mean, even if we look in
Bernalillo County, the
differences between Albuquerque
and other parts of Bernalillo
County, those needs are
significantly different, and we
shouldn't just
Broadly, ain't a brush over it
to say, this is what you're
going to do and how you're going
to do it.
I think we need to continue to
get that input. I would just
caution also when we talk about
local collaboratives, but they
are volunteer run.
Um, as our health councils, and
so to put that ball in their
court, uh, while I'm not saying
that that's inappropriate, I
would just caution that um these
are folks that have
Daytime jobs, um, and are just
dedicated to their communities.
So I think we need to find that
balance of what does that look
like?
And how do we inform folks? Do
we want to use the
collaboratives, which I think
may be a good approach, more on
the prevention side, how did
they get into schools? How do
they work with religious
organizations, how do they work
with community civic centers and
say, here's the, the pros and
cons of the programs that you
want to put in. We want to have
more drug prevention programs.
We want to have alcohol
prevention programs. Alcohol is
a generational problem, and
we're not just going to
wave a wand at it and say, boom,
it's cured.
Um, so how do we put in long
term programs? How do we put in
programs for suicide prevention.
That can be long term, and I
think that's really a good
place.
For the local collaboratives to
kind of look at, but I think we
should take a a strong look at
it, uh, and I don't mean this to
be uh tongue in cheek or a pun
collaboratively amongst all of
us to say, what are those roles
so that we're not overburdening
someone and then they have an
issue of getting the money out
the door, they have an issue
getting it to providers because
we've overburdened them.
Thank you.
Um, last question, uh, Mr.
Chair, um,
I also see the data challenges
that you've highlighted, Eric,
um, later in the presentation,
and it seems to me that
We struggle with data.
Across just about every single
Um, sector issue area in
government, um, and so,
I'm wondering um if there is a
recommendation um on how to deal
with
The lack of centralized and
continually updated databases,
um, spotty, um, you know, data,
lack of clear metrics, things
like that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Dixon. So I think
You know, we've put a lot of
money into a lot of different
databases, um, IT projects.
Uh
Across the across the state as
far as
Being able to track data, one of
those, uh,
is the all players, all player
claims database, um.
You know, basically brings in
every single claim, uh,
That occurs in the state related
to healthcare, and then, um,
analyzes it for prices and
things like that. I think.
One thing that we struggle with
as LFC analysts is that uh we
don't have access to that data.
Um, you know, even though the
legislature
Put a lot of funding out there,
uh, to get these AP, you know,
to get the APCD up. We don't
have access to that data at this
point, you know, we're working
with um the Department of Health
right now to try and, and do
that, but it's not there.
There's also the uh the miser
system, Medicaid management
Information System replacement
project.
Uh, you know, I think we're up
to almost $300 million that we
spent on that. And um
Just on Friday, I got my first
little bite of data out of that
for um
You know, and it's an enrollment
dash dashboard so that we can
see how many people are
enrolled. And so I think there
is some progress.
Um, but there's definitely a lot
more progress that needs to take
place on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Shido.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
just uh.
question on, on the Sherman,
thanks for the presentation on
page, uh.
That charter
Uh
Clarification for the grant
dollars. I know that it states
on that these entities include
uh tribes. So, so does the
Dollar amount
Reflected here also includes
what's
Directly to the tribes, is that
what you're saying with this
chart?
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I'm,
I'm sorry, which slide are you
on? 12, kind of broke up for a
second there. It, it was, it was
the one that was up there, that
one.
Um, yes,
You want to have with this one.
And Mr. Chairman, I, I uh
apologize. I forgot to introduce
um she uh.
Maya Peterson, she's been
helping out a lot with uh
pulling together a lot of the
data for us, um, kind of a data
analyst, and she, she can help
out with this discussion. Thank
you.
I've never used this before, so
who asked the question, Senator
Sendo? Yes,
um.
So you had asked if the if the
if the um dollar amounts for the
for grants that are specifically
for tribal for tribes are in
this, and yes, yes they are. OK,
so tribes in in the health
service as well because
um.
I'm actually not, sorry, Mr.
Chairman.
Um
Chairman Senator Shindo, I am
not sure about IHS dollars. I
don't recall seeing that
specifically in there. I did see
a lot of grants that were going
um to Pueblo's, um, Pueblo's
jazz, but I can double check
that. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and then on the uh
page 13, uh, there's several
line items that include tribal
assistance, tribal victims, and
tribal support. Are these
dollars uh uh Mr. Chairman, uh,
Funding that the state managed
that goes to the tribe or these
are also direct dollars going to
the tribes.
Yeah.
But
Listen,
chairman, yeah, I know it's a
little bit hard to read without
my reading glasses, um, chairman
and Senator Sindo, the um
See those specific grants I
believe are coming from the
office of justice.
Or tribal assistance programs,
um I guess my question is, so
these are not ones that the
state managed to go to these,
these are also monies that go,
no,
I believe they go directly to
the tribes, but again, we can,
we can verify that. OK. Thank
you. That's just had
clarification. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Represents Syria.
you know.
Somebody told me I had a
question. Sorry about that.
I guess we, we'll kind of wrap
this up, Eric, I mean,
I mean, if we had a great in BF,
right?
I mean, the department has $60
million reoccurring every year
for behavioral health systems.
And can't seem to get it set up.
I don't know, I mean, I mean.
Come back with this away, Adrian
kind of mentioned the solution
and how we, how we really get
these things set up and started.
Albuquerque just passed a, a
bond for $100 million to deal
with this, and they don't know
how to spend the money.
So, it's gonna go on spent.
There's so much money out there,
Senator Sindo, the sheet that's
most interesting to you and I.
We, we split a little town
called Thero down the middle,
and I don't think there's 300
people that live there.
And they got a million dollars
for
For behavioral health issues and
It's just kinda odd and I was
through Samsung money, Sasha
money.
show.
And, and so,
Uh, it's just we're not
targeting the money in the right
place. I mean, that's federal
money and so it's gonna go
somewhere, but I mean,
I, I mean, if there's
Look at and see if we can fix
this problem with independent
contractors to get these set up,
right, to build the plans and
get everybody in place and not
rely on the department and the
agency to do it anymore or the
collaboratives.
Or the
Someone else, but get them to
get it set up, so then we can
just start getting the money out
the door and Medicaid is the
largest part of that money,
correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh, yeah, by far.
And so.
It's just not working anyway.
Meaning one thing.
The legislature needs to really
focus on is fixing this mental
health issue because.
Martinez administration called
it prior to the Martineration
called the administration, the
system is, is failing us in its
creating crime.
Homelessness.
Um, a lot of other social issues
and so we got to get it fixed or
start that direction really
quickly, it'll be it.
5 to 7 year fix, but I mean,
that amount of money sitting
around not getting news is just
unreal.
So thank you guys.
Oh, Madam Secretary, we're here
to talk about.
You're next, you're the first
victim of budget cuts.
And chair members of the
committee, we are on top 3
business unit 370.
OK.
Great to see you, Madam
Secretary.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Uh, pleasure to be here. Thank
you all so much. I want to wish,
uh, congratulations to those of
you that have been re-elected,
and I know a couple of you are
gonna be leaving us, which is
sad, um.
But just uh please don't forget
that.
My staff and I are still
Working on the election, we're
not done yet. We're doing the
state canvas right now. Most of
the counties have certified, um,
and, and we're in the thick of
it, so.
Thank you for providing us some
time today. Um, so I'm here with
many of my staff. Um, I will
just, uh, Alex, uh, Curtis is
our communications director,
Christina Chavez, our business
services director, Greg Roxstro,
our CIO Mandy B. Hill, our state
election director Sharon Pino,
Deputy Secretary of State,
Lindsay Bachmann, uh,
legislative director and Justin
O'Shea is sitting next to me who
is our CFO, um, do they miss
anyone? No. OK. Um, all people
you all probably
We need at some point. So just
so you know their faces. Um, so
thank you all so much for having
us today. Um, our office has a
steadfast commitment to
continuing ongoing election
security initiatives, advocating
for essential legislative
changes aimed at enhancing our
program administration and such
a trajectory will naturally lead
to increased responsibilities
and heightened funding
requirements. With that said,
before we dive into the meat of
the presentation.
I do want to highlight that New
Mexico is ranked number one by
the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Election lab for our
election administration. So the,
the, the support that you all
have provided us over the last
several years, has contributed
significantly, um, to, um, our
ability to run elections really,
really well and effectively here
in New Mexico. And thank you all
very much for that.
So just to give a brief overview
of what we've accomplished in FY
25, um, obviously, right, I, I
guess not obviously, but we have
successfully fulfilled.
Our statutory and regulatory
obligations with nearly all of
our performance measures, uh,
meeting or surpassing are set
targets. Um, we are managing the
ongoing implementation of our
new business filing system,
which is about to come online on
December 9th. So for those of
you that interact with our
business filing system, you're
gonna be super happy, um, once
that is up and running, and
we've been working on that for
over a year and a half now. Uh,
we are managing ongoing
enhancements to
The campaign finance and voter
information systems, campaign
finance, I know all of you deal
with at some point or another,
um, and we're continually trying
to improve that module.
We conducted a successful
statewide public information
campaign to educate voters about
potential risks associated with
artificial intelligence in
elections, as I mentioned, we
were ranked number one in the
country by MIT, um, and I do
wanna just touch on the most
recent general election on
November 5th, of course, we
managed uh another successful
statewide election here in New
Mexico, and it's not just us.
Uh, we work together very
closely with our state's 33
county clerks, their staff, and
of course.
Of course, all of the poll
officials, uh, that work very
hard, um, in the polling
locations during the absentee
process, we are really proud of
this very professional group of
election administrators of both
parties that we have here in the
state and that we are able to
work really well together, um,
we continue to run successful
elections despite
The highly charged political
environment that we're all
living in right now, um, and we
are confident, um,
That the funding mechanisms
through the the legislation
passed last year, Senate Bill
108, um, are going to stabilize
our election funding going
forward and we'll, we'll talk
about that a little bit here
today, Madam Leader, I didn't
get a chance to congratulate
you.
Um, so very, very happy to
continue to work with you and in
that regard as well. Um, and,
uh, 11 last thing to mention,
you know, we didn't have a local
election this year in a fiscal
25, but we will have one next
year. So again, you know, you've
heard me say this a million
times, but we have a, a, a big
election every November now here
in New Mexico.
Thank you, Lindsay. Um, so just
to talk about our, our
overarching goals and
initiatives. First, to enhance
public service delivery.
Um, we, we are in office that
is, is there for the people and
the voters of New Mexico. We
want to foster widespread access
to timely election information,
make it easy to file for a
business, um, streamline
election administration and
implement new efficiencies for
our local election
administrators, our county
clerks. We uphold the integrity
of the electoral process here in
New Mexico and to do that, we,
we, we drive innovative
technological advancements, we
improved.
to access pretty much every
cycle, and I'll touch on some of
the things we've done this last
cycle, um, trying to do that
work, established
standardization and uniformity.
Um, this is really important
because even though every county
is a little bit different, has a
little bit of a different
flavor, different needs. We also
want to make sure that if you're
a voter in Albuquerque or in um
Springer or in Jal, right, that
you're having roughly the same
voting experience. That's the
goal.
We're continuing in our election
security efforts, um, to make
sure that our systems are safe
and secure, that they are not
hackable, that we're able to
detect threats that were able to
um combat them and recover from
them if possible. And then just
a few other goals, um.
The reality is election
administrators, we are dealing
in a very
Toxic political environment
right now. There are threats out
there. We need to continue to
protect every single election
administrator at all levels,
from me all the way down to the
local, you know, poll worker,
um, to make sure that they are
safe, um, that we are making
sure that all of our public
facing systems are secure and
that those ballot boxes that are
out there that are monitored
24/7 that do have alarms and all
the things we need to make sure
that those continue to be safe.
Um, so with that, we're gonna
just jump to our uh budget
request overview. Um, so FY 26,
this is, I think something
really important for you all to
know that this is going to be
the first fiscal year where all
of our direct election costs are
not part of our base budget,
because if you remember last
year, um, you all helped us pass
a bill to fund the election
fund. So we're paying for
elections now out of, we've had
the election fund for several
years now, um, but we
They were paying for elections
through our base budget, yes,
Senator, thank you. Yes. And now
we're paying for elections
through the election fund. So
what I'm presenting to you here
today is our um operational
budgets, um, and we'll talk
about that and then we'll talk
about what we need in the, the
different separate funds, but I
do think that's like a, a
cognitive um point that I want
to make that we're not paying
for elections out of our
operating budget anymore, which
makes sense, right, because
elections.
are kind of their own, their own
entity and their own beast. Um,
we have conducted an extensive
internal review of operational
versus direct election costs,
um, we're absorbing additional
costs of ownership to the base
budget owing to several new IT
system implementation, so, um,
SOS and enterprise democracy
live election stats, omni
ballot, we have all these
different programs that we're
now supporting in the IT realm,
um, and we are incorporating
necessary
enhancement work to our
operating budget for existing
public facing systems to reduce
the need for one-time requests
because I know we're often
coming to you with those, and we
are of course again this year,
but we'll kind of talk about how
that is going to be less and
less, um, as we move into the
future.
OK. Next one. So this is our um
an overview of our operating
budget request, uh, we are
asking for 14.2 million, um,
not, not 60, like I just heard,
uh, and approximately 20%
overall decrease from the
general fund uh to the general
fund from the prior year. And
remember, we are keeping our
elections budget separate, so
keep that in mind. Um, we've
removed those costs and we're
incorporating increased costs.
again towards new IT systems,
protection of those systems with
maintenance and warranty
agreements, etc. So that's kind
of what's driving the operating
budget request. We have one
expansion request and I really
wanna, uh, point out this is not
a program expansion. We have an
existing position that's a term
that's being paid for from
federal dollars. We have no
guarantee of those federal
dollars continuing, but the work
is going to continue. And so
there's a need to keep this.
person in her role and not only
that and expand the job duties
of that role. So we, we have
this person working for us now.
We're just trying to shift it
from a term position paid for
with federal dollars to a
permanent state position.
And then we have 7.
One time, appropriations, and we
have 3 in section 52 in section
6, and 2 in section 7, which
we'll go into further in the
presentation.
Um, so this is an overview of
our requests. You have them, um,
of course, right before you,
just a visual representation of
what our budget structure looks
like, um, compared to prior
fiscal years, um, a, a couple of
things that I want to point out
on this, we've established and
structured funds so that there's
clear reporting.
On direct election costs. So
have a grant expenditures and
operational costs for our two
programs which include
personnel.
Secondly, we have other
restricted funds such as the
campaign finance fund, which is
funded by fees to support the
campaign finance system
operating costs.
Thanks, Lindsey. Um, this is our
budget year over year, just a
side by side comparison of the
budget requests from the last 3
fiscal years. Um, overall, the
FY 26 request is a 20% decrease
from FY 25. But we do have
significant increase in IT
services costs.
Um, as I mentioned with the FTE
expansion, this is our elections
outreach coordinator.
We're just trying to reclassify
this position as I mentioned
from a term to a perm, um, and
you know, again, we, we just
wanna make sure that we continue
this work, um, not knowing if
we're going to be able to rely
on continued federal election
funding. Right now we're
currently at 69 FTE, um, we have
a, a bit of a vacancy rate right
now, but we're actively
recruiting, so there's no, we're
not holding any positions
vacant. We're actively
recruiting. This is like
like a total timing thing that
we happen to be here with you,
uh, saying we have a 25%. We
actually achieved 100% staffing
last year. That is always our
goal. Um, so our, uh, special
and supplemental request just to
touch on these. Um, so the first
one is the most important. Based
on how we structured the
election from last year and I
really want to give a shout out
to DFA for helping us make sure
we were able to um close
the gap in terms of paying our
bills this year, um, but what we
do need to do is continue to
refill the election funds so we
can continue to pay for
elections. Um, we'll have
another statewide election next
year. So what we're asking you
for to refill the election fund
to be able to insure our
solvency next year is 5.5
million, um, that's a fund that
can go up to 15 million. Um,
we're asking for 400,000 for
consultation work in support of
migration.
the do it environment. We're
asking for 300,000 to implement,
identify, uh, identity
verification and multi-factor
authorization. So a lot of our
systems, of course, are very um
Uh, critical and we need to
ensure that they're protected
and so moving to identity
verification and multi-factor
authentication so that we don't
run the risk of having them
hacked or penetrated by
nefarious entities is really
important. Um, we are asking for
$65,000. This is actually um an
old thing that we actually dug
up sort of in the course of, of
auditing, uh, there's the 65
$1000 sort of deficit that's
just been hanging out there that
we didn't even know about to
true up a negative cash standing
from an expired capital outlay
uh project and then 2.1 million
to the election funded trip and
negative cash standing due to
prior year requests. So what
that is is these are bills that
we owe from the primary election
that because our election fund
was not filled up.
On the front end, we ended up
having to basically put it on
the credit card for lack of a
better term and pay our we're
having to pay these bills on the
back end, um, and so this is
really important because we, we
just, we have counties and we
have vendors that are still
awaiting payment, uh, because we
did not get, you know, the money
on the front end to be able to
to pay those bills on the front
end. Um, so our next one is our
section 7 requests.
We're asking for 1.960 for an
election people property and
process management project. Um,
what this is going to be, is
it's going to be a central hub,
um, that allows us to um
recruit, retain and train poll
workers to know exactly where
every single voting system in
this state is at any given time
what they are, where they are,
how they're being utilized, um,
process management, so
everything from
Um, you know, how do you, uh,
train a poll worker to how do
you ensure voters can register
and vote on election day, like
the core information, um, hub is
going to be there. We have
something right now that doesn't
really work the way it's
supposed to, called the clerk's
portal. This is gonna be um a
really effective way of managing
all of those different assets
that we utilize to conduct
elections, um, and then of
course the, the big one is that
uh we
want to completely overhaul
campaign finance information
system. Um, we've gotten a bum
deal with the system we have now
and, and our office has done the
best we can. You've heard me
come to you over and over and
over again telling the same
story, so I won't beat a dead
horse, but it has been, um,
Really frustrating to for
everyone to try to work with the
current system. So we have plans
to just build a new one that's
actually gonna work the way that
we want it to, and we'll talk
more with you all about what
we're looking at and what that
looks like, um, but we're hoping
you'll support that request.
Um, so I do want to talk about
the election funding mechanism.
I think it's really important,
as I mentioned earlier, our
offices based budget is now
separate from our election
costs, um, so our base budget is
just staffing.
contracts and other operational
costs to help us meet the
requirements of the office that,
that our statutorily, um.
Mandated. Um, so last year, as
you all know, we finally moved
to using the election fund to
pay for elections. Well, why?
Because.
It was, it was just so confusing
from year to year, right? My
request would be this, this year
and it would be lower than next
year, right? Because one year
we, one fiscal year we have 2
elections and one fiscal year,
we have one statewide election
and it would just continually
fluctuate and I don't think it
gave you all the ability to
really see the real cost. What
is the real cost of operating
the office, and what is the real
cost of conducting elections. So
last year, successfully we were
able to really detach those two
things, begin to run elections.
out of the election fund, um,
what did not happen is again, as
I mentioned, is that election
fund didn't get like an initial
um
Dose of funding. So we're,
we're, we've been operating a
little bit from behind, uh, this
year, but um again, you know,
we're gonna have a regular local
election statewide and uh even
number, excuse me, yeah, even
numbered fiscal years, that's
confusing cause calendar and
fiscal, um, and then a primary
and a general rate and the odd
numbered ones. Um, so,
Basically what we're asking you
all for is to replenish that
fund up to 15 million. That's
what the legislation called for,
as I mentioned earlier, the 5.5
million when uh request will get
that fund up to where we need it
so that we can um continue to
run the elections without, you
know, running into the negative.
Um, so just one thing that I
wanted to mention is um we've
had a lot of legislative
changes, as you all know, um,
and we've had a lot of
implementations to do in this,
in this fiscal year, um, and
then we're gonna have a lot of
ongoing costs, um, as a result
of those changes, and this is
the slide is really just a
summary, um, so implementation
costs of new legislation have
been 1.4 million. That's to get,
that's to get these programs up
and running.
Um, and I'll, I'll mention the
implementations we've done.
We've done, um, the permanent
absentee voter list into
service, um, that cost about
500,000. We did our nominating
petition system or online uh
nominating petition signature
system that costs 60,000, um,
Challenger watcher and observer
training costs us about 200
monitored secured containers
about 300,000 and automatic
voter registration costs about
500. To get those implemented.
So that's where you're seeing
the 1.4 million.
Uh, also this year and, and
moving forward, we're gonna see
reoccurring costs of about 2.3
million in the election fund.
Um, so for example, we mail a
notice to all voters prior to
every election, about where,
when and how to cast your
ballot. Uh, we increased
election official pay. That,
that's been a huge driver, um,
of election cost increases, um,
but it's been necessary to
recruit and retain poll
officials, and I'll tell you,
um, I'm sure county clerks gonna
text me right.
now and tell me I'm wrong, but
we did not hear of any major
issues recruiting and retaining
poll workers this year, which
has been a huge issue
nationally, so I'm really proud
that we did that here. Um,
We needed to provide a vote vote
roster access to both political
parties when they're are all
political parties, I should say
all challengers when they're in
the polling place, voting system
check expansion. So we're
auditing those machines after
every statewide election now,
recount threshold changes. We,
we had more recounts, uh, this
last fiscal year than we had
before. So automatically, um, we
have maintenance and support for
different programs.
So those are those are the the
reoccurring um costs that we're
just going to see as a result of
the, the new sort of legislative
mandates. Um, our annual cost
increases are only, but, you
know, 50,000, so that's pretty
good. Um, yeah, go ahead,
Lindsey. Sorry.
Um, so with that, I just want to
thank you all. That's just a
rough overview. I know you guys
are all probably exhausted. I'm
sure these meetings go on and on
and on, and I don't wanna take
up too much of your time, but I
did want to give you all a good
picture of what we've
accomplished this year. Um, what
we're looking at in terms of our
requests for this coming fiscal
year and of course, to answer
any questions that you all might
have.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Secretary. Thanks to your staff.
We'll go first to Representative
Saranana and then go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Question on the spa.
What, what's the problem there?
We just got that one, didn't we?
Well, good question, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, representatives. So
We've been trying really hard to
work with the vendor that got
chosen through the RFP process
several years ago, um.
There have been, I mean, and I
Let, let's sit down and have
lunch sometime and I can give
you the whole timeline, but it's
been a, it's been a big
challenge with this vendor. Um,
they've never gotten our system
to where we needed it, and we've
had choices to continue to work
with them or to cut bait. If we
cut bait, we were talking about
going to like a paper system
again and trying to figure it
out from scratch, um, I will say
within the last year or so,
they've actually made some
effort to try to get the system
up to what we call minimally
viable.
in terms of what it was supposed
to be in the first place. Um,
but it's just never been able to
get there. And so, um, you know,
the reality is we can continue
to throw good money after bad.
Um, I don't think we want to
continue to do that. I think we
want to have the opportunity to
bring in someone who constructs
a system that will actually work
for the state and for you all
and for us. Um, and that's just
the place that we're at, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman, so I
Can you be specific on the
problems because I've used it
for the last couple years and I,
I don't, I hadn't had a problem
except the initial move over
that was so what, what specific?
Oh gosh, um, where, where to
begin, Mandy, do you want to
come chime in on?
She could, I will ramble and,
and I think Mandy will give you
some, some specifics if.
Yeah, Mr. Taran and and
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, I agree with
the secretary in that there is
probably a lengthy list that we
won't have the space to get
into. I think the module that
you're utilizing is probably the
best because we've really pushed
that as a priority because all
of you are utilizing it. Um, we
do have other modules like the
lobbyist, um, reporting module
financial disclosure. So if
you've done a financial
disclosure, you've probably had
a quite different experience,
um, but a lot of it.
It is really tied to issues with
those two secondary modules, um,
and then also compliance, so
there just is not a good
mechanism for us to be able to
ensure compliance with the
various aspects without a lot of
off kind of outside of the
system work, um, on our office.
So I think that's probably the
biggest gap and in working with
some of our law enforcement
partners, you know, it's, it's
difficult to get things moved
along forward if we're unable to
really trust the system and the
data, um, when we're looking at
That compliance side.
OK. Thank you.
Oh, great. Thank you very much
for uh Saenana. We're gonna go
to Senator Rodriguez and
Representative Lujan,
Representative Dixon, and then
Senator Woods. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, secretary and
staff, thank you for your work,
um, and, um, I just wanted to
mention a couple of things, I
guess, looking at your budget
hearing that this is a perfect
example when you mentioned you
have to work with a credit card
to be able to to meet your, your
needs and to pay your bills
because you didn't have enough.
Um, money that was um
appropriated, you know, these
are what we call unfunded
mandates that we really cannot
be doing um truly, it didn't
happen only here, it happens
sometimes with other
departments, and so, um, I hope
that we can ameliorate that
problem, um, but then one more
thing you mentioned also is um
about the campaign finance
system, and I think Mandy and
others, many others here, um,
will agree with us.
they get many calls from all of
us, and I thought it was just me
in the beginning that I could
navigate through the system and
just when I did, I was stuck
and, and then I couldn't get to
the next page or whatever it may
be, and so, um, your staff has
helped me and in others, I'm
sure, and every time I call,
they say we're on the phone with
other legislators, so I guess
you do have others, um, but, um,
on this new system, just
briefly, Mr. Chairman, uh, tell
me, what is it that you're
gonna, it's a brand new system
altogether revamp or is it?
be improving what you have or
what is, what can we see for
next time, Mr. Chair, Senator,
we have gone kind of every which
way trying to figure out, you
know, in a perfect world, we
don't throw something out, you
know, we make it better, um, and
then it's the unfortunate truth
is we're just at a total impasse
with this particular vendor in
or in terms of being able to
improve it. And, and frankly,
just the trust has been broken,
uh, between this vendor and our
office.
to be able to say we're willing
to invest further in your
company and your work to improve
the system to be what the state
of New Mexico needs it to be.
And that's, you know, that's
just the reality and we've,
we've been over backwards and
we've gone rounds and rounds and
so that's why at this point we
think we just need to start
fresh, start from scratch, um,
hopefully work with a vendor
that has the, you know, the
ethics, transparency and public.
nervous-mindedness that we need,
um, in order to achieve a
successful implementation of a
new system. I see. OK, thank
you. And have, do you have
anyone in mind so far? I mean,
you feel comfortable with more,
are there more out there that
can do this kind of stuff and,
and how can we ensure that
they're going to be better, I
hope they are, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, that's a really good
question. There are more vendors
coming into this space more and
more now when we first went out
for RFP about, gosh, 6 or 7
years ago.
now, um, there was, there was
not that much choice. Um, and,
and now there are more folks
kind of getting in, um, and
doing other similar systems,
maybe not necessarily campaign
finance, but let's say voter
registration, right, but that
they have sort of the same skill
set, um, and I'm looking at
other states. Georgia is a great
example. Me is a good example.
They've had some great new
implementations recently, so
we're really hopeful that we can
kind of get in on on on the
technological.
Um, and, you know, sort of just
the, the, the new public service
vendor opportunities that are
out there. I see. OK, thank you,
Secretary. Appreciate your work.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you,
Senator Rodriguez. Uh, thank you
for your leadership on the
legislation last year too, uh,
Representative Luhan and
Representative Dickson.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair, thank
you, Secretary, and yeah, I
would, I say working with CAS is
uh yeah, I mean, there, there, I
could go into parts just in my
head like, why isn't it
automatically filling in? Like
you have to enter the
information, the same
information like 3 different
times. I mean different things.
Anyway, so yeah, we need better,
we need uh better uh mechanisms
for reporting, make it uh user
friendly, I think I've
complained to you a bit, but
aside from that, you mentioned
that there were outstanding
ing bills to pay, if you will,
with our local uh clerk's
offices. Can you go in a little
detail about that because what
is the one, what is the, the
balance of those, uh, the, uh,
that needs to be paid, and are
you anticipating as you're still
working through our election
process. Um, any additional fees
or anything else that we're not,
that we're encumbered, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Lujan, um, I'm,
if you will allow our
uh Justin O'Shea to get into
those details a little bit. What
I will say off the top is that
these are primary 2024
deficiencies that need to be
paid and we anticipate being
able to meet all of our
obligations for the general,
correct? Yeah, OK.
Uh
Uh, Madam Representative, um, so
the, uh, obligations that we're
referring to from the primary or
for the ball on demand vendor,
um, there's about half a million
outstanding. Um, there's also an
obligation from the general, um,
that there are about 4 counties
that we were not able to pay.
Um, so that's outstanding from
this past general in November.
Um, so those are the
applications that were
When are we anticipating getting
those bills paid, so yeah.
That's Madam Representative and
Mr. Chair, uh, that's uh what
we're hoping to get funded
through this um special and um
uh section 6 request, um, that
2.1 million is only for the
primary, the 5.5 million is
hoping to supplement that
general election because we
didn't even have enough funding
for the general election, we had
to uh short 4 counties in the
general election, um, in this
cycle, Mr. Chair, so.
You're, so you're telling us is
that we have we're those vendors
and those bills are gonna go
unpaid until the next fiscal
year. That is correct, madam.
Mr. Chair, um,
Madam Secretary, I, I, I just,
that's how we
How are we supposed to have a,
you know, um, assure these
vendors in the future and have
better business relationships
and for them to trust us in the
future. I mean, these are, this
is to me a huge, huge problem,
which I understand the previous
legislation. Are you looking or
anticipating other legislators,
uh, aside from this, then asking
for your budget request and
appropriation to help.
Achieve us not going into, you
know, uh, default, um, in our,
in our counties. And if I may,
um, I like to mention that we
are getting reimbursed through
Senate Bill 108. We're getting
it reimbursed, uh, the full 15
million after this election, so
we're getting that 15 million
based on our expenditures thus
far, less than 5.5 million
special in section 5 and the 2.1
deficiency in section 6 from the
primary. So there's a lot of
moving parts here, um, from our
inability to pay our vendors and
counties, um, but I did neglect
to mention that we did have a
reimbursement pending within 90
days of this past election that
we are getting that full 150
million of our expenditures thus
far in the general election.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, next we'll go to
Representative Dixon and Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for
um for being here. I actually
don't have any questions on, uh,
the elections component. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I do
I had questions on the um
Corporate.
Um, side. And I think um I'm, I
was trying to look for the
average number of days that it
takes to process, um, corporate
registration and partnership
registrations. Um, do you happen
to know that information? Right
now, um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, we are at 3 days
turnaround time. Um, we have
been at much longer, uh,
periods, but now we're at 3. The
goal is always 24 hours. Um, and
with our implementation of our
new system going live on the
9th.
We are very hopeful to get and
and retain that, that 24 hour
turnaround time.
Wonderful. Thank you. Um, and,
you know, I only have anecdotal,
um, information, I don't, you
know, I, I can work to get
further information, but the 24
hours sounds fantastic because I
have met individuals who have
chosen to incorporate in other
states, uh, because of concerns,
but that is really just
wonderful news. So thank you so
much. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chair, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Dixon. Next,
Senator Woods, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for coming today.
Just happened to have a question
or two for you. Of course.
On section on your section 5 and
6 request.
Uh, you sit on the section 5
request, you need 300,000
300,000 to implement the
identity verification. On that,
explain that just a little bit
to me on how that works. Sure,
um, Mr. Chair, Senator, really
good question. So for all of our
systems, for example, our
statewide voter registration
system, um, our business filing
system, you know, all
A lot of these systems contain
personal, private data, their
systems that nefarious actors
would love to be able to get
their hands on this kind of
data. So what we're trying to do
is implement.
What we call multi-factor
authentication. So in other
words, um, when you're logging
into a system, it's not just a
username and a password. It's um
something that sends a text to
your phone, right, to verify
that it is you, um, or some
other, you know, way to
You know, not just take a a
username and password because
unfortunately, usernames and
passwords are things that can be
stolen, hacked, um, etc. Uh, we
want to be able to ensure that
only authorized users are
getting into the system and that
people's personal and private
data are protected. Um, so this
is the cost to install these
multi-factor or 22 step systems
across all of our systems and
platforms. So, so when you say
that you did mention the
election.
also
Correct.
So, so you, you have a, a system
now that you could cross.
Or
Mm
Same day voter registration, so
to speak, so that when
Let's back up, Mr. Minty. So on,
on the same day voter
registration. Someone walks in
and they decide they want to
register to vote. They hadn't
been registered before, so.
Tell me the process.
For them to walk in there and,
and register to vote. Sure, um,
Mr. Chair, Senator, so the
process is that you come in, um,
you say I'm not registered or
I'm not registered here in Santa
Fe County, for example, I want
to update my registration. Um,
you go through the voter
registration process just like
any voter would, um, including
your, you know, driver's license
number and last four of your
social, your full, your full
social at the polling place you
are required to prevent.
A documentary idea, photo ID
showing who you are with a
registration or excuse me, with
an address in the county, and if
your ID doesn't show that, you
have to show, you know, a
utility bill or a bank statement
or something that shows your
address there in the county. So,
you know, I'm not trying to go
to Taos and pretend like I live
in Taos with my Santa Fe address
on my driver's license. Um,
this, this system is a little
bit different from what we're
talking about with the
appropriation requests. What
we're talking about with the
appropriate
ation request is like all of our
internal systems, but in terms
of the, the, the question you're
asking, um, that system is sort
of, it's already naturally got,
um, sort of the, the built in
protections that I think you're
curious about, which is again
sort of showing those documents
at the polling place as voting
is actually happening at the
time, and that's the goal.
So, so in that case, when, when
that registration goes in to you
from the county.
You don't check nothing, it's
just accepted as being fact.
That's a that's a really good
question to Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, it goes from the polling
place to the county clerk's
office.
The county clerk has a queue,
uh, they're watching on, you
know, during the voting process
and as it pops up,
They're gonna put that
registration through the same
pieces that they put any voter
registration through that comes
in, you know, before the voter
registration deadline, they're
going to double check and make
sure it's not a duplicate.
They're gonna make sure there's
not somebody else in there with
the same social security number.
They're gonna run it against uh
the motor vehicle division
driver's license numbers, and
they're gonna make sure they're
gonna, if it's if it's a voter
from
Donana County, it's trying to
vote up here in Santa Fe County.
They're gonna transfer that
registration so that voter can't
go back down there.
And and vote, right? And vote in
two places. Make sure that also
they haven't voted yet, because
that's another thing. And then
they'll go ahead and, and do the
process that they would do for
any voter registration.
But what I'm getting at, that's
the system that's on her screen
there in the county clerk's
office. Correct. That's linked
to you, right?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, we do
have access to that. Like we can
go into the system and see that
there's maybe a registration
pending and then how it was
processed, but my, my office is
not processing the voter
registration. But that being
said, to your point, that's
exactly why we want to have
these multi-step protections. So
we don't want just anybody to be
able to go into that system, um,
even if they steal the
information, right? And see all
that private data.
Well, what I was getting at, I
understood during
At least one county that the
system went down when they were
trying to register people.
So it wasn't your system that
went down, it was a counting
system that went down, Mr.
Chair, Senator, that is a
totally fair question. The
system
It's kind of like
We're the mothership and and and
all the counties, um, are, are
tapping into the mothership, so
they all have, it's one central
system and it is my office's job
to maintain that system. And it
is the county clerk's jobs to
work in that system and to make
the changes. So to your
question, yes, it's a central
system that my office is charged
with maintaining, um, we had
over 50,000 same day
registrations.
this general election, which is
just um
I mean
Mhm
Monumentally more than we ever
anticipated and half of those
were on election day.
Um, so yeah, the system tanked,
uh, pretty quick. We got it back
up and running pretty quick. And
then what happened was the
queues that I was describing
were so, so lengthy at that
point that clerks were just
overwhelmed trying to get those
voter registrations processed.
So we know now, we, we learned a
big lesson that we can have that
many people trying to register
and vote on election day. It's
just we've never seen anything
like that before. So what are we
gonna do?
We're going to get beef this
deal up. Is this what the
money's for here, yeah, well,
not.
Not that particular money, but
to your point, Mr. Chair and
Senator, all of the IT programs
that we're doing a big part of
it is, is trying to beef it up,
right? To make sure that we have
enough server power, enough
hosting power if anyone tried to
watch the Netflix fight on
Friday night, um, and it kept
like going to the spinning wheel
of doom. That's because Netflix
didn't have enough servers, um,
to, to host at the level, um,
that they were getting usage, so
that's the lesson that we
learned and I think.
the lesson that Netflix learned
on Friday night too.
The enhancement work, yeah,
thank you. Thank you, Mr.
O'Shea. Yeah.
Clear this up for me. Sure. Is
this the money you're asking
for, for that problem. Mr.
Chair, Senator, not for that
problem. We are asking for what
is our request for enhancement?
Um, it's it's built into, OK,
thank you, sorry. We're not
asking for any specific wine
item, um, uh, in terms of
supplementals for that, it is,
it is built into our base
budget. So we are asking for
funds in our base budget to
continue building out um those.
Those hosting abilities.
So yes, we are. No, we're not.
We, we are asking for the funds,
uh, Mr. Cha Senator, just not in
that particular line item that
you were that you were talking
about. OK, so,
Miss Cheer, and, and
Madam
Deputy Secretary, ask, um, I, I
wanna ask this one more time. We
ran into problems on the same
day registration.
And we're going to get money.
This elect this funding cycle.
To expand the system, hopefully,
we will request.
Uh,
we will fix the problem. Yes,
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes.
Correct.
OK.
I've heard and heard and heard.
That we do not
Keep a database.
Of citizens.
In state of New Mexico or in the
United States.
So, we use the system.
Of a
Government ID
As you described.
And
If that ID says
That your address is.
Main Street USA.
And, and
You're voting on that same main
street.
And we are able to send it
through the motor vehicle
department and they found out
through the system he was
talking about, that, uh that
number, driver's license number.
Matches, they didn't vote
anywhere else.
That's as close to a citizen's
ideas we have.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, in terms
of the voting process, yes, and
because MVD with which, you
know, our voter registration
system is, is closely uh
integrated. They have much more
data on, uh, you know, whether
we know someone for sure as a
citizen, whether we know for
sure they're not a citizen or
there's kind of this in-between
group. So in terms of voter
registration,
data, yes, and, and MVD is a
huge resource to us in that
regard.
Um
You know,
We don't have mandates or even
an ability to check our data
against any other kind of uh uh
of a list, um, that, that is our
one mandate, right, is to really
fully integrate with MVD data.
So what we really know
Is if they're not a citizen.
Correct. Mr. Chair and Senator,
we definitely can say this
person is they've got a license
and we know for sure they're not
a citizen because they used a
green card or something to get
their license, yeah, they might
have used a passport. Correct
from another country to get
there.
driver's license. Correct. And
we do check against that.
Correct. We check against the
MVD data for every voter
registration. OK, and the last
question, Mr. Chair, is a simple
one. we do a, a different
election every year, and forever
and ever, we have tried to put
extra money in.
During the years when we have
the bigger
primary in general. You're
saying now that you want that
same.
Money
Is it you want the balance?
Brought back up, or do you want
a new appropriation for the,
I've got it here somewhere.
Uh, he was asking for.
And I don't have that. But it
We put a lot more money in every
other year. It's the way we've
been doing it. So, so tell me,
you wanna just make sure the
balance is up on that every year
is what you're saying, so it may
not be a huge amount of money
every year, but, uh, uh, you're
gonna, you're gonna send in a
And how you are request for the,
for the difference in the two is
what you have planned.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair and senator,
that's the
Effectively, the structure of
the bill that was passed last
year and the election fund is
that we maintain a balance, uh,
that we know can cover the costs
of
Any given election and that we
come before you annually like we
are now or, you know, we'll
officially do in January and say
um this is what we've spent
down. These were the costs
associated with the election in
the last fiscal year. And so
this is what we need to get that
balance back up to the 15
million so that we can pay for
the next election. And, and, and
with that, Mr. Chair, we're
really not increasing the dollar
value of that fund. We, we have
adequate uh
Top number figures in there that
we're having.
Bros, we haven't overspent that
account, um, we're, we're just
needing to bring it up. Correct,
Mr. Chair, and, and Senator and
we have DFA controls on that
account. So it's not gonna go
like
to 15 million and 1 or anything
like that, that's, that's the
way the system was created. Who,
who was a control?
Uh, the Department of Finance
and Administration.
They they're doing it in this
case, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's not
me, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Thank you very much, sir. Uh,
next we're gonna go to Senator
Gallegos please. Then we have
Representative Chatfield
first. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. Is
it Justin?
Um
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes, it
is. OK. Thank you. So, uh, just
I was just gonna ask, I'm
actually on the same page asen
Woods was, and this pipe.5 for
the election fundur its full
solvency.
Did you just not say earlier
that we would be reimbursed?
Correct. Um, uh, the issue that,
uh, our, uh, Madam Secretary had
issued earlier was that it was
never front loaded, um, and
we've been playing, uh, catch up
ever since. So this would ensure
that our current expenditures
for the general is solvent.
Um, the 2.1 million in the
Section 6 was for the primary.
Um, so yes, we are being
reimbursed, uh, Mr. Senator for
the uh
You know, expenditures for the
general, but we were never uh
loaded that we were only loaded
9.1 million, uh, for the general
election when we were supposed
to be loaded 15. So this 5.5
would get us to that 15, uh, I
guess my, my next thought, Mr.
Chair and Secretary Justin and
I'm new at this. This is my 2nd.
Meeting for LFC.
Uh, but can you explain to me
why we've had 73% increase.
Since 2022.
And what that has gone to.
Mr. Chair and uh uh senator, so
I would personally attribute
that to Ba on Demand, uh, units
that have increased, um, since
2020. Uh, we have data here that
we can give to you, um, but they
have increased due to various
legislative changes that we
highlighted earlier in the
slides, um, but we also have
various, uh, increases in, uh,
due to redistricting and also
some same day registration
changes and in the law, um, so
there's various mechanisms that
have increased the uh balance
and demand units.
are by far the biggest cost
driver uh for election costs.
And if I could, Senator, Mr.
Chair, just, um, I think the
redistricting thing is really
important. We went through
redistricting in 2021, that
creates, um, in that process, we
end up doing what we call
precinct splits. So precincts
get too big, uh, they have to be
mandated to be split by the
counties, um, and so we end up
seeing, um, you know, so many
more precincts, which means we
have to have so many more vote
centers, which means we have to
have so many more ballot.
systems at both centers, etc.
And so that's just sort of like
That's just the reality of and
and those are all legislative
mandates.
Well, thank you for that, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, could
have saved you a lot of time and
effort since our uh population
hadn't expanded.
We should have left to where it
was, but I know that wasn't the
plan. My last question is, and I
understood this right when
you're talking Senator Woods, if
we require
90.
For voting
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
yes, but how you provide your
identification is up to the
voter. So you can provide a
physical ID. You can also
provide a written or verbal
explanation or a written or ver
verbal affirmation of your
registered name, uh, your birth
and address when you are
registering and voting on the
same day, you are required to
provide that physical ID.
Well thank you for that, Madam
Secretary, uh, that's my last
question. I just
It understood.
that we were not obligated to.
I've actually had them are
offered them my
Um, voting card.
And they tell me they don't need
it.
So, I don't understand.
That balance. Now it may be just
because I have a face that's on
Facebook that they know who I
am. But
I think the right should be
right for everyone. They have to
give some kind of ID because I
could be a twin.
And could cause problems, so
you, thank you.
Thank you. Thanks, we're gonna
go to Representative Chatfield
and Representative Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
everybody got down and walked
around in my question quite a
bit, but I'm gonna throw it out
there cause I've been waiting a
long time. Uh, so, am I right to
understand if I walk up to vote,
I probably don't have to show my
driver's license as far as an
ID. But if I want to register to
vote, I have to come up with a
birth certificate and proof of
all the, all that stuff in order
to register.
But not to vote. Tell me just
Cut it down to the simplest, uh,
first grade level so that we all
understand about this voter ID
thing. OK, Mr. Chair
Representative, if you register
to vote in advance.
He
You provide the information you
provide to register your Social
Security.
driver's license number, etc. If
you're going to register and
vote in person at the same time.
That's when you need to bring
that documentary ID with you.
Uh, so,
You missed, you missed the 28
day deadline. You haven't been
registered, you wake up on
election morning, you realize,
oh shoot, I want a vote.
And I, I, you go to the polls
and you say, hey, can I register
and vote today? Yes, but you,
that's when you need to show
that ID and, and that those
documents. So,
His chair, Madam Secretary, uh,
when you say I don't need to
provide documentation on, uh, I
actually have my driver's
license number memorized, uh.
So I could just tell them my
driver's license number and
they'll check it. I can see if
it actually matches me. How, how
do they know that, that I'm me.
No, exactly, Mr. Chair and and
Representative for that same day
registration that is, that is
why you have to show a photo ID,
um, because you can't just tell
them your driver's license
number on that date.
If I register and I'm talking
about if I read in advance.
What, what are the requirements
on me to prove that I'm me.
You are providing your full
driver's license number and the
last four of your social or
you're providing your full
social.
Um, so that, that, that is the
data that you're gonna be and
your full birth date. Um, that
is the data that you're gonna be
required to provide if you're
registering in advance, which is
probably what you did when you
registered the first time.
Been a long time,
so, so how do they check that?
I, I guess it gets back to, you
know, if I'm, if I go in there
and get my driver's license,
long time before the election,
you know, they have to check
that on me, or they wouldn't
know if I was old enough to buy
beer, right?
or whatever.
So how do they check that? Mr.
Chair Representative, so our
system, um, first of all, we
have all the voter registrations
in the state and the system, and
we also have that access point
to MVD. So we're gonna run your
driver's license and or your
Social Security against MVD.
We're gonna make sure the data
checks out. We're gonna run your
registration against every other
registration in the state to
make sure there's not anybody
else out there, um, saying there
Jackie Chatfield trying to be a
registered voter, uh, with your
birth date, your full date of
birth, all that personal.
data that you only, you know,
right? We're gonna check that,
um, if we see that you're
registered in another county,
we're gonna transfer you to this
county we're not gonna let you
be registered in two different
counties, um, and so we do, they
do all of that, the county
clerks do all of that every time
they process a voter
registration.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Secretary, I feel a little
better. OK, good.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Chatfield. Next, we're gonna go
to Representative Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Madam
Secretary.
The proximity of my district is
very, very close to Arizona and
the majority part of the Navajo
Nation.
In the recent general election.
I had a particular interest in
that election with Arizona
because I had a never a fellow
Navajo that was running for
Congress, and I was watching the
boats, and early on in the
process, some voting machines
went down.
And then,
Some places ran out of ballots.
And the legal people had to
scramble around to see if they
could get the closing time of 70
p.m., uh, extended, so that was
extended for some chapters, and
I just wonder.
Why has they never reached out
to see how New Mexico does their
election.
And has anybody ever reached out
to you?
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. Yeah, I heard
about that issue. It was in
Apache County, as I recall,
Arizona, um, really unfortunate
for the voters there, um.
You know, I, I will say I think
Arizona generally does a very
good job of running elections.
They've got a lot more
challenges there, um, then we
have here just in terms of um
they don't have as cooperative
and helpful a legislature. So we
have here when we come to you
and we say this is what we need
to, this is what we need to make
sure that voters, you know, have
access and machines don't go
down and technology works and
all of those things, um, you all
have been incredibly
supportive of those efforts, um,
so you know, I don't want to
speak bad of my fellow election
administrators and maybe they
just had a bad day this year. I
hope they're able to figure out
but um they, they, you know,
they, they, we do chat a lot. We
do chat a lot and I'd be happy
to chat with Apache County
anytime they're, they're good
people there, I believe. Just
didn't get it right this time.
OK, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary.
I have a lot of friends in
Windero because the close
proximity to my district, and I
Some of the people that are
running the Navajo
Some of the people that are
running the Navajole
Administration, our personal
friends. I'm just wondering if I
can make a suggestion to them to
reach out to you, and, you know,
I could even mediate, uh, having
a meeting with you. Would you be
open to that so that we can
improve the system because this
is not the first time we ran out
of ballots. This is not the
first time the machines have
gone down. In addition to that,
it seems that almost every
We have to ask if we can get
more money to cover the
election. It apparently seems
that there is never enough
budget set up to begin with. I
think that is a major problem,
so
I would like to see if we can
pick your brain so we can have a
good election, especially for
the uh Navajo chapters that are
in New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Allison, great
suggestions, Senator Sheriff,
please.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary.
So I've been reluctant, but I'm
going to anyway.
So we know that, uh, that you
sent out 105,000 cards saying
you may be eligible to vote.
Go to this website.
But those cards weren't sent to
people that had a real ID. These
were people that were sent that
did not have a real ID in fact.
Um
Why didn't we send out cards to
people that
have a real ID and say, hey, you
might be eligible to vote.
As opposed to people that
Didn't have a real ID.
Mr. Chair, Senator, that, that's
not accurate. We, the data.
That we send those.
What we call eligible but
unregistered cards to or
anybody uh who
Appears to have eligibility, in
other words, we know for a fact.
But
We exclude people we know for a
fact we're not citizens, but
anybody who we think is a
citizen or no it's a citizen,
including those who receive real
IDs are included on that list.
So
Mr. Chair
Personal experience, a guy from
Mexico here legally.
As a driver's license.
As a Social Security card that
says for work purposes only.
Got a car.
I asked him
So, what did you show to get the
The New Mexico driver's license.
So I showed him my Mexican visa.
So we should have known that he
was not a US citizen because he
declared that he was not a US
citizen. Now.
He's got a good job, doesn't
want to get deported, doesn't
want.
Doestunately, it's probably
gonna be deported
but I apologize. I looked when I
looked on the the website.
But in his name, put in his
social security number.
It said, are you a US citizen?
I stopped right there.
But had he put yes.
Is there any way to verify that?
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
that is what the system does. It
goes back to MBD and it is going
to do a verification, but to
your point,
We also ask people, and we've
always asked people whether
you've been here for a year,
whether, you know, you've been
naturalized for a year, you've
been here, your family's been
here 14 generations to attest to
the fact that you are a citizen
before you register, and I'm,
I'm very glad that that process
stopped.
Um, when you stopped it, um,
because we also don't want is
people, you know,
Accidentally registering to vote
to test the system and
accidentally committing
4th-degree felonies.
But that is the point, yes, the
system will, it will ping back
to MVD.
So
Mr. Chair, it, it appeared to
me.
Because I talked to our own
county clerk.
If he had pushed the yes button.
You would have been registered.
Because there is no way to
verify after that.
Gone. That
MBD says nope if they and they
can't look at it. We'll make
sure you get the question and
then Madam Secretary, I think
you're trying to answer too. I
apologize.
No, this is the question.
I think now, Madam Secretary, if
you could answer. Thank you Mr.
Chair, Senator. There is
absolutely a way. We can always
go back to MVD and in terms of
The small handful of examples
that were brought to us by user
and by a couple of your
colleagues. We have sent those
over to MVD to be researched, to
understand more about, you know,
if these people are really not
eligible because they are not
citizens.
How is it that they ended up on
this list. And we're trying to
find that out. We're not hiding
from it.
We want to know that because in
the future, we don't want
incidents like this to happen
again. We don't want individuals
who we know are not eligible to
vote to get that card in the
mail. So we are absolutely
working on that, um, Mr. Chair
and senator.
So, Miss, I, I, I appreciate
that a lot. It just
Especially with the timing.
How far out from the election
did you send those? Was it 30
days or 90 days, Mr. Chair,
Senator, it's 90 days and that's
part of our agreement with the
Interstate Compact Group, Eric,
which were members of with 25
other states, and we all say
that we're going to do this.
Now, one thing I will tell you
too, um, Mr. Tarrant Senator is
starting next summer when our
voter registration process
changes at MBD, we will be
eligible for a waiver.
That we won't even be required
to send those cards out anymore,
um, after next summer, so we're
probably we're looking at, we
probably won't be sending out
any more eligible but
unregistered cards because we're
already gonna have to captured
so many registered voters
through MBD.
Well, I appreciate that. I'm
just, the whole thing just looks
Strange to me.
The timing of it, the uh in the
fact that
I had a real human being that I
could talk to and look at and it
wasn't, it wasn't some kind of
fantasy thing out there, it's
real human in front of me.
And uh, so thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Secretary, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you, Senator. I
don't see any other questions,
ma'am Secretary. I want to thank
you and your outstanding team. A
few of the highlights, uh, first
on the reduction in time and
registering uh corporations as
we continue to make New Mexico
the best state to do business
in. I think that was flagged by
Vice Chair Dixon, and it seems
like really substantial
improvement and you're looking
to further reduce that by 2/3.
That's your goal this year.
That's correct, Mr. Chair.
That's great. And uh, as it so
happens, I have experience with
the folks back home who needed
to register a business quite
quickly in New Mexico, uh, they
were able to do that on a very
tight timeline and through, I, I
didn't get involved. I just knew
they had to do it. And so it's
great to hear on the back end
and to see sort of at the state
level. Um,
Second, Madam Secretary, and
your team, I think it really
seems like the money that's been
invested in the bipartisan work
that's gone on around sort of
the fun, how we make sure the
elections fund is filled, that
seems to really be bearing fruit
and that with some of the
certainty around funding, you've
been able in your office in all
of our counties have been able
to avoid the pitfalls that
perhaps represented Allison and
others were talking about, uh,
There's not enough of something,
whether it's poll workers or
ballots or machines or this or
that. How important has the
certainty of funding been to
that Mr. Chair, it's, it's
absolutely critical, um, and,
and again, you know, as I
mentioned at the top of the
presentation, you know, MIT
ranked as number one, not for
nothing, right? Um, because we
are able to provide that
consistent support, um, and to
make sure our counties have what
they need, and I think you know
this, you know, these sort of
efficiency requests in the
supplemental request. I think
this is kind of our last hurdle,
um, to really get us where we
need to be to just
You know, we come before you and
we can talk about everything
we're spending the money on, but
maybe we're never here before
you again saying, please, sir,
can I have more,
so I think it's absolutely
critical. Great, thank you,
Madam Secretary. uh, and that's
maybe uh with our LFC staff
understanding sort of the role
of these final as you put it,
sort of final supplemental and
deficiency requests. It would be
great to look at sort of uh
updated um
performance measurement approach
to that that really reflects the
progress that's been made and
then sort of sets that bar. It
sounds like a little bit higher,
um, so that's something that we
can, Doctor Courtney, if that's
OK to capture as we go forward.
Fantastic. OK, Mr. Chair. Sounds
good to me. Thank you all and
thanks to colleagues for really
great questions. Thank you all
so much. Appreciate you.
OK. Now, we'll invite.
From elections to electricity.
regulations.
Excellent.
uh, chief of staff, great to see
you. Please uh feel free to get
started, introduce the members
of your team who are here, uh,
and we're on time as I
understand, perhaps maybe a
little bit behind so but take
the time you need. We know
you're very efficient also.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members. It's good to be here to
talk about the exciting things
that are happening at the PRC.
I'm Choya Corey, the chief of
staff, with me is our CFO
Miranda Mascarenos. Also joining
us our Commissioner Ellison and
Commissioner Aguilera.
Chair O'Connell is out of the
state and so he's unable to join
us. I also will make a passing
thank you to all of our
executive staff who is here as
well. Like, we filled up the
back of the room and now we're
filling up the front of the
room.
All right, so our priorities and
goals will look familiar to you
from last year. We've taken them
from our strategic plan, which
was a priority, the very first
year that the new commissioners
and myself were in, we set our
goals and we're working towards
them, um, they're not gonna be
surprising for anybody in state
government, low vacancy levels,
being able to adequately
compensate our staff,
modernizing the agency, which
includes IT modernization, um,
and improving processes for
efficiency.
We want to be leaders in
regulation, both in the state
and the nation, and we want to
make sure that uh New Mexico is
leveraged to be those leaders.
So as you'll see, all three of
our commissioners have been
elected or appointed to
leadership positions in the
nation. Um, this gives New
Mexico not just the unique
positioning that we have
geographically as being the
tie-in between the East and the
West, but it also allows us to
take some of that leadership and
drive the conversations at the
national level.
Also, we just recently, uh, put
on our 2nd annual seminar in
regulation. This was really
important for us because
It's kind of a niche field. Not
too many people, um, work in
the, well, lots of people work
in this area, but it's not a
generally known, um,
Industry and so we're trying to
help that and expand that and
expand, uh, understanding of
what it is that we're doing. So
we think that we're meeting our
goals and our priorities.
And we've made progress.
And part of that, a large part
of that is due to the funding
and the support that this body
has given us. So thank you.
Thank you for the support that
you gave us last year, um, so
that moving into FY 25, we're
able to pursue these. We've
really kind of hit the ground
running and FY 25, we're sending
staff to training opportunities
that would have never been
available to us without the
increase in funding that we saw
last year. I'm going to
highlight just a few because uh
it's really exciting.
waiting for us to be able to
support our staff like this so
that they can bring back the
knowledge, uh, we discovered and
are excited to have staff member
attending a society of
depreciation professionals, and
I highlight that because it was
sort of a surprise to all of us
as we realized that we had the
funding to get out there and
really train up our staff. We
discovered that this is a thing,
and it's really exciting because
depreciation is a main component
or a major component of rate
setting for utilities and how
they handle utility assets.
So that's one example.
As you know, we have a large
number of staff who also
participate as witnesses in
evidentiary hearings. So we've
sent many of our witness staff,
to expert witness training how
to be a witness. Uh, we've also
sent a number of our staff to
rate school. We are now every
new staff member gets to go to
the NMSU Basics course so that
they get that brand new
introduction to utility law.
It's a deep dive. If you've
been, it's like a week long.
mind-blowing exercise,
especially if you're not used to
utility regulation. We've also
been able to send one of our
hearing examiners to a judicial
writing course and um send one
of our hearing examiners to
performance-based ratemaking. We
have a lot more, and as our
staff kind of gets used to the
idea of being told yes. What
we're seeing is more requests
and they're discovering
trainings that they want to go
to and we're vetting those and
we're excited to be able to say
yes. One
the things that we're also
doing.
Is making sure that when we send
staff to training. When we pay
some of this is very expensive
training. When we pay for them
to go. We're asking them to
bring back the knowledge that
they learned there and teach
their peers. Sometimes that's in
the form of a white paper,
sometimes that's in the form of
a lunch and learn, which is a
newly implemented, uh, thing
that we're doing at the PRC.
Sometimes it's in the uh form of
just a presentation at their
staff meeting, but we're asking
them to not just learn, but
share what they've learned so
that they can engage with their
peers.
And all of us can become better.
Uh, one of the other items of
progress that I wanted to update
everybody on is our IT
modernization.
This last spring, we were able
to recruit a new director of IT.
We, uh, stole them from Texas
Public Broadcasting, and he is
helping us along with our CFO
and budget manager, uh, put out
an RFP for a new e-docketing
system. So, you've heard this
from me before, our current
e-docking system is not the most
efficient user friendly, secure.
picked up an adjective, and it's
probably not that. Um, so we're,
we have an RFP out that RFP
closes tomorrow and we're
expecting, uh,
A moderately robust, I'm
optimistically hopeful that we
will get a good response to
that, and we do anticipate being
on track to award that contract
before the end of the year.
We also came before you last
year and told you that we
weren't just gonna sit around
and be reactive, but we were
instead gonna be proactive and
so you've seen that through the
year, uh, we've completed a
number of rulemakings, two of
them that I've highlighted here.
One, we've completed a
reliability metrics rule.
Now, to me, this is really
exciting, cause you can't
improve what you can't measure.
And so we're starting to
measure.
So it's the first roll of its
kind in New Mexico. Thank you to
the commissioners who led a
robust workshop group through
the process of
Engaging with her national labs,
getting experts, hearing from
the utilities, and really
Being thoughtful about this
regulation so that we can start
to measure how we're doing.
We've also, uh, recently adopted
a greenhouse gas emissions limit
pursuant to the energy
transition Act. Now, this is for
utilities that took advantage of
the securitization involved in
that act, so it's limited to
P&M, but we now have per the
statute, the greenhouse gas
emission limit that we need to
be measuring on a 3-year basis,
their emissions.
Things to look forward to. We're
still in the process. It's a
lengthy process to promulgate
these rules, but we are working
on energy efficiency, the
statute requires a new um
A new regulation that's looking
for the 26 to 30 energy savings
targets for utilities, so we are
engaged in that, and we expect a
workshop in early January.
We are also looking at grid
modernization and distribution
planning, which is a major
component of
Many of the conversations that I
know I'm having and I expect
many of you are having as well,
because distribution planning
talks about how we get the
energy from uh the larger grid
down into the users. And
sometimes back, because now
we're facing a grid that's no
longer one directional. It's no
longer from the generation to
the consumer. Sometimes it's
from the consumer back onto the
grid and over to their neighbors
and it's multidirectional and so
this distribution planning.
Um, should help us with that and
also provide guidance on what
grid modernization looks like it
means and what the commissioner
commissioners and commission
will be measuring.
So when we built our request for
FY 26 budget.
We really did it with 2 goals in
mind. And that is to maintain a
low vacancy.
Uh, through means of adequate
compensation and growth
opportunities and modernize the
agency and increase capacity.
I'm going to take each of these
in turn.
So last year, I'm very proud to
say that we were able to get
town to a 3% vacancy rate.
We ended the year with an
average of a 5% vacancy rate.
Now, we've got 13 new expansion
positions. Thank you very much.
And so our vacancy rate is a
little higher than that is now,
but we are excited about filling
those positions, our HR, our
team, all of our hiring managers
have been on the ground churning
those out. And we think that
we're going to maintain that low
vacancy rate.
One of the challenges that we're
having, uh, is
Due to um
Well I'll talk about that in a
minute. But being competitive, I
think that's a theme for state
government, but it's especially
a theme when you're dealing with
specializations like you are
here at the PRC.
And then the second goal was to
modernize our agency and
increase capacity. So last year
I came before you and asked for
a really big increase. I want to
say it was 26% or so. And it
involved a lot of new expansion
positions.
What we've discovered, uh, we
got 13. Thank you very much.
We've integrated those
positions. We've looked at our
capacity and we think that we're
in a building year. So the
expansion positions that we
requested aren't
For more
I want to say frontline.
Employees. The expansion
positions that we're looking at
this year are really targeted at
increasing that capacity. And
we'll talk more about that in a
second.
So our overall budget request is
uh 11.1% from the general fund
with a 10.7% increase in the
base budget request.
The majority of that increase is
in the 200s to support our
personnel.
So you'll see that we're uh
requesting 1.4 million and an
increase in our 200 category.
That includes 5 additional FTEs.
For $575,000.
Without the additional expansion
positions are increase would be
7.5% or 856,000.
Um, again, that's to drive
retention and recruiting of our
personnel.
A couple of things happened
since the last budget cycle,
that's important to highlight.
First, uh, Spo changed the
classification of attorneys. So
it used to be that you had an
attorney, 123, and 4, based on
the number of years of
experience.
They are now just attorneys. So
you can have an attorney who has
one year or less of experience
in the same pay band as the
attorney who's been an attorney
for 30 years. Um, and that's
good because it allows us the
flexibility to compensate
attorneys, not just for their
years of experience, but say
The skill required of the job.
But what it's done is it means
that we're now at a at a
competitive disadvantage with
some of our other agencies who
maybe only have 1 or 2 attorneys
and are able to use their
vacancy savings to pay that
attorney more. So as we're
recruiting, and we have 3 vacant
attorney positions right now.
But we're discovering is we're
no longer as competitive as we
were, because a lot of our
attorneys are, um,
Newer, especially newer to
utility law. It's a place that
takes some time to get used to
and frankly, it's a little
intimidating, uh, if you've only
been practicing.
General litigation for a little
while. So we are seeing that our
um offers aren't as competitive
as they used to be with
attorneys. So that's the first
thing that happened. The second
thing that happened was
engineers state personnel office
moved the engineer categories
up, so that our engineers are no
longer at midpoint, that
midpoint shifted up. And so in
order to be competitive there,
we're also having to raise those
salaries.
And then the third piece of this
is uh we have, so, so now we've
talked about two of the major
components, attorneys and
engineers, the third component
of the PRC are economists. And
after doing a look, a hard look
at our um operational listing
and looking at where salaries
are, are utility economists are
um comparatively underpaid, and
frankly, it's giving us, again,
a challenge to retain them
because they come to the
commission to get.
training and then they're very
attractive for utilities and
others in the industry. And so
we want to be able to pay them
more as well.
So the other categories is the
300s is almost flat. We've only
requested a small increase there
to account for inflation, and
also we saw a big increase in
that last year, and we want to,
we want to see where that leads.
One of the challenges that we
have there is, again, this is a
very specialized area of uh
practice, not just for lawyers,
but for everybody. And so,
We, um, had a hard time last
year getting people to take our
contracts. We approached several
people to contract for with us
for hearing examiners, um, and
they declined to do so, mostly
because their background is not
in utility law and the learning
curve to get up to speed.
So we want to see what we can do
with these contracts. Uh, we
have explored experts for the
various cases that are coming up
and I'm excited to be able to
come back to you and talk about
what we've done. But for FY 26,
we're not requesting much of an
increase. In the 400 category.
Again, we're asking for a small
increase to account for
inflation. We're seeing our
subscriptions go up, and some of
these are absolutely crucial to
the work we do S&P Global is
used.
by our commissioners, our
hearing examiners, are experts
in um understanding where our
utilities are in the economic
world.
We also have Westlaw and about
half of our staff are attorneys
and so Westlaw is crucial. We're
seeing escalation causes in our
contracts there. And last but
not least, uh, AI is ever
present and it's growing more
so, and so we've included a
request here for AI assistants.
Uh, we have a couple of pilot
programs that we are working on
right now, some of our staff are
involved in to see how it's
working for them. Uh, but we do
anticipate, uh, that need, and
so we've requested it here.
So as far as our expansion
requests, like I said, these are
really aimed at increasing the
efficiency of the agency.
Uh, we've requested 2 additional
commission analysts really
geared at improving the pace and
in-depthness of uh case review
so that the commissioners can
commissioners and frankly, I
should say these analysts go to
support more than the just the
commissioners, they also have
been working with our hearing
examiners to evaluate the
records that are in front of
them and just help the
commission make more informed
decisions.
We've also requested one
attorney position in our hearing
examiner's division. And that is
specifically to be a research
clerk for our uh hearing
examiners, the, the judicial bar
judges, um, they, they often
have research clerks. And so we
looked at our hearing examiners,
and we said, OK, if you have
research assistants, how much
time do you think we could save?
And we actually think we'll see
about a 25% increase.
For our hearing examiners, if we
have just one attorney and we're
talking to uh fresh out of law
school, somebody who wants to do
research and writing, kind of
get that clerkship experience.
So we're asking for a research
clerk to assist our hearing
examiners, which we believe will
lead to faster case resolution.
We've requested a uh consumer
advocate and community outreach.
Uh, employee, this is because we
have a crack consumer relations
team right now. Uh, we have 3
individuals handling consumer
complaints. This
Individual would be more to
focus on helping the consumer
file the complaints because I
will tell you our three consumer
relations employees right now
act as mediators between the
consumer and the utility. So we
want somebody who is there to
help the consumer file a better
complaint, which is gonna help
in speed of resolution and also
it'll help us know if it needs
to go to a formal complaint
instead of just a uh informal
mediated resolution.
Also, this position, because we
don't think it's a full-time
position just doing that
disposition would do community
outreach, and boy, I have a list
of things that that person
could, could be doing with
community outreach. We, uh, work
with, um,
Well, it, I think it's the
health authority now, but it was
uh for Li Heap, the low-income
heating assistance project, um,
that is a constantly
undersubscribed to service and
so we want to do more to get out
there. We also want um to be
more accessible and so this
person would really be sent to
the communities to talk and to
hear about issues and bring them
back to us.
And last but not least, our last
expansion position request is
for a grants manager. We right
now have federal grants coming
into our pipeline safety bureau,
Jason Montoya is our pipeline
safety bureau chief. He and
Miranda, um worked very, very
hard at managing our federal
grants, but I will tell you
there are more federal grants
out there that we are not taking
advantage of because we don't
have a person dedicated to
writing those grants to managing
those grants if we were to.
get them. And so, again, this
position is dedicated or would
be dedicated to making our
existing staff more efficient.
That would mean that my CFO
could focus on being a CFO
instead of a grant manager. That
would mean our pipeline safety
bureau chief would focus on
being a bureau chief instead of
also managing that brand. And so
efficiency is really where we're
focused.
We have 3 special appropriation
requests this year, uh, this is
the second half of our IT
modernization request. You heard
me last year, I came to you and
I said I need 2.5 million, uh,
to make this happen because we
put out a request for
information and that's what it
told us. Well, last year we got
uh 1.5. think you were excited
about that. That's gonna allow
us to do the e-docket, uh,
implementation.
But there's lots more to do. And
so this is the 2nd request for
that.
The first request for this
million following on the request
last year, excuse me. Uh, we
also have discovered because we
have a new IT director as of
this spring, that we are
replacing laptops that are 13
years old. Here it says 7+. I
say 13 because I just talked to
him last week and we just
replaced one that's 13 years
old. Um,
The way that we are managing our
budget means that we have gotten
down to pretty
Close, we only reverted about
$100,000 last year. And so, uh,
I know somebody asked me as we
were talking about this and
socializing this.
We're the only state agency that
can't buy computers out of our
bar money, and the answer is, if
we're doing our job right,
that's right. Um, and so we want
to increase the technological
ability of all our employees,
this amount would get us the
other half. We were able to do
half last year. We want to do
the other half and make sure
everybody has new functioning
equipment that can manage uh
spreadsheets, because I was just
in a meeting with Miranda last
week and this spreadsheet.
Wouldn't load, so since all we
do is spreadsheets, it's kind of
important. And then last but not
least, for a special
appropriation is the community
solar. So this is a stopgap. We
estimated 700,000 will get us
another year of funding for
program administrator, if it
comes to opening up another
round of solicitations. So this
is the funny thing about the
budget cycle.
had to make this estimation back
in late summer, uh, at that
time, the commission hadn't
decided whether or not to raise
the capacity cap. And so we were
trying to
Do our best effort to um account
for that. Since that time, the
commission has raised the
capacity cap. It was 200
megawatts. They have raised that
cap to 300 megawatts. Now, that
doesn't always, or it's not
going to equal a new
solicitation right now.
But if it's time to solicit new
projects, $700,000 is what it
would take to get us through one
year of that. And if it's not
time to solicit new projects.
The program administrator is
going to have to continue
because we still have work to do
to get the community solar
program up on its feet. And so
one way or another,
This is to allow us to go into
the next fiscal year without a
break in any kind of service.
Right now, the community solar
program and administrator is
funded through application fees
from the projects that
Applied to be um selected. That
funding runs out at the end of
this fiscal year. Um, and so
until you all, the legislature
tells us what they want, what
you want to do with the
community solar to make it a
more robust and long-standing
program. This is to get us
through that, um, through that
question.
So with that, um, I stand for
questions. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chief of Staff.
Great to see uh you, your staff,
commissioners, thank you for
attending today. Um, well, I
know Vier Dixon has some
questions. Any other questions?
I'll have a few. Uh, OK, uh,
great. Let's go to
Representative Luhan and
Representatives Dixon,
Senator Woods.
Uh, er Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
not used to going first in this
committee, um, yeah, I just want
to say really thank you to the
PRC that um all the things that
you're saying in here, uh, of
showing up, doing all the extra
work and to high to the high
extent that you've said I've
seen it out in um.
In the community and in the the
field of which you work in
because I've been um taking
myself out, uh, into that field
more extensively as well. Uh and
I just want to say I commend you
for that, um, with.
With the community solar uh
portion of this we've been
hearing a lot about, you know,
some of the needs and the
demands and different.
Um, requests, if you will, for,
for the community solar as far
as um what is going on for our
state or the need for our state.
Um
The 7, what is, what is the cost
now that you, is that the cost
of 700,000. Mr. Cha, what
you're, your, your budgeted for
the work that you've done and
It's, it's gonna be dependent on
us moving forward with
additional programs. Can you
explain that? Just clarify that
for me a little bit. Mr. Chair
Representative, the 3 year, um,
Allocation that we had was just
over a million dollars. It was a
really random number. It was
like a million 999,099 cents,
um, for 3 years. And so that
expires at the end of FY 25.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
that's, uh, thank you for
clarifying that. That was a 3
year program, that's what I was
wondering about too, um, so
thanks, so we don't know if
we're gonna go with that this
year. It's gonna be dependent on
legis like furthering programs
and such, um.
What are they gonna ask you? Um,
as far as all the FTEs and
everything we have right now.
Um, can you go over how, what
other programs are the funding
you, you, you expect to have or
maybe have um I'm not gonna be
able to be dependent upon, Mr.
Chair, and you're gonna need
More funding for, if that's the
case.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, we do rely on a federal
awards for pipeline safety
bureau. We are seeing those
awards are based on an
allocation from Congress, and
that number fluctuates. We're
seeing significantly. Sometimes
we're being told the
reimbursement is going to be uh
close to 65% this past year we
saw it was at 53%. Um, so with
that, we do utilize the other
part of that funding out of the
pipeline fee fund, which
is uh the fees generated. So we
are able to calculate that fee,
uh, going into the next fiscal
year based on the, the
allocation that we assume we're
going to receive from the
federal government. We're also
seeing two of our grants, one
called grant and our damage
prevention grants, those
allocations are slowly
decreasing as well. Um, so with
that, those wouldn't be general
fun positions that would just be
directly to our, to our
pipeline.
Uh, safety bureau, the, the
other side of the coin would be
the
Positions that uh Toya has
mentioned where we need to
compensate our employees in
order to retain them and in
order to attract personnel.
Mr. Cha, I just want to say
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you for, for all the work
you put into this and um I'm
always very supportive as well
as others for this, but uh.
We, we, that's why I'm asking
about the additional funding and
everything because we need to
put all everything on the table
in order for you to, to be fully
functional as we're looking at
infrastructure and growth and,
and that big conversation around
that we really need.
are regulatory component really
fully activated and fully
funded, but that's, that's,
that's how I see things, but we
will continue these
conversations. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Next we're gonna
go to Senator Woods, then
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is, uh,
You spend uh quite a bit of the
commission's time is taken up by
utility rate cases, or am I
wrong?
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, rape
cases are pretty all
encompassing. So when we do get
a right case, it takes up a lot
of time. Rape cases um are not
all filed at the same time,
we've seen instances recently
where we've had 2 or 3 at the
same time, and so then it does
take up.
Most of our time and I've also
noticed you're talking about
community solar. How many of
those have been built so far?
Mr. Chair, Senator, there are no
community solar projects
currently broken ground right
now.
And how many are scheduled to
begin.
How many, how many?
You you approved so many of
those, right?
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, 1414.
And not one of them has broken
ground yet?
Or
Where what stage are they in?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I would say, um, subject to
check, so I can get the more
recent update, but um,
We're in interconnection phase.
So the community solar program,
um, is waiting on two things.
I'm oversimplifying it, so
please excuse me. But two major
things. One is how do they
interconnect to the grid, and
what we're seeing is um
We're seeing large costs all the
way from
Several 100,000 to millions of
dollars to get these projects on
the grid. And so then the
question is, how do they pay for
it? The second, uh, thing that
we're hearing community solar
projects waiting on is finding
out what the solar bill credit
is going to be, and that the
commission is actively
considering they discussed it at
their last meeting, and I think
it's going to be discussed at
their next, although I'm not in
charge of setting the agenda.
So
We all remember that law when it
was passed, the developer would
pay for any.
Grid upgrades it was necessary.
Is there some way that's not
what we're doing.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, the
community solar project is so
responsible for that upgrade
that it would take to connect to
the to the grid, um.
What we're seeing is it's price
prohibitive. And so I think uh
some of these community solar
projects are working through
that.
So what I'm asking, I guess, in
the short term is that you're
asking for $750,000 for further.
Other investigation.
What, what is the $750,000 that
you're asking for to do.
Mr. Chair, Senator, the
$700,000.
Would do several things. One, it
would allow the third party
administrator who's in constant
contact with the selected
projects to continue to help
them and help us work through
the ever arising myriad issues
that um keep coming up that
we're having to solve.
There's an example of a
community solar project that
maybe is physically located
outside of a a utility service
territory, so that's an issue.
There's interconnection issues.
There's consumer protection
issues. The third party
administrator doesn't just
Select projects. Although the
$700,000 would allow them to if
we go to another round of
solicitations, but it works as
the the facilitator to help us
move through these issues.
And I, if I may, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair, Senator, I misspoke. I
said there are 14 projects
selected. I knew that was wrong
as soon as it came out of my, my
mouth, and I just asked staff 47
projects were selected. And
that's, that's what's got me
confused.
There was some, some kind of
process.
Into uh picking these projects.
And we had 47 qualified.
Through this process, and yet
not one of them.
As built to interconnected. It
would see a big hiccup here.
Mr. Chair, Senator, we saw
several big hiccups here, um.
To start with, we saw such a
robust response from developers,
the selection process just grew
into a monster. We, we selected
47 or the project administrator
selected 47 based on an RFP
process. There are more than 400
applicants. And so that alone
ate up immense amount of time
and resources. Also, uh, we as
the now that it's down to 47,
working through that
interconnection process
and they um grid capabilities
for each selected project with
the utilities has also eaten
into that time. I know that um
My time on a electric co op
board of directors. I was
There has been
Request
Or par.
In certain places on
Our little grid.
And
We had to do a study.
And, uh, um, not only
With in our area, but the, the
whole, all the way back to the
generator, it had to be a study
done to make sure that, that
He was able to supply that load.
And now we're doing a deal, but
we're gonna bring in a, a load.
In a
A different location with the
community solar type.
System, and now we're going to
feedback, the grid the opposite
direction. Is, is that
Is that kind of what?
Mm
The part of the studies that
we're trying to do.
I
Its feet backwards is, is to,
you know, you talk about
simplistic. Mr. Chair, I'm about
as simple as you can get, so I,
I'm, what I'm trying to do here
is, is
I understand.
Very complicated business. Very
complicated infrastructure.
Electrons flowing.
Just because you decided to put
something here doesn't mean it
will work without a lot of
study. You don't want to
overload.
The system in one spot and make
it unreliable.
And I think that's, that's the
question that you have. That's
what you're asking the money for
is to make sure you keep the
system reliable.
So that the
So the customer
Won't lose all his computers on
spike sometime.
Uh, won't lose all of his
electric appliances. And so I
understand your hiccup. I
understand your problems. I
understand because you, these
systems were designed.
Completely different.
The system was designed to have
a major generator, and then kind
of like a, a pine tree.
Where your generators at the
bottom and it goes all up to all
the leaves and, and
The leaves are the insource,
that's the toaster out there.
And now we're trying to bring
the fire.
go the other direction.
And where are you tile on that
system.
is so critical.
To not disrupt everything.
You know, I, I read a report
just the other day about how
A substations could wreck the
whole.
Rid of the United States.
And so
This is a big job you had.
And I, I will admit that.
And that's why I ask about rape
cases because
There's so many chests.
Pieces moving in those rape
cases.
That
It, uh, you don't have enough
staff to do that, but you have
to have
Highly experienced staff.
Um
You can't spell electrical
engineer with two e's, you know,
and you can't spell Zeke, uh,
uh, a geek with two Es either.
And those guys don't grow on
trees, and so to get those
people in to do your work. It
takes money, and it takes
experience, and, and then you
try to make those same people
come from engineering, running
norons and electrons and
I,
I know I know you're busy and I
need,
but what I'm getting at, are you
You're asking for money.
I worry about where you're
asking to put your money.
It's what I'm worried. You're
asking, you're saying I need 750
million for community soldier.
Community solar is not being
used right now. It's not being
put in.
Maybe we need to set it on the
side.
And use your money.
For the rest of the grid to
keep, to keep.
Other things going.
Is my opinion and I will, I will
be quiet, but I, I appreciate
the opportunity. I appreciate
your questions and your
experience, Senator Woods. Uh,
any, any comment?
And, and that's OK. Let's, let's
go on. We'll have a few more
questions, uh, for, I think
we're going next to Senator
Padilla and then Chair Munoz.
OK, thank you, chairs. I just be
real quick. Thank you very much
for the presentation. Uh, you
know, one of the primary swim
lanes that I swim around up in
here is the broadband
cybersecurity, AI, all that kind
of stuff. So can you talk a
little bit about um you know,
now that you're
Retooling, reconfiguring, doing
a wonderful job, you know, and
all that kind of stuff. Um, I
had a really interesting
relationship with the previous
PRC.
Every time I went over there,
just just loads of fun, as you
can imagine. So, um, so now, um,
how are you, how's the bench
strength of, of the PRC with
those three major topics, which
is, you know, front and center
in all of our lives now. I found
that previously we hamstrung the
PRC because we didn't budget
them appropriately to have uh
the appropriate staff to do that
kind of work and that kind of
analysis. You talk a little bit
about how that's going.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I just wrote
down your 3 issues cause I wanna
make sure I touch on each of
them. So, um, taking telecom
first, we just uh saw the
retirement of a longtime
employee who's maybe the best in
his field, Mike Griffinger left
this year. Uh, we, we're really
excited about the gentleman who
is acting bureau chief in our
telecoms bureau. We think he's
doing a great job, and we are
building the stuff to
support him and the telecoms
bureau in that, that includes
things like SRSF. You're very
familiar with what that
includes. Um, I will also say
that it has been
Well, I, this goes for
everything that our 3
commissioners touch, but they
take their jobs incredibly
seriously. And so that the work
that they do when telecom issues
come before them is in depth.
It's thoughtful. Um, I think you
see that with the SRUSF
distributions. Now, we are
seeing um
As you are aware,
telecommunications has largely
been deregulated from our shop.
For a while now, and so we're
seeing less and less of it. What
we are seeing is consumer
relations, just because we don't
regulate them as closely
anymore. It doesn't mean that
consumers have less problems
with them. And so our consumer
relations division is busy
fielding, filling those. We also
work, uh, we've been working
closely with the Office of
Broadband.
Whatever the other word on that
is like
Whatever the other word on that
is,
thank you both of those words
are in there.
Yes, we've been working with
them. I know Eugene or acting
bureau chief is in close
communication with them. As far
as cybersecurity and AI.
We are developing that
expertise. It has not gone
unnoticed that as we modernize
our grid, the cybersecurity
risks also increase because the
more smart things you have on
the grid means the more access
you have to the grid means the
more opportunity for bad actors.
And so we have actually
dedicated an individual at the
PRC to be uh kind of looking
into this and bringing us all up
to speed and all along, and we
are aware of those.
um
Of the need to keep up with
that. And the same with AI. So
we're facing kind of a twofold
issue. We want to make sure that
we're taking advantage of AI so
that we can see efficiencies. I
sound like a broken record,
efficiencies is what we're all
about, but also what worries us
about AI is where a quasi
judicial agency, which means uh
made up lawsuits made up cases
sites. Those are real risks for
us, especially when we're seeing
tens of thous
an d s or hundreds of thousands
of pages of documents put into
the record, and so we're trying
on one hand to figure out how to
best use AI to our uh to our
best interests and our
efficiencies, but also very
concerned with the um
insidiousness of AI making up.
Precedent for us and so we're
trying to watch for both of
those things.
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. So what is your
plan to backfill the bench
strength that's needed to
You know, oversee this part of
your office, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I lost Riberger and you know,
so.
We, uh, Mr. Evans is another
longtime employee of the PRC, so
we feel very confident that um
he has the, the history to be
able to fill this position. I do
believe, in fact, on Friday, I
think we posted for that
position officially, all of our
positions in our utility
division, which is the division
that acts as expert in front of
the PRC and with other agencies
across the state, um, our plan
is to fill every single
division, which is why you see
some of our other requests.
Excuse me, fill every single
position, which is why some of
our requests are kind of unusual
because our plan is for very,
very low vacancies and no
vacancies in our utility
division.
I appreciate that, and that's
all I have, Mr. Chairman, but I
hope we maybe in the next
meeting we can get an update on
kind of where that is because
you have a legislature coming
up, obviously, and, you know,
um, the AI component especially
is gonna be just all sorts of
pancakes flying around the
kitchen, if you will, and I was
in, uh, I was at Microsoft last
week for a couple of days and,
uh, Mr. Chairman and committee,
I am blown away at how this
stuff is just.
Leapfrogging itself overnight,
you know, it used to be said
that we advanced 100 years in
our previous level of technology
every, uh, decade. We are, they
are predicting that we are going
to be advancing technologically,
every 36 to 48 months now.
For the previous 100 years
catching that up and
leapfrogging that. So we really
do need some help, uh,
regulatory wise. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Munoz. Those
dog your center.
Let's go back to the
conversation and community solar
in an ideal world, if we gave
you the 700,000 and we could
make these interconnections
happen in the substations
happen.
How quickly would the PRC in the
market be able to handle those.
And then we have a 3rd
commissioner yet. I'm no one's
retiring, but if that they've
been reappointed yet.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair,
To answer your last question
first. Uh, no, we've not heard
from the governor on the
appointment. Um,
And
You know, I think one piece of
information that we're missing
for the community solar.
puzzle is we don't know what
kind of consumer demand is going
to be out there. We know that
there is a huge amount of
interest in developing the
consumer uh solar projects, you
may need these solar projects,
we know that there's a huge
amount of interest in making
sure that they can interconnect.
What we don't know is consumer
demand and so while the
commission did raise the
capacity cap, I think that last
piece of information is gonna be
really important before they
decide to open up a second.
Uh, solicitation.
And and so you had 400
applicants and only 47 were
accepted for community solar to
develop, right?
Mr. Chair, that's correct. Why,
why wasn't there 100 out of the
400 and not, I mean, regionally,
I mean, uh, you would think
these would be strategically
placed with.
Descriptions subscription
services like Apple, right? Get
an app and you can do anything
you want and and power is gonna
be the same way. Why were more
approved.
In that first round. Mr. Chair,
there was a statutory cap of 200
megawatts total for the entire
state, and so, um, they're
really originally there was 45
projects selected and then as
the process went through and
these projects discovered
interconnection costs, they
discovered other things that
contributed to their plans to
build, uh, some of those
projects reduce their capacity,
which freed up enough room to
select 2 additional.
So it's really about the
capacity cap that was set by the
statue and now by the
commission.
And, and, and I don't know this,
but I'm gonna ask, right? On
community solar, I mean, they're
only, they're only generating
power at certain times of the
day. Are, are those required to
have battery backup at night to
backfill that grid when they're
not.
Generating
Mr. Chair, they are not.
And and is that something that
we should look at statutorily, I
mean, cause
You're selling someone is
there's some me a subscription.
I expected 24/7, right? And, and
you're selling someone else's
subscription and, and you're
only gonna operate from 8 to 5
when the sun's up, depending on
daylight savings time and, and
so battery backup is gonna be
key in the backfilling some of
that onto the grid because
otherwise you're gonna be
relying on purchasing power from
some some other place, P&M
backup, and, and the resistance
by
And
Excel, right? Well, because
you're gonna be selling the
energy in their market, but then
when the when the peaks are high
from 5 to 9 or 5 to 10.
They're not gonna be any power.
So how are we going to balance
that out? Have you guys looked
at that?
Mr. Chair, I believe that is one
of the major issues that the
commissioners are currently
struggling with in their open
docket, and I believe that is
one of the reasons that we have
not seen a solar bill credit yet
because that very question, um,
does not escape. And and so how
does the legislature and I see
two of them in the room.
Uh
How does the legislature help
you
accomplish that goal. I mean,
I mean, I don't, I don't care
where you live, right?
I mean, I switched the 3 story
commercial building to all
electric.
Right.
It's more efficient. I'm only
paying one bill.
The gas company sent me a bill
when I didn't even have a meter
and it already cut it off, so
there was fraud.
And, and so I, I've, I've had
more reliance and steady
reliance on electrification of a
single building than than using
two other sources, or one other
source for for heating.
And so, I mean, this is a big
question. I think the
legislature is gonna need to
tackle with. I mean, if we're
really gonna do this and
You know, Elon Musk, I think
whatever appointment he got from
Trump.
I mean, he, he made a comment
that New Mexico has enough
solar, could have enough solar
to to energize the United
States, right?
So we know that's gonna happen.
And so how do we, how do we, how
do we help you?
get you the technology gets you
the staff, gets you everything
we need to be so we can be a
leader in this, so when we
generate power and wind power or
solar power, and we have battery
backup that we can sell it to
some other state.
And, and at a higher rate and
And get that accomplished or
even just cost savings for us.
Mr. Chair, so I will say that
our current budget request, um,
including the expansion
positions.
is designed for what we are
currently like right now, being
asked to do.
I am aware that there is a lot
of talk flying around. I think
for the first time in my career,
I can say, man, what an exciting
place to be, um.
Because this industry is often
kind of
Off to the side. I, I just said
this morning we're the most
important state agency that no
one knows about.
So if we're going to do more,
we, we need more.
Because right now we're kind of
on a shoestring staff. So that's
the first thing. Um, as far as
whether or not there should be
consideration of uh battery
resources in combination with
community solar, um, what other
legislative initiatives in
specific response to your
question, I will take that back
to my staff, and we will get you
an answer. Um, there are some.
Legacy issues that the PRC has
faced as far as structure goes,
um, as times evolve, we are
really kind of shooed in a
certain way of doing things
because of the statue, um, it's
no longer as flexible as we
need. So I do think you'll be
seeing something from us
regarding that ability to be
more flexible to make sure our
commissioners have the ability
to make the best decisions, uh,
the structural ability, I should
say, to make the best decisions
that they can, um, you will see.
Some
Work from us on, on funding like
rising, raising the pipeline
safety.
Damage, excuse me, the pipeline
safety um penalty cap to align
with federal standards and the
commission has also asked me to
talk with you all, and you will
be seeing also a uh.
Proposal for self-funding
because other states make sure
that the PRC doesn't have or
their version of the PRC doesn't
have to compete with general
fund to
Make sure the regulation is up,
up to snuff, um.
We, we want to be the best in
the country. And I, I think
we're, we're there and we want
to stay there and so it's gonna
take some creative solutions. We
have an agency, we have a staff,
and we have a commission that's
dedicated to finding those
creative solutions, and so I
think I would ask for this
body's help, including creative
funding and creative uh
statutes. And so to your
specific request about what do
we do since the sun only shines
during the day, we can get you
some specific answers.
And and then so I'm gonna throw
this in the trash can.
And you bring us a plan that's
really gonna work for you.
That
Think about the, I mean, have a
vision, right? I think you guys
have a vision. It's how do we
help you accomplish that vision,
right?
Got you a new building. That'll
help a little bit. But how do we
help you accomplish that vision,
not just say, oh, give us a
nickel today and we'll tell you
we're gonna need a dime tomorrow
to complete it, right?
How do we get the dime to say,
OK, we're gonna complete it, and
I'm glad you mentioned that you
want to become a fee agency, and
so I'll be glad to carry those
bills for you because I think a
lot of people in flexibility in
generating income in their
agencies.
Um, need fes.
You see it in the environment
department, you know, the
judicial branch got rid of
theirs, but then they started
playing around with money and,
and, and stuff, and so now we
got to subsidize them in the
legislature can only hold on for
so long.
If you can figure out a way
where you can do this and
generate revenue with fees.
And you can come in and say to
us and in the 60 day. This is
what I need if a fee bill passes
or doesn't pass, so I can
Get this completed, and, and I
wanna ask you about concentrated
solar too, cause I don't really,
I need you to really explain
that to me. Mm.
A rookie, but I know that we're
going to have to generate power
from solar.
Because, number one,
The coal plants in my area shut
down.
The power plant in my area shut
down.
So where did our co-ops get
money, get power from, from coal
generation, right? And if I have
to look and say, I hate so, I
don't like so or whatever. I
know that when I turn on my
lights, which I want to have
power.
And, and so in Senator Woods
buys that Tesla truck.
There's plenty available just to
the north to us that he can
simply charge his truck and not
have to change the oil and, and
put, put gas in it. Um, but how
can we do that? I mean,
Everybody agency comes in here
and say, oh we, we just want to
do this and do this, right?
Don't think 3 steps ahead.
On how we get there.
And I know, uh, I went to one of
your meetings, but I, I really
think if you're going to head
that direction, and we're gonna
do community solar and
interconnects. This all has to
come together at one point in
time.
And
I've seen that. And, and it's,
I'm not an expert, so.
Think about that, and I see two
of the commissioners here. I
mean, I'm on your team.
Just figure out how
We're in the W column, not in
the L column.
Right?
Because I think if we don't have
a vision to lead in the state
and, and win.
The state has had a vision of
not winning in certain things,
and so let's figure out how we
get the W up and then tell me
about concentrated solar.
Like I don't know anything cause
I really don't. Well, Senator,
uh, excited about your
invitation because we have a
vision, uh, that's one of the
things that we did when we first
got in is creative vision, so
we're happy to bring that to
you. And then I got to tell you,
I don't know much about
concentrated solar either, so.
Perhaps we can get back to you,
or if, uh, there's somebody
raising a hand back there that's
fine
thank you. That sounds perfect,
sir. It's a great question. I
think we'll all have questions
and I think the opportunity to
sort of share additional
information in response for the
whole committee is outstanding.
We're dying to hear about
lottery winnings.
And maybe funding your agency.
I
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon, and then I'll have
a couple of quick things.
Thank you. Um, I actually do not
have a question. I just wanted
to sort of um extend my
appreciation for the efforts,
um, that the commission and
staff, um, and that you all have
led and invested in over the
past year plus, um, to be
efficient and, um, you know,
really just make the PRC a
strong working entity, and I
love the trainings.
that staff are going to and your
attorneys because, you know,
making sure people are armed
with the best, um, and most up
to-date information is critical,
and then, you know, sharing that
back with um other members. So I
just wanted to say thank you.
Thank thank you very much, uh,
Madam Vice Chair. I would echo
those comments, uh, I think
really good questions, um,
madam, uh, chief of staff, uh,
again, thank you to you, to your
commissioners. I'm gonna read
off a few questions and then
maybe we can follow the chairman
sort of have the follow up, um,
unless there's very brief, uh,
responses, the dot piece thaten
Padilla brought up, I think is
very interesting, and I know you
noted sort of hopefully there's
more integration with the state
system.
as opposed to what we've seen in
the past, which is different
agencies go in their own
direction, uh, more
centralization and additional
investment seems uh exciting.
would love an update on regional
transmission, uh, opportunities
and progress and impressed uh
that, as you noted at the
beginning, all three of our
commissioners are in places of
regional and national
leadership, and I know that's
one that's very important for a
lot of us in a lot of different
parts of the state.
Um
Really interested just around
the whole idea of low growth.
And the potential nonlinear
nature of that.
And what I think I mean by that,
not knowing is.
And particularly as we think
about data centers and some of
these other.
Uh,
areas that were, and as the
chairman talked about, I think,
connecting more of daily life
because it's more efficient,
it's, you know, we're very well
situated.
That, that it's not just sort of
a management where utilities
have been for a very long time,
but potential steep increase.
And if that's an opportunity for
us to gain economically.
And to gain more reliable,
affordable, uh, energy to, for
our citizens, then we should be
taking advantage of it, but that
clearly presents a lot of
stresses too. Um,
The, you, I think this is sort
of all of this goes into a
category is the chairman and and
director Cle have noted sort of
more for more, it's OK to ask
for more funding. There has to
be an associated increased
output. It can't just be for
maintenance. There may be
backfilling and there's
shortfalls and gaps that have
previously existed, and if those
exist moving forward, we need to
know about them, but it really
seems in particularly under the
new commissioner.
your leadership, chief of staff,
and your staff, CFO and it's
very impressive to have your,
the staff who's here today.
We, we have to have more for
more, and maybe one of those
areas and you sort of pointed to
it, is around the timeline
improvement.
If we can turn things around.
25% faster or more in a safe and
reliable manner. Perhaps that
needs to be integrated into r.
In extreme cases, perhaps it can
go into statute, but that's a
benefit for the New Mexicans who
need energy, and the developers
who are wanting to create that
energy. And so if we're looking
at additional funding, the uh
efficient timelines and faster
timelines, I think are really
interesting. Um,
And I think again, the committee
really covered it incredibly
well, building off of, I think
one last thing just to build off
the chair the chair Munoz's
point.
As there are statutory changes
and improvements.
In community solar may be a
great example. Maybe there are
some holdups with
interconnection with our uh
IOUs. Maybe there are things
that the IOUs need at the same
time.
Communities need this resource
that's been offered to them for
the last 3 years. And if there
needs to be additional changes
in collaboration since, you
know, PRC works very closely
with the legislature, um, then
we should be considering that as
well and the fees, I mean,
again, all the pieces were
covered, so.
Lots to, to follow up on, but
only providing additional budget
as there are more, you know,
more is offered to New Mexicans.
And thank you for your
leadership. It's exemplary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We will
follow up, uh, with all the
committee on these items and uh
Chair Munoz's question as well,
and thank you for having us
here. Happy Thanksgiving.
Thank you.
Your lawyer doesn't have to
worry about losing his job
because the lady that fired him
that day. We're not cutting that
funding I think I told him that.
I think that's him right there.
Right.
His next lottery, Ofra.
Oh.
5 minutes.
We already started the time
clock meth and you got 3 minutes
and 33 seconds left.
You can start we're we're ready.
just you,
just you today.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm Beth Gillia,
executive director of the Office
of Family Representation and
Advocacy, which I refer to as
Oprah. Um, I know it's late in
the day, so I'm just gonna talk
for 5 minutes and then, uh, or
less and go for, uh, go directly
to questions. uh, OR was
established, as you know, in, by
the legislature in 2022 to
provide the highest quality
interdisciplinary legal
representation to children,
youth, and parents in cases
under the Children's Code.
Primarily abuse and neglect
cases where children are in
foster care. We began providing
these legal services statewide
on July 1st of 2023 and began
providing peer navigator
services, which is part of the
interdisciplinary part I
mentioned in Bernalillo County a
few months later.
What makes over different and
more effective than what
happened before we existed is
that Ofra uses a model that has
succeeded in other states. This
model has increased safety for
kids, created greater placement
stability and fewer school
moves, reduced kids' time in
foster care and created real
permanency for children more
quickly, whether that's what
their families of origin or with
caregivers kinship caregivers or
other adoptive families, and by
reducing time and care, this
model saves state funds.
Based on the success in other
states, once over it fully
operational statewide, it's
projected to save up to $13.8
million annually in the cost of
foster care alone, and I'll just
mention there are other areas
where it will save money, but
our economists didn't, uh,
didn't cost those out.
So I just want to take a moment
to say what we've accomplished
in our first year since we're
brand new and we're still
getting to know each other. Um,
it's important to understand
that although we've had counsel
for children and families for
many years in New Mexico in
these cases.
The shift to Ofra as an adjunct
agency in the executive branch
is really a large scale
institutional change.
It's a change that's the kind of
innovation that takes time and
time to fully implement and will
be accomplished in stages. So
with this in mind, I want to
just highlight a few of our
first year accomplishments. We
provided counsel in all to all
the clients who are required in
over 1600 abuse and cases in
children's court, and that
includes over 2000 children in
state custody. We represented
255 adults in fostering
connections cases, we provided a
small
small number of voluntary
placement consultations as
required by our statute. Those
numbers are very tiny. They have
been tiny for a long, for as
long as they've existed, um,
they actually doubled to a whole
of 13 in the last year. Um, we
began providing social work and
peer navigator services to a
small number of clients in
Bernalillo County, and we're
already implementing our plan to
increase that number of cases,
uh, increase the number of cases
that are social workers and
navigators touch and now
not quite halfway through the
fiscal year, we've already
passed the halfway mark in our
performance measure for the
number of families receiving
interdisciplinary services. So
we feel well on our way to
meeting that performance measure
this year. Um, we also tackled a
number of long-standing pay
inequity and other compensation
issues for contract attorneys,
and we've built solid and
trusting relationships with them
while we're simultaneously
increasing the support they get
and raising performance
expectations of.
them.
Uh, we collected more than
$500,000 more than was budgeted
in 4E reimbursements, money that
will carry forward into this
fiscal year.
And I could spend a lot of time
talking about many other uh
plans, strategies, training that
we've implemented, uh.
policies that we've implemented,
but not in the interest of time,
I'm not gonna do that. Um, I
will say what I believe the most
important and fundamental
accomplishment of our agency in
the first year was that we've
built a healthy organizational
culture where staff are
supported, are encouraged to be
creative and communicative and
are given the mentoring,
coaching and training that they
need to perform at the highest
levels. We're also starting to
implement the litigation
supports that are really
necessary and that haven't been
utilized in.
the past, so expert witnesses,
translators, interpreters,
investigators, um, all the kinds
of things that make the
difference between an effective
case in court and one that is
not.
Um, our contractors and our
staff know what to expect from
us, even as we're still rolling
out our model across the state.
I couldn't ask really for more
than that in the first year
we're really establishing a
strong foundation. Um, so what
are we requesting today. So, uh,
you have a very brief handout
and you'll see from that handout
that we're seeking $14.66
million in the base budget,
which is compared to 11.612 in
the current.
fi s cal year and we're seeking
a very small uh increase in in
expansion funds, $336,600 for
prevention services, um, called
the Family Wellbeing Legal
Consultation Program, and I can
tell you more about that in a
moment. The handout outlines how
our budget request is divided
between personnel contracts and
other expenses, and rather than
going through each slide, I
wanted to emphasize that our
request in each category is
aimed at
Specific staffing needs or
specific supports that will lead
to continued strong employee
retention, higher quality
representation and with that,
the result that families and
children will be better served
and have better outcomes. So I'm
happy to go through the slides
if that would be easier for you
or I'm happy to go directly to
questions at your pleasure.
Um, I think wrap up the
presentation we'll just go to
questions. Are you ready for
questions?
OK. Questions from committee
members.
Representing Hedon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Presenter, the biggest, the one
question I have relates to
Translators when uh parents go
to court and so I have been
contacted by a couple who said
there has not been a translator
available for them. And can you
please give me uh uh a
confirmation that no matter what
language they speak, that there
is a translator for them when
they go to court. Yes, Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Herndon I,
I'll just say I'm stunned to
hear that because translators
are available in court through
the court system and through
CYFD.
So, and they're available
through online services and
in-person services that are
available 24/7 so they can call
in and get a translation
immediately on the spot, um, for
purposes of Ofra when it's our
client and they are not in the
courthouse or not in a CYFD
meeting where those two are
covered, um, we will provide a
translator for lawyer-client
meetings, social worker or
navigator meetings with our
clients, and currently, uh, we
follow the
model that has been used by the
AOC in the past, which is the
attorney or whoever the person
is who needs the translator, um,
pays for it and then we
reimburse. We're actually in
negotiation with an interpreter
service at the moment and
hopefully we'll have a contract
in place very shortly so that
they will just be able to pick
up the phone, get the get the
interpreter online immediately
and not have to worry about um
paying the bill upfront.
Just to follow up with Mr. Chair
and Madam presenter, if they go
to court and they are the
impression is that they're
translator is not there. Who do
they call to verify one is
present to help them. Yeah, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Herndon, that they should be our
attorneys should be inquiring
about this ahead of time, but
the caseworker at CYFD is
responsible for providing the
translator and making sure
there's a translator in court.
So as the, as the prosecutor of
the
those cases. So our attorneys
should be inquiring and making
sure ahead of time that that's
happening, and I will follow up
absolutely with all of our
attorneys to make sure that
there's no question that when a,
when a client has a case, if
they need a translator, that one
is arranged ahead of time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Any other further questions?
You see me. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
He's going that first corner.
Or Scott
And who
First
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LFC analyst for Public Safety.
We're gonna be looking at the uh
budget request for the parole
board, which is agency code 760,
to be able to find that behind
tab 7.
Um, also with me today is
Roberta Cohen, the director of
the parole board and some of the
staff.
The parole board is entirely
funded with general fund revenue
for FY 26, the board requested
an increase of about 34% or
267.6,000.
The requested increase was for
personnel and employee benefits,
HR services, and to fund
anticipated increases in board
member compensation.
And FY 24, the board cut the
number of parole hearings
canceled or scratched by about
1% compared with FY 23,
continuing the trend of
reductions and scratches since
FY20 during significant progress
over the past few years.
The board also improved the
number of hearings resulting in
the issuance of a parole
certificate.
from 79.4% in FY 23 to almost
94% in FY 24.
Conversely, several other
performance areas were not as
strong. The share of parole
revocation hearings held within
a month of a parolee's return to
custody, continued to decline
from 90% a couple of years ago
to a 42% in FY 24.
The number of applications for
medical and geriatric parole
granted also remains stubbornly
low, with 6% of about 85 total
applications.
The board is also working to
implement the provisions of a
bill passed in the 2023 session
ending life sentences for
juvenile offenders. The board
has been holding hearings twice
a month since September 2023 and
successfully cleared the backlog
before the end of the fiscal
year.
Any questions from committee
members on the pole. Senator
Woods left, he must have got
riled.
Thank you. Connor, you're gonna
do?
Yes, Richard, Mr. Chairman,
yeah, the New Mexico Lottery
Authority. This will be behind
tab 9 in your binders.
The first thing I'd like to
point out is, um, what we have
CEO David Barden of the Lottery
Authority here with us, uh, this
afternoon.
The New Mexico Lottery Authority
does not receive a general
appropriation, nor is it in the
general appropriation act. It is
a quasi-government.
Entity, the lottery authority
reports that it has transferred
a little over $50 million in
each of the last two years from
the uh
Ticket sales revenues to the
lottery tuition fund.
Um, that's slightly running
ahead of the LFC projections for
lottery revenue, which we're
sitting at around $45.5 million
and have been consistently. So
that extra money winds up paying
those
Scholarship costs, um, and
really there was a large special
appropriation made several years
ago that we've been drawing
down.
has
Lottery tuition scholarship
costs consistently outpace the
revenue that's raised from the
lottery.
ticket sales.
Um, and so,
Anything that they get above the
projection sort of extends the
time horizon that the lottery
tuition fund is gonna be solvent
to pay the full cost of the
lottery program, but I'd stand
for any questions.
Questions from committee
members.
I, I guess, let me, let me ask a
question. I mean, why is lottery
sales stagnant. You may have to
have the director.
And come up
Oh, I buy them
when my wife's driving that we
have something to do, but.
So, uh, I guess what I would
tell you is we've had 2 years
that we had record returns, a
combination of things occurred
during the two-year period from
21 to 23, 24 and 21, of course,
was the COVID year and we had
very high scratcher sales, the
last two years we've increased
our sales with scratchers about
$9 million.
We sort of plateaued out, we, we
have a mathematical formula, as
you know that we have to meet
every year and it makes it more
difficult. We give a percentage
and not a dollar amount.
Sometimes the, the dollar amount
goes up and the percentage
shrinks.
So without uh changing sort of
our formula of the 30%, we're
sort of plateaued, where we're
gonna stay, we're probably about
25 to $30 million like what our
return would be from our
projections.
If we did not have 30%.
I think we tried fixing this
before, correct?
Yes, sir. I've been killed
several times trying to fix
this.
I'm not willing to bear that
cross
I, I don't know, Connor, I guess
it's something interesting that
we need to do. I mean, if we're
looking how we're going to fund
higher education, right? In fund
that endowment. We gotta
increase our revenues.
Mr. Chairman, we can provide
more revenue for the scholarship
funding. OK.
Proven.
Got to get.
I'll leave that up to you, sir.
OK.
The other thing is if, if you
did 112 scratchers in and did
them for the legislature, and
each had had our own, we'd have
to see who the most popular
legislator would have the
scratcher, right?
Yes,
sir, Miss.
Thank you. Uh, any other
questions?
Yeah
You know, thank you.
We're done for the day then,
Charles, right? What time are we
starting tomorrow?
8:30 a.m. tomorrow.
Thank
you, guys, we're adjourned.
They
Yeah
What's your man.
7:30 please.
