Questions if there's time then
on the agenda, we'll go for a
2nd round if there's still space
and opening, but I wanna make
sure everybody does get an
opportunity and that we aren't
running along as a result of
that. So just kind of let
everybody know that keep your
questions short, keep them, keep
them concise, keep them to
questions, not long.
High rates or uh lectures or
things of that sort would be
appreciated. Um.
Let's see. Anybody knew who
wasn't here yesterday
introduced. I don't think so.
And so, all, yeah, all the
educators show up on time. The
bells rung. It's time to get
started. So, um, John, House
Bill 2 overview LESC road map.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning members. Um,
I'm gonna do a a quick sort of
synopsis of, of the run of show
this morning. So you'll see that
the first presentation is that
House Bill 2 overview, uh, along
with the, the road map sort of
update um and overview as well.
The second presentation today is
um uh approving our calendar and
approving our work plan, and
this was all sort of intentional
in terms of
Here's, here's what you did this
session.
Here's where that fits in to
some of the work that you've
done over the last few years.
Here are some things that need.
Probably addressing as you
continue to focus on that
roadmap and some of the work
that's outlined there.
And then here's how staff is
going to address some of those
things this interim. So there is
a sort of a narrative arc here,
if you will, even though we've
got a couple of different
presentations, and so you'll
hear some uh repeated themes,
probably some repeated numbers,
um, that's, that's intentional,
uh, so that, yeah, for those of
you who are very familiar with
this, it may be a little
repetitive, but hopefully it's
helpful and that we get a little
bit more understanding of uh all
of those things. So, as I said
yesterday, we're actually gonna
start
Today's, uh, with our quick
guide, so you should have your
quick guide. If not, we can get
you a copy. I think we have some
extras laying around for now.
And we're gonna, and we're gonna
start on page 20.
That's page 20 of the quick
guide.
Uh, and this is gonna serve two
purposes. One, you'll get to see
how we navigate some of this
budget stuff in the in the in
the context of the quick guide,
and 2, we won't have to rely
solely on very tiny
Uh, numbers that are in your
high level.
But you do have a a a copy of
your high level in your binders
as well.
And so if you'd like to, um, you
can follow along as we go. I'm
going to focus primarily on the
quick guide because it really
does give you the highlights of,
of House Bill 2, but you'll
notice on page 20 under that
first item the proposed formula
changes.
There is a high-level line
number or through 10. So as
you're reading along in the
quick guide, if you'd like, you
can also reference the high
level, because it tells you what
line numbers are in that high
level. So, you know, this is,
this is for those of you who
really love spreadsheets and
want to see all the numbers
together.
This is for those of you who
like stories.
Um,
OK, so let's get started cause
I, I don't want to take up, it's
gonna be a, a long morning as it
is.
Obviously, uh, the first thing
we're gonna talk about is
recurring and, and money that
goes straight to to school
districts and and charter
schools through the state
equalization guarantee. So these
are all the things that we
colloquially refer refer to as
above the line, right? Recurring
money that goes directly to
school districts and charter
schools.
The biggest, um, change, if you
will, to how we fund schools was
House Bill 63.
And we talked a lot about that
yesterday, so I won't talk too
much about the actual bill
itself.
But here is that $132.9 million
that was associated with House
Bill 63.
I do want to mention here, and,
and I just wanted to say this
publicly, that uh some of you
have heard concerns from maybe
some school districts primarily
charter schools that received
less at-risk funding.
Because of the changes in House
Bill 63.
And I just wanted to say very
publicly that that was a policy
decision that the legislature
made in order to
More
More accurately identify poverty
at the school site level.
And while we had a handful of
charter schools that lost
at-risk money.
Many of them gained in
secondary. So if you were a
charter school who serves 6th
through 12th grade, you received
additional units for those
secondary students because that
was also part of House Bill 63.
I also wanted to mention that we
had a number of charter schools.
Um, many of whose, who's their
leaders actually brought an idea
of of what they used to call an
equity index and sort of morphed
into this family income index as
an idea years and years ago
because they were not receiving.
Appropriate at-risk funding
because they actually serve
students who um were from
low-income families and had
other at-risk characteristics.
And so House Bill 63, you've
heard a lot from folks who have
lost some money because of those
changes. There are school
districts and charter schools,
the vast majority of them that
received additional funding
because of these changes, hence
the 132.9.
And if you have specific
questions about those, we'd be
happy to answer those later, but
I did want to point that out in
that first big item because it
was probably one of the biggest,
if not the biggest policy change
in regard to funding this
session.
I started starring the numbers
in my book to say what I should
talk about it, and I start
almost all the things, so I'm
gonna go through as many of them
as possible as quickly as
possible, uh, stop me if you
have questions.
The next one that we, that we
talked about during the session,
and that is important for you
all to recognize is actually a
decrease to the SCG that um was
is usually recommended by the
Finance Committee in order to uh
To accommodate for enrollment
declines. So in other words,
there's the assumption that
because you have fewer students,
You, uh, it doesn't cost as
much. This is not a one for one.
This, this is not, we lost this
many units and we subtracted
that amount out of the formula.
But it is that I want to say, I
think about 70, 75% of that uh
enrollment decline is reflected
in this uh decrease.
To the SCG of 35. uh on the top
of page 121.
135.1 million for 4% salary
increases for all educated
personnel. This, this number 135
does not include transportation
personnel, those folks are
included in the transportation
allocation in a different
section in the budget, but
that's what that 135, the 4.4 is
to raise those minimums to 55,
65, and 75, um, doesn't seem
like a lot of money and that's
because most of that is captured
in
4% raise. And so teachers get
that 4% for those individuals
who did not meet the new
minimums with their 4%, that 4.4
is intended to backfill, so
everyone is able to get to that,
that minimum number.
And then you'll hear, uh, in
June a little bit more about
insurance, but every year,
insurance premiums go up, and
every year you appropriate
additional funds so that uh
school districts can pay their
share of those insurance costs.
That 38.4 is school district
share obviously employees pay
their share out of their, uh,
very quickly categorical
appropriations, as I said, this
is what we call middle of the
line, which doesn't even make
sense, but uh that's what we
call it anyway.
And uh that's where
transportation lives. That's
because transportation funds can
only be used on transportation
and very specifically only on to
and from transportation.
So we're not talking about
activity trips or field trips
for for elementary school
students. This is getting kids
to and from school.
The Indian education fund, which
you've maintained uh funding at
$20 million for this year.
We'll go ahead and and go to
page 22.
Um, standard based assessments,
we won't talk too much about
here other than you pay for
these. This is how the state
provides those yearly
assessments at the every spring
to school districts and charter
schools. That's the end of our
categorical, and now we're gonna
talk about below the line
appropriations and again below
the line are, uh, sometimes
recurring, sometimes
non-recurring, usually go
directly to the department and
the department distributes those
funds in the forms of grants and
other flow-through.
Or other services, I should say
too.
The biggest one here is the 42.2
million for school meals.
There's another couple of line
items that that address school
meals that I might touch on if
we get if we have enough time.
But this is the largest chunk of
reimbursement. John and I can
interrupt for just a moment
because I'm looking through the
first section on the state
equalization, those are changes,
increases or decreases that
between the line is the actual
amount, not a change or
decrease, and now I'm below the
line we're back to changes and
thank you. That's great. Just
make sure that that's clarified.
Thank you very much.
Yes.
Because we're not going through
this entire document and I
didn't point out that every year
for above the line and recurring
to school districts, we have
what's called the base, you
know, we always build on or take
from last year's appropriation.
So everything that the, as the
chair pointed out in the SCG are
increases or decreases to that
base.
He categorical appropriations,
these are year over year
appropriations and so we're not
adding 141 million. That's the
total appropriation for
transportation or the fiscal
year 26.
Thanks for the clarification.
Same thing with below the line.
These are year over year
appropriations even though some
of them are technically
recurring, um, these are not
increases or decreases. This is
the total amount that's uh being
that you all appropriated for
these particular initiatives.
So again, school meals is the
big one.
Early literacy and reading
support that $14 million is the
money that the state uses to
train teachers, uh, PED is now
using that to fund our model and
support schools, instructional
coaches when it comes to
literacy, a number of different
literacy initiatives, and so
that's uh that 14 million.
The next two professional, I'm
sorry, school leader and teacher
professional development. These
are items that you have funded
for a few years now, the
department provides uh
professional development for
individuals across the state,
with those, um,
appropriations.
A new appropriation is the
Indian Education initiatives,
and that's that $30 million the
second item on my, on page 23.
So, in addition to the 20
million that goes directly to
the Indian Education Fund. This
is on top of that, and this
appropriation is 30 million over
3 years. So essentially bringing
the total Indian education
appropriation to $30 million a
year. For this year, and then
depending on how you appropriate
to the Indian internet fund over
the next couple of years, that
might change. But this 30
million will be spread over.
3 years.
The $29 million for structured
literacy implementation, that's
paying for uh the summer program
that the secretary mentioned
yesterday.
Career and technical education
is $40 million and you'll see
right under that big 40 million,
it says high level line numbers
85, 102, 181.
Again, what we're trying to do
in this document is make it easy
for people to understand how the
budget works, even though we've
got potentially different
funding sources, different
places that it lives in the, in
the budget because it may be
called something different. So
this particular chunk includes
work-based learning as well.
So
Um,
This 40 million is pretty
consistent with what we have
funded her career and technical
education and work-based
learning initiatives over the
last um couple of years.
And, and Mr. Chair, this is a
lot of information if, if it's
up to you if you would like
people to be able to ask
questions now as we go along, or
should I get through the whole
budget before we, we stand for
questions.
John, I think it's kind of up to
you, uh, again, I would ask
people to make sure it's
questions and keep questions
tight and short and not long
diatribes or
philosophies type thing that
people have questions, let me
know. I really like things like
this to be more of a
conversation than,
you know, presenting at and and
back. So if people have
questions.
Kind of politely just go on your
mic and ask. Happy to do that
and I'll make sure that we, we
keep enough time to hit the high
level things if there are some
things that we OK.
Well, let's go ahead and go to
page 24 then.
Um, you heard about educator
fellows yesterday, and most of
you are very familiar with
educator fellows at this point.
You've heard from your
communities, um, $20 million for
educator fellows continues that
program that was initially
started with federal funds, um,
and again, as the secretary said
yesterday, uh, provides
opportunities both for current
educational assistance to, to,
um,
Take advantage of the program.
But ideally, it's also
recruiting new folks into
schools as well. There's
obviously we've had other
initiatives like grow your own,
that is saying we have folks who
work in schools. Let's
Progressed them through the
education system and see if they
can be teachers and other kinds
of educated professionals.
Ed Fellows was actually intended
to recruit new people into the
system. And so we have had
districts kind of do a little
bit of both.
In its inception, it was, if
you've graduated high school and
you want to work as an EA and
you've never done it before.
Come on in, and you can work as
an EA and and then pursue some
sort of education degree, if
that's what you'd like.
We've had folks, school
districts use these educator
fellows, um, not just as EAs,
and not just with the intention
of becoming teachers, but people
who want to be social workers,
folks who want to become
counselors. So this is really
about the entire educator
pipeline, not just about
classroom, uh, 15 million for
out of school, uh, time
learning, summer enrichment and
high dosage tutors.
The big one you heard yesterday
in regards to special education
is the statewide IEP and you all
funded a statewide IEP, um.
The year before,
In conversations with the
department and with LFC as we
started to think more about the
infrastructure needed for a
statewide IEP. It made a lot of
sense just to have a statewide
student information system that
that IEP could be a part of,
rather than build separate
systems that operated, you know,
sort of in silos a little bit.
And so this $12 million that
you've appropriated is for that
statewide SIS.
That would be available to
districts to use, um, and I'll,
I'll shout out a little bit here
to, to Assistant Secretary
Frosted, I know they're doing a
lot of listening sessions,
they've put together a working
group to make sure that when
that SIS is available, it does
what people need it to do. Um,
we appreciate they've reached
out to us at the legislature as
well to say, OK, what are your
needs in a statewide SIS and how
can, how do we make sure that
this system works for as many
users as possible, and that
they're sort of
Socializing this idea with a lot
of districts, as you all know,
we have a number of SISs across
the state.
Not everybody likes change.
And when it means you're now
swapping all your student
information from one system to
another.
Not everybody's super excited
about that all the time. And so
there, but they're doing a
really good job of of outreach,
um, and hopefully that goes very
smoothly.
10 million for summer
internships, and that's actually
an increase from last year, we
had about 5 million in this
particular line, um, so now
we're up to 10.
Community schools at the top of
page 25 or 6 million, and you
heard yesterday the secretary
talk about the math lab pilot
project. And so there's that $6
million for that, um, pilot.
School improvement, $6 million
and again this is something the
secretary referred to yesterday
and in supporting those schools
have been identified as needing
more support.
5 million for youth behavioral
health supports.
And then on page 26.
Um, obviously, there's a few
different things that I want to
call out specifically those two,
the steam and the stem,
uh, steam initiatives which, uh,
the department.
Has some ideas about how they
want to support Steam
initiatives across the state
with that. And then the STEM
network is that very specific,
um,
Sort of infrastructure for STEM
collaboration and coordination
across the state that we've
presented to you all, or at
least a couple of years, and we
have a a strong group of
advocates, folks at NMSU who are
ready to send up that work, and
I believe they're working with
the department right now to work
through some of those logistics.
In our initial recommendation,
that was a $6 million
Appropriation through the Purf
grow.
And that would have been $2
million a year for 3 years, it
landed at this $3 million and so
they're working together to
figure out what does that do for
a year and then what my next
steps be? So we might bring that
back to you in the fall,
depending on the progress and
what they, what they determined
they might need in the future.
And then, uh, $2.3 million is
going to the department. Um,
this was intended at least to
support the, the implementation
of the new principal and
superintendent, uh, training,
licensure, and professional
development.
And so this is the support the
department in doing some of that
work.
So, that's sort of our
traditional um budget that we're
used to seeing every year. Those
are the high level ideas.
Obviously, if you look through
this, there may be some other um
some other things that you might
want to talk about or that you
have questions about. Happy to
talk about those as well, but we
felt like these were the the
things that we wanted books to
know about um at a first glance.
Starting on page 27 is the
public education reform Fund and
very quickly, you'll remember
that the per the perf, as we
call it, was, was, um,
Initially set up as a reversion
fund.
Most of you know this story
already, but I just, you know,
for context.
As a reversion fund from K5 plus
and ELTP.
As we spent down those funds,
and once you repealed those
programs and replaced them with
K-12 plus the balance in that
fund shrunk to nearly 0.
And this year, you all decided
to repurpose that fund as a
3-year pilot fund for education
initiatives, and so they'll
appropriate appropriated money
to the fund.
And then these programs that I'm
going to talk about here are
using those funds on a 3-year
basis, and it comes with um some
pretty
Stringent, I would say,
evaluation criteria that the
department is working we've, we
as the legislature, LESC and LFC
worked together to provide some
directions to the department
about how to go about developing
those evaluations and so the
department's working on those
and I believe they're due to us.
Evaluation.
June 1st.
July 1.
Of course, that makes sense. Um,
So these programs that I'm going
to talk about here will all have
evaluations set up in on the
front end. So we'll know how
we're going to measure the, the
impact of these programs before
we get started.
The first one is supports for
attendance for success, and uh
you have funded.
These initiatives, similar
initiatives over the last few
years, the 18.6 is about $6
million a year over the next
secondary educator uh literacy
training, and you heard
yesterday this focus on middle
school and also high school ELA
teachers primarily to make sure
that they're familiar with how
to support students who are
struggling with reading. Again,
that's also 3 years, so 5, about
$5 million a year. The same with
math achievement.
Uh, on the top of page 28.
There's a couple of things that
you all um learned about over
the last couple of years and
decided to support. The first is
innovative staffing strategy. So
we're talking about things like
the opportunity culture model
that was being used in in
Carlsbad. There's a couple other
models out there, and so the
department is administering
those funds for districts that
would like to take advantage of
that.
And then lastly, supports for
students who are unhoused, and
you'll remember that was that
pilot program that was run in a
few districts to provide um
essentially cash for students to
go to school, but also to
participate in additional
support services, um, school
districts also had to.
Provide some of those services
and provide additional supports
for those students in in order
to be eligible for the funds.
This is a an an expansion of
what was a a pilot program that
was funded with philanthropic
dollars, um, and this is about
$2 million a year over the next
um
3 years.
Again, here's some other
non-recurring.
Appropriations, I did want to
specifically point out the 3 on
page 29 appropriations to the
Hispanic education and black
education, and bilingual
multicultural education acts.
I'm going to talk a little bit
more about those as we talk
about the work plan. So I won't
spend a lot of time about the
about the acts here other than
to say they did receive a little
money, that's money that goes
directly to the department to
support uh the implementation of
those acts.
And then on the last page.
Uh, there's $50 million that
will flow out to school
districts. This is capital
outlay funds to support CTE
maintenance and uh and and
security. I'm sorry I missed the
first one, and repairs. So this
is capital outlay money that
will be distributed to school
districts using the SB 9.
um, formula.
The school districts will
receive an uh an allocation from
that 50 million to be used,
however they see fit, as long as
it fits within these categories.
And then the last one is that
$60 million for electric vehicle
infrastructure distribution.
Very high level. Most of this we
talked about a lot during the
session and, and, and if you
look at your high level just for
a second.
That's this sheet.
The format is always the first
number column, if you will, is
The current fiscal years,
numbers.
Every column after that are the
recommendations from LESC, the
executive and LFC.
And then the last column in this
case is what you actually did in
House Bill 2.
And I do, I do want to point out
that um if you look at the LESC
recommendation.
Versus what actually ended up in
House Bill 2, especially in in
recurring and some of these
other pieces, um, you all and
your recommendations how a, a
large impact and a large
influence on the state budget
when it came to education.
Before I go into the road map,
um, Mr. Chair, maybe that's a
good time for budget questions.
But you want to ask questions
and remind you, uh, as I
indicated at the beginning,
please keep your questions close
and tight and no longer than 5
minutes, I will cut you off. Uh,
Representative Garrett.
Very short and this is actually
has to do with grain from PED
for Ver. um, I just have a
request. Every
You're often PED brings us bills
in January.
And I would just request on the
math achievement bill,
especially if that can be.
Um, done earlier and then I just
wanna remind uh PED that we have
two expert math teachers.
We have Representative Sarana
who did high school math for
many years. We have
representative um Yita who did
middle school math, including uh
bilingual math, and she was also
a NApe consultant at the
national level. So I would just
encourage them to be involved in
the legislation, that's it.
Thank you.
Thank you, they're all motioning
at me because I was a high
school math teacher also and
taught APTA and all levels. It's
OK.
How
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Absolutely, we
intend to have our bills ready
much sooner this year, uh, and
we look forward to working
closely with the LESC committee
and especially those with
expertise in the area of math.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, very quickly,
I can't predict everything that
will happen, obviously, but um
we've already, we're already
talking to PED about some
literacy ideas that they have,
and so it is our intent, um, to
put those ideas in front of you
as early as possible, as much as
possible, and I will say, I know
that they're working very hard
as part of some of the changes
that you passed this year, EED
now has to submit its public
school support request budget by
September rather than November,
and so I know they're working
very hard to.
put a lot of those uh proposals
together much earlier than they
have in the past, and so we'll
be in communication with them
and hopefully you'll hear about
those things uh much earlier.
This year.
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um, John.
Uh, my, my first question is
regarding out of school time. I
believe that's page 24.
My question is probably just to
Greg as well, is, was that
enough money because I did hear
that many districts or some
districts ran out of funds and
were not able to continue these
either tutoring efforts.
Or activities through the end of
the year.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and and
Representative, come on up, uh,
I just want to say 11 thing, and
we'll hear about it in a minute.
This is one of the items in our
work plan, because we do want to
get a better grasp, not just on
how much money is going out and
who's using it, but on what
kinds of programs, and, you
know, there's such a variety of
out of school time programs that
we want to get a better handle
on, on.
What, what are people actually
doing with that? And I can let
you speak to your actual
question.
So, and, and the funding is a
little different from last year
to, to what we're seeing for
next year as well. For this
year, the, the funds were split
between tutoring and out of
school time in this coming year,
there's a lot more funding for
out of school time and less for
tutoring. So, um, I think that
we, we are anticipating that we
will have enough funding for the
coming year to support uh out of
school time efforts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, John. My next
question is regarding CTE and
security because sitting on the
LSC like some of my colleagues,
we see that funding for security
in CTE.
It shows up in different parts
of the budget, so it would be
more kind of helpful, Daniel, to
sit out there and kind of track.
Were these funds are so we can
see the total amount of money
that are spent on these
priorities of the LESC.
Um
Mr. Chairman and uh
John, my next thing really is
about.
You know, we talked about
summer, we've talked about
professional development, and
yesterday we talked about
alternative licensure folks.
And I think one of the things
that we have an opportunity to,
as we talked about these folks
that are
Coming in are made through
alternative pathways that they
have opportunities and we should
look at providing stipends so
that they can be a part of the
summer reading institutes or
others to gain that valuable
experience of student teaching,
if you will. So I think that's
an opportunity and also pay them
for training that they may have,
that's something that I want to,
you know, kind of look at and
consider.
Uh, next thing real briefly, as
we talked and mentioned it
yesterday. We funded the
teachers and I see that
increase, sir, I would really
like us to be planning and
helping out our support staff as
well. That's gonna be another uh
area. In my last thing really
isn't about, it's about
activities and I'm gonna keep um
Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna keep
with that saying, if we can get
and track some data about
students that participate in
activities, how is their
attendance and how
Is there uh
Achievement, and I think that
because it does type into
budget.
Because if it would help us to
support some of these
activities, like I tell Chairman
Romero all the time.
One of the greatest honors that
I've had being in the
legislatures when they had the
mariachi band at a Triscoll High
School, as they greeted us. We
need to fund programs like that
to get kids in school. So, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for the
time.
Thank you. Representative block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
I'll be brief. Uh, thank you,
John. Uh, a couple of questions.
I have had some concerns from my
area of the state regarding the
increase in salaries and the
budgets that they're currently
doing in places like Almogordo,
Las Cruces. I've heard some
places they're doing hiring
freezes because in the budget,
they just cannot.
Uh, they can't balance it,
essentially, and they're having
to go into reserves to have to
pay for that, and that was my
big concern when the bill came
forward this last session, which
is why I opposed it. The only
person in either chamber to do
so, not a very popular thing to
do, but because we wouldn't be
able to balance budgets. And so,
Mr. Chairman and John, could you
tell me a little more about that
and then how we're going to make
all these districts whole with
these large increases in their
budgets with these salaries.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative Block.
So I, I think, and, and you all
know this, this is a very
complex issue, a lot of which
has to do with local decision
making, uh, enrollment declines
at the local level. And then how
folks have decided to pay both
how much they're paying their
employees, and how many
employees they're paying.
And so, you know, we felt, first
I should say, you know, we rely
on data that the department that
schools provide to the
department who provides it to us
around how many teachers are
working, what are their current
salary levels and how much, um,
then we estimate how much it
costs to get those folks to
these new either either percent
increases or minimums. And so we
know that's not perfect, it's
what we have. And, and I'm
actually really looking forward
to talking more with the
department this year.
as they're tracking more teacher
data, both in terms of vacancies
and and hopefully trying to
clean up some things that we see
that are sort of just sort of
dirty data in terms of like half
FTEs making $100,000. Like those
things don't make sense to us.
We know they're probably wrong,
but that's the data we have.
I would say, um, and I would
have to look more, more uh
specifically into those
districts' budgets, and we will
do some of that over the, over
the interim.
It it may have to do with
declining enrollment.
And then how you
How you react to that as a local
district.
Right? And we know, as I've said
many times,
Just because you lose kids
doesn't necessarily mean it's a
proportionately, um, a
proportional decrease to your
costs.
But if you're seeing
Percentage or enrollment
declines over 5 or 10 years. I'm
going to talk about some long
term planning that Daniel's
still, he's still working on us
about.
You have to make those
adjustments. Otherwise you end
up paying the same number of
teachers, more money.
With fewer kids, which means
less money from the state. And
so, um, again, I'd like to learn
a little bit more about the
specific questions, but I think
that's, that may be part of it
at least, especially knowing
that large districts like Las
Cruces, probably Amoordo as
well.
benefited from the changes for
House Bill 63. They, they
received additional funds in
addition to the salary
increases.
And so how they're, they're
making decisions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
I'll, I'll be working with those
people and I can definitely get
you in contact with them because
I know that there are at least
in Alamogordo, there is some
confusion, especially regarding
things like the transportation
budgets, and then also the
salaries and what we need to do
because we're losing kids, but
we're also gaining kids because
a lot of our population is very
transient because of the bases
and there's missions and people
are are stationed here for a
little while and then they have
to be stationed really quickly
somewhere else. So it's
definitely something that's a
concern. I'll continue.
working with you and with uh my
local district, but if I have
any of those specifics, I'll get
them to you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Hopefully, I didn't use
up my whole 5. Thanks.
Uh, Representative Sara.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
I have a question on the um
statewide student information
system. So right now we just
have a whole bunch of systems
all over, and we want to put it
under one.
so it does the offices of
cybersecurity cover all these
little systems or do they have
their own? How does that work?
No, Mr.
Chairsana district's contract
with these vendors on their own.
And so there's, that's
So cybersecurity is probably
actually going to be a uh not
tangential, but a benefit of
having one statewide system, as
well as we, we hope that there
will be some efficiency in terms
of cost, because each of these
districts is entering into
individual contracts with each
of the vendors, right? And, uh,
ideally, when we pay for all of
it together, we won't be
spending as much and districts
will then have some operational
budget freed up at the local
level.
And Mr. Chairman, I believe that
will help with, we've had a lot
of schools hacked and um you
might bring the Office of
Cybersecurity in on this also.
They might have some information
as far as some really good um
applications out there, right,
thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I said my time
uh represent uh Nerval Moya,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, John. Um, I, I'm,
uh, my question is along the
lines of the schoolwide
information system, um, because
we're, I had a conversation with
my local district and um her
concern was that she wanted to
be a part of the ones that's in
the pilot program in order to be
the first ones to get it, but
what she was kind of told at
that point in which it may or
may not be true, was that
The the funding was here for a
year and her fear was, um, I
don't want to do this, and then
they decide not to do this and
then we got to go back or we're
stuck with this or what. So like
what's what's going on with that
so they can find some kind of
security there, Mr. Chair
Representative, it's it's a
great, great question. I think
the intent, at least from staff
is to recommend to you all that
this is something you pay for.
And that would mean potentially
some sort of recurring funding
or at least making sure that
that line item gets in the
budget every year, and that's a
decision that you all would
make.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So definitely, we, we would need
to secure all that. OK, good,
that's so, that's good to know.
Anyone else?
If not, the second half of your
presentation, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I have a feeling, I,
I just imagined that all of a
sudden we'd have a competition
for who could get their
questions in the fastest.
So we're gonna move to this
presentation that you should
have just been handed this
morning, and again, I, um,
especially Representative Vaca
based on some of your comments.
I hope that you'll hear between
this and the next presentation,
a lot of the concerns or
interests that you have for the
interim covered here, because
that's the intent is to continue
to, to iterate on some of the
policies you've already made, or
continue to provide you with
more information about policies
that you might want to make.
So we'll go ahead and go
straight to
Uh, slide 2, which is
essentially how we do our work.
At LESC, and E as LESC staff.
So we're engaging in this
continuous cycle of adaptive
policy making and all that means
to us is
You might pass something this
year, and then we learned a
little bit about the impact of
that policy, and we go back and
we change it, we revise it,
ideally, we make it better,
right?
We, we strive to uphold these
several values, which is, uh, as
we heard a lot about yesterday,
engaging stakeholders and
communities.
Summarizing leading national
research,
Providing high quality original
data analysis.
Uh, and all of those things
culminating in
Budget and policy proposals.
We take very seriously our role
as nonpartisan staff.
And I can say we have regular
conversations internally, both
about that, but also about why
we do the work.
And that's to make schools
better for kids.
And so we're gonna bring you
ideas ideally, led by all of
this work.
that.
Make schools better for kids, or
at least we think so.
And so we just wanted to to
highlight that.
Very, very quick history on
slide 3 of how we got here in
terms of the road map.
In the fall of 2022, then
director Pera Ornament put out
the road map first, and in doing
that, we analyze some plans, we
analyze a lot of research,
including research that you had
already been, uh, using, uh,
such as no no time.
No time to lose.
Um
And decided, let's identify some
key areas in education that
would guide our staff work and
ideally guide some of your
decision making as a as a
committee. So we developed this
plan, the roadmap to address
those critical education issues.
And over the last few years,
you'll see in a minute here that
you've done a lot.
The legislature has done a lot
in implementing some of the
things that you've that you've
learned over the last few years.
This is maybe a little
editorializing.
But it is, it is about time.
And patience
And staying the course.
And um chairman said this
yesterday about about baby bonds
or buying bonds. It takes time.
And so our job as staff is to
help you understand the kind of
time it takes for some of these
initiatives to take hold and
really create an impact, so that
you can make decisions about
when to stay the course and
potentially when to say, OK,
we've we've tried that and it
didn't work.
On slide 4.
Uh, I should say we, we're
iterating a little bit on, on
this graphic of uh of a road
map, and, and part of this is we
really want to provide you with
sort of very, uh,
Easily understandable and
accessible thing that you know,
when we say the road map, this
is what it is, and here's what
we're talking about, right? And
again, um, you'll see a couple
different versions in the
presentations today, but
ideally, everyone will have a
sort of a a concrete idea in
their mind when we talk about
the road map, uh, in the near
future. I'm going to very
quickly go over the 4 areas. The
educator ecosystem, academic
design, full child supports and
these overarching systems.
So I won't go through all of
the, the bullets, but you'll see
in the little boxes around
there, these are the things that
we think
Um, have to do with these larger
overarching areas.
And so recruitment preparation,
retention as an example, an
educator ecosystem, obviously in
academic design things like
literacy, math and career and
technical education.
Bilingual and multicultural
education that I'm going to
touch on in the work plan a
little bit that maybe we haven't
talked as much about, um, over
the last couple of years.
child supports, uh, behavioral
health and guidance and career
counseling, as well as some of
those activities, fine in
performing arts, uh, physical
and health education, and you
could even probably throw in
other extracurricular there as
this whole child, uh
conversation, part of that whole
child conversation.
And then those overarching
systems. We just talked about
the statewide SIS.
What are the things that need to
happen in order for the system
just to be able to operate. And
we're not just talking about
kids being able to show up at
school every day because the bus
is on time.
Do we have good data systems? Do
people have access to good data
to make decisions. Does the
funding that you all appropriate
every year, go to the right
places, and is it enough? So
those kinds of large scale
conversations.
Systems that have to remain
steady while you're iterating on
some of these other ideas, uh,
and innovations.
So
I don't mean the next few slides
as a sort of um like.
Parade of, of accomplishments
necessarily. Yeah, you have done
a lot.
I, we've, we've identified a few
things here, both to to remind
you about some of the things
that you've, you've done.
But also
to then talk about what are the
next steps?
Right? Um, this is not a, this
is not a, um
You know, job well done,
although it is still more work
to do.
So in the educator ecosystem,
some of the highlights that I
that we've pulled here,
obviously, every year you've
thought about teacher salaries,
and you'll see increases both to
minimums.
And percentage increases to
salaries throughout the last few
years.
I do want to call out um in
2022, you expanded the use of
teacher residencies.
You all should be very proud of
that particular, uh,
Bucket of work, if you will.
We are a national leader.
In teacher residencies and will
probably ask some folks to come
and talk to you a little bit
more about how they're planning
to improve those programs, but
New Mexico is doing teacher
residencies at a scale and in a
way that no other state in the
country is doing, and a lot of
people are looking at us as a
model for that.
Um
We, we call that House Bill 130
here or the specific
Call out of professional work,
and we know we're iterating on
that idea still and figuring out
how to make that work best at
the local level, given all the
other things that we're trying
to worry about, but that you
pulled that professional work
aspect out of your study, you
have no time to lose in other
pieces as uh as important in the
system, uh, I wanted to call out
here.
Um, throughout, uh, we've, we've
now trained a number, not a
number, almost all elementary
school teachers and letters.
That is about educator quality.
We've now funded for 3 years
starting in FY 25 residencies
and other clinical practice. So
that long-term commitment to
those things.
As we heard about yesterday, we
funded those uh salary
differentials.
And then this past year, you
took, you took a couple more
steps when it came to the
educator ecosystem and quality.
Improving principal and
superintendent training in
hospital 157.
Increasing salary minimums and
requiring EPPs.
To make sure they're teaching
teachers.
How did he treat it?
That's that's an important part
of the system, also in 156, and
then obviously some other uh
appropriations for salary
increases.
Um, an innovative staffing.
So again, not all inclusive.
But a lot of work in the and and
this, there's only one slide
that includes previous years to
2022, you've done more than this
in the years before that.
But since the roadmap was sort
of developed, I wanted to kind
of start there and and and work.
Academic design.
And again, this doesn't go back
to the beginning, but one of the
biggest pieces around academic
design is that work in literacy,
and your support to school
districts and charter schools or
instructional materials.
Over the last few years, you've
increased the amount that goes
to districts and charter schools
for instructional materials.
Uh, you increased it, I believe,
in 2022 by 8 million to 43, and
then if you skip ahead to 2020,
I'm sorry, 2023.
You, you bumped it again to 55
million.
So that's money that's flowing
directly through the SCG, the
districts and charter schools
can use for instructional
materials.
The other key component in
academic design that you'll see
sort of uh as a through line in
all of these years, his career
technical career and technical
education and work-based
learning.
In 2023 and 2024, you all passed
new graduation requirements.
It didn't stick the first time,
that's OK. We came back, made
some adjustments, worked with
stakeholders, it was a good
conversation, I think, for
everyone to have. And in 2024,
you passed a revised and
upgraded graduation
requirements, which gets at that
academic design and how school
districts think about how they
provide secondary education.
Um
One thing that's missing from
this piece, and you're going to
hear more from us, uh, this,
this interim is math.
And we've, and you've, you all
have talked about that, other
folks have talked about how
we've focused so much on
literacy, which is a great
thing.
When it comes to how much we put
on teachers in terms of training
and other things we were trying
to be cautious about not
overloading folks, but I think
there's a, there's a consensus
that we have to do something
about math in 2025, you did fund
that. You did fund secondary,
uh, I'm sorry, math achievement.
Uh, funding and professional
development in math as well. And
then I did want to mention um
the increase to the secondary
student factor, which should be
seen.
As a complimenting in a piece of
graduation requirements.
Ideally, if we do our jobs
right, these pieces connect and
should be done in tandem.
On slide 70 child supports.
Primarily a lot of um
Below the line funding to
specific kinds of initiatives,
uh, the biggest increase that we
saw that I highlighted here is
um if you all remember going
back to, I want to say 2018,
2019, uh, appropriations to the
Indian Education Fund were in
the 2 to $5 million dollar range
over the last few years, you've
really bumped that up. Um, and,
um,
With, with the additional money
you've appropriated this year,
there's actually some
flexibility and you'll hear
about a rule that the department
is proposing that will give them
some more flexibility about how
they distribute that money.
To trap sues and nations and uh
local education agencies.
Through the last few years,
you've also increased at risk
factor, and it culminated in in
House Bill 63, both in a
revision to the formula itself,
and we should say, to an
increase to that at risk factor.
That kind of got lost in some of
the other details, but it's as
part of that whole calculation.
And in addition to using family
income index, the at-risk index
now is 0.40.
In 2019, I want to say it was
0.13.
And it could be just a just a
little bit off.
But you have significantly
increased funding uh to to
school districts to serve
at-risk students.
Um
And, and that's culminated this
year.
I won't go through the rest of
these. Uh, I've already talked
about some of them. I should, I
should point out the passage of
the the tribal regalia
legislation. Again, other, other
kinds of things that go beyond.
What we do normally in school,
but really thinking about that,
these are whole people we're
dealing with.
And they bring so much in terms
of challenges, but they also
bring a lot of assets to our
schools, and how do we leverage
those assets? How do we honor
those assets? Um, it's something
that, again, you'll hear me talk
about in a minute. New Mexico, I
think is still uniquely
positioned to do in a way that a
lot of other states either can't
or haven't.
And then lastly,
Some overarching systems that I
was talking about, uh oh.
Mm
It's never a good sign when your
decoder is not receiving from
your encoder.
OK, great.
Are we still OK as far as
OK. Should I keep going? OK.
Uh
OK, perfect.
So, again, overarching systems,
I did go a little retroactive in
this first bullet, uh, to be
honest, 2022, which was a budget
year, and when we're talking
about these overarching systems.
It's not policy years. And so
there wasn't a lot to talk about
in 2022, but I wanted to
highlight some things that you
had already done, which is
requiring education plans of
school districts, so they're
telling PED how they plan to use
their money. That was a
response, both for a call for
accountability, but also in
response to the lawsuit as part
of that um big sort of omnibus
SB1 HB 5 effort in 2019.
You funded fiscal transparency
in the creation of uh
Uh, a dashboard for budgets that
exists.
Whether or not everyone's
looking at it, right? That's a
whole other question, but it
exists out there. You can see
how school districts are using
money thanks to the dashboard
that PED built.
And then you also pass that
year, the attendance for Success
Act.
Which you've heard a lot about
over the last few years, but was
a key step in the state sort of
rethinking.
The, the, the transition from
sort of truancy to chronic
absenteeism, and then how
schools again support students
in that, not see it as a, as a
place where we should be
punishing kids. Um, we, we did
some
Uh, local, local ma reductions
in capital Oland in 2023, which
is part of those systems because
kids need
buildings and not just any
buildings.
Up to date, high quality
buildings to go to school, um,
as someone who taught in a
classroom with no windows.
Um, there's something about
that, and it's not that great.
And so we, we want to make sure
students have um comfortable
safe learning environments, and
that was one way to do that.
In 2024, you passed Senate Bill
137 that required that school
board training, which again is
getting at these sort of
governance issues that we've
been talking about.
You did fund the statewide IEP.
And then this last year, um,
When we, when I mentioned that
system of funding.
HB 63 really got at some of
those large scale revisions that
we had not made to the formula
in a long time.
You've now funded a statewide
SIS. We've extended that local
match reduction as staff.
capital outlay oversight task,
yeah, I just wanted to say the
whole name because I thought I
knew it. Um.
All of those people are
considering how do we deal with
construction in the long term.
Because what we're seeing there
is buildings cost a lot of
money, districts can't afford
them.
Luckily, the state is is able to
support a lot of that right now,
that may not always be the case
and so we want to think through
some long term. So those are all
the things you've, you've kind
of done.
And again, not, not a, uh, you
know, that you've completed your
assignment, but that we've made
some progress.
And so this next slide, I'm
returning back very quickly to
uh I'm already over time. I'm
sorry.
To the road ahead.
And you'll see that again we've,
we've bucket, bucketed them if
you will, into these four
topics.
I won't go through all of them.
I'll just maybe I'll just hit
one or two in each of the
pieces. The first one and
probably the most important one
I'll talk about in educator
ecosystem.
He's actually quality.
And we're, we're talking about
quality both at the educator
preparation program to ensure
that when someone enters a
program like that, we have
faith.
That when they leave the
program, they're as ready as
they can be.
Considering that they've never
actually taught a class
themselves, right? But those
residency pieces are important,
but we're also talking about
course alignment, um, that when
you take a course at a
particular college, we gotta
hold up, don't we?
We've got to take a pause as
they reboot the system, which is
probably going to turn us off.
