Uh, formerly the Human Services
Department, and I'm here today
to talk about the agency's
fiscal year 26 budget request,
uh, before I begin, I'd like to
express my gratitude and the
appreciation of my entire
agency, uh, for your service to
the people of New Mexico, and
I'd like to thank and recognize
the incredible team of public
servant leaders who are here in
the room today from the
healthcare authority uh for
showing up every day to do such
hard work for New Mexicans.
Um, on slide 2, I'm gonna give a
little, a brief overview of
some, some things that are going
on at the healthcare authority,
but I'll spend most of my time
today talking about the fiscal
year 206 budget request. Um,
we've really are focused on
three main priorities, uh, the
first one is to ensure access to
healthcare. The second is to
provide greater protection and
reduce risk for vulnerable New
Mexicans, um, and the third is
to fix structural underfunding
of the agency.
to assure performance and meet
state and federal requirements.
Um, before I leave this slide, I
do want to thank the more than 1
million New Mexicans who are
customers of our agency. The
words on the right, uh, of the
slide are from a real customer.
This is a single mom with two
kids who works 40 hours a week,
but still needs our help to make
ends meet.
Um, and she took the time to say
thank you to us, uh, for our new
rollout of the Sun Buck program,
which is our summer, uh, grocery
program through that program,
she received $240 over the
summer, uh, in grocery benefits
for her two children, uh, and
you know, I'm really grateful to
her for reaching out to us to
say thank you. We received a lot
of notes like this from our
customers all the time. Um, I
just want to say thank you back
to them, uh, because they really
offer a glimpse into the day to
day struggles that they are.
experiencing um in their real
lives every day.
On slide 3, it's because of our
customers that we are anchored
to our mission, uh, which is to
ensure that New Mexicans attain
their highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible, and high
quality health care and safety
net services.
OK. Before I move to slide 3
failed to introduce our CFO
Carol Lee Graham. She's sitting
to my left. Uh, welcome, Carol
Lee, here to answer questions,
and then our Medicaid CFO Alisa
Walker Moran, here taking over
our first slide, uh, direction,
uh, but here to answer your
questions as well as um our
leadership team here in the room
today.
On slide 4, I wanted to talk a
little bit about the healthcare
authority. We've got 2400
authorized positions, um, that
includes about 400 positions
that were transferred to the
agency, um, as part of the
healthcare Authority transition,
um, from most of those came from
the Department of Health for the
um developmental disability
supports division and the
division of Health Improvement.
We also received some staff from
the Office of the Superintendent
of Insurance, as well as from
the General Services department.
We are very focused, a little
bit obsessed these days with
maintaining a low vacancy rate
are current budgeted vacancy
rate is 2.2%. Um, that is below
our target of 5%, um, and we
have 3 divisions uh where we are
asking for funding for existing
FTEs we're asking for um funding
to support authorized positions
in 3 key areas. The first is the
income support division.
are funded vacancy right now is
negative. Um, we're at -13.5%.
We have done a really great job
of onboarding new case workers.
These are our frontline staff.
The income support division is
the front door for the agency.
It is where most New Mexicans
come to receive their benefits,
um, and so the adequate
performance of the income
support division is really the
reputation of our agency. Um,
we're also seeking um to reduce
our funded vacancy rate for the
developmental disability.
Supports division, um, we are
currently at about 1.2%, so very
little room to hire in that
division. We are very focused on
uh making sure that we reduce
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
of um individuals with
disabilities we've um taken on
the load of um visiting every DD
waiver um individual twice a
year. We've done that with the
existing staff structure, uh, so
I really think that an
additional investment in the
staffing of that division is
necessary.
And then lastly, um, we are
seeking a reduction in our
Medicaid vacancy rate, which is
currently at 5.3%. Um, that is
one of the lowest, we one of the
lowest staffing ratios in the
country in our Medicaid program.
They're doing a tremendous
amount of work. Uh, we are
flowing billions of dollars out
into the healthcare system. We
really wanna make sure that we
are adequately funded to oversee
the work of our managed care
partners, um, and implement
these really strong good
programs that we know work and
are effective in improving
healthcare outcomes for New
Mexicans.
Um, on slide 5, these are just a
few of the successes of the
healthcare authority. I'm not
gonna talk, I'm sure you'll be
relieved. I won't talk about
this entire slide.
Um, but these are some things
that were accomplished by the
agency in the past year. I would
like to call out three things in
particular on this slide. The
first is that we successfully
completed the Medicaid and SNAP
unwinding. We worked through a
pretty substantial backlog to
achieve timeliness, um, on our
Medicaid and SNAP applications.
We are currently issuing an
expedited SNAP benefits in 2.5
days, 15 days for regular SNAP
benefits and 2040s for.
Medicaid applications. Uh, we,
the agency had not been timely
in several years. Uh this is a
huge accomplishment. I would
like to acknowledge the
leadership that worked, um, so
hard to bring these numbers
down.
We effectively launched our new
turquoise care program. That's
our new managed care program
that launched on July 1st, and
we received approval for our
Medicaid 1115 waiver, um, that
really focuses on the health
related social needs of New
Mexicans on Medicaid, and we are
one of 4 states that received
approval to implement Native
American traditional healthcare
practices in our Medicaid
program. And then thirdly, I
just wanna acknowledge all of
the food expansions that
occurred in the past year, um,
just
In October, we expanded the SNAP
benefit to 200% of the federal
poverty level serving um 67,000
additional households here in
New Mexico. We implemented
supplemental food benefits for
individuals with disabilities
and for seniors that benefit
went from $32 a month to $100 a
month, and then we launched the
Sunbox program that summer
grocery program for children who
qualify for Medicaid and SNAP
and reduce free and reduced
lunch so that they could have
food afford food.
over the summer. And then
lastly, not on the slide, but I
do want to just recognize that
our agency is also boots on the
ground when there's natural
disaster that affects the
community. We had a lot, we were
very busy this summer with
storms and floods. Uh, we
provide emergency food
assistance to communities, um
where there are better displaced
by these disasters, including
most recently in Riodoso due to
the fires, Roswell, I do to
Woods and floods in San Juan and
Rio Ariva County.
On slide 6, I just want to say
thank you for supporting the
agency's fiscal year 25 request
to support the agency as a
data-driven organization. We
have new data dashboards that
are available now. Um, our first
dashboard launched in November,
that includes our customer data.
Um, it's a really fascinating
tool can tell you sort of by
county who's enrolled in Snap,
who's enrolled in Medicaid, who
might be eligible for these
benefits that's not enrolled.
How much their benefits are, how
many kids, how many adults, all
of the things that you need to
know about our customers. We
have a new interactive map on
our website, our own homepage,
um, and then we have additional
dashboards that will be rolling
out for inpatient, outpatient
and long term care this spring
and provide our access this
summer and we have provided the
data dashboard to our LFC
analysts, uh, resolving, I think
what was a bit of an outstanding
issue related to data access
from the agency. So, I'm gonna
pivot to the
budget on slide 7, our total
fiscal year 26 budget request,
including the base and
expansions is $15.5 billion. Um,
that's, uh, funded primarily
with federal funds at about
85.7%, meaning that the meaning
that the remaining 14.3% are
general funds, largely, um, and
as a reminder about 306 million
came from the Department of
Health, um, and is now an
agency's budget, um, as part of
the healthcare authority.
transition, we've also added
federal funds for the new
hospital directed payment
program of about $1.2 billion.
So that's all reflected in the
agency's budget. Um, so that
hospital program doesn't reflect
any additional new general fund.
Um, our general fund base
request is $2.2 billion that's a
$232 million increase from
fiscal year 25, representing
about 11.7% in general fund.
There are 3.
Uh, cost drivers, really, I'm
gonna talk about those in a
little bit more depth, uh, but
they really are the Medicaid
program, the developmental
disabilities waiver program and
then the income support program
and the funding for additional
um to fund the authorized FTE.
Um, we have a very small
expansion proposal this year.
Um, so most of our funding is
really in the base. We have
about 23.3 million in um FOA 26
expansions, so that's just a
1.2% increase um in over our FY
25 budget, um, just to note
about our reversion rate for
fiscal year 24 was a 0.23%. Uh,
when you're talking about a
budget that's uh $15 billion we
reverted about 4 million.
That's pretty much as close to
zero as you could get, I think.
On slide 8, these are our base
budget requests by division. I'm
gonna focus kind of on the
higher ones, uh, today. Um,
we've got, um, a general fund
request, um, for the income
support division that is about a
37.5% increase in general fund.
The primary drivers are of that
are to continue an 8% salary
retention differential, um, you
may recall that the agency had a
a snap settlement with the
federal government. This is the
final year of the SNAP
settlement. Uh, we did that
salary differential through that
snap settlement, um, now we are
asking to continue that um in
permanence, uh, because it will
otherwise result in a pay
reduction for our frontline case
worker staff. Um, we are also in
need of additional support for
our customer contact center,
which receives millions of
contacts, uh, every year and to
sustain funding for 158 existing
FTE.
In the uh developmental
disability supports division. We
have a 16.4% increase requested.
Um, that is largely driven by um
the increase in the number of
individuals receiving waiver
services reductions in federal
funding, increased utilization
and maintaining that no wait
list for that program. Um, and
then we have some additional
medical assistance division
program and administrative, um,
costs, um, primarily related to
contract costs.
Um, for those of you who have
been wondering what's going on
with the um miser program, uh,
that IT program that's taken a
while to launch. Uh, we just
launched 3 of the modules, and
so things are starting to go
live as they go live, those
contract costs shift into the
program and so that's really
reflected in that cost. We are
also asking for funding uh for
existing FTE about 20 of
existing FTE to support new
programs in that MCO oversight
that I spoke about.
Um, and then we have in our
budget, um, increases in
provider rates uh for that full
year. I think you all recall
that we did a 6 month, um,
increase, uh, the rates
scheduled to go to 150% of
Medicare in January for primary
care, maternal child health and
behavioral health. Um, so the
base reflects now a full year.
Uh, we are gonna see a lower
federal match coming up in
fiscal year 26, um,
And we've projected pretty close
to flat enrollment, we're at
about 1% we think. Um.
And so, uh, but we also are
seeing higher cost inflation on
medical, so 2.6% medical cost,
and then we have some
replacement of funds that are
going away, including um county
supported Medicaid funds that
are reduced tobacco settlement
and opioid fun.
OK. Um, on slide 9,
I'm gonna talk about um
Medicaid. Um, it's important to,
to note what the cost drivers
are, but one of the things I
want to do first on this slide
is just mentioned that
subsequent to the September 1st
budget submission, um, the HCA
had additional data to inform
the budget and we hear the
actual need is lower than what
was uh in the original budget
request. So I think our original
budget request was 166 million.
in general fund we've now
revised that down to about 124.9
million in general fund. There
are some levers that the agency
executed to um contain what
looks like a pretty, a pretty
substantial shortfall in fiscal
year 25, um, and that is the
result, um, the result of those
cost containment measures, um,
is really means that those costs
will not carry into fiscal year
26.
Um, so, again, yeah, these are
the cost drivers. I spoke about
them at a high level already.
Um, we have some, about $16
million in expansions for
behavioral health, assisted
living facilities, and pace, so
not a lot there, and then we are
asking for 32 million um from
the grow fund, um, to focus on
our 11:15 waiver initiatives.
Those are really innovative new
programs, um, specifically, uh,
to
things like food as medicine for
pregnant women and food
insecure, um, seniors, medical
res respite for homeless
individuals who are
transitioning out of the
hospital and access to care for
individuals transitioning out of
prison and jail.
Next slide please.
Um, so I just wanna
uh, have a high high level note
here about um provider network.
Um, we've been getting a lot of
questions about whether or not
the rate increases are actually
influencing impact to the
provider network. Excuse me, we
are seeing net growth across all
provider types. We are tracking
that, um, so I just wanted to
show you that here um we've seen
since July 1st, net growth in
behavioral health workers of 469
additional behavioral health
workers and 429.
physician, um,
MD work uh workforce uh
resources, so we're tracking
that across many provider types.
Some of the some of the actual
increases are pretty
substantial. I was actually
surprised to see, for example,
we've added 9 podiatrists to the
provider network. Um, pretty
substantially. It was, uh,
actually pleased to see that
we'll be tracking this data
going forward so we can see how
um we're growing that provider
network, uh, with the
investments that you all have
made.
On slide 11,
I just want to call out that our
budget does optimize federal
funds for New Mexico's Health
and Human Services agencies. Um,
we will, uh, buy fiscal year 26
have leveraged $1.7 billion for
our sister agencies, um, that
includes the aging and long-term
services department CYFD
guardianship services that the
Developmental Disabilities
Council, the Department of
Health, um, some of that has now
since moved into the healthcare
authority, but some of it's
still over at DOH early.
childhood education and care and
um resources that the public
education department to support
schools.
OK, um, I'm gonna talk now about
behavioral health. We really
don't have a lot of uh growth in
the behavioral health budget,
uh, proposal, uh, right now, all
of the general fund request is
being driven by a replace, uh,
to replace reduced opioid
settlement funds in the form of
$2.5 million. Um, that request
will continue to fund the Fresh
Start renal Assistance Program,
um, that is serving 201 people
in fiscal year 2.
Uh, so we've seen a lot of
growth in that program, um, and
then I'm gonna talk a little bit
about behavioral health. So even
though it's not a, a big cost
driver in the budget. It was on
the agenda today, so just I have
a slide on that I'm happy to
answer any questions, um, on the
next slide, please.
Um, we do continue to see growth
in access to behavioral health
services year over year and you
can see in the graph in the
right, we're serving um in
fiscal year 24, 303,978 New
Mexicans receiving uh behavioral
health services of some kind.
Um, we are, uh, very focused on
trying to reduce provider
administrative burden, um, and
utilizing the growth funds for
um what we call SE, which is
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment. Um,
And then the third thing I want
to talk about before I move on,
uh, because it's so important,
it's building the crisis
continuum of care. Um, we
obviously have been very focused
on the 988, um crisis continuum.
We've got two mobile crisis
teams in New Mexico. 3 crisis
triage centers, and then we are
getting ready to launch 5,
certified community behavioral
clinic clinics on January 1st,
um, they are required under
federal rules to provide 9 core
services and
one of those key services is
24/7 crisis care. Um, that also
includes outpatient behavioral
health and substance use
services screening and
monitoring and care management,
um, so we're really excited that
those are about to launch, um,
everything looks like it's ready
to go. One provider, um, didn't
quite make it to the January 1st
deadline they will launch in
April.
OK, um, talking a little bit
about the developmental
disability supports division,
um, our total base growth is 42
million in general fund. Um,
there are really 3 key drivers
related to the waiver program
growth, um, that includes
support for increased
utilization as people have gone
on to the waiver and you can see
um in the table or the graph on
the bottom there, um, the growth
and waiver, um, that we're
serving more individuals since
that super allocation.
It takes a few years for people
to start to access more
services, um, those that's
starting to become real as we're
seeing higher costs, uh, and
utilization, which is a good
thing, um, we want these people
to get services, but um it is uh
costly. We are seeing a
reduction in our federal
financing, um, and then we have
our continuous allocation
process. So that's 3.8 million
to support the ongoing
allocation of people to the
waiver. Um, we are also
requesting a 4th item, which is
uh
To uh reduce our funded vacancy
rate, so additional 3.8 million,
um, and I'm gonna talk about
that on the next slide.
Um, we are, I do want to just,
as I mentioned earlier, um, call
out the accomplishments of DDSD
and the division of Health
Improvement, uh, both of those
divisions have been very focused
on reducing um the risk of
abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. You probably read
about um some cases in the
paper. There were a couple of
waiver providers arrested, uh,
just last week, uh, for abuse,
um, those were investigations
that were initiated by our
agency. Um, that's the result,
um.
the work we're doing, we are
doing 2 wellness visits of every
waiver, um, patient, um, per
year, uh, to make sure that
people are safe, that they are
being well taken care of, but
they are not being neglected,
um, in the case of things like
neglect where it may not be
abuse. We're trying to address
those problems so that we can
make sure that people are, um,
you know, getting all of the
things that they need to
maintain healthy lives in their
communities, um, with adequate
support.
Um, so we really are trying to
focus on that, um, the
healthcare authority is also
very focused on um better
support and collaboration. Um, I
think DDSD is one example of
really where there are a lot of
different players that are very
involved. Um, we've got very
some dependencies on Medicaid,
and dependencies on the income
support division to make sure
people get access to services,
um, and so really focused on
trying to increase that
collaboration and keep people
safe. I do want to
say that DDSD um has an
existing, they launched a new
bureau, um, that is really
focused on individual safety and
advocacy. They did this at the
recommendation of a report, I
think that was financed by the
legislature about what
improvements they needed to
make, but they did do it with
their existing staffing
structure, um, and so needed an
investment.
Um, there.
Um, with the income support
division, um, we are requesting
a pretty big, um, infusion here
uh to support um the
administration of the program.
Um, so our request is for 16.4
million in general fund growth.
Um, again, this is to support
our front door, um, of the
agency and make sure that we
provide adequate service to our
customers.
Um, we know that when the income
support division is not
functioning, these are the calls
you get. Um, these are the calls
you get saying I cannot access
my benefits.
Um, the healthcare authority
hasn't responded to me. We need,
um, it's been, you know, 60 days
and I'm still waiting on my food
benefits. These are the calls
you get. This has been one of
the big focuses of the agency
and just making sure uh that we
clean up and we have people
getting their benefits timely,
but it is um very tight right
now. We have actually more staff
than we can afford, uh, and so
we are asking for that uh
funding so that we can continue
to support those existing FTE um
into
The future.
And it was just remind you all,
um, I think there's also a
special appropriation that we
are requesting around training
for our frontline workers. Um,
one of the things to be aware of
is that from the pandemic and
then going through the unwinding
and all of the staff on boarding
that we've done, we have a
pretty new workforce. These are
really complicated programs.
They are issuing billions of
dollars in benefits and we want
to make sure that they are
adequately trained and that we
have a good training program for
our team. Uh, and so there's
additional funding requests.
for that.
Um, the last point I think I'll
make about the income support
division, um, is that we cannot
support our current caseload
with existing staff, um, as a
reminder, we are at a negative
vacancy rate as of September
2024. Each caseworker is
responsible for 13, 1,337 cases.
That's a 22% increase in
caseload since 2019 in their
caseload ratio, um, in fiscal
year 26, our caseloads will
increase to 1,506 per
caseworker.
That's an additional 13%
increase without funding
additional FTE.
Um, and just a reminder that we
did do some food expansions. We
are serving another 67,000
families through Snap and other
food benefits without that
increase in FTE staffing.
OK. Um, I'm gonna do a quick
word about state health
benefits. I feel really
important to call out, um, what
is a pretty big number here, um,
and we have a request for a um
supplemental of 124 million. Um,
I don't think we'll need the
full 124 million, but um wanted
to put the true number out
there. Um, the reason that this
number is so high is that um,
There are 2 primary cost
drivers. One is that when we
inherited this from the General
Services department, um, I would
describe us as not having an
accurate projection on the
premium collection. Um, so the
premium collection is actually
gonna be $31.5 million less than
what was projected originally,
um, and so we are inheriting
that, um, and then we are also
seeing higher medical claim
costs, so we are seeing.
12.5% growth in medical claims
and then our pharmacy claims
cost has increased by almost
29%. Um, you all probably know
that the biggest driver of this
is the GLP1 drugs, um, for
weight loss and for diabetes. So
we are uh covering those
products, um, they are, they are
expensive, and that is the
number one driver of cost on the
pharmacy benefit right now.
We also want to be very
transparent with you all, uh,
because through the state
employee benefit, we are also
covering members of local public
bodies, their share of the
deficit is about 37 million, um,
so right now we need to think of
some solutions about how to
cover um the share that the
local public bodies have kind of
also contributed to that
deficit. Um, if we were to try,
try to make up the shortfall
with premium increases alone, we
would be increasing the premium
by 35%. That would be on top.
Of the 10% increase that we did,
um, this year.
On state health benefits.
So, cost containment's gonna be
really important. Um, gonna talk
about that on slide 19.
Uh, we do have some initiatives
that we are taking, um, the
first is that we are going to be
implementing Medicare
reference-based pricing for
hospital and professional
services, we think we can save
about 45 million by doing this.
Um, something to be aware of
here is that um this is an
initiative where the state
essentially says we're not going
to pay above a certain price.
Right now we're paying uh in the
state health benefit about 300%
of Medicare for hospital
services, for example, we would
say we're gonna pay.
200% of Medicare. Um, the
important thing to know here is
that we have to have this
strategy work in tandem with uh
potential customer, customer
abrasion, um, strategies so that
customers don't end up with the
balance bill, uh, for those, and
so we are looking at some
strategies, probably for
discussion during session about
how do we do that in a way
that's really mindful of the
patients that we're trying to
serve and that we don't just
pass the cost on to them.
Um, we are also looking at
negotiating and procuring better
pharmaceutical savings, um, we
have a traditional pharmacy
benefit manager model today. Um,
we are looking at joining up
with state consortium, um, there
are states that have kind of
pulled together for pharmacy
purchasing. We think that gives
the state better control, um,
and more transparency in terms
of pharmacy spending. Uh, we do
have 3 repricing um exercises
going on right now with some
vendors just to see.
the best cost optimization is
going to be. We have a, a
potential opportunity to
leverage federal funds. Um,
there is an opportunity to
potentially get um funding from
the federal government for
children of state employees who
might be eligible for CHIP. Uh,
we are looking at that as an
option to see how we might be
able to execute that and get
some federal dollars. We are
also going to be looking at
changing our coverage or cost
sharing policies for GLP1 drugs,
um.
how can we preserve that
benefit, but also think about
what's a really reasonable
benefit, um, and what a
potential cost sharing might be,
for example, for individuals who
are using those products for
weight loss.
Um, we are also going to be, uh,
I think in heavy discussion
with, with all of you about what
the premium increase should be,
um, and then how get that gets
split split between the employee
and us as the employer, the
state of New Mexico, like,
what's a reasonable share for
everyone to pay, um, what seems
right, how are we passing those
costs on to employees and how
are we as an employer picking up
some of the costs.
And we'd like to look at
updating our salary bands and
they want to call attention to
um the graph on the right, um,
uh, the state is actually paying
a lower share, um, because
employees have shifted into the
highest cost band since 2019, so
you can see in 2019, um, 60% of
employees were making less than
$50,000 which is the lowest cost
band. So that means that the
state was paying a higher share
for them today, um, about 36% of
them.
employees are in that lowest
cost band. Most of the employees
have moved up into the higher
tier, which means that they are
paying the higher share, um, I
think what's interesting about
this is that if we were to leave
these employer bands, the salary
bands as they are today,
eventually we will have no lower
band. Um, we will have kind of
priced everyone out of the lower
band completely. Um, we are also
probably going to request some
collaboration about um the
deficit share that's driven by
the local public bodies, um, and
then we
are asking other state agencies
to contribute to the
administrative personnel costs
of operating the fund.
Um, I just wanna, I have a
really quick slide here about
the healthcare Affordability
fund. I'm not going to get into
too much detail here because it
is primarily um a non, uh it's
not traditional general fund,
although I do, I do believe it
is general fund, uh, but we are
asking for 121 million um
increase uh to support basically
3 things, uh, paid for out of
the fund. One to continue our
marketplace affordability
program and protect, um,
enrollees through Be Well.
Mexico from premium increases,
um, and higher subsidies. Um, we
are also looking to strengthen
our small business health
coverage affordability,
assisting with lower deductibles
for uh privately um employed
employees and then um funding
for a full year of the uninsured
program, um, which is for people
who are ineligible for Medicaid
or other sources of coverage.
On, on slide 21, um, these are
our 5 expansion requests. Uh,
we've got uh one request, uh,
7.2 million, that's really
around the correct salary
placement. I think this is
something you're probably
hearing about from other
agencies, um, one thing that I
want to mention here is that a
majority of our workforce at the
Healthcare Authority is
currently compensated at or
below their respective midpoint
of their salary level and 20% of
our employees qualify for at
least one benefit that's
administer.
started through the healthcare
authority.
Um, we are also seeking 5.7
million to raise rates for
non-medicare and non-medicaid
behavioral health codes. We're
seeking um about 5.3 million to
raise rates for the PACE
program, and then close to 5
million for increased provider
reimbursement rates for assisted
living facilities. Um, we do
have on slides 22 and 23, um,
are non-recurring budget
requests. I know there's a
separate hearing this week, but
they're um on slide 23, they're.
Just 3 that I want to call out
to you or 2 that I want to call
out to you. Um, the first is 124
million for that state health
benefit shortfall, um, that I
think we will be wanting to
discuss with you further and
then um there is a $54.3 million
special request for the medical
assistance division that is no
longer needed, um, and so I just
wanted to make sure that you
were aware um that that request
is no longer um one that the
agency will be uh pursuing, um,
that is related to the cost
containment that was issued.
That was performed by the agency
in fiscal year 25.
As I wrap up today. I just want
to talk about on the next slide,
um, the healthcare authority's
economic impact. We've been
doing a lot of study on this,
um, and there's evidence that
our programs are promoting job
creation, uh, in key industries
in New Mexico, resulting in
actual earnings for New Mexico
workers generating revenue to
businesses, generating tax
revenue to the state and local
governments and sustaining
economic development and
reducing poverty, um, for
For example, the economic impact
of our food, heating, cooling,
and cash assistance benefits is
estimated to be $1.9 billion for
the state of New Mexico and
creates and supports 18,549 jobs
here in our state. That does not
include our healthcare impact.
We are uh currently studying
that and it's a little more
complicated, um, and probably
much higher.
So,
um, the 3 takeaways, as I
conclude, um, is that our fiscal
year 26 budget request optimizes
general funds and federal funds
to boost essential services that
will ensure healthcare access to
healthcare, provide greater
protection and reduce risk for
vulnerable New Mexicans and
fixed structural underfunding of
the agency to ensure our
performance and meet state and
federal requirements, and I just
want to mention that the
investments in these programs
really do work. Um, New Mexico
has gone, um, largely because of
the investments in these
programs.
um, from last in child poverty
to 22nd in child poverty, a huge
accomplishment for the state of
New Mexico, and I thank you for
your time and for your
investments. And we'll yield to
you, Mr. Chair, for questions.
We can all go home because all
the money is spent.
Senator Sheer.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I'm gonna
I wrote my notes in order, so,
but I didn't always write down
page numbers, so maybe we'll try
here. So we talked about uh
healthcare provider payments to
150% of Medicaid, Medicare.
Um
Is that enough?
To make sure that our doctors
and hospitals can stay here and
stay open?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Scherer.
Um, I think
In my opinion, I do believe that
this is, this is a really
historic investment for the
state of New Mexico through the
Medicaid program. Um, our rates,
I believe when we uh are
completed with execution of
those uh rate increases in
January will be
Um, highest, the highest
Medicaid rates in the country. I
think it's hard for me to
Say that we should go higher.
Um, I would like to see the
results of those investments,
um, you know, it probably
depends on who you ask. I would
guess that providers might think
it's not enough. Um, I do
believe that they provide
tremendous value to the state of
New Mexico and um, you know, I
would, I think it would be um
great if they were paid more,
but I, I think that um, Medicaid
will have picked up its
responsibility. Um, we, I do
wanna just also say that um
through the
legislative collaboration and
through the collaboration with
the hospitals in particular, um,
we are going to be raising that
revenue and passing through $1.2
billion to New Mexico's
hospitals. Um, I believe that
that is, that is enough uh for
New Mexico's hospitals, but
again, I don't work at a
hospital and you'd have to
probably ask them what their
position is, but I think really
infusing our providers with cash
will allow them to be
innovative, um, to really unlike
unlock the access doors and
entry points.
allow them to invest in new
services for the state of New
Mexico, um, allow them to
attract and retain um good
provider networks. So I do think
it's um I, I can't even really
overstate the investment that's
been made, you know, over the
past 3 years by you all and how
important it will be, and I
think it's, it's going to work.
and Madam Secretary, I know that
uh commercial insurance pays
more.
Um
And, and I know for most
hospitals, they, they balance
commercial versus Medicare and
Medicaid, and um uh and if the
payer mixes out of balance,
that's causes trouble. Uh,
doctors maybe not so much, uh,
with CPAs and uh figuring that
out, but they have the same
issue.
Uh, and so the reason I asked
wasn't because of that, but
Maybe we ought to be trying to
find a way to get more
commercial insurance in here as
opposed to us paying for it
because that really will change
the, the payer mix and really
will change whether a doctor can
stay or a hospital can stay
open.
So, I just throw that out there.
Uh, you in, in here said uh that
you weren't asking for much for
behavioral health.
Um, but the governor put out
that she wanted $100 million for
behavioral health, health.
To solve the crime problem.
If she gets the $100 million
who's gonna use it if you don't
want it?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
just a quick point I want to
make about the um the hospital
issue before we leave that one
too, um, which is that the
Medicaid rate through this
directive payment will be at the
average commercial rate. So, um,
that's the whole, um, exercise
of that additional 1.2 billion.
Um, in terms of behavioral
health, um, I don't think it's
that the agency is not asking
for a lot. It's that we're not
asking for a lot of additional
expansion items, um, the
governor hasn't issued her
budget yet. So I, I really, I
can't speak to what's in there.
what she may be asking for, um,
and there may be some changes,
um, in terms of what she may
request the agency to do once
she releases that budget. OK.
Yeah. So,
Do we have any
Uh, results in, in the
behavioral health world. I know
we keep saying there's more
access, more access, more
access, but are there fewer
people that need it?
Are we, are we solving any
problems?
Um
Individual human problems. Mr.
Chair, Senator, um, share, I
think that's a really
interesting question. Um, when
you're talking about mental
illness, for example, I think
the goal is treatment, not
necessarily a cure, um, you
know, people who have, for
example, schizophrenia, they'll,
they'll live with that for their
whole lives. And so it's really
about managing um that, um,
certainly I think substance use
disorder is something that um.
We can improve outcomes on there
have there have been some
promising, I would say, but not
totally, um,
I'm not sure what to make of the
data. There's been some
reduction in overdose deaths.
There's multiple theories about
why that could be, we've done a
lot of distribution of naloxone,
a lot of heavy, um, sort of
focus on, uh, treatment, um, but
there's also sort of theories
about the drugs being safer, um,
and so I just don't know enough
yet. Um, I would say that
there's probably still not
enough, uh, treatment, um, it
takes a long time for people to
get better from
mental mental illness or from um
substance use disorder and it
takes a commitment uh from the
individual and so I think um
You know, I'm not sure that I
would look squarely at outcomes.
I think the utilization trend is
very promising, um, and what
we're really trying to do is
turn the tide of some of these
public health concerns around
overdoses and um use of things
like fentanyl and um other
factors that we know are
contributing to the public
health concern. And so, you
know, for example, uh, public
health offices are offering
medication assisted treatment
now, um, and so that we can make
that more available. I would say
that there's still a lot of
work.
to do in the behavioral health
space to to really move the
needle, um, now that we've kind
of improved access.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
I, I agree there's a lot that
that's never going to go away,
never be cured.
Um
But I also know there are things
that can make life better.
OK, so I don't need to go as
often, OK? Uh, maybe I need to
go every once in a while, for
whatever reason.
Uh, I know there's uh
Uh, alcoholics Anonymous, for
example, uh, you know, so
they've got.
Program, but they also have told
me straight up that the best way
to get somebody sober is to let
him crash and burn until they
get to the bottom in their
world.
They're not gonna ask for
treatment. They're never gonna
to ask for help. So if we keep
them right here above the
bottom.
Then we're never gonna get him
sober.
But we're never so and, and I, I
know that sounds wicked and
evil, and I've even asked that
question, wow, do we really want
that?
Um
So, uh, but that's, that's what
That's what that particular
group is telling me this, you
know, we're not talking about
psychologists or psychiatrists
or whatever we're talking about.
People that are members of AA.
Um
But it, but the bottom line from
their perspective is, until you
hit bottom, you're not going to
try to get better.
So if your, if you're hovering
just above bottom because
somebody's helping you hover
there.
It's not
Really
Long term help.
I just throw that out there.
Um, on page 17, you did talk
about.
Number of case.
Case managers.
Or case workers, what did you
call them?
Um, yeah, case workers, where
you had
704 in 20.
2019 and 607 now.
So we're down 100 people.
Why
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Scherer,
I think it's probably been a
combination. It's just the
funding of the agency, um, there
was a period of time where I
would describe the agency as
having a very hard time. We went
through the great resignation,
um, of course, as you know, uh,
you know, it's like a worldwide
phenomenon in which people left
the workforce. Um, I would say
that that impacted us. It was
hard for us to get workers. Um,
we've had to make a lot of
really creative shifts around.
how we support the workforce,
uh, of the agency, for example,
we've taken some of our
positions, um, that, for
example, are located in our
field offices and some of our
higher cost communities like
Santa Fe, um, we don't pay, we
don't pay enough to live in
Santa Fe, but, you know, these
are good um salaries in some of
our rural communities. We've
shifted some of our workforce to
our rural field offices that we
could on board um staff. We're,
we're having a state job is a
really desirable thing. So we've
kind of made some ads.
assessments like that so that we
can um really have the adequate
workforce that we need, but I, I
think what you're looking at
there is just the sort of steady
decline of, um, you know,
funding, so there's been some
chipping away at the agency's
funding over the years partially
because the agency couldn't fill
positions, um, a trend that has
been reversed, um, but also sort
of recognizing that um with high
vacancy rates, um, the
legislature, I think fairly.
questioned whether it should be
funding all those positions and
so I think that's what you're
seeing in the data there.
OK.
And then the veteran's home, uh,
did I understand that the, the
federal government has not
Helps
Get that thing ready for right,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Chair, I
think that might be a question
for the Department of Health.
They operate the veterans home.
I, I'm not sure, but I can take
that question back to secretary
delay
and they were supposed to
reimburse it for us and then we
built it and then they reimburse
us because they said we built it
in the wrong place.
Because we don't have enough
people to operate it, so that's
kind of where that one's at.
OK, thank you.
Uh, so the bottom line, uh, for
me is results, OK? Uh, what I
fear with every agency in the
world, not just New Mexico, but,
but every agency in the world
has this desire to grow and get
bigger and, and, um,
And, and, and what I would like
to see is how do we put
ourselves out of business.
In each agency, so that people
don't need it, not that we're
just cutting people off and
letting them, you know, go, but,
but how do we, how do we get the
results so that people don't
need the services anymore. How
do we get the results so they
don't need snap anymore, they
don't need Medicaid anymore. How
do we get there?
And of course, all of that's
economic development, how do
they get jobs, uh, so they don't
need this. So, um, that's not.
You, of course, but, but Mr.
Chair, last year I did talk
about a Medicaid.
Trust fund like we did with some
other trust funds, and I thought
we were actually making progress
there.
Uh, so you put in
X number of dollars, whatever
that is in and allow that, just
like our other trust funds to be
invested and grow, so that that
money is coming out to help
support Medicaid in the future.
And I think I would still
I like to see that. I think that
would also help our hospitals a
lot because then they, they
would see that as well. So.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair,
Senator, I do want to just make
one point, which is related to
um the issue you just mentioned,
which is I think this whole team
of people in this room would
love nothing better than to have
the agency not need to exist
anymore because people were well
off enough that they didn't need
our programs, but um people
working minimum wage jobs will
still require assistance from
our agency and many of our own
employees require assistance
from our agency, so.
Definitely um I think it's
important to just recognize that
um those investments in like the
minimum wage and in high paying
jobs are really necessary, um,
in order to really move the
needle and get people um out of
programs like the ones that we
operate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, good morning.
Mm
You spent more money than the
rest of the state.
Just amazing.
$15 billion.
And
I know management is a huge
piece of this.
And I know that, you know,
trying to keep your thumb on
every piece of it is, is a job.
Um, I can't even imagine how big
a job that is, to tell you the
truth.
But with that, you've been
having some
Audit deficiencies.
And one of your audit
deficiencies has to do with
verifying your uh
Documenting the proper licensure
of some of your providers.
And I often wonder if that will
come back to bite.
It's, that's a poor.
Said a word in, well, that come
back to mess with your
Reimbursements.
From the federal people trying
to say we're providing skilled
care from people who aren't
licensed.
So
I know you said you, I know you
probably working on the problem,
but could you comment on it just
a little bit?
Uh, Mr. Tay, um,
Senator Woods. Um, I, so you're
absolutely right. First of all,
if you want to say it is a very
big agency and it is a lot to
keep an eye on. Absolutely, um,
we, you know, I'm really
appreciative actually when there
are audits that are done, they
tell us where it'll look. They
tell us what to pay attention
to. They can be very helpful.
Um, there were some pandemic era
protections that were um for
providers.
During the COVID-19 pandemic
around, I'm not having to
re-verify licensure as often. I
think that may have driven some
of the audit findings. They do
have the Medicaid team if you
all, um, if they want to weigh
in on and answer the question.
We did just launch a new, um,
one of the modules of our miser,
uh, system replacement is a new
provider, um, enrollment system,
um, that system is really
tracking and can kind of tell us
with greater intelligence when
things are expired.
Um, and make sure that we are
not letting providers kind of
continue on the program without
re-verifying their license. Um,
so I think, you know, that is
one initiative that we're taking
to make sure that that gets
cleaned up. Um, I'm gonna look
behind me with your permission,
Mr. Tay, and just
OK, I'll see if they have
anything to add. It doesn't
sound like it. So, uh, we are
paying attention to that one. I
don't think um there has been a
lot of cleanup just like there
was an unwinding of the Medicaid
and SNAP pandemic era
protections, one of those
actually was related to provider
enrollment.
OK.
That brings me to your income
support division.
And you're asking for a
8% rate uh 8% employee
retention.
factory there.
Are you trying to bypass the
state personnel office there.
Um, Mr. Cha, Senator Woods, no,
that actually that 8% has been
in place for about, I think it's
been about 3 years. Um, that was
part of a snap settlement that
we made with the federal
government, um, we are seeking
to make that permanent. So I
think if we were to be able, we
weren't able to make that
permanent because it was part of
the snap settlement. Um,
certainly,
would help if we could make that
permanent as part of, um, if we
got funding for that now that
the snap settlement is expiring,
um, and we're able to sort of
make that a permanent salary,
uh, placement initiative for our
caseworkers. Um, I think one of
the reasons that it's not
bypassing rules is that it is um
we we are allowed to do
retention differentials, um,
people cannot hang on to those
if they leave, and so that's the
point is that, uh, trying to
keep those frontline workers
working for the healthcare
authority.
they can't use it to negotiate,
for example, a higher salary at
another agency and so they have
to stay in that job in order to
keep it, um, and that is allowed
by state personnel board rules.
So, so we're talking about this
is other state moneys or federal
monies that's gonna pay for a
lot of that, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, we're
asking for a general fund to
continue that 8% um increase,
and that is because we made a
settlement with the federal
government that we would do
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
that's correct, and this is an
8% over last year.
Uh, Mr. Tay, Senator, I think
it's just continuing the 8% that
was implemented 3 years ago. So
if we don't continue that if we
don't get the general fund,
we'll have to eliminate the 8%.
So our caseworkers will see an
8% reduction in their pay. So,
the snap settlement gave them
the ability to hire employees to
get.
Caught up. They took those
contract employees and now they
want to take them and move them
to a full-time state employees.
Instead of just using the
contract employees to keep
cleaning up Snap. You want to
change that federal money and
Not use the federal money and
now take state money to hire
those employees, that kind of
bait and switch that we see all
the time, Mr. Chair, um,
Senator, I really want to just
correct something, um, which is
that contract workers cannot do
snap determinations. There's a
federal prohibition against
that. So we actually can only
use contract workers for
Medicaid. Um, so this actually
doesn't relate to the contract
worker strategy just to clear
that up.
OK, so it's, it's
It's a mandate that we have to
follow.
It's a, it's a
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, it
was a mandate under the SNAP
settlement, the agency is
requesting to continue that
salary increase so that we don't
have to reduce the pay of our
caseworkers. So,
Are you gonna ask for that?
Every year
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
probably would be if I will
answer that question.
Uh, Chairman, Senator, uh,
Woods. No, that would be in our
base request, so it's in our
base request this year to fund
that, and that would be
included.
Uh, from here on out in the base
request. So which it would just
be a base request this year that
we're asking for that, that 8%.
So why would you just put that
in as a, as a salary instead of
coming back every year.
Well, accounting deal, not my
problem.
OK.
Estras also here somewhere that
you're expecting Medicare
medical costs to increase by
2.6% this year.
Now, we've been having nearly
double digit.
Increases in the past. So you
think that we're going to
finally lower it down to 2.6.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
um, that is based on the current
uh CPI inflation rate. Um, I do
have our Medicaid CFO here who
uh would invite to the table to
um talk about, you know, whether
how that cost was arrived at.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator Woods,
uh, yes, we look at the uh the
prevailing CPI, um, we do
recognize medical costs are
higher and increasing, they're
starting to slowly come down
from what they were during the
public health emergency. And so,
uh, we have already done, I
guess I'm probably gonna go off
topic a little bit, but we've
done some rebasing in our uh
medic.
MCO capitation rates, and so
that has already been accounted
for in some of the calendar year
25 rates. So we've had some
increases there and as uh the
secretary mentioned, we've done
some cost containment with
those. Um, and so those costs
don't necessarily con they they
continue into 26, but they're
already accounted for that high
level of CPI. And so this is
just the next year's CPI. We do
recognize there is a risk, CPI
could be higher, medical costs
could continue to escalate.
significantly, um, but we do use
the prevailing CPA.
So, so, Mr. Chair, we, we have
no quotes as to future rates, we
just have
The inflation factor, the, the
cost of living increase is what
this is reflecting.
But not really uh
Concrete, something we can
budget for.
Is it already figured in? Are
you already figuring it in your
budget. So what is the figure
you're figuring in your budget.
For increased
Rates
Can you, can, am I asking the
wrong question here? Well, Mr.
Tay, um, Senator Woods, I think,
um, the rates actually do
account for a separate portion,
so there's about 49 million
that's built into the base,
that's to continue those rate
increases. So that's separate
from the CPI inflator that's
applied to the benefit, so it's
accounted for in the rates, um,
so in that sense, I think what
Um, what you're pointing out is
that we did apply an infator to
the raids, um, and so the CPI is
sort of additional costs, not
the rates, if that makes sense.
Um, sort of the cost of
healthcare doing business, uh,
kinds of expenses, yes, um, on
top of the races and so there's
a separate line item in the
budget on that slide, um, that
kind of describes the 49
million.
Let me find that slide for you,
um.
Slide 9 that really kind of lays
out the rates as a separate
item. We also have like
enrollment as a separate item
and then that projected medical
cost growth. It's just sort of
on top of those other inflators
that are applied if that makes
sense. OK, OK, I see the 49
million, and so,
How much did we use out of that
line item last year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, are
you asking how much came out of
a line item related to the
inflation. What I'm asking is,
uh,
Where it says, uh,
Maintain Medicare reimbursement
rates.
Medicaid
and it, and this has to do with
how much we are going to
Move those rates above the
Medicare rates, right? Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, that's
correct. Um, in the fiscal year
25 budget were funded for
putting the rates at 12, 1,
sorry, 100 fiscal year 24, we
were funded to go to 120% of
Medicare and then in fiscal year
25 were funded to go to 150% of
Medicare starting in January. So
what's different is that this
budget that we have today.
for fiscal year 25, reflects 6
months. So that additional 49
million is for the other 6
months. That's for a full year,
if that helps. OK.
The question I'm asking is did
we roll that out last year.
I've, I've, I've had some
Some administrators that
Kind of told me we didn't get
that money on the ground
anywhere, but am I wrong or they
wrong or?
kind of bring me up to date real
quickly on that. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods, we, um, we did
the rate increases up to 120% of
Medicare, those were in fiscal
year 24, and we will be rolling
out those new rate increases up
to 150% on January 1st. So we
are on time. The team has done a
tremendous amount of work to get
all of that done, but I think
you may recall that doing those
in January, or sorry, July is
incredibly difficult and
requires us to do all this
retroactive reproces.
the state asked to do them on
January 1st, so that we would be
ready on time. We are ready to
go. Those will be rolling out.
Um, in fact, those fee schedules
are all posted on our website.
Um, so we are going to be
rolling those out January 1st,
um, as planned and per the
budget and maybe that's what it
was. It was that delay that they
were talking about getting that
back if we helped with that
delay, have we?
Or we're gonna be more timely on
our payments is what I'm asking
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, yes, I
think I'm putting these on the
calendar year basis, the rate
increases on the calendar year
basis really helps with uh sort
of avoiding this retroactive
reprocessing, um, so everything
will be perspective going
forward. Um, the rates are
actually really good right now
too. They're at about 120% of
Medicare um today and so I think
providers should be um looking
forward and ahead to those rate
increases.
occurring in January, but, um,
and then we will be auditing,
we're, we're making sure that
those have been implemented
correctly. We're auditing the
MCOs, making sure that um all of
that is done right. OK. And my
last question is, is kind of a
simple question, yes or no. Um,
I heard you make a statement a
while ago and I'm, I'm sure I
probably misheard it.
Uh
And it was that
That, uh, the budget.
Request you present today.
I thought you said it wasn't
approved by the governor yet.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Woods, so, um, it is approved by
the governor. I just, um, of
course we, the agency has to get
approval from the governor, um,
and but we submit our budget to
the governor on September 1st.
Then she issues her executive
recommendation, which I haven't
seen yet, and that was just the
difference. She may make some
adjustments to the agency based
on what she would like and what
her priorities and what
additional information she has,
so, um, I think I was just
referring to the fact that her
executive budget is coming due,
not, um, that I didn't work with
the governor's office to get
this budget. I take that as a
yes and a no.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative de la Cruz.
Mr. Chair.
That is so loud, um, secretary.
I'm assuming that the providers
for behavioral health are
private providers that are
contracted with your department.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh Representative
de la Cruz, um, they do contract
more directly. It sort of
depends on, on there are
multiple ways that we work with
providers, so, um, most
providers, they have to enroll
with our agency, um, and then
they take contracts with the
MCOs, um, our managed care
partners, there's 4 of them. Um,
they can contract directly and
then we do find some state
funded behavioral health
services through our behavioral
health services division also
through um some direct.
relationships. Thank you.
So how do you try to ensure uh
that best practices are followed
that we are
Either creating or following
models that are, that are as
effective as possible in this
arena.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, all of the services in the
Medicaid continuum are
considered best practices, um,
we are not allowed to cover
services that are experimental
or that are not considered best
practices, so, um, there are
certain services that are kind
of under this best practice
umbrella, um, particularly in
the behavioral health space, for
example, the agency added 5,
what we call evidence-based
practices to the um benefit
package, um, this year.
Uh, that doesn't mean that our
other services are not evidence
based. It just means that we
kind of added these under the
umbrella of adding the 5
additional evidence-based
practices. There were sort of
newer services that were just
added for, uh, for example, for
children, um, to better serve
children and adolescents, but by
no means is that meant to say
that the very wide array of
medical and behavioral health
services that are part of this
service continuum are not best
practice services, they are all
evidence-based.
Uh
Mr. Chairman secretary.
One of the fears that I have is
that the state has so much
outlay related to behavioral
health, not only in in your
area, but in other areas in
other programs across the entire
state, including education,
which is commendable, but has
been stated earlier, it's,
there's always a fear that that
it it may not be effective in
in.
I to this day, I never really
gotten answers as to whether
what what are the outcomes when
we say outcomes, I don't, when
you talk about schizophrenia,
yes, it's a lifelong thing.
Uh, but I'm, I'm, I'm curious
how we try to determine that the
effectiveness of of this outlay.
across the entire spectrum of
the state.
And, and just as importantly,
how do we try to ensure that
there is an abuse by providers,
so that it looks on the surface
that they're providing service,
they're providing some level of
care and that it's not all fake,
and abuse.
Just to collect money. How do we
ensure that that taxpayer money
is protected. Um, Mr. Chair,
Representative de la Cruz is a
really good questions. Um, you
are not wrong at all that there
are pockets of behavioral health
in multiple agencies, um, that
is part of, we are tracking
that, um, we have a contractor
that sort of brings all of the
financing together and tracks
all of it.
But I
I think that much of the current
structure predates a time when
most of the funds are in
Medicaid, um, so 90% probably of
the funds for behavioral health
are actually in the Medicaid
program. Um, I think some of
those appropriations may predate
a time that and so we've kind of
got this inherited system of
maybe uh multiple moving parts.
Um, we do have some ideas about
how we might want to look at
that a little differently, um,
as a state because I do agree
with you. I think it opens up
some
um, not just of, um,
I, I don't know about the risk
of fraud. I'll I'll address that
in just a second, but the risk
of duplication or not being as
smart or maybe not as optimizing
of the federal revenue as we
could be, so I think there's a
lot of opportunity there to
rethink and reimagine the
structure, which to me seems a
little bit
Old, uh, given where we are
today with the Medicaid program
being the primary financer of
mental health services and now
even things like housing being
financed through Medicaid
benefit. In terms of fraud, um,
we do have an inspector general,
um, in my agency, um, they
investigate fraud if there are
ever suspicions of potential
fraud or abuse of providers,
those get referred to our
inspector General's office, um,
and they conduct a full
investigation. So we do have an
avenue, um, and then, you know,
If at a point that there's
substantiated fraud. We have a
lot of levers that we can use
from corrective action plans or
recoupment of payments, um, to
sort of, um, excluding providers
from our network. So there,
there is sort of a back end
fraud process, um, and, uh,
people can make referrals to the
Inspector general, um, and
they'll do an investigation.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I just
applaud and and encourage this
vigilance in this area. Thank
you.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Madam, I got a question on slide
number 14.
On the right side of the slide,
you're asking for 3.8 million to
uh reduce funded vacancy rate.
On this side of it, you have uh
DDS requested 3.4 million.
To reduce funded vacancy rate by
10 full-time employees, in my
math, you're paying in $340,000
a year for these 10 vacancy
rates.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Garcia, I mean look at that. I
think you are pointing out a
typo in the slide, uh, so we've
got a 3.8 in one section and a
3.4, um, and, um, in terms of
the cost for FTE, we'll try to
answer that question now or we
can get that to you. So I'm
gonna turn around and see if uh.
Yes, you have the answer to that
question.
In terms of the cost for a Madam
Secretary must be a clarifying
deal because it to me it, uh,
you're asking for 3.4 million
for 10 FETs, that's $340,000 a
year each.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garcia will provide some clarity
on those numbers. Yeah.
No.
And I've got my CFO right here
who may be able to answer, thank
you for that, uh, Mr. Chairman.
One more question that I have on
the, on the waiting list. Is
there any waiting list at all
anymore?
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, the way that the
current allocation process works
is that it's done once per year,
um, and we allocate, um, folks
who um kind of accumulated,
there is now, I believe there is
a waitlist of about
Um, I believe it goes up to
about 500. Um, we are trying to
get to a rolling zero. So what
we can do is we're sort of
funded to do once a year
allocation process except for
expedited allocations, um, the
agency is proposing sort of
moving to a rolling allocation
process so that we have a true 0
of a waitlist of true zero. that
is not the way that it currently
is funded.
And uh thank you, Mr. Chairman,
on, on that question, the first
question I had, if you get back,
will you get back to the whole
committee on that question,
please, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, I believe we
have an answer for you right
now. So no, let my CFO answer
that. Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, the actual number is the
3.4 million that we are asking
for.
So in the slide 14 on the
left-hand side, the 3.406.6 is
the general fund that we are
asking for to reduce that fun to
see that.
funded vacancy rate and the typo
on the right hand side is not
3.8.
You know that, that's a big
title, you know, I, because I'm
just reading what we have in
front of us, you know, and it's
hard to understand what you're
trying to do when you're asking
for that kind of money. We can
definitely give you more
detailed information on that.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Represent Dixon
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I have um a couple of questions,
uh, specifically, uh, relating
to nursing facilities, Medicaid
rates, reimbursements. Um,
Could you elaborate? Could you?
sort of walk me through the
difference between rebasing and
rate increases. What's the
distinction?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, so we've got our um CFO
coming up to the table uh for
Medicaid, um, the Medicaid, uh,
nursing facility rates.
are typically what's called a
cost-based reimbursement. Um,
those are set based on nursing
facility cost reports we um have
you all are probably familiar
with the program that we use in
which nursing facilities pay a
provider tax, um, and we
generate revenue for that and
that goes into what's like a $90
million pool of dollars, and
that is divided into different
components. One of those is sort
of a
inflationary rate increase every
year, and then we do, um, the
rest is really a quality pool,
and so, um, there are
Is a um there should be a
process to rebase those
cost-based rates on a regular
basis. So that's that sort of
base rate. What you do is you
take nursing facility cost data
and you essentially
Do an analysis, um, and
determine what their cost-based
rate should be, and so, um, that
is sort of the basis of that,
and so that is, that's their
base rate. They get a quality
payment on top of that, um, and
I'll see if, do you have
anything to add?
Um
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, I would add
that, uh, technically, ideally
if we had the funding, we would
conduct this rebasing every 3
years and then in the interim,
those 3 years you would apply an
inflation factor until the next
rebasing. Uh, unfortunately, we
did not receive funding to do
the rebasing, and so, um, we
could not do the nursing
facility rebasing this year.
That's correct. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. When is the last time
that the HCA or uh previous.
Department requested uh general
funds for a rebates. Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Dickson, um,
that was in our fiscal year 25
budget request and not financed.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, is
it in the fiscal year 26 budget
request. Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, no, I don't
believe it is in the 26th
request at this time.
And um, so it's not in the
fiscal year 26 request, but we
know that it's been more than 3
years. When is actually the last
time that uh the nursing
facilities had a rebate.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
the full, the last full rebates,
I believe was in 2007.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. So that's 17 years
ago. What factors? What are some
of the differences between
What a nursing facility, what
would that impact if a nursing
facility has not had a rebate in
17 years. Could that affect
their ability to admit more.
Um, clients, what are, what are
the ways I'm wanting to make
sure that I have a full
understanding of the difference
between rebasing and the rate
increase. And if the rate
increase deals with inflationary
issues. Um, and we're looking at
a 17-year gap on rebasing out.
What are the ways that the
facilities may not be able
To accommodate.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, I, I understand the
question. I think what you're
asking is what are they
sacrificing, what can't they do,
that's really important to New
Mexicans, um, I think, you know,
you probably wanna ask a nursing
facility that question, but I do
believe that they have higher
costs, um, they have, you know,
they provide meals, they provide
room and board, um, they provide
our expectation is that they
provide good quality care, um,
you know, we have quality
metrics for nursing facilities.
And really expect them to invest
in the quality and so I think
they would probably say that it
puts them on a thinner margin,
uh, for the ability to do that.
I do want to just say that um I
think that since 2007 is a
little bit misleading because we
did implement the healthcare
quality surcharge program, um,
which was done in in
collaboration with the nursing
facilities, um, and it does pass
through $90 million. Um, most of
those dollars, you know, when we
We started that program. It was
really an infusion of the base
cost, and we were really trying
to address base cost rates, um,
Over time, our insistence has
been that those really those
rates be there to support
quality and so um they really do
have incentives to improve
quality and they would receive
financial bonuses for doing
that, and I, I do, um, I don't
disagree, you know, we, we did
sort of put forth a proposal,
uh, that we would do the
rebasing and finance that, um,
and we've been working pretty
closely with the nursing
facility association, so they
are very aware of our financial
um situation and we've been
really
transparent with them about what
that number for rebasing is, and
I don't, it's not that we don't
support the rebasing. In fact,
we've asked for it, um, but I
think, uh, part of the premise
of that program was that they
weren't getting those
inflationary increases, which
they now do receive every year.
Um, and so I think it is true
that we should do a rebasing,
um, in that, um, it would just,
you know, ideally you would have
those inflationary increases
plus possibly the rebasing, um,
but they do have a big pool of
quality dollars that they are
incentivized.
is to try and get by improving
measures for New Mexicans.
Thank you, Mr. Church. Thank you
for, for elaborating on that.
Um, about how many New Mexicans,
uh, rely on the services for
nursing from nursing facilities.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, I don't know if I have
the number of uh total number of
residents and nursing
facilities, but I can email that
to you later.
Uh, we can provide that to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Secretary, and um I think that
would be helpful because, you
know, one of the things that we
talked about yesterday, uh, in
one of the presentations is the
uh graying, um, of our
demographics and so, uh,
I think it's fair to say that we
expect more people, more New
Mexicans to need to utilize
those services as well. So it's
not just a matter of how many uh
New Mexicans.
Need nursing facilities today,
uh, but if we are not able to
accommodate.
The number that need them today.
We're certainly not going to be
able to accommodate um
Tomorrow. Um, do you have, I, I
think you mentioned, do you have
an estimated cost, uh, that
would be required, uh, to do an
adequate, uh, rebates.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I believe that
number is, and we can provide, I
think it's 25 million.
Yeah, um, which is
And we have 3000 people in
nursing facilities. So thank you
in real time. 25 million general
fund for that rebasing. And uh
Mr. Chair and secretary, and if
the money comes from the general
fund, um, then, uh, is it also
then eligible for federal
matching, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Dixon, yes, uh,
built into the Medicaid rate.
Excellent. OK, thank you very
much. Uh, that was all my
questions. Appreciate it.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, to
follow up on, on something that
uh Representative Dixon brought
up. What does it cost to
actually do the rebasing.
That you've asked for in the
past, but is not in this budget
request. Um, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I believe the
agency requested in the fiscal
year 25 budget, was it?
About 20 million.
Um, that was, and so it's not so
much the rebates and the
exercise of rebasing, it's the
impact to the rates that wasn't
financed, so we did do the
rebasing. We actually know the
number. Uh, we just don't have
the financing in our budget to
actually support the pass
through on the rates and so, um,
we were at the time of really
having this conversation with
the nursing facilities is
looking at a very substantial
shortfall in Medicaid, um, that
obviously has been addressed uh
through some of the levers in
the department, but we don't
have extra funding.
to do the rebasing in it, and it
wasn't supported in hospital
too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary. I
just find it kind of amazing
that we rob from Peter to pay
Paul, and we have to pick and
choose which one we're gonna rob
from and which one we're gonna
pay. And so I, I find that a
little bit disenchanting to uh
to know that it's
It's a long term care nursing
facilities.
And so, uh, with that being
said, I have, I have a few other
questions on page 9, this 2.6%
projected medical cost growth.
I, I heard, uh, uh, you say what
it was for, but I'm curious,
does, so does that mean that all
professional services will
increase 2.6%.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong. No, I
think that just means that we
have to pay a higher rates
across the board, like in our
capitation payments to reflect
that there's going to be higher
utilization, that there's gonna
be higher cost of doing
business, um, the rates are, I,
so I, I'm probably, I should
defer to our um CFO about how
those rates are built, but um
it's just sort of a broad
recognition that some
of the cost growth in the budget
is just driven by inflation. Um,
it's not so much that we are
going to be building in 20.6% to
provide our rates. Um, I think.
And I'll defer to the CFO if
there's a better way to phrase
that.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you, Carrie. Uh, so when we do
rebasing, whether it's for the
NIFs or for the managed care
organizations, we look at the
true costs for prior years. And
so in some cases, there's lower
costs and in some cases, there's
higher cost. And so that's what
rebasing means. We rebase to the
most current uh data. And then
once we have that rebasing done,
that establishes our base. And
since we're talking about FY 26
of
of course, are base would be
calendar year 25. And so we're
trying to forecast what could
possibly be the next year's um
adjustment, you know, if we do a
full rebasing, we would do it
the normal cost. Otherwise, we
may just apply an inflation uh
factor for the next year, and so
that's where we use the CPI is
what would be the next, um,
potential cost. So it's just an
average.
Uh, costume later. It, it, it
could be lower in some cases or
higher utilization in that. OK,
thank you for that
clarification. I also just
wanted to clarify that um uh
Medicaid reimbursement rate
increases is not across the
board. It's only for a few items
because that's being um trickled
in and, and across the board. So
I just wanted to clarify that as
well. Um,
I wanted to talk a little bit
and some, some clarity on page
13 on the FY 25 grow funding,
um,
That allows for training for
primary care physicians in
screening.
How
Can you just tell me a little
bit more about that and what is
the amount that you're asking
for.
Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Armstrong, I believe that that's
25% growth funding. I'm going to
defer to, I'm gonna look for a
head nod over here from uh our
director of Balls that's FY 26,
not a, sorry, FY 25, not an FY
26 request.
Just how we're spending those
dollars. OK, thank you for that
clarification. Um,
So can you tell me uh a, I heard
you talk about, um, Mr. Chairman
and Madam Secretary about
assisted living increase.
Medicaid reimbursement increase?
Sure. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong, we are
as one of our expansion items
and just acknowledges exactly
what you were saying, which is
not every provider is getting an
increase through all of these
increases. We just talked about
nursing facilities and there's a
gap there, um, we also, um,
recognize that assisted living
facilities have also they have
not received a rate increase
since 2019, um, and so we have a
in to put, I believe in the
detailed amount 5 million
general fund, um.
I see that it's on slide.
The details of that are on slide
21.
Um
So that would be for assisted
living facilities, a 3.4% rate
increase, uh, with a total
request of about 18 million with
the match, um, again, the
assisted living facilities
actually don't benefit from the
healthcare quality surcharge,
there's like no pool of dollars
for them to access, um, in terms
of like quality incentive and so
we felt like we needed to um do
something for them. This year's
um expansion requests are very
modest, um, in recognition.
of the fact that um there isn't
a lot of uh general fund
recurring recurring money and so
um that was as high as we were
able to go, um, within the
parameters for the agency. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary. So
that was that I had that circle
to ask as my next, next
question. It says medical
assistance division, but it
wasn't specific, so that 20
million is for um assisted
living. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong, that's
correct. So that, um, 5.
million general fund would be
for assisted living providers
that increased rate and Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary said
the last time they got an
increase was 2019, I believe,
and correct me if I'm wrong,
that's when we started all of
this, saying this is not good
enough. We need to raise these
reimbursement rates. So they've
received one already in 2019,
there's other entities that have
not received any.
And so I, I'm just curious to
know, not that I'm against doing
that for them, but
As you've heard, there's a lot
of um other entities that have
not received.
An increase yet, but we're
giving them a 2nd round. And so
I just want to make sure that
we're being fair.
Um
And, and so can you clarify?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, I'm trying to think of what
the real gaps are. I do agree
that there are probably some
gaps. Um, we did raise the
entire fee schedule, um, which
affects almost every
professional provider, right? So
all of those providers, but I
think you may be referring to
and the nursing facilities, for
example, have gotten increases,
just not rebasing increase that
they received multiple increases
as well, um, assisted living
ab il ities have not gotten an
increase since 2019, we were
trying to address the gap, the
pace providers, again, that was
a request that was put in our
last year's budget did not get
funded, um, so that's in, you'll
see that again, um, and then we
do have some codes for like
behavioral health, for example,
that are not tied to Medicare
and so we are trying to, that's
another expansion item trying to
raise those reimbursement rates.
I would probably say, and I
don't necessarily agree that
There hasn't been a rate
increase, but I would say that
there is a pretty big gap
between the um personal care
provider workforce, um, and
what, what they really sort of
feel like they need and what we
are paying and um we would be
happy to work with you. We've
been working with them to
provide as much transparency
about what those dollars look
like to get them to where they
want pretty expensive
investment, um, but we would be
happy to work with you and um I
can also send you a follow-up
email with just where are those
gaps are, we'll do a little um
circle back so that in your
interest of fairness and making
sure that everyone's getting
their fair share of these
increases that we can provide
you with that information. Thank
you for that. Um, I think one
thing, Mr. Chairman, that um is
concerning to me is that the uh
New Mexico administrative code.
states that there should be
rebasing done every 3 years. I
don't know that this body knows
that when you make that request
that it's in statue.
Let that be done. And so it's
concerning to me that you've
asked for it, that we haven't
funded it.
Um
And you're saying that the
rebasing has been done, the
request has been made, but that
the legislature didn't fund it.
Is that correct? Uh, that is
true, Mr. Chair, um,
representative Armstrong for
fiscal year 25. Um, I think.
You know, I'll take full
responsibility if you feel like
we didn't communicate something
clearly to you all, um, about
what the regulatory requirements
are, and we can do a better job
of that. I just want to make
sure, Mr. Chairman, that we know
that it's, it's in statue.
And, and that we're not funding
it and so I, I didn't know that.
Um, I'm not, I'm not blaming
you. That's my job to know, but
um I'm just
interested to find out, you
know.
It's not in this year's request.
And so that's concerning to me,
um, if it really is a priority
and needs to happen, it should
be on the request. And then if
we say no, then you can point
the fingers at us.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, uh, that is a
fair point and I'll take full
responsibility for not
communicating better. So, uh, I
really apologize for that, um.
I would say that um this year,
the agency was just put under,
you know, there was, there's
just not that much funding
available, um, when we were
putting together the budget
request, um, and so in me end up
in the executive request uh from
the governor, um, but that's why
we did want to be very
transparent uh with the
association about what those
dollars were, um, I think they
knew that it wasn't in the
request, um, and they, you know,
we've been just really
transparent and upfront about
what we can and can't afford,
um, how that ended up that way
and so, um, happy to continue
that discussion and we'll circle
back to see if there's something
that's happening with the
executive request that may be
addressed that issue. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you, uh,
Madam Secretary. Thank you for
all you do. Appreciate you.
thinking, I mean, I mean, it
should have been your request
this year. I, I don't know what
happened if the exec didn't
allow it, but I mean, we both,
the legislature and you, we both
have to hold our feet to the
fire.
I mean, if we're not making
adjustments, blame it on us. If
you're not requesting the money,
we're going to blame it on you.
But I mean, that's something
that we have to do in in
I just don't remember from last
year, so I couldn't tell you but
represented small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, madam.
Uh, thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thanks
to your team. First, Madam
Secretary, on the state
insurance costs, uh,
Appreciate you addressing it.
Appreciate the uh several of the
measures you put up there.
One, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
do you intend to bring
legislation and or their budget
asks related to the two proposed
uh cost control measures, you
included.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, small a, um, I think, I
think we are looking at some
legislation, um, we're still
working on the details of that,
um, in sort of final discussion
related to that, um, following
kind of the measures that other
states have executed, um, where
they've done similar
reorganizational um management,
uh, putting things sort of the
state health benefits with the
Medicaid agency.
making sure that there's sort of
this collective view about
projected costs and collections.
Um, I do.
Anticipate that there will be
legislation, but um I just
wanna, I, I, I wanna make sure
and Mr. Chair, Madam, the reason
I ask is, uh, I think I request
from you will request from our
LFC staff sort of a menu of
options.
That should include, I think as
you've noted in the chair is
highlighted for a number of
years, I think with a lot of
foresight, the absolute sort of
You know, uh, at least you're
proposing cost containment
measures, uh, through the new
reorganization. Right now, we
have no solutions when it comes
to the local public bodies.
Um, and so I think we have to
have as part of that menu of
options, proposed.
Changes, modifications to that
relationship because right now,
it's simply the state.
Picking up more and more share
of local public bodies insurance
costs.
In ways that are
Maybe or maybe not connected to
their health and certainly our
stretching.
us financially and, you know,
so, uh, do you have any, any,
can you provide that menu to us,
say by the end of the year, uh,
Mr. Chairs representative, sure,
yeah, I think that we can do
that. Um, we are trying to work
with the local public bodies, I
think, and the other IA
agencies, so we'll be working,
meeting with them. I really want
them to know that the things
that we're doing, we want to
extend those to the, to the, you
give those flexibilities to
that.
Um, make sure that they know,
for example, if we're gonna go
do this reference-based pricing
and that's gonna be done through
legislation, would they like to,
would they like to join, um,
we'd like to offer that, uh,
feel our role is to really be
the convener for those
discussions, and so we are doing
that
right now. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Uh, 2nd in the UNM
meeting, which was a couple of
months ago, uh, data access was
obviously a key point is.
You pointed out,
Is what you shared that there
the data access issue has been
solved. Does that mean that we
have access to the uh claims
database is and is it sort of
from your understanding at
least, sort of fully solved for
where we are right now in terms
of what data is available.
Obviously, there's always
process issues which we share,
uh, I think an interest in
streamlining how data requests
are made.
ensuring that sort of it's a
manageable, uh, sort of
Clear and understandable way to
request data with the
expectation that it comes back
quickly.
What's your understanding on
that to go just a bit deeper,
uh, Mr. Chair Representative
small a um
We, it's my understanding. So in
terms of the all pair claims
database, I think that you're
asking about that is the
Department of Health and I'm not
sure. Um, I really don't know
what access is being requested
or sought for that project, so
it cannot cannot answer that
question. As for the data for
the healthcare authority. It is
my understanding we had uh
multiple meetings with LFC
staff, um, and their analysts.
We've done a couple of things.
One, we've created a portal for
all data requests to just go
through this portal.
their triaged and tracked, um,
and so there we're doing that
and we're trying to make sure
that we keep on top of
everything through a single
point of entry. So I think that
that part of it is managed and I
think the LFC staff were uh
participating and cooperating
with us in this effort, um, and
they really have recognized the
challenge of the agency trying
to manage all of it. So I
appreciate of that. Um, I know
there was a request for sort of
direct entry point access to
many of our databases, including
our um claim system and our
Um, eligibility system, we seem
to have resolved those issues to
my knowledge. Uh, if I'm not
right about that, I'd love to
know, open the door, uh,
hopefully hear from that, from
Eric about that, uh, but we have
provided access to the
dashboards and the agreement is
that we would provide access to
those dashboards sort of like a
higher level of user access to
those dashboards that we've
developed. So I think it's
resolved, um, if not, hopefully
someone will tell me that it's
not, and we can try to do some
more problem solving. That
sounds great. Thank you.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, and you know, this
will be an iterative and ongoing
process. Great to hear that
there are new tools that have
been jointly developed with LFC
and the and you all with the
portal and other ways to sort of
see challenges and tackle them
together, and I'm sure there'll
be other challenges that arise.
There should be, we should be
pushing one another, I think, as
the chair just said, but as long
as we're working through them,
that's what we expect. Um,
With regard to there's been
questions around the uh 8% in
the FT increase.
It's been addressed. I think
it's one of the challenging
places for the committee and for
myself to sort of try to
understand.
Ideally, what more we're getting
for New Mexicans.
And services delivered to New
Mexicans or efficiency of
services delivered to New
Mexicans, given sort of the cost
constraints. So as we go
forward, I think there'll be an
interest in
Is there a way to modify that,
um, the proposed, the 8%
increase are all of those staff
needed given that the unwinding
and sort of attendant stresses
or lessening. Just expect those
questions, and I think because
sort of an all or nothing
approach, given the other
pressures that we're facing is a
very challenging place for, I
think for me and then it sounds
like for other folks.
Um
Provider numbers, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, um
the numbers you cited, which is
429 new doctors.
469 new behavioral healthcare
professionals.
Those are those new sort of
enrollees in Medicaid. I those
providers were here in the
state.
In between July and December,
and they
chose to sign up to provide
Medicaid services.
Are those new providers who
moved to the state or is it a
mix of both, and can we get the
Specific mix, if it is a mix
indeed.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I actually don't know. I, I
can find out if there's some
insight from our database that
will tell us where they came
from, uh, I don't actually know
the answer to that question, um,
basically they're new
enrollments or net new
enrollments to provide services
to the Medicaid population, but
we can drill down and see if
there's some additional insights
that we can provide. That's
great obviously a very, thank
you very much. um.
And um
Uh
Yeah, I think on the, well, on
the healthcare affordability
fund, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary.
The
it sounds like that you all, or
are you all anticipating
potentially greater
responsibilities that exist that
will exist in calendar year 25,
fiscal year 26, uh, based upon
sort of federal changes and
challenges, uh, related to the
continuation of the subsidies
and other the, yeah, the
insurance subsidies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
Representative small
all different directions here,
um, I think that's true. I think
that there probably will be some
expirations of assistance that
are occurring at the federal
level, um, probably more than
ever, um, the sort of state
support is going to be really
crucial. Um, we do anticipate, I
think there has been some
indication, um,
And obviously there's a little
note on our slide that if those
federal subsidies expire,
enrollee premium payments would
increase by over 75% on average.
So definitely creating a little
bit of an affordability problem
for New Mexicans, um, and really
what the fund was created to do.
Got it. OK, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Secretary, that's something for
us to pay very close attention
to, and I think share, you know,
as it was essentially that may
mean that we're on the hook for
substantially more funding in
order to support the New
Mexicans and the small
businesses who have signed up
through the marketplace that are
receiving healthcare
affordability fund support,
right?
That's correct, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Small. And, OK,
so we'll need to be able to
understand that story for
ourselves, tell that story for
the state and then have a
conversation about whether and
how we meet that challenge. Um,
OK, I think that wraps it up for
me. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Uh
For the state.
In health care benefits, right?
In, in the local governments.
Uh, I need you to build those
local governments.
I mean, we agreed a couple of
years ago when they took us to
court and said their budgets
were done.
That's a couple of years ago, I
think that case is still sitting
out there, but we need to be
able to build them, cause that's
not all our responsibility. And
even if they run a deficit and
they get caught up.
Then what I need you to come
back and calculate is.
How do we really get that caught
up.
I mean, we're we're gonna be
running this deficit every
single year. And I'll tell you
why I'm struggling this, cause
we're looking at state employee
raises.
And, you know, 3% of the 4% rate
could get all eaten up by
healthcare costs. And so in my
mind, I'm trying to
How do I fix this side?
And then you increases on this
side, so they actually take home
more.
And, and I really need you to
come up with a number.
It says this is the rebalancing
if, if this is a
I don't know off the top of the
head, maybe somebody knows if a
10% increase, what's the total
cost, right? If somebody knows
that, um.
Um, Mr. Terror, I think it
depends on, but so for example,
I think it's 800, the total
premium for a family is I think
$800 a month, $881 so 10% on top
of that.
But, but we have to, we for
what's the cost? I think Mr.
Chair, what you're asking is
like, what are the different
models or scenarios, right?
What's the total cost on our
employees to get the healthcare
benefits to the level they
should be. So we can say,
From here on, we're a 0 starting
point. Next year you may have a,
a 6% increase, and you guys
should be using the right CPI to
calculate that, so we don't fall
behind again and again and
again. I mean, this started
because the exact didn't
increased health care premiums.
It started this whole giant
snowball.
And it's just getting bigger and
bigger and bigger, and we need
to fix it so we can start over
again.
At a basis point and, and I want
that number so we can fix it.
Even if the cities and the
counties run us a deficit in the
cost.
But
That has to get done, cause this
year, what's their number gonna
be this year for a deficit on on
the healthcare, cause we only
did a 10% increase last year,
Mr. Chair, uh, with the
Even with that 10%, we're
running about 124 million short.
Um, we, you know, we will be.
Running some cost containment
initiatives, they're not going
to make up 124 million. So to
your point, the local public
bodies, their share of that
deficit is 36 million. We need
to figure that out we need to
resolve that with them, um, we
also have these initiatives
around um what we're paying, um,
and really trying to set a fair
price for providers, but not be
overpaying for services, um, and
then, uh, we
You know, if there's something
we can do to get federal match,
we will do that. We're kind of
really looking at pharmacy
benefits, but you're to your
point, it's, it would require a
35% premium increase to make up
this difference and I think that
how we do that is really
challenging, um, because that's
really the shortfall, that 35%.
So what I'm hoping we can do is
contain costs and then try to
really achieve, come to the
number collectively about what
that premium increase should be
based on
The cost containment that we're
able to achieve.
So I mean just rough math, I
mean, real rough math. I mean,
if we did 200 and uh maybe try
to get this to me this week so
we can figure it out.
If if we did a $250 million
investment, did that take us
pretty much to zero and cover
the healthcare costs and get us
caught up so we can go to.
I'm not gonna say 3%, but a 6%
increase annually and, and just
reset us, right?
And, and get that under control.
I mean, otherwise, that 124, at
every 20, 10% is 240 and you say
you're 36%, so we're 360. Pretty
soon we're gonna have this.
5 $700 million number if we
don't deal with it now.
In in
It's inherent executive.
started this and she and I had
this conversation.
When you didn't do that, those
increases, it just magnified the
effect in 5 years later we're
doing the effects.
So let's look at that really.
Really hard. I'm, I'm interested
in in balancing that in with uh
increases.
We're gonna go off on this, you
know, behavioral health stuff
and we're really gonna focus and
target what we wanna do in
behavioral health.
Uh, I need to make sure that
your agencies and us are, are,
are meeting to make sure that
we're setting this up.
And, you know, I
I can go almost anywhere in your
presentation and say, you know,
if it's an emergency service
that needs to happen in reserve
or commodo or Magdalena or Dale,
where they have those emergency
responders.
I don't want to wait 6 months
for a contract.
I want those to be, you know,
initiated within 30, 60 days,
the services to be out there, so
when something happens, it gets
taken care of.
They referred to providers, and
so when we set this up, I don't
want to come back and this is
what happens in government is we
set these things up and they
say, well, we don't have a
contract or they didn't send me
a contract for 4 months. I
operated, and then I couldn't
operate anymore, so I had to cut
the services because I didn't
get payments.
Or I had to pull from my
reserves, and I couldn't
continue the operation and then
they paid me, and then I got to
start it up again.
I mean, at some point, we're
gonna have to figure out how do
we make this flow very smoothly,
how we get the services out and
how we really make it work
because
That's the number one issue no
matter where you go, besides
that and potholes.
Uh, and, and so we're gonna need
your help.
Um, to make sure somebody is
On point and on top of how we
connect those, how quickly we
can get them connected.
And it's gonna be different in
in every area. I'm not gonna say
we're gonna be experts because
you may have a great provider in
Albuquerque, but then
Ros will that provider may be
different and want something
different in.
It's gonna be a lot of changes
to do that, so I wanna make you
aware of that as we head that
way and make sure that we're
We're on top getting this
figured out, so it really works
and we can get it stood back up.
Mr. Chair, um, that sounds
great. We would love to have
that conversation with you and
really understand what the
expectations will be very
clearly. I'm not a mental health
expert. I may need mental
health, but
we all.
But I, I think it needs to flow
and it needs to flow across the
state.
And
It needs to flow pretty freely
in in government cannot be the,
the roadblock because I did not
get a contract. I waited 8
months and, and I, I, that's the
stories we don't want to hear at
the end because that's the news
stories that we're gonna hear
about. I mean, it's different in
Albuquerque, it's different in
Las Vegas. It's different in Lee
County.
different in cows and, and the
way they respond and how we do
that, so it's just
But it is so.
Appreciate your time. Thank you.
One thing I didn't see was any
real cost savings because when
we did the ACA that was gonna
really generate billions of, of
cost savings and
You know healthcare is tough,
but we got to get there at some
point.
Uh, well, Mr. Chair, healthcare.
It's not getting cheaper,
unfortunately, uh, but I do
think that we can do a smarter
purchasing and smarter price
setting, um, and hopefully, um,
Hopefully that will start to
move the needle where you're
looking for.
Thank you. Thank you.
Secretary Casados, I thought she
was a lady.
Rachel, you're starting this.
But
have 6969
or 690.
Sorry, Mr. Chair. That's right.
Uh, will be um agency code 690
CYFD. I'll do just a little bit
of table setting very briefly,
um, because this is a legisat
and then I'll turn it over.
Guys could just kind of quietly
move out of the room so we can
keep going.
Yes, come on, I'm gonna go very
fast.
You need a refill on your
coughing, Madam Secretary.
It's full.
I'm just checking because that's
a big glass.
Actually this is tea. Oh, it is
tea.
All right.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, this agenda
items include 2 parts, Legisat
related to the Children, Youth
and Families department and then
the agency's budget request. So
what I'll do is just a little
bit of table setting about the
performance challenges we've
talked about during the interim,
and I'm not gonna read from the
brief. I'm just gonna point out
a couple of things, but you have
a brief in your packets that
looks like this, uh, labeled.
Legist act for children, youth
and families department, um,
agency code 690. I'm Rachel
Mercer Garcia. I'm the LFC
analyst for CYFD, um, over the
interim, you all have focused on
3 key performance challenges
related to the state's child
welfare system and children
within families department,
those three challenges are, um,
our state's rate of
maltreatment, child
maltreatment, and repeat
maltreatment. That's the rate in
which children reengage.
With the child welfare system.
Um, the second performance
challenge you all have focused
on over the interim is related
to community-based placements
that specifically the number of
foster homes and treatment
foster care providers that we
have to serve children in the
state's care. And then the third
key challenge, the state is
facing within child welfare
being workforce specifically
having sufficient numbers of
workers in protective services
and addressing what is
historically been a high
turnover rate. I'm not gonna
read from this brief, but if you
look
at the very top, there's kind of
3 key takeaways related to those
three areas. When it comes to
repeat maltreatment, our state's
rate ticked up a little bit over
the last year. We now stand
about 15%, uh, which is, um,
higher than the national
benchmark of 9%. You all have
focused pretty specifically on
the submission of the states
family first prevention Services
Act plan, um, and as of date,
uh, we still as a state don't
have a plan in place.
And that would be a real
opportunity to draw down federal
funding and implement prevention
services. That's kind of key
takeaway number one. the second
key takeaway, um, is that CFD
has made um some hiring progress
over the last year in FY 24, um,
they have been active in hiring.
They have positions posted, but
continue to face a challenge
when it comes to retention. So,
uh, protective services
caseworker retention is the
measure that we track over time.
That's roughly 34%.
Uh, over the last year, it's
slightly better than the year
prior. Um, but another key data
point, uh, related to CYFD is
actually as of December 1 of
this year, they're, they have a
smaller head count slightly and
protective services than they
did a year ago, even though they
have been hiring, so retention
continues to be a significant
challenge, uh, and then the
third, uh, key takeaway CD has
held a variety of recruitment
events you, you heard about
several planned activities over
the interim, related to
recruiting.
teaming and supporting foster
care providers. Um, we have not
seen a substantial increase, but
there has been some uptick in
the number of
And foster care providers and
treatment uh foster care
providers in the state. I'm not
gonna walk through really
deeply, but you can see some key
data that outlines some of those
things in your packet. You'll
see the states uh maltreatment
rate and repeat maltreatment
rate on that first page. On the
second page, you'll see a graph
that shows the appropriations
you all have made in personnel
within protective services at
CYFD tracked against the actual
headcount, and that's where
you'll see that that data point
I mentioned where there's
actually a slightly smaller
headcount.
As of December 1st than there
was last year at this time.
You'll see the trend rate for
turnover among protective
services, and then you'll see
that graph related to um
resource families that's held
relatively steady, hasn't
increased substantially, but has
ticked up a little bit in the
last couple of months. I'm not
gonna talk deeply in the rest of
the brief, but um for your
reference, there's some summary
about some of the activities
CYFD has been engaged in related
to these three performance
challenges and you all ask them
as part of the
Leist that to give you updates
on, on activities related to
those kind of three key
performance challenges. Um, so
that is sort of my table setting
and data walk through in your
packets. Um, I will now turn it
over to uh Secretary Teresa
Casados of the Children, Youth
and Families department, um, who
is prepared to both talk about
the actions related to those
performance challenges as well
as the agency's budget request,
and she will talk from a
presentation that you all should
have had distributed that looks.
like this.
And
Thank you, Rachel.
We
All right, good morning. Um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, before I address
the issues raised by the LFC and
the Legisat report. I want to
thank our analyst Rachel,
wherever she went. um Mosie
Garcia and the LFC team for
their willingness to work with
us as an agency to achieve the
best outcomes for children. I've
said it on numerous occasions
and I'll say it again. The only
way that we can be successful is
if we all work together. And I
truly believe that to be the
case last year, this year, and
ongoing. Um, it's been a really
busy year for CYFD with lots of
things happening there. Um, I
have members of my leadership
team with me today, which I
think you've previously met, um,
but I'll introduce the two with
me right here. I have Valerie
Sandoval, my deputy secretary
over Protective Services and
juvenile justice and Kathy
Phoenix Doyle, my deputy
secretary over behavioral health
and Family Services.
Um, I also want to start by
thanking our team.
We have over 1600 employees who
continue to come to work every
day and do the hard work that
has to be done in this agency.
And as Rachel said, we struggle
with retention. It is an
incredibly difficult job, um,
and we're working really hard to
make sure that we're not only
hiring, but that we're putting
in place initiatives for
retention. Um, so strengthening
that workforce continues to be a
priority on an ongoing basis.
So there have been some
successes, um, and progress at
CYFD and before we start talking
about um issues that need
improvement. I just want to
share with you a little bit of
the successes that we've seen,
and I'll be really brief on
that. So I am excited and you
will be as well, um, to share
that CYFD has submitted the
Family First Prevention Services
Act titled 4E Prevention Plan to
the federal government. That was
submitted last week after
several iterations and drafts
and work over the last.
year, um, we worked with Casey
Family programs who had two
independent reviewers, take a
look at that and provide
feedback. Um, we then
incorporated their feedback and
provided that to Cabinet
Secretary Elizabeth Greginsky at
ECECD for her review and input
on some of that program
language. We took her input and
incorporated that. Um, we then
had um internal reviews at CYFD
by staff in different areas, um,
and another external review.
by an individual who works in a
behavioral health realm, um, and
are happy to say that that
product was delivered
successfully to the federal
government last week and we're
incredibly hopeful that that
plan will be approved, um,
Hopefully very, very soon. I
don't know the time frame the
federal government is working
on, but I would love to say that
that will happen quickly. Um, in
our juvenile justice department,
we have a 90% rate of
satisfactory completion for all
formal and informal probation
clients. So the work that they
do with those individuals that
are in every community across
the state is pretty incredible
and the success rate that
they're seeing with those
individuals is amazing and I
just want to shout out to our
protected, our juvenile justice.
vision, which really is very
silent in our agency, and they
just continue to do the work
every day.
Our protective services Bureau
has licensed 124 new
non-relative resource homes
since January. Um, that was the
last information that I have. I
believe they're continuing to do
that licensing process and work
on that, um, but we're excited
to have these new foster homes
join CYFD and serving the kids
across the state.
Um, our behavioral health unit
completed the RFA to expand
behavioral health services
across New Mexico. I know that
issue has been talked about in
many of these hearings on the
$20 million has been um
discussed over and over, and we
have made awards to entities for
expansion in behavioral health
services across the state.
So this great work is ongoing
every day by some amazing staff,
but we definitely need more.
Although the department has
participated in 52 hiring events
since July of this year, we
continue to struggle with
hiring, and more importantly, we
continue to struggle with
individuals who are leaving the
agency. So retention is high on
our list.
Our continued partnership with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
To ensure that we are targeting
employees from various sectors
across the state is ongoing.
We currently have 250 positions
posted with state personnel
office on indeed, we use
LinkedIn and social media.
We're increasing our media
presence and also targeting our
out of state recruitment
opportunities for social
workers, psychology, family
studies, criminal justice, and
like degrees.
We participated in the National
Association of Council for
Children event in Utah, and we
attended an event at the
University of Texas. We're
returning to the University of
Texas in February and are
targeting surrounding states and
schools of social work.
We've also engaged with
universities to enter into
contracts for those out of state
universities who provide online
social work degrees to increase
our stipend program for current
New Mexico residents who are
obtaining their social work
degrees in an online platform.
We're also exploring the
possibility of J-1 visas for
social workers.
So we are looking at every
avenue we can to bring in
additional workers, specifically
social workers at this point in
time to the department.
Since July, we've hired, and she
said, 207 new employees.
250 of our employees in CYFD
have a degree in social work.
129 of those are licensed social
workers. We want to do
everything that we can to retain
the licensed social workers that
we have. So with some of the
one-time funding that was
appropriated through this
legislative body, we are
implementing a 10% temporary
salary increase for our licensed
social workers in order to try
to retain them. That's temporary
one-time.
funding, so we have to figure
out what does that look like
when that um funding goes away,
but right now it's incredibly
important for us to retain the
workers we do have, and so that
has been implemented and that
will be um on I believe their
next salary and run through the
end of June.
We're looking at other
opportunities with special
funding that's been given um to
do additional TSIs for retention
of other staff and to look at
recruitment initiatives and
incentives for individuals
coming in to CYFD.
So along with that, our training
is key to better support for new
and existing staff, and that
will be realized through our new
workforce development Bureau.
That division has been moved
under our operations and we're
focusing on training, which is
completely been revamped over
the last several months. We're
utilizing regional trainer slash
coaches, so they will be in each
of the regions as opposed to
centralized in Albuquerque, and
that will provide better support
for our workforce in all of the
counties across the state. New
employees will stay in their
respective offices for the 1st 4
weeks of their start date.
Previously, they were
in an immediately started
training, which was then really
difficult for them to understand
at the time that they were
obtaining that training, how
that was put into practice in
their community. So we're gonna
be working closely with trainers
and coaches through integrated
onboarding, virtual classroom
training, simulation, virtual
reality, and on the job training
was structured debriefings.
A synchronous e-learnings paired
with synchronous virtual
workshops will reinforce the
e-learning and the application
of what they're learning. New
employees after that 4 weeks
will then come together as a
cohort for in-person training,
um,
To gain a better understanding
of the agency, their role, and
how they put into practice what
they've learned through those
previous months and weeks of
training, years, months, weeks,
um, and so that we believe will
help with retention because what
we hear from many of the
employees who have gone through
training, is that once they get
back out into the field after 5
weeks of training. They are not
prepared and don't understand
how that relates to the work
that they're doing. So we're
switching that around in the
hopes.
It will have better retention
with new incoming staff. It's a
huge investment in staff to
provide that training, even
after that training, they are
not able to carry a full
caseload that happens over a
period of time. And so building
up that staff to the point where
they can carry a caseload is
oftentimes when we lose them,
they become completely
overwhelmed and so we want to
minimize that through our
training academy.
In addition to that, as I
mentioned to you previously, we
partnered with Highlands
University to launch the Inspire
program. This program will take
125 of CYFD's current employees
in cohorts of 25 and provide
training to them, which will
begin now in January, and it
will run through August of 2025.
That inspire program is to
augment CYFD's core training for
protective services workers with
interdisciplinary professional
preparation
for culturally relevant um
skills will work on additional
skill training and social work
areas, and that will increase
their social work knowledge and
experience within our workforce.
Alongside the Inspire program,
we're working to launch a child
welfare certification program.
Um, that will be for existing
employees and for new employees
on boarding with CYFD.
Our training also works to build
and sustain collab collaboration
between staff, community
partners, and foster parents. I
think that's a huge part of our
training that has been missing.
We target each of those
populations separately,
providing them the training that
they need to do their respective
work, but a lot of that training
is interrelated. Our staff works
constantly with our foster
parents and community partners,
our foster parents work with
community partners, and
We have yet to build that
community in collaboration upon
around those entities and so our
new training will incorporate as
much collaboration with those as
possible to really promote that
um building of community and
networking. The training for our
foster resource parents, um,
based on feedback from them will
now also be done with our
trainer coaches in the regions
so that they have the support
that they need locally and
somebody
that they can work with um on an
as needed basis in their
communities.
Right
We recognize that foster
families are an essential part
of ensuring a safe and nurturing
environment for children in our
care. The recruitment and
retention is continuing with
over 250 events annually. These
include community events,
recruitment specific events,
local fairs, meet and greets,
and informational meetings in
communities across the state.
We currently have 2,105 kids in
care.
We have 1,85 licensed resource
foster homes.
With 20228 beds available. Since
January of this year, we've
licensed 124 new non-relative
homes and 324 licensed relative
homes. This is important because
in New Mexico, we believe that
keeping kids with family or
relatives is critically
important. So while there is a
huge focus on non-relative home
recruitment. We feel that
recruiting licensed relatives.
Homes is a huge step in
maintaining normalcy for kids in
our care.
We have 60 non-relative licensed
home studies currently in
progress and 103 relative homes,
studies in progress.
So I don't know what the outcome
of those studies will be, but
we're hopeful that we will soon
be join having, you know, at
least 150, hopefully 163 new
homes join those that are
licensed in the state of New
Mexico.
But understanding that the
challenges faced by foster
families can often be
overwhelming. We are working
internally to ensure we can
provide the support needed.
By providing support, we can
equip foster parents with the
tools and resources they need to
create stability and positive
growth for these vulnerable
children.
Part of the 1.25 million
appropriation that was received
through grow funding is being
appropriated to create a foster
parent support group. We're also
going to be working to enhance
wraparound services in
communities, so foster parents
have that support for the youth
in their care and provide foster
parents a referral incentive.
So one of the things that we had
tried to roll out was a spider
web model where foster parents
could help to recruit friends,
neighbors, relatives, other
individuals, so they could build
community around themselves with
people that they know who are
also experiencing the same. One
of the issues that we ran into
was how do you incentivize them
to do that. And so part of that
funding is going to be used for
an incentivized training and
on-demand training support
opportunities for foster.
your appearance.
In previous presentations, I
talked with you about our um
belief in the foster care plus
program. So I'm excited to say
that we are ready to launch this
program. We've modeled our
program after Oklahoma's
program, it's enhanced foster
care, which was developed to
respond to the complex
behavioral, medical,
developmental, and mental health
needs of children in custody.
New Mexico has similar
challenges and gaps in service
for children with more complex
needs.
Our staff traveled to North
Carolina to attend training
provided by Presley Ridge, were
working to contract with
Oklahoma, the executive director
who operationalized their
program has since retired and is
interested in um coming to New
Mexico to help roll out the
operations of our program, some
of the benefits of the enhanced
or the foster care plus program
will be increased team meetings
for the families and the kids
that they serve.
increased in-home quality
visits, therapeutic services,
including individualized and
family, 24 hour crisis
intervention, evidence-based
specialized training and a
supplemented foster care rate
for those families caring for
kids with higher needs.
Our target is a cohort beginning
in mid-January to early
February.
So it's incredibly important
that we build out that foster
care services and those needs
for the kids in our custody, but
it's also important that we
realize that what we really are
trying to do is to narrow that
door of kids entering into
foster care to really work with
those cases where there is
evidence of abuse and neglect
and kids that need to be in our
system to be safe, but there's
also families that enter into
our system who are
Just in need of additional
support, and that's really what
our family services division is
working to ensure that we're
working to provide necessary
services to families to ensure
safety and well-being.
This is done through prevention
and intervention. There's been
lots of talk about the
prevention and intervention work
that happens or doesn't happen
at CYFD. Last fiscal year, we
spent about $16 million on
prevention and intervention
services. For fiscal year 25,
we're anticipating spending
about $20 million.
This funding will enable us to
continue programs such as our
community-based prevention
intervention and reunification
program. Our family outreach
multi-level response are in-home
services, the keeping families
together program, the family
resource centers, which I'll
talk to you more about in a
little bit.
Um, the Carra program, which is
of critical importance for the
state of New Mexico and our safe
sleep initiative. So many of the
deaths that happened in New
Mexico that we hear about for
infants are attributed as unsafe
sleep. That's a huge number of
the population and the deaths
that happen. So we're working
closely with the Department of
Health on that initiative. Um,
we recently purchased 1000,
almost 2000 crabets for
distribution to families in need
of a safe sleeping.
environment for their infant. In
the first quarter of fiscal year
25, our family services team has
served or worked with 1,0654
families.
Those are families that just
need additional support where
they are right now today. And
our hope is that by working
closely with those families and
building those relationships and
helping them to understand the
importance that we can also help
to reduce maltreatment.
Right, all of this work.
It is concerning if our
maltreatment numbers don't
decline.
So I will point out, however
small it is, that we do have
currently a small reduction in
the maltreatment. As Rachel said
at the end of fiscal year 24,
that maltreatment rate was at
15%. Currently, our reoccurrence
of maltreatment is at 14.3%.
That is still too high, and
we're continuing to work on
analyzing what that means and
what those include. So over the
past year, the reoccurrence of
maltreatment included 1.2% for
sexual abuse.
3.7% for medical neglect. 8.7%
for physical abuse, 20.1% for
emotional abuse, and 86.8% for
neglect.
So of the neglect, the top 3
categories, making up 44.3% are
alcohol abuse at 15.9%,
inadequate shelter at nearly 15%
and drug abuse at nearly 14%.
So in order to reduce
reoccurrence of maltreatment
based on neglect alone, we need
to understand the societal
issues.
Some of these are within CYFD's
purview and others which see
white.
Oh, sorry.
OK.
You're in charge.
Sorry about that.
OK, so some of these are within
CYFD's purview. Others CYFD does
not bear the sole
responsibility, but can be
addressed through collaboration
with our partners. A major
accomplishment is standing up
our four family resource
centers.
These partners have established
one stop shop locations for
families to engage in services,
get referrals for other services
and importantly build community
and a network of support. Since
July 1.
These
FRCs have engaged in 320
families.
So we've established a family
resource center in Dona Anna
with FYI as our provider. That
one opened July 1st.
We also opened one on July 1st
in Valencia County with Whitey
eye as the provider.
Hasa opened in October with the
Chavez County Casa program.
That FRC was hugely important
during the recent floods that
happened in Roswell. Families
were coming there in droves for
support. It enabled them to
connect with families, some who
needed other services and had no
idea of theportunities that were
available to them. Our most
recent FRC is in Rio Riva County
with McCurdy Ministries which
opened on December 1st. We are
looking to establish two
additional FRCs, one in San Juan
County and one in Lee County.
Those are areas where we have
high numbers of reoccurrence of
maltreatment, and we want to be
in those communities with our
family resource centers, which
are all community partners that
come together to provide
services in that location to
help address those issues.
There are many other counties
who have a need.
And we have obtained a large 5th
wheel, um, and a truck, which
was transferred to us from
taxation and revenue Department,
which has been out being
outfitted to work as a mobile
family resource center to be
able to track target counties
with high reoccurrence rates,
um, while we work to stand up
resource centers in those
communities.
Strengthen families in their
communities and constant
connecting them with a continuum
of services that meet their
needs is critical to preventing
child abuse and neglect,
including reoccurrence of
maltreatment.
So I believe those at that
address the issues in the
Legisat report. I'm happy to
take questions on those, um, but
I wanna just kind of briefly go
over our budget request, um,
because I think that is
incredibly important to
continuing the work that we do.
So CYFD's request for fiscal
year 26, um, fills FTEs expand
services and continues providing
assistance to families across
the state. Our request is for
400
$12.7 million. This
Provides program support.
Um
For juvenile justice at $81.3
million protective services at
$209.7 million behavioral health
at 64.5 million and family
services at $33.5 million.
This is an overall increase of
23 million $551,000 which is an
increase of 6.1% of our overall
budget.
However, this increases our
general fund ask by 37
million750,000 dollars, which is
an increase of general fund of
14.5%.
This allows funding for the
positions required to meet the
Caves requirements.
Funding to remove the AMI and
YDI from the behavioral health
$20 million for ongoing years to
reduce office days?
It helps to fund our new
training academy to provide
training across the state for
our employees and foster
families and community partners.
It adds in cultural activity
funding for children in our
care.
And it
Gives us general fund dollars to
replace federal funds.
It also increases funding for
general services and do it
rates, which are established by
those two departments.
I know that there's been
significant concern expressed
regarding CYFD's decline in
federal funds. However, the
appropriated revenue from
federal funds has not been
realized in many years. This
amount has been overprojected in
CYFD's budget requiring the
department to utilize state
general fund dollars to plug the
hole.
And streamlining the delivery of
services, reducing duplication
and replication between programs
and ensuring we are fiscally
responsible. We have aligned the
programs under the appropriate
divisions.
CYFD's reversion for fiscal year
24 is about $7.8 million.
CYFD does not have program
transfer authority and therefore
we were unable to utilize that
funding from the other port
programs to reduce the deficit
that we saw in protective
services. I'm once again
requesting program transfer
authority as we continue to
realign the structure of CYFD.
I remain committed to ensuring
taxpayer dollars are spent in a
reasonable manner, and I ask
that you trust the work we are
doing and give us the
opportunity and the flexibility
to build a better CYFD for you.
So with that I stand for
questions.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
uh thank you, uh, secretary and
your staff and uh to your entire
team of.
You do uh work with the most
sensitive.
Program and sensitive to
everything, you know, for our
state, you know, I really um.
Give you a lot of uh
Kudos to that, you know, that,
that is a very, very
Challenging and difficult work
that all of you do, but thank
you for your work.
Um, what I was gonna ask you is
um.
In reference to the program for
New Mexico Highlands University.
Uh, so will you be designing the
content or they will do that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
thank you very much, um,
especially for acknowledging the
hard work that staff does. I
appreciate that. Um, we are
working with Highlands
University. They received a
federal grant to start the
Inspire program and we're
looking at the curriculum and
what that is, and then we'll be
working directly with them as
they develop curriculum for the
um certification program. We
don't want it to duplicate the
training that we're doing
internally and we really want
that to.
Hansen prepare our staff, um,
you know, there's been major
concern of lack of social
workers, um, and as much as I
wish I could just produce more
social workers to come work at
CYYFD. We're hoping to take
existing staff and incoming
staff that aren't social workers
and really put together a
curriculum that helps them to
build that skill where we feel
comfortable that we can certify
them as appropriately trained to
work in the child welfare
system.
Mr. Chairman, uh, secretary to
uh you see that expanding to the
other universities, or?
This is gonna be more of a like
a pilot too.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Gonzalez, I hope to expand that.
I hope that we can get other
universities in different
regions across the state to help
participate in that. We're doing
a pilot program with Highlands.
Um, a lot of that though will be
virtual work and so we will be
able to reach some of those, um,
workers in rural communities
across the state.
Yeah. Oh, thank you for that
response, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
I guess they just trying to view
and see the whole picture, and
I'm sure there's uh quite a few
parts to it, but on your
retention,
Uh, would you say that part of
that is so.
Salaries.
Um
Mr. Chairman, Senator Gonzalez,
yes, I do believe that a lot of
that is salaries. We've worked,
um, we got funding from the
legislature to increase
salaries. We've done that. Um,
it just is really difficult to
keep up with salaries, um, with
some of those, and there's
disparities within our own own
organization where some of our
workers specifically are
placement workers are, um, yeah,
a lower classification, thank
you. A lower classification than
say our investigators. So a lot
of
will come in and start in
placement and then when the
position opens in
investigations, they'll transfer
because it's a higher pay band
and so you lose that training
and then you've got to start
over with different training
with investigators. So we're
also looking at the pay bands um
to make sure that we have equity
within the department.
Uh, Mr. Truman, I guess I would
say that I probably would be
the, the hard part, it's like,
um.
With a CDL commercial license
driving.
You know, you train them and you
work with them, and then there's
so many different.
Uh, places that they can go to
that pays more.
And, uh, you know, so how could
we work to
Try to reduce that and keep your
employees set up, keep a
retention level.
At a lot higher and uh so that
would be, uh, you know,
something that I would see as a
as a big challenge. Now, um, one
of the questions that I, as I
thought of it as you were
talking about.
High level of um.
You know, uh
With individuals leaving because
of uh the stress or because of
um the nature of the, the job.
Yes, um
What happens in the scenario of
when someone leaves.
And how is that covered until
you replace them.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Gonzalez, I think that is one of
the biggest problems that we
have. If a caseworker leaves,
and let's just say they're in an
office where there's 5 other
caseworkers.
And they're carrying a caseload
of 40.
Those 40 cases then get
distributed amongst those 5 case
workers. So now you have 5 other
caseworkers who already had high
caseloads, and now they get
additional cases added to that
load. We can hire, even if we
hired in 2 weeks. That
individual doesn't start
carrying a caseload until a full
caseload until after 6 months of
their hire date, they can do
graduated caseloads, but
basically when one person
leaves, the burden of their
caseloads falls on their
co-workers for a minimum of 6
months.
OK, well, well, thank you and
um.
You know, I hope as far as our
comedian, as far as the
The legislature that we can
support you as much as, you
know, how we can work with this,
but uh again, thank you and
thanks to all the work that
you're doing and
a lot of success on that
training program, I think that
that would be a key issue too.
But also in working with um.
You know, uh, strategies of how
can you work on the retention of
keeping individuals, I think is
a big step.
So, uh, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Uh, representing Chatville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good to see your presentation
this morning. Thank you. Welcome
here. Uh.
Enhanced foster care. I used to
take care of some kids and they,
they were in treatment foster
care. Is that the same thing?
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, it is basically the
same thing, um, like everything
else, we struggle with
treatment, foster care in the
states we're working closely
with healthcare authority and
the providers to try to increase
the number of treatment foster
care providers, um, but even
when we increase that number,
sometimes it's still not a match
with those individuals and so.
those are the kids that often
end up without placement and are
often in our offices, so this
enhanced foster care or foster
care plus program, um, we'll
hopefully be
A home that can provide those
intensive services that are
needed, um, and have a better
opportunity to work closely with
the department where we're
placing those kids and then
we're working to support them.
But yes, it's similar to
treatment foster care. So back
then they had a lot of
subcontractors, not, not my
state, various other, I can't
come up with the names of some
of the rest that in, in the,
most of the foster parents
worked for a subcontractor. Is
that still true?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, yes, that is still
the case. There are 5 treatment
foster care providers in the
state that then subcontract out
with families. And, and do they,
do you still, at one time there
was a, was a
Home in Los Luna.
And I, I heard it at one point
it was closed. Do you have some,
some, do some of these
subcontractors say have group
homes.
That these kids stay in for a
while when when necessary. Um,
Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, to my knowledge, they
do not still have group homes.
So, uh,
Sure, what happens to the kids
that don't have an immediate
replacement with the foster.
Uh, family, if there's no group
home or no place for them to go.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, those are the kids
that um remain in the seaway of
the offices with staff.
They remain in your office. Yes,
sir.
So
Mr. Chair.
And, uh,
Is, is that
Not better served if they have a
group home where they have a
facility to with beds and
kitchen and uh people personnel
with training to take care of
them.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, that is exactly what
we've tried to do through our
multi-service homes that we've
licensed, so AMI is operating a
multi-service home in
Albuquerque that serves um males
aged 12 and above, so if they
don't have an appropriate
placement and we can't find um
placement for them, they are
going to AMI. They have capacity
for 12, and we just recently
opened a similar home with YDI
in Albuquerque. I think it
opened.
Week before last Monday, last,
last week, um, that is through
YDI, um, and that will serve
youth age 12 and above, females,
um, and we were able to move in
3 females last week, so, um,
that is the two homes that we
have. That's the funding that
was in the 20 million for the
first year um of operation and
that addition that in that
continuing funding is in our
budget request for next year.
So, Mr. Chair, is there no
need for a similar type home for
children that are under 12 that
need stabilization. I'm talking
about sometimes there has, well,
almost always there's a very
traumatic event in their life
that precipitates them being put
into a foster home and back in
the day, they would go to a
facility where they would be um
Give him counseling, uh, taking
care of, uh, kind of
Given guidance and then they
moved on out to a, to a foster
family. So we have nothing in
similar for, except just staying
in the office for, for kids
under 12.
Um, so Mr. Chairman
Representative Chatfield, we
have our receiving center that
is staffed by CYFD 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, and that
serves youth under the age of
12. We do make an exception for
youth older than 12 if there's a
sibling group, if they have
younger siblings that are with
them, then we will maintain that
family unit, um, but the
receiving center serves kids
under the age of 12.
So
is the reason that we no longer
have the group homes because we
felt like they didn't work very
well because they're not, we
don't have the funding because
nobody uh wants to have one.
Why do we no longer have that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, um, the group homes
were um
Dissolved prior to me taking on
the role at CYFD, but it is my
understanding that they did not
feel that group homes were the
appropriate placement and there
was really a push to get them
into individualized homes, which
I completely agree with and
understand, um, but I think we
kind of missed that step in
between and ensuring that we had
not only the, the appropriate
foster homes, um, but also TFCs
and RTCs in the state that could
meet the needs of kids with
higher
Duty levels and then an
appropriate step down process
that really works with them from
this level all the way down to
getting them into that home.
There's that middle part that I
still believe is missing and
what happens is they'll exit
either a an RTC or um a TFC.
And they still have higher needs
that are not met, and they end
up in an office where those
needs are still not met and then
that cycle continues and then
we're seeing them back in a TFC
or RTC. So I believe building
out that middle with acute um
care and I think that we can do
that through enhanced foster
care, where we're providing them
an environment where they're
getting more of those intensive
services that they need.
So, Mr. Chair, I, I agree with
you.
Madam Secretary, that uh there
is a middle state they're
missing, uh, for some children,
it's fine to just go on to
Your family, but for some kids,
they, they need a lot of really
Uh, counseling and, and, and
some of them are.
might even be dangerous. They, I
mean, they, they're a danger to
themselves to
They, they need uh review and,
and they need counseling, and
then they're able to go out, not
all of them, but I'm talking
about treatment foster care or
an enhanced foster care, uh,
kids primarily. The last
question, Mr. Chair, uh,
With these subcontractors, how
do you ensure how much money
goes to admin and how much,
well, not just with the, with
the subcontractors, but with the
agency as a whole, uh, what is
the percentage that goes to the
kids and the, and the percentage
that remains in admin, you have
a kind of a, some kind of a
rough estimate, uh, both agency
wise and
Uh, subcontractor like.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Chatfield, I don't have an exact
number of the breakdown. You're
talking about CYFD as a whole or
the money for the TFCs that go
to the providers versus to the
TFC provider. I don't have that
information today, but I will
definitely work with um our ASD
department to get a breakdown of
direct services dollars versus
administrative if we can.
I would love to see that then.
Thank you for the work you do.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Represent Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
So
Appreciate the, the, um,
presentation. I want, I wanna
thank you for sort of, you know,
the, the transparency of your
data and you know, the, the
charts, especially around the
recurrence of maltreatment, it's
not easy to present this
information as we all know, but
this is, you know, this, this is
where we're going to do this,
um, so.
In all the discussion too, I,
and I think it was brought up in
the last um presentation
regarding your staff, um, in
retention and training.
How are you implementing if you
are Mister chair, um, a balance
for them to reset self-care and
those sorts of things.
Mr.
And this, this type of work is
what I'm getting at. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lu Han, you're right, it's
critically important and, you
know, it's really hard to get
that balance with the work that
they do, especially when we're
short staffed, right? I've been
in the office, you know, many
times when workers are there
through the day. We usually if
I'm down there, go check to see,
you know, do we have office
days, how that's going, and
sometimes you'll see many of
those same workers that just
finished their shift for the day
who are there now doing an
office stay overnight with.
kids who, you know, to
representative Chatfield's.
Point. Sometimes they express
that trauma.
In ways that sometimes, you
know, come out as anger and
danger to themselves and others,
and so trying to tell these
workers who are incredibly
committed to try to take that
time and step back is really
difficult. It's hard to find
that balance and it's, you know,
we provide them the leave time
that they need um when a trauma
occurs, we provide them the
opportunity still to do the flex
schedules. We provide them
opportunities to take their
Um, exercise leave, which is
incredibly important. So even
though we're short staffed, we
still try to work in those
initiatives for them, um, you
know, we wanted to do, um, admin
leave for them and just randomly
give people time off, and the
majority said we can't take it,
we, we can't leave work and so
that's something that we
struggle with really and really
trying to feel how do we do a
better job of supporting the
staff that we have, um, to give
them that time for themselves.
Thank you. As we know, it's a,
it's a, it's a workforce that
has a high burnout rate, you
know, and I mean, that's how I
interpret this from my HR
perspective and really ensuring
that we're going to put the
implement those those sorts of
things, it's gonna be really
important for this agency for
retainment and recruitment, um,
and to get your numbers up.
Um, Mr. Cha, I just wanted to
focus on that a little bit, um.
So
thank you for having the
convention last week. I think
many of you had a lot of
legislators that attended, I
attended myself. And so I wanted
to, I think, uh, Senator, um,
Gonzalez was touching on this a
little bit with the, the program
when you went to Oklahoma and
other programs that were
presented there, um, I think the
question came up during the
conference when we have like the
an age 8,
information program that's
working with our local
governments and local
communities. How are you working
with that those programs are
local governments, if you can
expand on that, um, I'd like to
know how that, because I can
save and expand infrastructure,
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lu Han. So right now, Anna, age
8 received funding in the last
legislative session to conduct
kind of a gap analysis to really
determine what the gaps are in
providing um a child welfare
system in New Mexico and so um I
Have had conversation with them.
I think they're still in the
phase where they're going out to
communities and gathering
information, um, and I hope that
the department can be engaged in
those conversations and a part
of the discussion when we're
really looking at what does that
continuum look like, um,
including other partners, which
are the schools, the Department
of Health, um, you know, all of
the partners that really touch
on the lives of the kids and
families. Mr budget request
regarding the increase to GSD.
Can you
maybe expand on that is that, I
would understand that to be much
to some of the asked for last
year, um, in a special
appropriation regarding, um,
risk management. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative Lu
Han, that would be all of the
rates at GSD. So the risk
management rates, the lease
rates for our vehicles, um, the
workers' comp rates, um, so
several of those have gone up.
Thank you. Um, and do you know
what that amount's gonna look
like for us?
Mr.
See if I.
Um, so the rate increase between
GSD and do it, um, is 76.6.
But that, like I said, includes
GST and do it. I can get you a
breakdown of just the GST if
you'd like that breakdown so we
know what we're expecting and,
and, and, um.
Because when we get all that
information that's then it's
broken down. We're like, wait a
second, where did this?
Uh, so you come from, I guess my
last question is just gonna go
to um really a page 11.
And if you can
You know, some of these, these
uh these numbers are, are um
worrisome, of course, and I'm,
um.
Looking into Santa Fe, of
course, cause that's where my
district is and how that
Um, these shifts from like our
yellows to our our oranges and
then into the red like the
bottom being Torrance County.
They went from a, a light green
to a, a red, um, are there any
I guess my question would
revolve around if our, our
shifting from the reds and the
oranges into the greens as we're
seeing some of that. Is that
because there's their, their
third party.
Um, nonprofits and such doing a
lot of work in those areas. I
mean, what, what is, um, what is
helping to change to the
positive, and then what is not
happening in these counties
where we're seeing the, the
opposite, Mr. Chair. So Mr.
Chairman, Representative Lu Han,
um, I think this graph is really
helpful to kind of show, but
it's also a little bit deceiving
cause you get a little panicky
when you see it goes from green
to red or red to green, but
those numbers are really
representative of, you know,
depending on what the
denominator is in those.
Counties. Some of those
communities are really small,
and so even just one individual
can just change those numbers
dramatically. And so, um, you
know, I think you um mentioned
this shift in Torrance County
and, you know, out of um our
denominator of 55 cases. Um, we
had 14 reoccurrence and so that
shows a huge shift just in that
small population. Thank you.
Thank you for helping us. I have
actually uh population question
mark and and.
And numbers. So thank you for um
deciphering that with me. Other
questions and, and for the sake
of time I'm gonna stop there,
but I just wanna say things are
changing and, and we're gonna
have more questions as we get
closer to the session. Thank
you.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
thank you, Madam Secretary. Um,
I was curious, I have a couple
of questions. The, this new
foster care plus.
It's what I'll call it. I don't
know what you're calling it, but
foster care plus, OK, um, are
there rules and regulations, um,
and procedures uh for this being
implemented or, or uh done right
now.
Talked about
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, yes, there will be
definite rules, regulations,
procedures, we're looking at the
cost and what that funding will
be. Um, we are looking to bring
the individual from Oklahoma who
set their program up on contract
with us to help our staff to
implement it and make sure that
from the beginning of that, that
we're very clear in what those
guidelines are.
And uh thank you uh Mr. Chairman
and Madam Secretary, and so will
it be done through the New
Mexico administrative code or
how are you or just how are you
doing that?
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Armstrong, that will be through
policy and procedure at the
agency, um, similar to what we
have, if there is
Policy that needs to be in the
administrative code, then we'll
definitely be looking at
rulemaking through that process.
OK, thank you. Um, Madam
Secretary. And so what qualifies
a child for enhanced or foster
care plus instead of the regular
foster care. Um, Mr. Chairman
Representative Armstrong, it
would be the evaluation that is
done to determine needs that um
that specific child has, um,
oftentimes they, you know, need
more intensive.
therapies that are regular
foster parents um cannot meet
those needs on a regular basis,
um, and so there will be an
evaluation conducted of all of
the kids that come into foster
care, um, specifically those
that we have a hard time placing
or that have several disruptions
in the foster system, those that
are um exiting a TFC or an RTC
that may not yet be ready for
just regular foster care and
still have additional needs.
That's
The population that we're
looking to um provide services
through, um, Foster Care Plus.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. And
so Foster Care Plus is, are
they, is all foster care falling
under foster Care Plus, and how
are we going, going to support
all foster care parents under
this umbrella.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Armstrong, under
the foster care umbrella. This
is one of the programs, so we
have, you know, the, um,
treatment foster care. We have
residential foster care. We
have um right regular foster
care that has the ears, so tier
1, tier 2, tier 3. This will be
um kind of one of those tiers
and above that, so, um, when
they have um additional needs,
they will fall into a different
tier of service.
OK, thank you for that
information, Mr. Chairman and
Madam Secretary. So, um, on your
CYFD prevention, um, a little
programs here. I see Kara again,
and you know that's my pet
peeve, and I wondered how, what
are you thinking about doing
with Kara, if anything, and um
and I just wanna know your
plans, uh, for specifically
Kara. Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Armstrong, um,
Kara has been high on our
list, we are looking at um
introducing legislation, um in
this upcoming session, which we
have not yet finalized and I
have conversations that need to
be had with individuals who have
had previous legislation, um,
but there's definitely um a need
for us to really look at what
that looks like, um, you know,
in reviewing the federal law,
which we've talked about a lot,
um, that makes that a voluntary
program. And again, I think the
whole reason that it's a
voluntary program. We still need
to really be cognizant of, we
don't want to make it punitive.
We don't want to have implicit
bias against individuals that
are needing that service, um,
and we have to understand that
we have to do something earlier.
Um, we talked about universal
screening last year, that's
something that I believe
Department of Health was
exploring. I re-engaged those
conversations with um Gina De
Blasi, who was over there right
now to really look at how do we
do a better job of finding.
out those families and those
babies earlier than at birth to
be able to set them up with a
plan of care and provide them
services. I think at birth is an
incredibly difficult time for us
to be in a hospital and
providing papers that just say
here's a plan of care, and we
want you to sign here without
really engaging and having them
know what's available and what
that is. I think that our
navigators that we set up at the
department under family
services.
have been doing a really good
job in engaging with families
that are declining to
participate in that plan of
care, right? So the MCOs right
now are engaging with those who
do elect services and they're
monitoring to make sure that
they're engaging in those
services, and when they're not,
they're notifying our department
and family services going in and
reaching out to those families
to find out why did you stop or
why did you not start? Or what
are the barriers for you and
then if they
feel that child is unsafe at
home that they are immediately
making a referral to
investigations for further work.
But I also want to make sure
that they can go in and engage
with those families and still be
in communication with the MCO so
we're not replicating services,
but I also want to make sure
that we're not dropping the ball
on families that we think the
MCO is working with, and then
we're not and nobody is. And so
it's been a dance with the MCOs
over the last several months
while we really build this out
at the department. Um, we have
16, I believe, Kara Navigators,
um, we just
Repurposed 20 positions that are
getting reallocated and will be
posted to hire an additional 20
navigators for communities. OK,
thank you for that. And so I'm,
I'm just curious, uh, on your
opinion, why is the KaA Act at
the federal level good enough at
the federal level, but not good
enough for New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, the federal level
makes it not a mandatory
program. And there have been
states that have made it
mandatory and have found that it
didn't work in families were
disengaged and kind of falling
off the radar, um, and they've
walked that back.
Um, Madam Secretary, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I believe it's the
other way around. I believe the
federal is mandatory and the
state of New Mexico makes it.
Uh
Uh, volunteer.
So that that's my question. I, I
know for a fact that at the
federal level it's mandatory.
And so my question is, if it's
good enough for the feds, why is
it not good enough for New
Mexico.
So Mr. Chairman Representative
Armstrong. I believe the federal
law makes it mandatory for them
to have a plan. I don't believe
it's mandatory that they engage
in those services.
While Madam Secretary, we do.
Neither.
So not sure how, how good that's
working out for us, um.
The next question I have, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
is how long do children stay?
And CYFD custody before
something permanent is done.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, um, ideally we look
to target an 18 month period,
um, but in some cases that
extends past that point, um, for
instance, if we have a family
where we're working towards
reunification, um, and let's
just say that, um, the family
needs alcohol treatment, right?
For us to do a positive
reunification and them to be
safe at home. If they're unable
to get those services in their
community or there's a long late
wait list to get
to a provider, um.
Chances are that the court will
likely extend that period of
time for a longer period for
reunification.
Thank you, Madam Secretary and
Mr. Chairman and um and in New
Mexico, we don't really allow
foster parents to
Uh, intervene at all with
Possible reunification, um, and
so, you know, I, I have a
constituent that has had a child
for um she has been in CYFD
custody for 5 years.
And so just the, the thought of
a child not having permanency
for that long is really um
disheartening to me because uh
You know, we're, we're depending
on
On uh your agency.
To make sure that our children
are safe and I know it's a big
job and like I've said before, I
don't want your job and, and,
and I, I'm happy that you have
the job, but I, again, I would
like you to do that job.
Uh, to the best of your ability,
which I think you're, you're
making a lot of really good
changes, uh, and I appreciate
that. But when we are depending
on MCOs to make decisions.
Who aren't. They have, they know
nothing about childcare.
Or, or the lack of.
Uh, we're depending on MCOs to
make sure that families are
following.
The Kara plan, I think that's a
problem.
Um, I think that
Uh
Some of the good things you're
doing, I'm glad that you've,
we've finally resubmitted this
plan, so maybe we can get some
federal dollars, um, you know,
it's been since 2022 that we
have been lacking on those
federal dollars. So I appreciate
you getting that done. Can you
tell me what it cost, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Secretary to
uh
To hire this company to help
you.
Put this plan together.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, there was no cost to
the agency, um, Casey family
programs paid for the review,
um, and the feedback on that
plan. OK. Thank you for that.
I'm glad that's, I'm glad that's
in place. I, I appreciate that.
So there's a lot of things that
I do appreciate, but this car
plan, I'm, I'm not gonna stop.
I'm not gonna stop.
And, and I hope that you don't
either. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you. We got quite a few
people on the list, so we're
gonna wrap up by 12, so let's
try to keep it to like 5 minutes
a piece or less represented
Garrett and then uh centers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and some
of my questions were addressed,
um, Representative Armstrong
talked about the Kara.
It seems other states do mandate
that not only the plan, but the
follow through.
Um, services, so I know we all
want to hear more about that.
And my other, my second question
was the submission of the um
family first prevention.
Service act. So if you can let
all the legislators know whether
we're on this committee or not,
when you hear back from that,
hopefully the new
administration, is it gonna
waylay it unnecessarily.
Um, and then, um,
My
two questions that I have are,
um, the juvenile justice
services. There's been very
severe cases in Albuquerque,
where the guy who shot his
stepmother in the neck.
I was remanded to his
grandparents. They said there
was no place to put him in a
juvenile facility, and there's
been similar cases. How, how are
we developing more residential
situations for juvenile justice
what's the status of that? I see
that there's vacancies in
personnel, but can you just
elaborate on that? Sure. So Mr.
Chairman, Representative
Garrett, um, CYFD houses
individuals after adjudication.
So if they've gone through trial
and been adjudic
and have been sentenced to serve
time, then we, um, house them
and we still have, you know, um,
capacity at our facilities for
those youth. The problem that we
see in these communities is
individuals that have not gone
through that judicial process,
and they are awaiting trial.
Those are the county facilities
where they have lack of space
and typically we remand them to
their parents or grandparents or
family members because they
don't have space to house them.
I think that's a problem.
that we're seeing across the
state, there used to be many,
many detention centers in
communities, and we're down to 4
in, I think 4 counties that have
detention centers, so.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
thank you very much for that um
clarification. And um
Also, I too went to, I want to
compliment your department on
the family, uh, the childhood
welfare summit. Um, now I know
who Cathy is. Um, it was great
because there were teachers, uh,
partner agencies, legislators. I
think it was very effective, and
I know we're looking forward to
hearing the recommendations
because our table certainly had
robust feedback. Uh, so thank
you for doing that. I really
appreciate it and that's uh
All my questions. Representative
Garrett, thank you very much for
joining us. Um, I think there
was good conversation at all of
those tables, and as you said, a
good mix of people, um, to
figure out how do we build a
system and not just um one
agency trying to figure that
out. So thanks for attending.
Senator Gangs.
Thank you Mr. Madam Secretary,
and I also thank you for letting
me slip in a replacement since I
went there last week. Uh, I do
want to go back. Earlier you
talked about retention, and that
you'd retain, retained 124, lost
her parents in the system. You
know how many we've lost as far
as
Um, in the system. I, I, I know
to give you a little background,
you know this, my daughter does
a lot of nights.
At the office in Homs and I
think a lot of it is due to my
thought, the loss in, in foster
parents, and I'd like to try to
solve that, but I just wondered
if we keep those numbers, um,
Mr. Chairman, Senator guy goes,
I don't have those numbers with
me today, but I will get them to
you and I can provide those to
the committee. It is one of the
areas of concern, right,
retention, you know, we work so
hard to increase our numbers and
new foster families and
employees, and it's just like.
10 steps backwards when you lose
some that you already have. So
definitely working on those, I
believe the foster care plus
program is really gonna help us
to build what we need for ending
office stays, right? Because
typically those individuals that
are in the office, either we
can't find placement because of
their level of need or they've
been in placement several times
and disrupted it and end up back
in the office. So hopefully the
enhanced program will help to
end.
on that situation.
Madam Secretary, I appreciate
that. Uh, I'd had some more
questions on that, but, uh,
Repent Armstrong asked him, but,
uh, I was just wondering and,
and thinking through the laws.
If you guys do internal uh
interviews and or surveys of
foster parents and were staffed
as they leave because I'm trying
to figure out how and I and I
know it's a really hard business
to be in. I, I mean, I can see
it when my daughter's had a
really hard day.
And I feel for him because it's
it, it's needed. She needs to be
there, but it's a really heavy
burden, uh, but I'm just
wondering if we're interviewing
or doing surveys that may not be
as personal.
But at least to grab some
information and be able to get
some understanding of what's
causing this.
We do that? Um, Mr. Chairman
Senator Gallegos, we have done a
variation of surveys. I don't
think like.
I think that at this point we
need an outside vendor who's
really gonna do those surveys
and get those results and give
us those recommendations. For
us, it's kind of hit and miss.
We send a survey, sometimes they
respond, the information that we
get oftentimes is vague. Um, it
does clearly, you know,
sometimes it's very clear about
the shortcomings of the
department, but I think in order
for us to really get a better
understanding and gather that
data. Um, I think it's gonna
require us to do an outside
entity.
to survey foster parents and to
survey workers, you know, both.
Workers that are still there
with our stay interviews and
workers who are exiting to
really learn from that. So
something that we'll take back
and look into. Thank you for
that, Ms. Stern and Secretary
I'll actually ask my other
daughter.
It runs cause there might be a
opportunity for that because
they have interactions with both
groups.
And that may be
An option, uh, just throw that
out there. Thank you. I do have,
uh, my final question, Mr.
Taran, uh secretary is during
the chemness hearings, said that
the reasons that we couldn't
fulfill Caness commitment was
because legislature did not fund
them, and I'm trying to figure
out what we did not find or what
we need to fund to be able to
get us back on track for Kevin
has.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Gallegos, um, I think there are
a lot of reasons that we don't
meet the commitment. I think the
number one reason is the
shortage of staff, right? And so
that is twofold. Yes, we need
the money to hire them, so
please make sure that we're
considering that. But we also
need the people. If I have the
money and I can't find the
people, the money doesn't do me
any good, um, and so we're
really struggling with trying to
get people to apply for jobs at
CYFD. We recently
had a position in Albuquerque
for a permanency worker, and we
got 0 applicants after posting
that. And so, um, it's a huge
struggle and so I think it's,
you know, not just incumbent
upon the legislature for the
funding, but the fact that we're
really struggling with hiring
people.
Um, Mr, Madam Secretary, comes
earlier on your presentation
talked about the J-1 visas, uh,
public schools have been a
really good prover on
The value of bringing people
over on those visas, uh, and I
know you'd, you'd made that
comment. It's worth looking at.
I as a contractor, have looked
at blademan from Cuba, just
because there's a need, we can't
feel it, you have to look beyond
the box to try to fill those
voids, so, uh, with that I'll
yield and thank you for your
time.
Uh, Sen Steinborn.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Secretary, and your whole
team. Good morning. Thanks
everybody for coming.
I do have a few quick questions
for you.
Number one, this might be, uh,
well,
I'm just curious, do you have,
like, and by the way, I've been
listening to your presentation
since the beginning, even though
I wasn't in the room, so, um,
some follow-ups. Do you have
like a chart?
Uh, you had mentioned earlier in
your presentation about
The reasons for neglected kids,
I think you had said.
You know, substance abuse was
You know, high, 20% or something
in alcohol was another 15%. I'm
just throwing out numbers. It
seems like it was around 30 to
40% between those two categories
alone.
Number one, what I'm wondering,
aside from
Um, the Kara program.
Do you have a way to compel
parents who are dealing with
substance abuse and that's been
identified as a key issue. They
have a way to compel them into
treatment or in in
And, you know, and sent them
into going in the treatment.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, I don't believe that
I can force a parent into
treatment. I think that has to
be, um, something that they're
willing to undertake. There has
been a lot of conversation with
the Children's Court Improvement
Council, um, and some of the
judges that sit on that about
starting up some of those court
programs that we used to have,
um, I don't even think
pre-pandemic. I think they've
gone away quite some time ago,
but there were a lot of
programs.
That were not punitive that the
court that families could engage
in within the court system, um,
that really helped for them to
um
You know, look at options for
treatment or look at different
things and so that is something
that um Judge Ward and Judge um
Schneider, who both are on the
CCIC, um, we've engaged in those
conversations and are really
looking to maybe pilot some of
those programs um in some of the
communities. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, Madam Secretary, I
mean, I wonder, you know, when
you have the removal rate, you
have the threat of kids being
taken out of the home, that's
pretty good incentive for
someone.
To take advantage of an
opportunity. So, I mean, uh, do
you ever do that? Do you ever
say, hey, unless you do this,
then we, we're gonna have to
take your child away or this is
kind of a final step.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborg, yes, if the child is
unsafe in that environment, um,
then we absolutely
take that away.
Well, I understand that, that
kind of was what I was asking
is, do you, do you use treatment
as a incentive to
urge him to get that treatment
or they, or their child gets
taken away if they don't change
the behavior that's kind of
creating the problem. Mr.
Chairman, Senator Steinborn, no,
I don't use that child is
leverage to get a parent into
treatment.
Well, if the child is gonna be
taken away anyway. It's, it's
really for the, for the, anyway,
you're not, maybe seeing my
point, um.
But um
I mean, you identified you
voluntarily identified this as
being a problem and a cause of
it.
So dealing with a solution.
Figuring out a way to get them
into treatment would be a good
way to do it. And you have
carrots and you have sticks,
and, and how you use those at
the opportune moments seems to
be a key strategy. I'll move on,
um, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary.
Kind of building on that, if you
look at all the reasons for why
kids end up being vulnerable,
and you have all those needs,
you read off the chart, you said
alcohol and substance abuse, but
I assume there's a lot of other
reasons, I think you mentioned
housing. Do you have a whole
chart that you can provide us. I
didn't see it in your
presentation.
Uh, Mr. Senator Steinborn, yes,
I do. OK, that would be really
helpful thing just from a
policymaker's standpoint about
what are the root causes. And
then for your department, I'm
wondering, have you taken that
chart and then said next to each
item, you are the policy
solutions that address each of
these things.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, um, for those that we
have direct responsibility for
gas, but as I said earlier, some
of those issues, housing,
alcoholism, drug use, which are
the top three issues that I um
said were neglect. Those are
societal problems that I think,
you know, society and Department
of Health with some of their,
you know, um, interventions and
policy initiatives are working
towards. Those are not issues
that fall within the realm of
CYFD.
I, I, I would urge, um, with all
due respect, I mean, you used to
work for the governor and the
governor right now is working on
housing, you know, we've been
struggling to have a coherent
substance abuse policy, but
apparently there's ideas for
that. But I'm saying these
issues got to be connected, and
especially as it relates to
kids, because you can't
necessarily solve the kid
problem without solving these
other inential issues to support
them. So they are connected.
Um
By the kid. And so, I'll just
throw that out there that I
think
That would be really smart of us
to connect these pieces and make
sure that we're bringing those
needed resources to bear to
solve the problem for the kid.
Moving on, Mr. Chairman, um, the
crisis line, or that's probably
not the right way to put it, but
the phone number line that you
instituted a few years ago, your
department, for kids to report,
like they could text
anonymously. I really thought
that was a smart idea, and I'm
wondering how that's gone and
have you gotten a lot more
Tips that way. Um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Steinborn, that has gone
incredibly well. We do get um
high number of
Text messages that come in
through that. We actually have
dedicated staff that are um
central intake to deal with
those calls. Um, I don't have
numbers right now of how many,
but we definitely have those
available if you'd like to see
those as well, Mr. Chairman,
Secretary, what percentage of
kids that are in need, do you
think, don't ever get reported
that are out there just.
Extrapolating what we're missing
out there.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, I have, I don't have
an idea, nor would I take a
guess.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman, finally,
you know, you had mentioned the
idea of universal screening.
I think it's always sad when you
hear about the kid that you
didn't know about.
Right? And that's, that's what
you wake up and you're like, why
didn't we help that kid? Why did
that kid die? It breaks your
heart, it breaks all of our
hearts.
And so the idea is how do you
catch those kids in crisis
beforehand, um.
In a free society, that's
impossible to do 100%, of
course. But any rate, um,
You know, the idea of universal
screening, I'd love to learn
more about that, what that
means, what part of the
healthcare system does that.
did get discovered that they're
in crisis or the family's in
crisis. Um,
What can we do to support that?
Does that tie into, you know,
Medicaid, um,
You know, health services.
What, where, where would you
anticipate catching them through
a universal screening program.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, said the universal
screening was for um expectant
mothers so that we could
determine earlier if there's
issues and so we're looking at,
you know, doing universal
screening for pregnancy during a
regular visit, um, when there's
other screenings that take
place, maybe 7 months, so that
it gives us time to work with
that family.
Yeah, and I just wonder, are
there other opportunities along
as they get older, where um we
could be trying to identify
You know, kids in crisis. Are
there other other areas outside
of birth? Um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Steinborn, I think there
are absolutely areas where we
can really um have better touch
places with um you. I think that
was really discussed at the
summit that we had last week,
which was the whole intention of
that building that continuum of
service that includes the
schools and pediatricians and
just your community that these
are people that see these kids
every day. See?
IFD doesn't get involved until
there's usually some sort of
trauma. And so building those
partnerships with those other
providers that are with kids
every day is so critically
important to building a system
of care for kids. OK, thank you.
That's all I have, Mr. Chair,
and Kerry, just please, yeah,
send us that chart of the cost.
Thank you. I still got 5 people
on the list and so uh
representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
make it quick. Uh, thank you,
secretary. Uh, the first
question I have is on, on kids
that you get takeaway from
parents for drugs.
And then they go back to the
parent. How long of a follow up
do you have after they return
back to the family, and also how
many of those kids wind up
coming back.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Garcia, I don't have with me
information right now about how
many of those kids end up coming
back into our system, um.
We can look at that and get you
back that information. Um, and
then once they go back, so I
think it depends on how they go
back and so if kids go back home
with a home a safe plan at home,
our workers are continuously
following up with them, um.
To make sure that they can
maintain at home, so it's a
process that we have in our
system what is the time frame?
It depends on the.
So that is a plan that they put
together for that trial home
visit with the family, um, with
the child with our behavioral
health unit to ensure that we
have a good safety plan for that
child to go back home, but then
we're at home ensuring that that
safety plan is being worked and
being met. Uh, thank you. How
long do you follow up on a, a
month, 2 months, 6 months. Um, I
think it just depends on the
issue. If we feel that it's a
high risk, it's a longer period
of time for follow-up. Part of
the work that we've done in
creating
Family services is that some of
that work is handed off to
family services and their
navigators for continuous
follow-up and potential other
services that they might need to
engage in in order to be
successful.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr.
Chairman, uh, the next question,
uh, you mentioned earlier that
you try hard to keep kids with
family members. Is that true?
Is that correct? Mr. Chairman
Representative Garcia, yes, I
think that, you know, for kids
to be in that family unit when
it's safe for them to do so, um,
is a huge priority. It gives
them familiar surroundings.
They're still with, you know,
relatives and people that they
know, they can usually maintain
in their same school district
and in their community.
Um, and so that's important, but
we also have to recognize when
there are issues that we, you
know, they can't be in that
environment, then we want to
ensure that we have foster
families that can provide
similar circumstances, we try to
still keep them in community,
um, and do our best to make sure
our priority is the child.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
the secretary, and also it's
very important in my correct, if
you have a set of siblings or
brother and sister.
It's very important to keep them
together, not right, Mr.
Chairman Representative Garcia,
we make every effort to keep
siblings together. If it would
mean that we couldn't place them
if we had two placements for
siblings, um, versus them
staying in an office, then we
may face a situation where we
are separating them.
But that is definitely not the
goal.
thank you secretary, uh, and
this is just a, a comment on the
last part, you know, how you, I
was fortunate to get invited to
that summit that you had a
couple of weeks ago.
And it was very important
because, you know, what I really
like about it at the end of the
day, you had breakout groups and
we sat on the table and talked
about.
How we can improve you, you
know, everybody has a different
idea. And what I liked about it,
that ideas emerged on everybody
is saying, well, we should do
this and we should do this, and
they're all good ideas and I
imagine they got back to you and
I just wanted to thank you for
that. It was very, very
important and you had a good
turnout and to me it was very
educational. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Chairman. Senator
Woods.
Quickly, Mr. Chair.
Um, there's a couple of things
you, you asked for a request to
reorganize reorganize the
department to create family
service program and moving some
FTEs from protective service,
behavioral health and juvenile
justice facility program.
Well I take statute change.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
no, it does not.
OK, so it's just simply a bar
that you want. Um, are, are not
a bar, but uh, uh, uh, a
different request on funding.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
we're looking to establish that
as a separate pe code so that
we're able to align it and be
able to report out so it would
have its own separate budget.
OK. The, the $1.471 million to
the General Services Department
for premium increases on your
Your liability insurance, do you
see any way that you can go
through training to decrease.
Those court cases, those
lawsuits.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
so that's a cumulative amount
that includes all of the
increases for general services
and do it, but um,
Yes, I would love to be able to
decrease um what we're doing on
our lawsuits. One of the things
that we're doing um within our
legal department is um and our
um performance and
accountability is taking the
critical incident reports or
incidents that happened within
the agency and actually
strategizing to see if there's
policy change or um just, you
know, procedures that we can
change to prohibit that from
happening again in the future.
If we're not looking at those
issues and what
cause them to make changes, then
we'll continue to make the same
mistakes moving forward and
that's exactly what I'm saying,
Mr. Chair, is that
Is it an impossible task, and
impossible goal to stay out of
those lawsuits, uh, all I see
is, uh, a rising cost, a rising
cost or rising cost, and
If it's an impossible goal, then
it must be a poor law.
So
I'm asking, and from that
direction, I don't know all the
details. Uh, all I just wanna
know if, if there's a
Light at the end of the tunnel
that we can do something and
stay out of lawsuits. Stay
correct the, the problems that,
that are causing the lawsuits, I
guess is a better way to state
that, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Woods, we are looking at those
opportunities. I agree with you.
I don't think anything is
impossible. Um, I think that
never having another lawsuit is
highly unlikely, um, but we're
doing everything we can to
minimize that. The last question
I have.
When I start talking to cops on
the street, they talk about the
revolving door of juvenile
crime, and you guys are the ones
that uh
Except those standards, um,
From what I understand, I know
very little about this, but, uh,
you make the determination on
what to do with those juveniles.
And
The question I have, when they
start talking to me about a
revolving door. Is there any
statistics that you have?
Uh, or can get us.
As to the reoccurrence of
juvenile crime.
Uh, and, and
Because, again, if that's
something that's not working,
again, we need to change
something, and I know that, you
know, we taught behavior health,
we can talk anything you want to
talk, but it's still, if you're
the, if you're the victim of one
of those crimes, it makes no
difference whether someone's 14
or 28, you're still a victim.
And so if it's a reoccurring
deal.
That's what I would like to
know.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
um, we do not set or determine
what happens with those youth
who commit a crime, right,
they're referred to our
probation officers, um, we make
a recommendation um based on
that, oftentimes our
recommendations are not upheld
when they go to court. Um, so
when an individual commits a
crime and they're under the age
of 18, um, they go to court to
in whatever county that that is,
um, the district attorney's
office from that.
District is there to represent
and to make the recommendation
on what happens with those
individuals. Our probation
officers only make a
recommendation and give that to
the probation officer. Well, it
sounds like maybe I get a little
uh
So, um, you know, we're involved
he said she said kind of the
deal, um.
Yeah, there's not, I mean, like
I said, we can make a
recommendation, but oftentimes
that's not the way that that
goes. It's based off of the
thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Representative.
Thank, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Uh, thank you, Madam
Secretary, and thanks to your
team. Uh,
First
When will we receive the first
required report on the
implementation of differential
response.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
or Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
Um, I don't know that I have an
answer to that, and I don't know
if Cathy does.
So
No, as required.
Mr. Chair, I'm looking into, we
had a apparently uh an issue
with our contractor, and it's
still in draft form, and so
we're trying to ask them to get
it out of draft form, so we can.
Turn it in.
And um it
I think I'm, I'm hopeful that
they can do it within the next
month, but I'm not sure because
they're the.
I, I honestly don't know
everything that's going on with
the contract and so I've just
been alerted that this is the
issue is that it's in a draft
form. Now we may be able to at
least give the draft form, but
it wouldn't be defined.
And I've just been alerted as
well. Thank you. Uh, thank you,
ma'am. Thank, thank you, thank
you for the answer. Something
that we'll track and um I, yeah,
something that we'll track and
need uh to engage.
And get whatever form it's in
now. Appreciate the answer and,
and obviously want to help get
it in final form and then
understand where we are. Uh,
secondly, for the newly hired
staff, um, what number were were
licensed licensed social
workers.
And, and I'm gonna go through a
number of questions, um, if some
of these are better just to
transmit offline, that's fine. I
will be following up to make
sure that when there are sort of
specifics we either get like an
answer or uh we don't know which
is also understandable.
Um, I believe that number is 129
licensed social workers. OK,
perfect. Um.
Uh, wanna go, um, to, well, let
me sort of stay in that hiring
piece.
The retention abyss.
the point that sort of the,
you're saying it's mostly due to
pay.
I'm curious as to sort of the
other parts of that and how you
would rank that and also like
sort of the, the causes for that
challenge.
And I want to ask, and with deep
respect for the job, you, your
team, and all folks who are
employed with deep respect for
the work that people do. Um,
with a father-in-law who used to
work in and support in this
field is sort of culture, like
what component does culture,
leadership, and at all levels,
so not just at, at the highest
level here in Santa Fe, what
parts do those play?
in the retention challenges that
we face.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I believe that
the money part of it is a large
part of our retention issues. I
don't believe it's the largest
part. I believe that the people
that do this work, truly do it
because they care about the
families that they serve. Um, I
think that the workload is
incredibly demanding and
challenging. And I think that
there's a lot of burnout. Um, I
also believe that maybe the
culture.
I think is probably one of the
largest issues that we have
individuals leaving the agency.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I appreciate
that and as we go forward and,
and that should be part of our
conversation.
With robust proposals coming
obviously from within the
department, a significant
backlog of legislative proposals
that frankly haven't been
accepted over the term of this
administration that are gonna be
very much on the docket.
How those impact culture will
be, I think one of the questions
that we certainly have, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, with
regard to case load, um,
The number of folks who are
carrying cases, uh, sort of the
case workers. What is that
number?
Because and what I'm trying to
understand is a snapshot of the
case workers, the case load, and
how that's distributed amongst
the caseworkers.
Um, to understand, like, is,
does it, yeah, to begin to
understand that.
OK. Um, Mr. Chairman, I don't
know that I have the actual
number of case carrying staff
with me today, um, but I can get
that to you. Um, but again, I
think, you know, one of the
largest issues that we have is
when somebody leaves.
That caseload gets redistributed
and so like when I look at our
case loads in which hopefully by
this point you think they'd be
declining and we'd be doing
better. They're actually getting
higher for those workers, even
though we're hiring people cause
the new people aren't caseload
carrying staff. So the burden is
falling on those that can, and
every time somebody leaves it
just their caseload gets higher
and higher to where it's to a
point where it's just
unmanageable. Got it. OK.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, but I'll get you
those numbers. Yeah, I
appreciate the numbers and
acknowledge sort of the
crisis,
um, cause for sort of a
temporary pay or or or other
measures to keep folks from
leaving and thereby increasing
that caseload, but um,
The, uh, I certainly have
constituents. I know we all do,
uh, who are, um, in, you know,
who are uh foster families,
foster homes, who do they, for
the, the foster families, is
there a liaison for whom do they
connect with? Because in this is
again an issue I've talked
directly with, with constituents
about, I know others have that
as well.
Um, Mr. Chairman, our foster
families work directly with our
placement workers, um, and so
again, another area where we're
still looking to hire placement
workers are also responsible for
going out and recruiting new
foster families, so all of those
events that I talk about that
we're out at, you know, every
month, um, they're also
responsible for that. Until we
did our training academy and
removed that they were also
responsible for training foster
families, so as you can imagine
with limited staff, being
events, training foster
families, and then trying to
engage and do the visits with
our current foster families, um,
that didn't leave for the best
service from the department. We
created kind of a foster parent
hub within our department with 5
positions in the hopes that they
could be kind of a mini call
center and take those calls from
foster families so they have a
live person in the agency to
talk to, and then they can work
to try to track down that worker
to get the response to the
foster family.
We posted those positions, we
didn't get applicants. We
created them as exempt positions
so we could just maybe use that
to go find people and recruit
them, um, and we still have not
been able to um bring those
positions in and taking from our
current staff to create that
just maximizes the work that the
others have to do, and so it's
an area where we know there's a
lot of issues within the
department, um, and we're
working to try to find solutions
to resolve that.
OK, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, thank you for, for
sharing that and going into some
detail, um, around the federal
funds, uh, the, this is a
clearly a, a core area of
concern, um,
I guess what I would request is
detail, like detail to the best
of your ability to know one,
when we expect a decision on the
waiver.
Um, or, or that they, uh, the
plan, excuse me, uh, to
Um
And this is, I think this is a
great deal from LFC. Frankly, I
would love to see.
Who scale adoption of
Uh, the strategies that have
been put forward to draw down
federal funds because sort of
simply replacing all federal
funds with state funds is it's
not the best support for the
kiddos out there and those
families because there is, there
are more federal dollars when
those federal dollars are
available, you know, if we
briefly talk about upstream
causes, each state dollar that
is replacing a federal dollar
means that that federal dollar
isn't available for.
Another agency or another
program that deals with some of
the up upstream causes.
Um
So, I think it's a, I don't want
to spend too much time going
into that, but a robust, yeah,
feedback there is appreciated.
Um,
The, as it relates to the
congregate care piece, um,
It seems like that going back to
a congregate care model is that
best practice and is that sort
of uh something that the
department is pursuing. Um, OK,
Mr. Chairman, I'll answer both
of your questions. I'll do
congregate care first cause that
one's probably quicker. Um, that
model is not something that
we're looking to go back to
these um multi-purpose homes
that we've created in
Albuquerque for males and
females are really just um
A solution that we came up with
because of office days. Office
days is one of the largest
issues for our staff, um, and it
really is a huge issue when we
do do exit interviews. They're
just completely burnt out with
working during the day and then
being expected to be on call for
those shifts when we have
emergency that night, and if not
on call, then staying and doing
an office stay and that's 24/7.
And so these um facilities, the
multi-purpose homes are for us
to use while we build out.
Our foster Care Plus program in
the hopes that those individuals
that are typically in those
homes can move into Foster Care
Plus. OK. Thank you, agree it
would seems like that takes us
back into settlements and
creates more risk for the state,
and most importantly, that is a
worse place, it, it is not an
acceptable mid and long term
place for kiddos in New Mexico
because of so thank you um with
respect.
To the federal dollars, we
absolutely agree on the drawdown
of federal dollars. I know
there's been a lot of that
conversation that we're leaving
money on the table.
We brought in Don Winstead, who
um was an expert in 4E funding.
He was hired by the Casey
Foundation. They paid for him to
come out and do an analysis. He
did not determine that we're
leaving tons of dollars, um, on
the table. So he's doing a
report for us, which we have not
yet received, but if anything
does come up where we've left
money on the table, we have the
ability to go back 8 quarters to
still request that funding and
we will do so. um.
Administrative dollars have um
there's been conversation that
those administrative dollars
have declined when I go back and
look at that historically, like
5 years ago, I believe we were
drawing down $3.2 million in
administrative dollars. This
last fiscal year, we drew down
$12.7 million. So although it's
declined from two years ago at
14.4, it has increased
significantly from 4 years ago.
Um, and with the plan.
It doesn't necessarily mean that
even when it's approved that we
can immediately start drawing
down those federal dollars or of
the programs that we have will
be eligible for those federal
dollars once they meet all the
minimum requirements, but we
have to understand that those
programs right now, many of them
are being funded with TANF
dollars, which is 100% match.
When we switch them from the
tanin to this plan.
It's a 50% match. So to run
those same programs will require
a general fund contribution that
is not currently in our budget
to be able to pay for those.
We'll be able to redirect the
TANF funds to other programs, so
in essence, it will be more
federal funds coming in, but it
will also require more general
fund as a match to run the
programs that we're currently
doing. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Two last things. One, you
mentioned it, I think it's a
important that we sort of have
it publicly shared. What is the
number of, of kiddos who slept
in offices last night.
17. OK, thank you, and I think
it's just
and then Mr. Chair, uh, and, and
as we all acknowledge, it is um
unacceptable, it's dangerous,
it's causing, as you pointed
out, it's creating and causing
some of the uh challenges that
are affecting kids and affecting
uh staff. Mr. Chair, um, the, I
think the point that we just
briefly discussed before about
the funding, sort of
the way to wrap this up. I would
urge you, um, and appreciate
your acknowledgment around some
of the challenges, your
forthrightness in terms of
facing those, the limited time
this administration has
remaining.
To robustly look to leverage and
partner with the legislator
legislature on legislative
changes. That's not been the
approach over the majority of
this administration, um.
And it leads into some of these
pieces like funding. It is a
fair point to make to say there
will be an increased general
fund need even once we get to
federal participation
appropriate federal
participation.
But I don't feel comfortable
making that a recurring budget
item.
Before we've gone through these
other federal steps before
essentially, there is an
appropriate approach, because
then we're, we're not fixing the
problem that is in large part,
you know, leading to or
connected with severe harm and
the worst harm to New Mexico's
kiddos.
So more money that is alongside
progress in a number of these
areas is a very fair
conversation or appropriate use
of existing money, but simply
sort of base funding for things
that should be, that, that are
not right size yet is, I don't
see how we responsibly do that,
and I think it is very connected
to so many of the reforms that
legislators, you know, across
chambers and across
parties have been pursuing. So
that which presents an
opportunity policy and budget
this upcoming session, saying no
to those just to make it even
more explicit, saying no to
those policy um proposals from
both chambers and both parties.
In sort of no, this is just not,
we don't want it.
I think that
Fundamentally changes the budget
conversation. The budget will be
there to support kids in New
Mexico. It will not
Yeah, I I've said it. So anyway,
thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
Thank you, you know.
It's one of the toughest jobs,
right? For you, for your
workers, I mean, you think about
it really, you're, you're in a
home and you're gonna take a
child and, and you know what's
going on.
And to take that child, I mean,
those kids that slept in the
office. No, it's not ideal. It's
not where we want them, but they
were safe.
Right, very true. That's a,
that's a different story.
We're forced in these situations
or we choose jobs that are in
these situations that make us
make decisions.
And we make decisions as best as
we can, and they're not always
ideal, but the alternative is
worse.
Way worse, right?
So I mean
I, I, I think your staff kind of
need to know that we're here to
support them and, and you got to
realize what that really means
in the family and what's
happening and how you have to
make the decision and, you know.
It's a tough situation. Um,
let's touch about pay and, in
the LOC study, uh, you know,
the, the reason people were,
were leaving and this is the LFC
CYFD recommendation was lack of
leadership was 19%.
Over overworked 8%.
New opportunity, 8%. Too many
cases and backlog 7% mental
health, 7%.
Personal reasons burn out, they
all kind of go through there, I
mean, I don't know how you fix
that. You can fix the lack of
leadership situation, 19%.
That's an easy thing to fix.
You gotta get their supervisors
to start communicating a lot
better and seeing what their,
their personal needs are. We had
a presentation yesterday in in
in
It, it goes so deep that, you
know, you, if you are my
employee, I'm sure I'm your, I'm
your boss and I need to know
what's going on, but I really
needed to know what's going on
in your family, right? Is your
mom and dad all right? Are you
kids all right or is school
going good for him. If you don't
start communicating that with
employees, they're gonna leave
at a higher rate and there's no
employees to replace them.
And and so we gotta begin that
change.
The pay scale has went up 37.4%
since 2020, so we went 52 median
salary range to 72. That's a big
jump in 3 years. So pay is pay
on this one underpaid 4%. So pay
wasn't really an issue.
And so, how do we handle the
rest of it, right?
Uh, the, the study says you're
right in the, you're above
actually pay in in workplace or
in the 50th percentile and 52 in
some in specialist, and just
depends where you're at. The
only one that's in the negative
is a county office manager, and
I don't.
You know what that detail that
is.
So we've strengthened the pain.
You figured out how to
Keep people, but the reason
they're leaving is, is the
leadership reason, that's the
largest number. It's not on you.
I mean, you barely came in what,
a year and a half. Yes,
somewhere in there.
Me, so you, you just look at
that and you say, how do I fix
these things?
Um, the child protective
services scorecard, right?
Everything's in the red and the
yellow.
I mean, those should be easy
fixes that we can accomplish
with.
Something. I'm, I'm not the
expert, right?
We should be able to easily
accomplish that stuff.
Whether it's
Hiring, I don't know how you do
it, but we should be able easily
accomplish, but the
maltreatment, right?
This is, this is the one that I
have the hardest time with. I
have a hard time with it all.
The maltreatment rate hasn't
changed, right? I mean, we're
shooting for 10% or 9%.
Since 2017.
We've been uh right at 15 and
above in some years, I mean,
we're not getting that changed.
And and I don't know how we fix
that, but then I look at you
say, and correct me if I'm
wrong, in the maltreatment deal,
we're gonna put places in San
Juan and I see Roosevelt County,
which is Roswell, right, and in
other high places, but then they
look at Sabola County, which has
the highest, it's at 18.2%.
And in 10.4% of reoccurrence,
but we're not targeting that
maltreatment in those areas. It
doesn't give me the number,
right?
And, and then I look across and
I'm just gonna talk about my
alleys, McKinley Counties is
still one of the highest. It's
still higher than San Juan,
right?
And so I don't, how do you
target those highest counties
with the the of the greatest
need to to change that.
Maltreatment number and you have
to go there.
But we're not going there. And
you may be going to Roosevelt
where it's high.
Um, and I'm assuming.
In Las Cruces and in other
places where the numbers are
really high.
Travistonia and uh.
Uh, sand walls less than
McKinley.
Um
That you're already there and
it's not working, so.
Why are we not targeting the
highest places? Is it just the
smallest number or I just give
me more detail on that. You may
have to give it to me. No, of
course, Mr. Chairman. So I think
um that's right, we're looking
at the numbers of children
affected as opposed to the
percentage rate. So, you know,
we're targeting San Juan nuts in
our maltreatment report, we had
40 kids, um, versus McKinley
County, there were 15, right? So
the percentage um is higher in
McKinley County, but the number
of
children that we need to serve
is higher in San Juan. So that's
what we're looking at. Um, and
then we'll be targeting some of
those other counties with the
mobile response FRC that we
have.
But overall, what's the total
number of kids?
The total number of kids, um
826.
And there's no way to just
target this and say, all right,
we're gonna sign a special
person.
For maltreatment in
The
The 12 in McKinley County and
the 40 in San Juan that we just
target those kids in and and
start moving the needle on. So
we will be targeting these with
family services and the
navigators that they have in
those communities to work.
And then, uh,
I mean, you got a tough job.
I mean, 2 years ago, the, the
exec told everybody, well, we're
gonna fix this on our own. We're
gonna fix this on our own. We're
gonna fix this on our own. Don't
run any bills, don't, don't
change anything. Don't change
any laws in the legislature
stayed silent.
He said, all right, we're gonna
give thee the exec the chance to
fix that. You weren't the
secretary then.
I think she got fired shortly
after. Um.
And, and then you came along
and, and we're like.
Oh, we're gonna fix CYFD. We're
gonna fix CYFD and, and we're in
the 3rd or 4th year of this, the
Kevinesque is still going on. We
gotta get some resolve to all
this.
Um, your days are numbered. Uh,
it's in, in 2 years left and how
much change you can make, and
it's really about fixing things
from here on out.
It's not adding new programming,
it's like, let's fix what we
have, um, I have this
conversation all the time. It's
like, you know, we don't want
any agencies destroyed, and this
is not bearing upon you at all,
right? But you sit here and you
watch and the, and the
tournament prior administrations
CYFDA I think there's
3 or 4 CYFD administrators. This
1 may be your number 4 or 5
guess. I'm not gonna count.
4 or 5. So there's no stability.
And and how do we do that? I
mean,
That's really what we're gonna
need in this.
Cause we sit here and we watch
it get worse and worse and worse
and, and
And the media is not gonna
report on the good kids that got
adopted and, and the success
rates and and the good things
that happen.
They're just gonna hit you
between the eyes on all the bad
things that are happening in in
try to stick a mic in your face
and say you're the reason why,
but you're.
It's not, it's a system, but I
mean, if we could really, really
fix some things.
And, and figure out what you can
really target and really fix to
move the needle.
In the last 2 years.
I think we need to be on board
with you.
And, and some of that will
become legislative and
There may be a fight about that,
but I mean,
The exec doesn't know
everything, and we don't know
everything, but if we don't work
together to fix this.
It's gonna get worse.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I absolutely
agree with you. I mean, I think
I've said it so many times. I
can't do this by myself. I do
need the help of the
legislature. I desperately need
the help of the community. I
have the assistance of my fellow
agencies, which I'm incredibly
grateful for. Um, you know, it
was the whole reason we did this
convening last week is to really
pull together. We can't do it on
our own, and you can't change an
agency just because you put
legislation in place that says
so, right? I mean, we've seen
that with the Kevin S
litigation.
Um, they've given us clear
guidelines. You have to do this,
this and this. It's easy to put
on paper. It's more difficult to
implement and make that work. I
think collectively, we need to
figure out what can we do in the
2 years or the 4 years, what can
we set up so that we have
programs that truly work. And
then really take a look at what
needs to be in legislation.
Right? Like determining how you
run an agency to put that in
legislation and everybody has a
different take on how that
works. It's about the programs
and what do we need to
legislate? And then how do we
take that legislation to put it
in operation so that we have
really strong programs for our
families in New Mexico, and it's
not just the child welfare
program, right? It's across all
spectrums and, you know, how do
we support them and provide for
them and if we don't deal with
the
alcoholism issue or the drug
issue will continue to see all
of these problems regardless of
what legislation tells us we
need to be doing.
I mean, I just can, I can argue
with you all day, but we had the
money and we had the opportunity
to make the change.
And it didn't happen.
And
change whatever change you
wanted in CYFD I think we, we
kind of gave money to make
change and, and we have the
opportunity and, and we didn't
make the change, um, and when we
had money to make the change and
and it could change in January 1
and fall off the cliff, and I
mean, if we didn't make that
change and it's on us and it's
on the administration too. We're
both to blame, but as we move
forward,
I wanna see this fixed because
I'm, I'm watching it in another
agent.
see is it's getting and you're
not destroying this agency, but
the cost of fix an agency.
You're asking for almost 400 and
some million here to fix this
agency, right?
When we could have tried to fix
some other things before instead
of just throwing money at it and
never really got it. Yes. I
appreciate that. I'll buy you a
cup of tea or it's probably
cold. It's lunchtime, so thank
you guys. We appreciate your
time today. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We're back at one,
Charles. We're back at one
o'clock.
