We'll get started this morning.
Representative Lenty, you want
to start introducing yourself on
that side, and we'll get
started.
Oops.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, members. Good morning
audience and those tuning in
online and those are here today.
Uh, thank you for allowing me to
introduce myself. My name is
Derekente. I am from San Di
Pueblo and I represent the
sixty-fifth district in the
House of Representatives that,
uh, includes parts of Rio Riba
County, San Juan County, and San
Juan County. Thank you much.
What its chairman, uh, good
morning, um, audience. My name
is Brian Baca. I represent House
District 8, which is the
northern part and western part
of Bilensi County.
Good morning everybody. My name
is um Debbie Serana. I represent
House District 21 in Berna Leo
County. Um, the Monzano High
School area of Albuquerque.
Thank you.
Uh good morning, Mr. Chairman. I
need no introduction. You know
who I am. My name is Jerry
Garcia. I represent House
District 69, which covers parts
of San Juan McKinley's
Bernardioen Socorro Counties.
Nice to see all these smiling
faces today. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Your reputation precedes you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I'm
Representative Meredith Dixon
from House District 20,
Southeast Albuquerque.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, uh, State Senator Pete
Campos representing all the
parts of 7 counties in
northeastern New Mexico and I of
course want to welcome all the
members uh to LFC to the people
that are online, and most
importantly, I want to thank the
staff of the list Finance
Committee for awesome work
during this interim, uh, you're
truly a dedicated and
professional staff, and we
really appreciate the work that
you always put forward. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, uh,
state Senator David Gallegos
from Eddie and Lee County, uh,
part of the oil and gas, uh,
happy to be here, learning a
lot. Thank you.
Good morning Chairman and
members of the committee and
folks in the audience and those
tuning in, uh, Benny Sindo, uh,
senator for District 22.
Good morning, Miss Chairman Pat
Woods, Currique Union County,
Senate District 7.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
state senator Roberto Bobby J.
Gonzalez, District 6,
encompasses part of Los Alamos
Ria Riva Santa Fe.
All right. Good morning to
everyone. I'm Nancy, Senator
Nancy Rodriguez, District 24 in
Santa Fe.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Joy
Garrett, state rep from
Northwest Albuquerque, where all
the volcanoes are. Good to see
you all.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee, and guest, um
Representative Tara Luhan, I
represent House District 48,
which is right here and um city
different. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Anthony
Allison, San Juan County
District 4.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Vice
Chairman, State Representative
Art de la Cruz here.
I represent the heart of the
South Valley in Albuquerque.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We got the cool kids on the back
of the bus here.
Mr. Cha, colleagues, everyone,
it's good to see you. Good
morning. I'm State Senator Jeff
Steinborn from Donana County.
Good morning, everyone. uh,
Representative Rod Montoya from
San Juan County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair
Representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos
District 43.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair. My
name is Nathan Small. I
represent House District 36 down
in Donana County. Glad to be
here.
Thank you. Good morning. I'm
George Minosa representing
Senate District Forum, Sabolo
McKinley and San Juan County,
so.
We'll get started Wayne, are you
gonna?
Madam Secretary, starters.
Good morning members of the
committee, Mr. Chair, it's a
pleasure to be here with you,
uh, presenting another revenue
estimate. I think we've got it
down to a science, the
presentation format, so we'll
cruise through it, um, as usual,
I'll be covering the changes to
the macroeconomic baseline
forecasts that have occurred
since the last estimate with was
presented to you in August, and
I'll turn it over after that to
Secretary Probes who will, uh,
basically bring that together
into how all the changes that I
cover affect general fund
revenue and after that,
chief economist, Mr. Torres will
give the LFC brief.
So I'll start on slide 3 of the
executive briefing just a
reminder, as you all know, the
Consensus revenue estimating
group is made up of career
classified economists of 4 state
agencies. I just want to
recognize the hard work of, of
all the folks in this group,
including the LFC economist, uh,
the three economists behind me
from TRD, chief economist from
LFC, uh, and his support team as
well as the economists from DOT.
They do a great job and spend a
lot of time on this several
times a year.
Turning onto slide 4 will cover
some changes that have been made
to the baseline economic
forecasts that we subscribe to
from Moody's, S&P and and
Beaver, um, so again, we're
comparing what they released in
October 2024 to what they had
released around July that
informed the August forecast,
and in general, let me just say
high level, there have been
slight improvements in recent
months to the baseline
forecasts. The most recent
months that have occurred since.
the last forecast generally are
coming in just a little bit
stronger. So for um a lot of the
macroeconomic indicators that
I'll be reviewing. There's just
a very slight upward positive
trend that adds to GRT adds to
pit. So in more detail, uh,
starting with Moody's baseline
forecast, the Federal Reserve,
um, lowered its federal funds
rate by 25%% in November, and
Moody's expects one more 25
basis point cut to occur in
December in this month.
Inflation is anticipated.
to reach the Fed's target in
early 2025, national GDP as I
mentioned a moment ago, is
expected to be just a little
stronger than they thought
during the last forecast, which
adds to some of our major
revenues and real GDP is
predicted now to increase by
2.7% in 2024, with growth, uh,
flattening, which is what we,
uh, predicted previously to
growth will moderate to 2.3% in
2025 and 2.1% in 2026. So same
theme as last
time, just everything a little
bit from a a little bit higher
starting point. We expect
economic growth to moderate and
flatten quite a bit over the
forecast period.
So that's what Moody's is based
on. S&P is not too different.
Um, they expect one more, uh,
rate cut in the, in the coming
months. They expect 2 more rate
cuts before the end of 2024. Um,
again, they expect inflation to
reach the Fed's the Fed's target
rate in 2025, just a few months
later, and similar outlook for
GDP growth, um, let's see,
they're expecting 1.6% in 2025
and 2.1% GDP growth.
Uh, in the following year.
And let's see, uh, S&P also
lowered their expectation for
peak unemployment rate. Um, it's
now expected to peak at 4.6%
instead of 4.8%.
And then moving to Bieber, which
forecasts the New Mexico
economy, the forecast for the
statewide indicators from Bieber
is again just very slightly
stronger than in the last
forecast and the um employment
growth rate in the out years is
a little bit flatter. It's moved
down from 0.3 to 0.2% expected
growth. And one important note,
and we'll get into more detail
on this towards the end of the
uh presentation from Secretary
Props. We have a set of new
risks to the forecast that are
just based
On um federal policy changes
that are expected to occur in
the next calendar year around
things like trade, immigration,
um, things of that nature.
tariffs.
All right. So I'll go through um
some of the data changes from
one forecast to the next on, on
the next coming slides, uh,
slide 5, you can see that slight
uptick in the expectation for
real GDP nationally. Again,
we've had stronger growths come
in since the last forecast, so
the line, uh, the forecast line
just sort of shifted up. Uh,
won't go into great detail on
that, but you can see some of
the strength is coming from
consumer spending, exports, uh,
federal spending, and fixed
investments.
Next week on slide 6, we have
the same data, but for just the
state of New Mexico, um,
comparing the new gross state
product forecast for the
previous forecast, and you can
see a slightly stronger upward
revision for New Mexico than was
the revision to the national GDP
forecast. Again, you can see,
you know, we've, we've got more
actuals coming in the black line
is above the uh the blue dotted
line from the previous forecast,
leading contributors to New
Mexico growth include wholesale
trade, finance.
And insurance, arts
entertainment and recreation and
manufacturing, all of those
sectors growing more strongly
than anticipated.
The next slide, we'll look at um
the forecast for the US labor
market, and you can see they're
just very, very slight revisions
on slide 7 to the number of
employment, uh, the number of
jobs in new in the entire US and
sorry, ma'am I'm sorry can we
advance the slides?
Thank you.
Run on 7. OK. Thank you. Um, so
on slide 7, as I was saying, um,
you know, the US economy keeps
outperforming job growth every
month, uh, you know, we're,
we're tending to add more jobs
than we expected and so you can
see this slight upward revision,
and also in in addition to the
new releases of employment data
that are coming out each month.
We've seen upward revisions to
past months in the last uh
releases. So again, the US uh
employment sector keeps
outperforming the estimate.
But really the big picture is
that it's expected to flatten
pretty significantly in the
forecast period.
Turning to New Mexico and slide
8, again, very, very slight
upward revision to the number of
jobs that are have been created
and are expected to be created.
Our employment in New Mexico
grew by 2.74% in calendar year
23, uh, and that is expected to
flatten, growing 1.5% in
calendar year 24.8% in 25.3% in
26.
OK. And then on slide 9, we
delve a little bit into
employment changes in the New
Mexico economy by sector, you
can see that for all sectors
over the last year, we added
12,600 jobs, um, and then we've
got a breakdown of individual
sectors, how much they added and
and lost and most of them
expanded, um.
We had um strong growth of 3.2%
in manufacturing, um, financial
activities were also strong at
2.8% growth and on down.
Moving to slide 10, US and New
Mexico unemployment rates. You
can see where we've been and
where we expect to go, uh, New
Mexico right now is is fairly on
par with the national
unemployment rate, and we are
expected to continue to be so.
Uh, we were at 4.3% unemployment
in October 2024. Um, and then
we've provided some detail for
the committee. It doesn't
necessarily affect the revenue
estimate, but um we've provided
detail on unemployment rates by
ethnic group from the census.
OK. Next on slide 11, we have uh
the forecast for inflation and
interest rates, um, and so you
can see, uh, the chart on the
left shows that inflation came
down a little bit more than
expected, that little period
where the blue line is above the
new black line of actuals, um,
so that's good for the New
Mexico economy, um, gasoline is
one of the areas that is falling
uh more and bringing down the
entire inflation rate, um,
shelter though, as I've
mentioned at the August
forecast, housing costs continue
to be.
holding up inflation.
And then the federal rates, uh,
federal funds rate, you can see
the actuals that have occurred
since the last estimate are a
little lower than what was
projected. So the federal funds
rate has come down just slightly
faster than was previously
expected.
OK. Now, we'll turn to oil and
gas indicators, which are
incredibly important, of course,
for New Mexico. And um one of
the takeaways from this forecast
is, is this, uh, downward
revision to the price of oil in
the near term. Uh, you can see
for FY 25, the current year, the
Craig has taken down the
estimated price per barrel of
oil by $6 which is pretty
significant from 76 to $70 per
barrel, but are really um
important thing to say about
that is that
You know, in, in years past
before, uh, policymakers put in
place some of the reserve
transfer mechanisms and
endowment uh mechanisms where,
you know, we're taking the
windfall oil revenue off the top
and setting it aside for the
future. The 6, you know, $6
revision to the price of oil
would have been huge news, just
really roughly every dollar in
the price of oil is probably
reduces revenue by about $50
million and in in so instead of
today telling you that the
general fund is going to be
down.
$300 million roughly because of
this, these other transfers are,
are what is absorbing that and
we'll actually see later that
well, because of the upward
revision slightly to the
economic forecast, we'll
actually see a slight increase
in revenue instead of that. So
it's these transfers that you've
set aside that will absorb that
roughly $300 million shock. So
great news for fiscal planning.
OK, onto slide 14, we have got,
uh, basically a reminder about
that close linkage between oil
prices and rig activity and, and
production volumes. Um, so on
the volume side, the volume
forecast for uh oil is up very
slightly in the current year by
um 10 million barrels, but then
it's down slightly in the next
two years. So there's, there's a
little bit more near term
strength in oil production and a
little bit um less strength.
In, in what's expected in the
out years, but kind of a wash
big picture from a revenue
standpoint.
Next on slide 15, we move to
natural gas and um basically the
uh the production line is, is
continuing very strong growth,
and again, the production volume
of natural gas is very much
being driven by the production
of oil because that natural gas
is naturally coming up with the
oil production. So those two
are, are tied together in New
Mexico more than they ever were
in decades past, and so
production increased to high of
3000.
570 BCF and FY 24 and an average
price of $3.16 per MCF and
prices are expected to moderate
in the near term and growth is,
uh, supply is expected to
continue to grow. Next on slide
17, we'll turn to some data
about the grocery receipts tax
and what's impacting that
forecast. The GRT is, of course,
the single biggest source of
general fund revenue.
And so, um, the GRT forecast for
FY 25 increased by 73 million,
um, you know, tie that back to
what I said about the slight
upward revisions um in GDP and
state GDP growth, employment
growth, all of that contributes
to a slightly higher GRT
forecast for the budget year FO
26 and then out in 27 GRT
estimate has been revised up 114
million for FO 26 and up 103
million for FO 27, and
course oil and natural gas
industries are also contributing
to that expected growth.
Much of the production activity
is what's uh contributing to the
GRT forecast.
slide 18, um, delves into GRT,
uh, tax-based growth by industry
just to kind of um you know,
paint for the committee, what's
growing strongly and and what
are the big sectors and so
importantly, construction grew
by 7.3% of the construction
receipts that are part of the
GRT base in the last year, uh,
also strong were professional
and scientific services and
several other sectors performed
well, um, one fairly small
sector
But did contract by 20%
administrative and support waste
management and remediation. So
it's notable that it contracted
by 20%, but it is a, a fairly
small sector.
Right. Next, um, we'll move to
slide 19 where we um delve a
little bit more deeply into the
Permian Basin GRT, uh, so Eddie
and Lee County tax bases are
very much tied to um oil
activity and natural gas
extraction and the Permian, and
there's just such a strong
relationship between those. Um,
the chart on the right, uh,
basically describes the change
over time across 3 fiscal years
in the GRT base, what we call
matched taxable gross receipts.
In just Eddy and Lake Counties,
and you can see incredibly
strong growth from 22 to 23 in
mining as well as trade and
transportation, which is also
linked, of course, to oil and
natural gas production, but just
like our revenues that are sort
of plateauing and flattening.
You can see the same tapering
off of growth from 23 to 24 in
Eddy and Lee counties.
Right, uh, we'll skip to slide
21 for some data on the personal
income tax, uh, forecast.
So, um, let's see for FY 24, Pit
actually contracted by 12%, but
I want to be real clear, that's
not because of uh a problem in
the economic base that has to do
with like implementation of
legislative changes, as well as
an accounting change that we've
just shifted about 190 million
from being accounted for as Pitt
to sit, and that has to do with
pass-through entity taxation, so
you'll see a downward, uh,
downward, um.
trend in pit, but the same
upward in sit. So it's a wash
between the two.
FO 25, um, Pitt is expected to
decline or contract 8%. But
again, this is due to
legislative changes. We're
putting in place the bracket
reform that was enacted last
session, and also it's, it's uh
continuing to put in place the
full year of that accounting
change for pastorenity taxation.
And then probably most
importantly for the budget year
FY 26, Pitt is expected to grow
by a very strong 3.9% and 3.8%
in the out years, of course,
pending any legislative changes
that could be made.
slide 22, we delve into um
what's, what's going on in wage
and salary for New Mexico
workers and of course, that
contributes to withholding,
which is a great leading
indicator on what's going on
with personal income tax. Um, so
you continue to see in the chart
on the left that when you
compare quarter over quarter,
we've just had incredibly strong
um growth in wage and salaries
over all the years that that are
plotted here and we've got one
quarter in for FY 25, the green
line there for quarter 1. We
continued to uh
exceed the previous fiscal year,
which is great.
And wage and salaries, of
course, withholding is, is, is a
great proxy of what's going on
with not just the number of
people who are employed in New
Mexico, but the wage they're
earning, all of that contributes
to growth and withholding.
And then, uh, the, the chart,
uh, graph 2 on the right, um,
just basically shows New Mexico
annual wage and salary growth
rate, and so we're coming down
from very high growth rate in FY
22. If you saw the years passed,
though, you'd see that part of
that growth was because of
COVID, you know, we, we had a, a
contraction of wage and salary
and then a rebound in FY 22. Um,
but we expect in the forecast
period to hover about 4% wage
and salary growth.
Next on slide 23, we break out
some of the more recent
legislative adjustments that are
affecting pit revenue, and so,
um, all of, all these details
of, of things that have been
enacted in the last couple
years, but some of the drivers
of the recent contraction in
Pitt are, of course, um the
child income tax credit, which
is being claimed for the first
time. I think it came in at
about $131 million of tax relief
for the first year that we sent
out the child tax credit, uh,
we've of course got the Social
Security exemption that is
exempting about 80.
5% of all Social Security and
come to New Mexico. Uh, solar
market development credits,
clean car credits coming up,
capital gains is the one revenue
raiser that was enacted. We've
narrowed that to basically carve
out that if you sell a New
Mexico business, uh, up until a
certain point, you still receive
that capital gains deduction,
but for uh more passive income
like stock gains and things like
that. It's, it's very much more
narrowed. That is a revenue
raiser.
All right. Onto slide 25. I will
uh provide a little bit of
information about uh what's
going on with severance taxes
and then rents and royalties on
federal land, um, and, and what
I said at the beginning about,
you know, we've, we've reduced
the forecast for oil by $6 per
barrel this year, and yet we
won't tell you that the sky is
falling with General Fund
revenue as a result. Um, and
that's because, um, precisely,
you know, there are these
mechanisms in place now that
either uh send windfall oil and
gas revenues.
To another fund for future
investment or um
or basically otherwise taking it
out of the general fund and so
these uh transfers in the orange
and gray lines are where we've
revised that instead of the
general fund. So you can see um
the newly revised, um, estimates
in blue of the amount of revenue
that's expected to go to the
general fund, um, you'll see
that for, for example, on the
left for severance tax, we've
now set in law that the general
fund will not get more than the
FY20.
4 level, which is this 1.145
billion. So the forecast can
change a lot, but that 1.145
billion isn't going to change.
That's now transformed from an
extremely volatile revenue
source to one that the general
fund can really count on. And
then in orange, you can see the
transfers that are estimated to
occur to the early childhood
Trust Fund and the tax
stabilization reserve, and then
a fairly new transfer to the
severance tax permanent fund in
gray there will be growing over
the coming years.
OK, and that is my last slide.
I'll turn it over to Secretary
Propt.
of the committee.
Way props with the Department of
Finance and Administration.
I was thinking on the drive into
work this morning, Mr. Chairman,
that I picked a pretty good time
to be DFA secretary.
Where once again estimating that
uh revenue continues to grow at
a moderated pace has been, uh,
Mentioned by Secretary Sergeant
Clark, um, but for the big
takeaway from the December
consensus revenue forecast is
set for FY 26, and this is
indicated on, I'm gonna jump
around just a little bit, but on
slide 29, Mr. Chairman.
The total new money for FY 26 is
now uh with the December
forecast estimated to be $892.3
million.
That's an increase of 233
million from the August forecast
that we presented to you in
Riodoso.
Again, total new money, the
amount that the pie has grown
since August is an additional
$233 million.
That will be available to be
appropriated uh by you, uh, come
January, we generally consider
that to be the recurring revenue
bucket it doesn't all have to be
recurring, but we generally see
that as a bucket of money that
you can appropriate for
recurring uh expenses going
forward.
I jump back this chairman on
slide 27. A lot of this has been
covered already, but I do want
to highlight and this ties into
um the last slide from Secretary
Chardon Clark's presentation
slide number 25, which frankly I
think is the most important
slide in this entire
presentation.
Because it demonstrates the
fiscal responsi responsibility
that you as a legislature, and I
believe the executive as well
has shown over the last couple
of years with the um
blessings we've had uh with
additional revenues and revenue
growth we haven't spent it all,
and in fact we, as you can see,
as you saw on slide 25.
Uh, we've set aside a
significant portion of that for
for future uh needs and and
that's something that I think uh
I talk a lot about, um, because
I think it's one of the most uh
biggest successes in the, in
the.
In the state in the last two
decades that I've been uh
working in state government.
But on slide 27, the one I will
highlight tying into that is
that investment income is
expected to increase by 11.3% in
FY20.
FY 25, uh, again, that's the
result of Senate Bill 26 and
other uh pieces of legislation
that's uh you've passed in the
last several years.
A slide 2.
208 uh is uh representation of
the total new money that I
mentioned, uh, you'll see at the
top, total.
A revenue uh less uh total
expenses is projected to be
$892.3 million again, that's
sort of the recurring bucket of
money.
Uh, but you'll see underneath
that, Mr. Chairman, we also are
estimating that we have about
2.5 billion in the non-recurring
bucket for FY20.
6
Back on slide 29, as Chairman,
uh, you see that, um, estimated,
this is the takeaway from this
slide is where our reserves are,
the estimated reserves for FY 24
are coming in at 33%.
Uh, estimated reserves for FY
25, of course, before any
appropriations are made are
estimated at 38.4%. I think as,
as he will cover in his
presentation, we are the
consensus revenue forecast group
is also projecting an additional
247 million uh in non-recurring
revenue that will be available
for FY 25 above the August uh
estimate.
And then again, FY 26, total new
money is forecasted to be $233
million above the 659 million
that we reported to you in um in
August.
Uh, on reserves, Mr. Chairman,
I, I do anticipate that uh as
the executive prepares its
budget and when we release our
budget that we will again
recommend keeping reserves at or
near 30%.
I passed out a couple of
articles that appeared uh over
the summer about Moody's and the
potential for the potential for
an upgrade in the state's bond
rating.
As a director's result again of,
of the work that you've done and
your staff has done over the
last uh several legislative
sessions uh to not only spend
wisely but set aside money as
well and keep reserves at a, at
a high level. Uh, so we will be
recommending reserves for FY 26
remained again at or near 30%.
Uh skip past the slide 30, it's
kind of duplicative of, of the
slide before that as Secretary
Shaon Clark noted, uh, we do
take a look at both downside and
upside risks to the forecast
that's reflected on slide 31.
Um, not gonna go through them
individually, you can, you can
read them, um, but there are
potentials for both downside and
upside. Uh, I tend to
Focus more on the, on the
upside, but there, there are
risks to the forecast and I
think it's an important thing
that the consensus revenue
forecast does to recognize
potential downside risks.
Uh, and try to give you as
policy makers, uh, uh.
A view into the future as to
where we would be, uh, if, um,
Any one of these, uh, downside
or upside risk materialized.
That's called stress testing,
uh, and uh that is uh on slide,
I think the slide number is kind
of hidden, but a slide 32.
Um, and slide 33 are um the
stress test that uh our
economists and our consultants
run for us.
Um
This is a pretty remarkable.
Picture because you see the
Worst case scenario, the low oil
price scenario, which is
represented by the red dotted
line.
Remains well above our projected
recurring expenses for FY 25,
and frankly, even I would say
for FY 26.
Uh, so while the low uh
Oil price scenario, the, the
worst case scenario that we, we
model would result in less money
available, about $600 million
less, uh, available in
non-recurring money to be
appropriated.
We would not, as I said, in
August in Riodoso be in the
position where we are asking
agencies to search under seat
cushions for dimes and nickels
uh to operate uh their agencies.
It would not even close to that
under the worst case scenario,
so.
Again, just a testament to the
remarkable place at the state of
New Mexico is in terms of our,
our revenues.
Um, I, I kind of thought that,
you know, the stress test on
slide 33, uh, is what discipline
looks like.
There's a lot of discipline to
to get to that position.
And I think on slide 34,
shows what stability looks like,
um, the main takeaway from the
slide 34 is that when those
lines diverge, uh, that's, uh,
That's volatility, uh, but
you'll see that over the course
of the last 3 years, those lines
have begun to merge and are
frankly, virtually mer merged,
and that means that the state of
New Mexico's revenue.
Bass is far less volatile than
it has been in the past, and
again, sounding like a broken
record, that's credit to the
work that you all have done as a
legislature and the executive.
Uh, in passing measures such as
Senate Bill 26, House Bill 253,
Senate Bill 78, uh, and others.
So, Mr. Chairman, the good news
is there's no bad news in this
revenue forecast, um, I'll close
by wishing you and your families
a merry Christmas.
A happy and safe holidays. Look
forward to working with you in
January.
Uh, and Mr. Chairman, I want to
finally say I've been appearing
before this committee now for
almost 20 years. One of the
constants has been Senator Nancy
Rodriguez.
And I may not appear before her
again, but Senator, I wanted to
thank you.
For the sport you've given me.
Over those 20 years in various
positions, um, you've been a, a
constant source of guidance and
friendship and uh
I'm gonna miss you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, you're gonna start off next
and.
When unite and not miss her yet,
because we may hire her and send
up finances a housing zar. Oh
no, no. He's just
he's saying that.
All right, Mr. Chair, I think
we're ready to get started here.
Um, if you turn to tab A in your
binders, you can find the LFC
brief titled Money Matters.
And general fund consensus
revenue estimate, it looks like
this.
Give you a second to get turned
over there.
Mr. Chair, as as the secretary's
mentioned, there's not a lot of
change in this revenue estimate
from August. I think when the
consensus revenue estimating
group publishes a new estimate.
We tend to have either a change
in direction, um, to the
positive or negative, or sort of
just a movement, a step in the
total revenue estimate, that's
where we're at today. We're on
track with what we thought in
August from our perspective as
the economists, we're about 2%
different from August. So not a
big change. Now, of course, what
that translates to in terms of
the
general fund for the budget year
is about $200 million. So a
little bit more than uh uh
pocket change for you all in
this revenue estimate.
Um, and starting on page one, if
you could, uh, if I could draw
your attention to the table at
the top, this 2% increase, about
2% increase in the revenue
estimate from August translates
to revenues in FY 25 of $13
billion up 250 million from last
year in FY 26, the budget year
that is coming up to be
appropriated during the session.
We're estimating $13.6 billion.
They do have a typo here at the
bottom of this paragraph. It
says 829 million. It's actually
89.
2 million, the same on the graph
on the right, retitled revenues
less appropriations, where it
says total less total that
should say $892.3 million. So
hopefully I can clarify any
confusion before it comes up
there.
Um, the story is really the same
if you look at the chart at the
bottom of the page, year over
year recurring revenue growth as
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned, huge growth in 22 and
23 record-breaking years, back
to back, we saw the decline in
FY 24, the growth dropped down
to 12.6%, about half of where we
were in the prior 2 years. We
expect FY 25 to do the same in
slowing, although with the
implementation of several tax
reductions we expect the growth
rate to decline even further to
1.
6%. Um, but if you look at this
graph here, the blue line is
really uh the direction that we
see ourselves heading in. We do
see the growth rate returning
towards that.
10 year trend, the really long
term trend of revenue growth of
under 5%, a little over 3% there
in the out years.
And what that translates to is
in the chart in the middle,
revenues less appropriations.
The bar on the left shows what's
already been appropriated, the
red is recurring, the green is
non-recurring, and you can see
the blue representing revenues
only slightly above where we
were in FY 25, so a little bit
of a surplus in 25 is what we're
estimating here. And then that
growth into 26 results in that
$892 million over current
appropriations.
Um, if you turn to the next
page, you can see a table
representing the state's balance
sheet with those revenue
estimates, and we expect ending
reserve balances for FY 24 will
reach about $3.16 billion or 33%
of recurring appropriations. Uh,
before any legislative actions,
we expect reserves to be 38% or
$3.9 billion in FY 25. But as
you all know, in the coming
session, as you all make
non-recurring appropriations
that will reduce the balance in
FY 25.
We don't expect that they'll
stay at 38%.
If you look at the table or the
chart, excuse me, at the left.
This is the change in recurring
general fund revenue. So what
contributed to the growth and in
FY 25 over FY24, um, as
Secretary Charon Clark pointed
out, the gross receipts tax was
a significant share of that
growth. Income taxes as we pass,
uh, increased tax collections
back to New Mexicans is actually
a reduction year over year,
because of those tax changes,
but really to Secretary
Crops at this point, the
interest earnings, $213 million
is by far the largest
contributor to general fund
growth in FY 25, and we expect
that to continue to be the case
moving forward. And that's
because of those increased
distributions from the land
grant permanent fund, and the
severance tax permanent fund,
which are benefiting from SB 26,
but also increased oil and gas
royalties on state lands and uh
more general fund use for
capital outlay rather than
severance tax bonding. So all of
that contributing to uh the
largest growth in
the general fund coming from our
state investments.
Uh, if you
Move on, if we'll move on
quickly through the economic
forecast here. Same story from
August. We experienced record
economic growth after the
pandemic. We are seeing that
slow down now. If you look at
the chart at the bottom of the
page, this compares our
expectations for inflation.
The current estimate in blue,
the previous estimate in orange,
and we actually are seeing that
we've made significantly more uh
headway on inflation reducing
inflation in the Federal Reserve
has been aggressive in it in
maintaining its interest rates
to make sure that those uh
prices come down.
We are doing better than we
thought we'd be in August, in
the near term, but we do expect
that in the out years, inflation
may return to a little bit of a
higher point than we thought in
August.
Um
Uh, uh, maybe another
significant indicator here for
us is the moderation of oil
prices. I don't think that's
been touched on, um, so much
yet, and I'll go into a little
more briefly, but
Our oil production estimates are
growing, but they're being
largely offset by decreases in
price and uh and that's actually
resulting in a net less
collections in the near term
from oil and gas related
revenues, and I'll get into that
more here in a second.
If you turn to page 3,
Uh, you can see that our
employment expectations are
largely on track with what we
thought in August. Um, I, I
really like this chart here in
the middle year over year
employment growth, and the blue
is New Mexico, the dotted gray
is the southwest average, and
you can see that early on in the
recovery, New Mexico was
actually outpacing our neighbors
and our peers for employment
growth, and far above the
national average, which is
really good news. In the in the
time since, uh, we've actually
returned towards that US
average.
Which is still good news for New
Mexico after a decade of of
lagging growth, but, uh, our
peers are starting to grow.
past New Mexico's growth rate,
so that's something to keep an
eye on.
Uh, the chart at the bottom of
the page again represents our
different expectations from our
previous forecast for wage and
salaries growth. This is good
news here. We see an FY 24, and
FY 25 expectations for wages and
salary growth above what we
thought in August, and we expect
that will continue, although at
a smaller amount, smaller rates,
um, into the out years.
If you turn to page 4,
The two charts at the left here.
are some of our favorites at the
LFC really demonstrating the
remarkable position New Mexico's
been compared to all other oil
and gas producing states, we
have surpassed North Dakota a
long time ago to become the 2nd
largest oil producing state in
the country, where quickly
reaching, uh, heading towards
text about half of Texas's
production, but on a percent
growth basis since really the
boom began. uh, nowhere close,
we're certainly leading the
country and I believe that at
this point, about 50% of the US
oil growth.
is coming from New Mexico's oil
growth.
Um, and, and if you turn the
page to 5, the table at the
middle here is that price
environment that I was speaking
to earlier.
We are seeing prices come down
from expectations of above $70 a
barrel in the previous forecast
to about $70 a barrel and
actually today I think we're
sitting at about $68 so we're
seeing some price weakness,
that's with a lot of supply
strength and demand weakness
that's resulting in lower prices
and lower price expectations
from August.
Um, we did see the, uh,
OPEC meet on Thursday and choose
to delay production, uh,
increases, which was good news
for prices, but prices didn't
budge much, despite that action.
So, still a lot of concern on
the global markets for
Demand and supply continues to
grow, which is causing prices to
drop. So if you turn to
Page 6 now, we can see how some
of that uh declining.
Christ's strength is maybe
translating into the gross
receipts tax. We, I just checked
our, our oil rigs for the last
week this morning, and we're at
99 rigs, that's down from over
100 or around 110 earlier in the
year. So we are seeing that pace
of drilling slowed down in the
Permian, um, across the Permian,
including on the Texas side, but
also in the New Mexico side. And
as Eddie and Lee now represent
almost 1/3 of our gross receipts
taxes, any weakness in that
industry, we can also expect to
weigh on our, our gross receipts
tax collections at the state
level.
level.
Um
Despite that slowing, or or or
maybe speaking to that slowing,
we saw 14.6% growth in FY 23 and
21% growth in FY 22 in the gross
receipts tax, a really
tremendous growth. We saw that
slow down to 6% in FY 24, that's
in the match taxable gross
receipts or the economic
activity that we're measuring in
the state, that the, the tax is
applied on, but we still had to
phase in the last 1/8 reduction
of the gross receipts tax cut
last year, and that resulted in
even slower growth of 2.5% tax.
collection. So economic growth
at 6.5% tax collection growth at
2.5%. And what we're seeing now
moving into FY 25.
is even slower growth from the
mining sector, which really
drove those 20% growth rates in
the prior two years. So, if you
look at the chart at the top of
this page here, you can see FY23
growth really coming from
mining, which is what the oil
and gas sector, um, files under,
about almost 45% growth, really
tremendous. And then compare
that to the FY 24 year below 5%.
So again, that slowdown playing
out there.
Um, and we kind of see that
slowdown playing out throughout
sectors, except for in
construction where we still are
experiencing strong growth.
OK, moving on to page 7.
And speaking to the points that
both the secretaries made, these
bars represent total oil and gas
collections. The top one related
to the oil and gas school tax,
the bottom, uh, relating to
federal mineral leasing
payments. This is the share of
federal royalties that the
federal government shares with
us for production on federal
land inside of New Mexico. And
you can see the total bars
represent total collections. FY
23 was a watermark year for New
Mexico in FY 24, we actually
experienced declining revenues,
and we expect the same.
FY 25. Again, not because of
production, but because of
declining prices and had those
protections, those insulating
measures, those distributions
not been put into place. I think
my quick back of the napkin math
was the general fun would be
experiencing about $700 million
in decline. So just speaking
more towards how those
insulating measures have
protected the budget, um, the
budgeting process, but also the
general fund and uh programs
that New Mexicans rely on.
If you turn to page 8,
The effect of those
distributions, uh, can be seen
in the chart at the top, because
they're not just insulating the
general fund, they're also
propelling general fund growth,
the largest general fund revenue
growth is coming from interest
or investments represented by
the green bar in the chart at
the top of the page here, really
blowing past all of the other
growth and all of the other
revenues. We're estimating about
an average of 12% growth through
the forecast period coming from
investments, that's almost
triple what the otherwise
general fund gross.
rate for other revenues would
be. So a significant strength
not only in, in insulating the
general fund, but also powering
its growth into the future. And
of course, these are the most
stable forms of revenue in the
general fund as well, another,
another benefit of those
reforms.
Um, one source of volatility
that I've raised, uh, I believe
in July during a study that the,
the staff that your staff
conducted on revenue volatility
is represented in the chart in
the middle of the page here, and
that comes from the state
treasurer's office distributions
to the general fund. So the
state treasurer's office invests
the balances of the state
general fund investment pool,
and any gains made from those
investments are distributed to
the general fund. But any losses
in that pool are also pulled
from the general fund, so they
can become.
anchor just as much as a, as a
benefit. And I hope it, it's
clear that the volatility in
this program is significant. We
are seeing over $80 million
distributions in any given month
down to $-50 million withdrawals
in any given month. And that's
because this, this program
