We'll have the staff to
introduce themselves, and I'm
giving a script here that I need
to read about the virtual public
comment, but I'll get to that
after we've introduced
ourselves. So, um
Senator Pope. Why don't we start
with you at the end there, and
we'll just work our way back
this way.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
Harold Pope, Junior Senate
District. 23, Northwest
Albuquerque and Bernal, Leo
County.
And it's great to be here. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair Alan
Martinez House district 23.
Uh, in Sandoval County. I
represent the northern part of
Rio Rancho in the western part
of the town of Belia.
Good morning.
Um, I'm Jennifer Jones and I
represent House District 32,
which is Dona Hidalgo and Luna.
Morning, Mister Chair, Madam
Chair. I'm Liz of Panic. Senate
District 39 parts of six
counties. It's a pleasure to be
here again.
Very impressive, Senator. Um hi.
I'm a representative Kathleen
Cats for District 44 of my
district is all of parts of Rio,
Rancho and the northern part of
Alameda.
I'm sorry of Albuquerque and the
unincorporated area of Alameda.
Uh, good morning. Um
Mr Chair and I'm Joanne Ferrari
from House District 37 in Las
Cruces and glad to be back in
the interims again.
Good morning, Mr Chair. I'm
representative Liz Thompson
House District 24, which is near
Northeast Heights. And I just
wanna say for those of you who
don't know we now have staff and
we have five extra days of
meeting, so my plan is to kick
butt on health care this good
morning. Uh, representative Tara
Lujan. I represent house
district 48 here in the capital
City. Um, just wonderful.
Time to get together and have
these discussions and have the
extra time and and efforts that
we're gonna put towards the the
critical issues we have. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr Chairman. Hi.
I'm Rina Sapanski. I represent
house District 47, which is in
Santa Fe County. Uh, good
morning. My name is Eleanor
Chavez. I represent a house
district 26, which is on the
west side of Albuquerque.
Sure. Thank you, mister. Chair.
Uh, my name is Xander Dawson. I
am the lead staff for L HHS. Um,
and the rest of the staff is not
here right now, So I guess I'll
go ahead and introduce them. Uh,
so we also have Andrea Lazarow.
She is a drafter with L CS. And,
uh then we also have Grace
Balder Ramos. She's a
proofreader and, uh, the three
of us are only on L HHS. So
we're fully focused on this
committee.
Sure or I they are also gonna
come up. Uh, do the first
presentation. But, um, we have
Eric Chenier. Um and then, uh,
Ruby, Anne Esquibel and Kelly K
and, uh, Nathan or, uh, well,
John Courtney's back there and
Nathan Ekberg and then Allegra
Hernandez.
And, uh,
I'll be the chair of this year.
We the way this committee works,
The chair alternates between the
Senate for two years in the
House for two years, and so this
is the second year that I'll be
chairing the committee. Uh and
so I'm state Senator Jerry
Ortiz Pino. I represent a Senate
district 12, which is downtown
Albuquerque.
As is currently configured
Senate district. 12 is downtown
Albuquerque and, uh, the older
neighborhoods that surround
downtown, Uh, plus about 13 or
14 precincts west of the river
in the Aris neighborhood.
But, um
This district basically gets
chopped up into little pieces,
and the number will be used for
a brand new district in Rio,
Rancho and Taylor Ranch. And I
think, uh, Paradise Hills.
Yeah.
Para ourselves, not Taylor.
Ranch Paradise, uh, in the next
election, so the district will
have a totally different
configuration.
And with that, we'll get started
this morning. Um
I just wanted to say about
public comment.
Um
There's been a
The determination made that if
we have public comment made in
person
We have to also have it online.
For people who can't, uh,
attend. I'm not sure why That's
the case. But that's been a
determination made.
And so, um
As we go around the state.
If we're going to have public
comment.
In person. Let's say we go to
Ruy do and we want to have
public comment.
We have to be in a facility
that's capable of accepting
remote public comment as well.
Um
Which
Not so bad for our committee. We
can usually find a venue that
does that how the land Grant
committee is going to handle
that. I'm I'm curious, but, uh,
that that's not our problem.
That'll be the Land Grant
Committee's problem.
Um, we also have here, um
Some
Kind of guidelines for this.
Members of the public may
provide comments in person or
virtually during the public
comment period.
The person wishing to make
virtual public comment.
Confined instructions.
And the link to the zoom
webinar.
On the
Committee, the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee's Web page at NM
legis.gov. So you go to the our
committee and then when it says
the agenda, it'll show you how
to make
How do you what the link is and
how to make public comment.
Virtually
While in the zoom webinar.
Turn off the Webcast to avoid
technical interference, So if
you're going to make public
comment, you gotta turn off the
Webcast. And then you can make
the zoom comment. Otherwise, the
the lag problem creates a an
issue.
During the public comment
period.
A person in the zoom webinar
will be called upon to provide
comment and their microphone
will be unmuted at that time.
And I guess we do that here.
Technically, our staff here
handles that OK.
Any questions anybody had on
that?
All right.
Well.
We've we've got a, um
Um
Uh, 1.5 Day meeting will be
winding up by noon to Morrow.
Originally we had thought we'd
meet tomorrow afternoon as well.
But the higher education
Department that we had invited
to make a presentation.
Um, said they weren't ready to
do that. We asked them to update
us on the status of their, um
Um
Loan forgiveness programs, and
we wanted to report on how
they're doing on
recommendations for how to make
Graduate programs and behavioral
health fields free to New Mexico
residents.
And how they would expand.
Two year programs that feed into
behavioral health fields, how
they would recommend doing that,
and they said they will have
that for us at our June meeting,
but they're not ready to do it
today. So that's why we
shortened the the, uh, agenda
tomorrow.
Tomorrow's meeting will start at
nine.
But we think we can still wrap
it up by noon.
We have lunch. We're gonna take
a break for lunch today. We
don't have anybody buying lunch
for us. Jason Weeks is providing
is
going OK, so we will have so
we'll we'll just go ahead and
and have a working lunch and and
just meet right through the
lunch hour. Uh uh, Jason, weeks.
uh, anybody else?
Just Jason Weeks, is offering to
buy lunch for us.
All right, So with that we'll
get started, and we'll have, um
Um
The summary of the post session,
Health and human Services.
Fiscal. Uh so we have Eric
Chenier
Kelly, Clint and Nathan Ekberg,
the analyst from the LFC, who
will make that presentation for
us.
And we're just gonna go in that
order, Eric. You, uh
And then OK, very good.
All right.
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Uh, thank you very much, Uh, for
having us today. Um, I just
wanted to mention real fast
again. It's kind of already been
alluded to LFC received funding
this year for additional staff
to support the human services.
Uh, work, um, within LFC, and
then also to kind of share its
work plan and its work products
with the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee, and,
um
So we've already done a little
bit of that work we've put
together on the LFC has reviewed
our work plan, and we've, uh,
shared that with, uh, your
committee staff and some of your
members and, um yeah, we're
ready to head into the into the
interim. Um and hopefully bring
you some, uh
Good work product. Uh, moving
on.
Um
One of the reasons why we did.
This is
HHS has become one of the you
know, health and human services
is
The biggest part of the state
budget.
Uh, just HSD alone or it's gonna
be become the healthcare
authority at the end of the
fiscal year on July 1st
Um
It's uh, $12 billion budget.
Um, with all funds.
Um, which is about the same size
as our entire State Budget
General Fund. And so that's
You know, it's it's we're trying
to put more of a spotlight on
The work that the health and
human services
Um, kind of block of agencies
and everybody else does.
So with that I wanted to first
jump in. You should have two
handouts in front of you from
us. Um, there might actually be
a third. It's It's a spiral
bound book that looks like
Um, that looks like this. We
didn't bring enough for
everybody, but it's um and you
can go ahead and find all the
different health and human
services pieces in there and
then also
Some other supporting
documentation kind of in the
back Then you'll see another
one. It's got these tables on
it.
And then there's another one
that's labeled, uh
Brief health and human services.
Yeah, And I also wanted to
mention that, um this post
session review If you didn't get
a copy, it's also on C's
website.
And so starting off. I'm just
gonna start off on this. This
one with the table here. Um,
it's to me. It's one of the
easiest to read and kind of
understand.
Um
This year and the prior year are
You know, going into the future,
honestly.
It's kind of an exciting time.
Honestly, it's
Of my 12 years in state
government. I've spent most of
that time working on health and
human services issues, and, uh,
we've increased funding quite a
bit. We've done a lot to kind
of, um, change the way that
we're funding.
Uh, health care in the state.
Um, for for one, we created the
health care authority which
brought over the developmental
disability support division from
DOH, also the UM, Healthcare
oversight division from DOH, and
then also the employee Health
benefits division from the
General Services Department. So
that was one big one big chunk,
right? Another big chunk is, uh,
we just passed Senate Bill 17
right, which allows us to
essentially
Um, tax the hospitals get that
matched. Send it back to the
hospitals. Um
And raise hospital.
Reimbursement rates through
Medicaid to the average
commercial rate, which is
Roughly ish depending on how you
count it about double what they
were getting before from
Medicaid. And so that's a That's
another kind of big thing going
on this interim that we need to
look into more.
Um
We also have done a lot of other
rate adjustments, and I'm gonna
get into some of those two. You
know, we did some last year and
then I'm also gonna talk about
some of the ones that we did
this year.
Um
And then we've done a lot of
other kind of less significant
but also very important kind of
a adjustments out there. You
know, there's the, um, the
health care affordability fund.
We also changed the way that we
we, uh, are doing tobacco
revenue. Um, we'll we'll
probably get into that a little
bit more. And so
Kind of a lot of changes
happening, Um, between
You know, January 1st and and
now and it's gonna be kind of
exciting going forward. And so
I'm looking forward to working
with you on that and so,
starting off on here. I wanted
to get into the numbers because
I I think the numbers uh, kind
of, say a lot, But then they
don't say everything and I'll
I'll talk about that a little
bit at the end.
And so if if you're unfamiliar
with this table here, um
This is something that we share
quite a bit with LFC. And then
you know when we get into the
session with health, health
appropriations finance and then
also, um Senate finance
And so you'll see if you look at
line two. The these are all all
the lines are marked on the side
line two.
Uh, you'll see the the prior
year operating budget.
Right?
And then you'll see
On each of these lines going
down so like line 678
Going down, we add or subtract a
certain amount for a certain
item. Um
For that operating budget, and
so
Uh, for example.
And I'm gonna be talking mostly
off of just the laws. 2024
chapter. 89 COLUMN That's just
what we passed in House Bill
two.
And these are either additions
to last year's budget or
subtractions from last year's
budget. If there's a parenthesis
around it, it's a subtraction.
If there's not, it's an addition
right and so
Um, and you'll see there online
three that, uh
The department actually came out
with their January projection
and showed that they were going
to spend about um $40 million
less during FY 24 than they had
originally anticipated. So we
did a little bit of an
adjustment there and you end up
with a adjusted operating budget
there. Online line four.
All right, but let's get into
provider rate adjustments, um,
that we did this year.
And these are all In addition,
we don't chalk this up, because,
um
That Senate Bill 17 that big
hospital
Build it past. It doesn't it's
not gonna show up on this. It's
gonna show up in future years,
right? And so that's you're not
gonna see that here, but, uh, if
we look at line six maternal and
child health and other physical
health services, so we
increased, um, that by about
$28.2 million 28.1 million
dollars, Um, and that should be
bring those rates up to 100 and
50% of what Medicaid pays, And
that's actually what the we just
talk
To HSD on Friday, and they've
confirmed that that's what
they're raising Those rates to
Uh,
Line eight. You'll see that we
raise rates for federally
qualified health centers and
rural health care providers by 2
million
Um
Online 10. We adjusted, uh, up
to 100% of Medicare for phase
three providers. So last year we
Did.
So for the current fiscal year
that we're in, we did, um
Rate adjustments up to 100 and
20% of Medicare.
And
That was for physical health and
maternal and child health, and
it was for certain types of
providers. This brings everybody
else that didn't get a rate
adjustment up to that level.
Or up to, um
100%
And then for line 11.
Those rate adjustments that we
did last year.
We needed to maintain rate
parity. So rate parity with
Medicaid, right? And so we did
those rate adjustments, But
every year, Medicaid's rates
also go up. And so we need to
maintain, uh
Competitiveness with Medicaid
and other provider other payers
out there and so
Yeah, I'm sorry. Medicare, and
so we need to maintain
competitiveness with them and
other payers out there. And so
we had to adjust that to kind
of, uh, keep up with inflation.
So that's that 28 or 26 million
and then you'll see that we did
another $11.2 million for the 20
smallest hospitals. And that's
one thing that, um you know, I
think you've probably heard a
lot in this body has heard a lot
about is hospitals are strugg
struggling, especially some of
the rural ones. Um, there's a
lot of, you know.
Issues going on with that. And
so that was, um one piece of
what the Legislature did this
year to kind of, uh,
Deal with some of the financial
struggles that hospitals are
going. I'm gonna go ahead and
skip down to other spending
changes. One thing we added this
year was funding for, um, and
that's online. 18. We added
funding for doulas and lactation
counselors. So that's that 5.8
million there.
Um and then line 19. It's It's a
small amount, 97,000, but this
is to bring pay parity for non
physician practitioners. So this
is like those, um nurse
practitioners and other
professionals like that. That,
um, is bringing him up to the
same. Pay that docs get paid
Right. So that's that there.
And then you'll see line 2021, a
few other other lines that say
CD DS D below.
Um
Those, uh, I just wanted to
mention here. I'll kind of
mention that.
The department, the executive
they had wanted to kind of
intermingle bring all of the dsd
funding, most of it into
Medicaid into the bigger
Medicaid program.
EC didn't really support that,
Uh, the Legislature that ended
up not supporting it, And it's
one of these things that it
could have kind of com Those
Fons and it would have been a
little less easy to see where
those funds are. And so, uh, we
didn't
We didn't support that. We kept
DDS D and medical assistance,
um, transparent.
Uh, skipping down to line 24.
You'll see that
The $68.9 million expenditure
there so
The feds decreased our federal
medical assistance percentage.
That's that's just language for
A federal match rate for
Medicaid.
So when our economy does better
The federal government reduces
that F map rate
When our economy does bad
Compared to other states. It
increases the match rate.
We've been doing better. Um,
it's good news that we're doing
better. But because of that, um
they reduced their
Match rate. And that cost us uh
$68.9 million. And that's that
was only a 0.91% reduction.
And we're looking at this is
probably gonna happen again next
year, Probably another
Um
I think right now the
preliminaries is right around,
um, a half a percent. Um, but
that's very preliminary.
Um
We know more about that in
October, when the federal
government so what is the
What is the the regular Medicaid
match Right now, Um
I have the it's It's around 71%.
OK, I didn't bring and we still
have the 90% right for expanded
Medicaid. So you have a bunch of
your Mr Chairman. You have a
bunch of different groups. You
have the Medicaid expansion
group, which is that group that
got expanded after the, um
Affordable care act was passed.
And that's 90% for those folks,
And then you have your regular,
uh, match rate, which is for
Um, a certain co cohort of
people, which is about 71%. And
then you have your, uh and I'm
actually gonna talk about this
more tomorrow. Um, because we've
We're also on the agenda
tomorrow for it.
Medicaid, Um, 101101, and I've
got those rates for you, too in
there, but you know, And then
there's the 81% for Children's
health insurance program and
some other groups. Um, that go
in there to
Um so moving on. I just wanted
to mention there on the bottom
of the medical assistance
division.
This was 100 and $25 Million
increase.
Uh, for for HSD this year.
That again doesn't include that
Senate Bill 17, which will go
into effect next year, Probably
Uh,
We're thinking at the end of FY
25.
All right, moving on to the
developmental disability support
program. I'm just gonna touch on
a few of these.
Uh, we had to replace DD waiver
ARPA revenue they were allowed
to, um
Use ARPA funding.
Um as a state match for a couple
of years, and that went away.
Now we've spent it all and it's
gone away. So that was about $37
Million, and so
Um, that
Got back filled with, uh,
General fund revenue.
Um
Just for DD waiver program
growth. We added another, uh,
12.4 million in there.
And then for, uh, provider
rates. We added 19.2 million, um
Moving on to Medicaid,
behavioral health. I'm gonna
kind of jump through this a
little bit quicker. Now, um
For behavioral health. It
doesn't look like a huge
increase the 1.2% there at the
bottom, Uh, online 69.
There is the 7.1 million for
behavioral health provider rate
increases.
But we've also done a lot in the
non recurring budgets. So
remember this is the recurring
budget. This is the budget day
increases every year.
Incrementally. We did a lot in
the non recurring side.
Um Oh, yeah. And I've I've got
the
F map right here from a minute
ago. It's 71.68% 71.68. The the
regular is 71.68.
Um
So we did 46 million this year
for, uh
During the 2024 session and non
recurring funding for the
health. Uh, rural health
delivery grants, which that
includes behavioral health. We
did 80 million for that same
thing the prior year and during
the 2023 session, um
We did 15 million for, um
That's over the course of three
years for espert screening,
brief intervention and referral
to treatment, which is an
evidence based treatment. Uh,
modality.
And also that 15 million can go
towards, um
Certified community behavioral
health clinics, or you might see
it in there as AC CBHC. Um so
We also did that.
Uh, moving on to the next page.
and so that that kind of
actually wraps up Medicaid for
its, you know, just the Medicaid
program, so Medicaid, behavioral
health, developmental
disabilities and me.
You got three programs in HSD.
Now that
Or directly Medicaid, Just for
those that know Ju just to just
a quick question before you move
on off that page, the the the
total
General funding now will be
Or I guess its general fund and
federal fund will be 11.6%
increase, and that includes the
replacement of ARPA and
everything.
That's uh, Mr Chairman. That's
correct. 11.8%. Yep. 100 and
$86.3 million that we
Uh, increase that this year
going towards Medicaid. Thanks.
And then OK, So the next page
Page two. This is for the so
there's the Medicaid Behavior
health program that was on on
the last program this pro or on
the last page.
On this page line. 77. We have
the behavioral Health Services
Division, which is
Basically they manage the
Behavioral Health Collaborative.
And then all of the non, uh,
federal matched funding.
Um
Within the state, so that's
basically everything that's
within the collaborative and so
Um
If you look at line, 79 we we
had to replace those, um,
expiring 988. You've probably
heard of the 988 crisis and
access line that the federal
funding for that, um, expired
and so we replaced that funding.
Um, linkages housing for, uh,
homeless people with serious
mental illnesses A million
dollars there.
Uh,
And again the certified
community behavioral health
clinics. We did 1.5 million in
the recurring side, plus that 15
million on the non recurring.
Um, and that's that grow
funding. The, um
I had explained Drew, yet that's
the government results.
Um
Government results Fund. Uh
yeah, it's changed several
times. But that's that's the it
It's It's for funding for three
years, and it um
Essentially it allows
departments or whatever to
Um
Pilot different programs and
then after that, three years,
we're gonna come back and review
maybe evaluate those programs
determine whether or not they
should have continuous
Um, where we at so line 82
again. We funded Esper. Um
And that was actually the
screening. Brief intervention
referral to treatment. We did
that with
Um, moving on to income support.
Going down.
Online 97 got 14.1 million there
for an increase in benefits for
elderly and disabled.
Um and that and then also, so
that brings the benefit from
$32 a month that they were
receiving to $100 per month. Um,
and I believe the department is
expecting to get that program up
and running in October. Last
time I spoke with them.
Um, I'm gonna skip along, so we
had some pretty big increases in
program support. You look down
there at line 120. They got
almost a 50% increase. And this
sort of makes sense because this
is gonna be the first year that
the health care care authority
is
Um, operational They took on a
lot of new responsibilities. Uh,
we are asking them to do a lot
more. Um, we're hoping for a lot
more data out of the department.
Um
And so you'll see on there. Some
of those line items are for
Improve data analysis stuff like
that. So that's that's what
that's for, Um
And then I'm gonna move on to
page three to kind of wrap this
up.
Um, line 153. You'll see the
department total and this is
just general funds.
We got to $1.99 billion
Uh, in the departments, so we're
almost at $2 billion
And they had a total of 12.2%
increase, which is pretty good
size increase for a department
this size.
Um, they got they got a lot in
there. Um
And then you'll also see if you
look down lines 155 through 163.
These are other revenue sources.
Um, like I mentioned, um
You know, there's there's some
early childhood funding in
there. There's some tobacco
funding in there and other
things like that that were
Uh, counting in there, and that
actually brings us above.
The $2 billion mark from what
you just said. I want to go back
to that earlier question,
because I think I misunderstood
you at the bottom of page one
where you have an 11.6%
increase. That's an 11.6%
increase in general Fund in
General Fund for Medicaid
programs for Medicaid program,
Mr Chairman.
What? What is the some of that
is replacement of ARPA.
Mhm. So what is the
Was there actually much growth
in
In the in the Medicaid.
Health care services.
Uh, Mr Chairman. So some of it
you had the 37 million
Uh, D DS D and then you had
What else? Um
I mean, I think that was the
biggest chunk of it right of
the, uh
What would that be?
100.
$86 million.32 million of it was
was the ARPA so
We? There's still a pretty a
pretty significant increase in
in
In its program expansion.
Really? Right? Right? OK? Yeah.
and and rate adjustments.
Thank you.
And with that, Mr Chairman, I
wanted to kind of just leave you
with And then we're gonna I'm
gonna pass it to, um, Nathan and
Kelly, but I kind of wanted to
just leave you with
This idea that we we did do a
ton of funding this year. It's
probably some of the best.
Some of the
Biggest change that we've seen
in a long time in health care,
uh, in this state, but
What I kinda wanna leave you
with is it is just funding.
And I think a big piece of what
we're looking at over the
interim.
Is going to be making sure that
this funding actually turns into
Um
Changes for the state. Right. So
when I think about
That Senate Bill 17 the past.
um, the hospital rate
adjustments.
Um, you know, in five years are
we gonna wanna look at that and
say
Well, we just maintain the
status quo or are we gonna wanna
say that we've actually improved
access?
For access for and better
quality services for
Uh, the people in the state and
I, I think this is gonna be a
really critical time going
forward in the next couple of
years to make sure that that
really, uh, results in something
and so with that I pass it over.
Um
All right. Well, thank you, Mr
Chair. Uh, my name is Nathan
Ekberg. I'm one of the new
health and human services
analyst. I just made the switch
a couple of months ago after
being a program evaluator for
LFC for over 10 years.
Uh, today. I'm sitting in for
Rachel Garcia, who I think most
of you know, does the is the
budget analyst for CYFD.
So, uh, just kind of using the
same table that Eric used for
his, uh, agency. I believe it's
page six. In your packet. It
should say Children, Youth and
Families Department General Fund
high level there at the top.
So the Legislature maintained a
relatively flat CFD operating
budget.
While making significant
Uh, multiyear, non recurring
appropriations to the department
to pilot and evaluate
evidence-based workforce
Development and prevention and
early intervention programs. Uh,
before moving these programs
into the Agen agency
Base operating budget.
So when keeping the operating
budget flat.
Um
The legislature.
Considered significant operating
budget increases as CYFD has
received in recent years,
including a 20% increase in
general fund appropriations
between FY 21 and FY, 24 and
really considered the fact that,
uh, spending has not been fully
leveraged by the department, um,
leaving available resources, um,
on the table and on spent.
Um
So the FY 25 recurring
appropriations increase Cyd's
operating budget by 0.6%.
And that includes 2.5 million
for tribal liaisons, uh for the
Kevin S settlement.
Revenue to backfill court lost
court fees and fines in the
domestic violence program and
General fund revenue to replace
Social Security Administration
revenue. UH, previously used to
provide care and support for
foster youth. And if you're
looking at that table on Page
six
Um, you can see in the program
support
Section.
Their, uh, lines one through 11.
The agency requested 23.1%
increase for
administration.
Um
They did not, uh, get that
amount but instead got 3.7% and
again, that's for those six
tribal liaisons tied to the
Kevin S settlement.
Uh, moving down the table.
If you look at protective
services
Uh, line 35.
Uh, this is where we're talking
about the Social Security
security benefits. So up Until
recently, the department was
able to retain, um, any sort of
federal
Uh, revenue that a child in
foster care might be getting
Um
But, uh, under the secretary
that, uh, money can no longer be
used by the department, and it
goes to the, um to the
Child. Um, there was a bill
introduced during this past
session. House Bill 254.
Which would have prohibited the
department from using a child's
federal benefits to pay or
reimburse the department for any
of their costs associated with
their care.
I think the reason the
Legislature, um introduced this
bill was just to solidify it in
law. Uh, right now, Like I said
the department is not using this
money, but future secretaries
may opt to again, um, retain
those funding if
Um, if the department is is
needing that those additional
resources
Um
So that Bill, uh, did end up
dying in committee, but, uh,
that would have been house Bill
254.
Uh, moving down the table.
Um, line 53.
The behavioral health services
was kept, Uh, relatively flat
except for, uh, $300,000 to
backfill, um, to make up for
loss of court fees.
Uh, I think the Legislature has
kind of trended towards, um,
reducing fees, making, um
Sort of the system plus punitive
and as a result, the Legislature
is backfilling making up for
that. The loss of those the fee
revenue. Um
So that's what, uh, line 53 is
showing there.
So even though CYF DS, uh,
operating budget
Remain relatively flat.
Um, there was still
$24 million in non recurring
special appropriations to CYFD,
including 18.6 million in the
growth fund that Eric was
talking about a little bit
earlier.
So if you look at page three in
the briefs that we passed out
earlier
There towards the bottom of the
page. There's a bulleted list.
Um, showing what
Some of these, uh grow pilot
initiatives, um, would fund so
that would include $1.7 million
for a pilot program to
incentivize masters level social
work, life insure to develop and
retain case workers.
4.2 million to expand evidence
based implementation a
multilevel response or
differential response in, um CPS
9 million to implement and
expand evidence based community
based prevention and
intervention programs. Um, that
will eventually be eligible for,
uh, medical reimbursements in
the future.
And 3.75 million to recruit
train support and retain
resources, family and treatment
foster care providers.
So again, The emphasis on this
money is
Um, accountability. The
Legislature is more
Uh, easily able to monitor the
use of these funds when it's in
this grow pilot program versus
uh, the operating budget.
Um, some of the language
associated with these programs,
uh, was altered a little bit by,
uh, Governor vetoes. Um, after
this last session.
Um
The legislative intent of the
appropriations for Prevention
and early mention were changed
by partial vetoes. Removing
language, uh, directing the
department to invest in evidence
based approaches.
Um, that may be eligible for
federal funding in turning over
to Page four here in this brief
The Legislature also re
appropriated a non recurring
funding from prior years that on
that went on spent by the
department.
Clarifying the intended use and
extending the period of time the
department has to use. The
funds, including 3 Million to
implement a workforce plan to
recruit, develop and retain
social workers.
And $20 million to the health
care authority and CYFD to
support start up costs
associated with evidence based
Children's behavioral health
services.
Um, if you look at the
A little call out box there on
Page four on the side of Page
four. These are also some
initiatives that the Legislature
passed during the session.
Um I would just like to
highlight Senate Memorial five,
which created a task force Well,
which really tasked FC with
convening a task force.
Um
Kind of to look at. Uh uh uh,
CYFD, Um, just wanted to report
that said Memorial Five Task
force has been convened,
including two members, um,
including Senator Lopez and
representative Chavez. The
first meeting of that task force
will be May 24th. I believe it
will be, um over at LFC.
And, uh, it will also be
available. Uh, publicly, uh,
streaming
Um, so with that
I think I'll turn it over to
Kelly.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee Kelly C
Legislative Finance Committee.
I'm, the analyst for the
Department of Health, the aging
and Long Term Services
Department, early childhood and
a smattering of other agencies.
So, um, just to kind of go off
of, uh, Nathan's presentation.
You all have our spiral bound
notebooks in front of you, and
that's a post of everything that
happen. All agencies healthcare
included, but beyond that, so if
you want other questions of
other agencies, you have that.
And on page 169, since we've
been talking about the growth
fund a lot if you wanted to see
that in a table form, that's a
little bit easier to read. You
can find it there so page 169,
and that breaks it out by fiscal
year, So remember that those
appropriations are over three
year periods. And so the amount
you see there is what they're
gonna get each of those three
years, not all three years.
Into one line item. That makes
sense. OK, So, for instance, the
early childhood department is
gonna get $5 million each year
for three years for a total of
$15 million to work on a wage
and career ladder. So that's how
you read that table. If you have
any questions about those growth
funds in particular to CYD,
since that was such a big part
of CD's budget was doing a lot
of their preventative and
intervention services through
this revenue source. So just
Wanted to make that easy and
convenient for you all to read.
And with that I will talk about
my agencies, starting with the
early childhood department.
So in your packet with all of
those tables, Page seven. So the
last page of your presentation
is the high level for the early
care and Education Department.
A majority of the programs that
run through E, CE CD, or
Childcare assistance,
Pre-kindergarten home visiting
our Family Infant Toddlers
program, which is a
developmental supports program.
We also have, um nutritional
programs going through, but
those are kind of like the big
hitters that are big cost
drivers in that budget.
And this budget was really
generous in a lot of ways, given
that they have the trust fund,
which you all are aware of has
grown beyond what we ever
imagined. It would be, um,
projecting to be over $9 billion
in just a few short years. You
all, uh, passed a bill that
would increase the distribution
from the trust fund to, uh, fund
a bunch of activities in EC CD
instead of using general funds.
You also pass a land Grant
Permanent fund several years
ago. As you know.
And, uh, was put on as a
positive by the public and that,
um, is counted as general funds
in this high level, so most of
the revenues that went into
expansion of the EC CD are trust
fund or land grant permanent
fund revenues. Land grant
permanent fund revenues as a
technicality are considered
general fund.
And
So what were the big things that
we changed? Um, During the covid
crisis, the feds gave us a lot
of money in the federal packages
directly to EC CD. Those were
non recurring revenues and a lot
of what they did with that
revenue was to expand childcare
systems both eligibility so they
increase the income level of
families eligible to receive
childcare assistance. They also
waived copayments, so families
were not having to pay
copayments. Um and they raised
Rates, so the amount of funding
that we've been spending per
child as the checks go into
providers, But all of that was
done with non recurring revenue.
We knew that
We were planning for that. And
so you'll see really large
increases for childcare
assistance. $75 million, which
you can see online 51 through
53. A lot of that is
backfilling those federal
revenues so we could continue
those policy decisions going
forward in a recurring way.
I will also note that there's a
really significant policy
decision in this and that it's
uh 40 of that million 40 million
of that was for infant and
toddler contracts. And, um many
of you may not know childcare
assistance is big. It serves
about 28,000 kids every month,
but the smallest portion of
Children that are served are
infants and toddlers. Why is
that important? Because those
are the Children who are most
likely to be neglected or
abused. They can't speak for
themselves. Their families are
under a lot of stress.
And risk factors, and they're
the most expensive population to
serve right. It's relatively
cheap to serve a school age kids
because you can have 15 kids to
one adult for an infant. You can
have up to four kids in a
quality center per one adult
that changes the math on that
business pretty significantly
and so we've been trying to
incentivize providers to open
more of our infant toddler rooms
so that we can reduce risk. And
because we know it's
Center of the most brain
development and child well being
of those years. You want
Children and family to have
health. Happy, healthy, safe
interactions so that they can
have those good long term
outcomes educationally and
economically, So that was a
really big policy decision that
was done this year in the
budget.
Other big policy decisions was
using the trust fund money to
support the doula and lactation
support that you get in the
Medicaid division, so that'll be
matched with Medicaid dollars to
help those young families.
Um and then we increased
Medicaid home visiting rates
using 1.5 million from the trust
fund.
Now I know you all know this,
but I'm just gonna remind
everybody why this is important.
So home visiting. It's not
necessarily a care where you
drop your kid off and you're
able to go participate
economically. It's a provider
that comes into your home or
into a safe space and coaches
the family on how the things
that they may not know right.
They may help them find
auxiliary services. They may
screen them for, um
Different risk factors and, um,
send them over to other
providers. And so it's a really
prevention intervention early on
before things may get chaotic.
It's also really stabilizing the
family to have the caregiver
have somebody who's an expert
and say like you're doing great.
This is not you're not
experiencing something that
other families aren't
experiencing. But here's some
helpful hints that may make you
feel a little bit better.
So we have home visiting
statewide. It's not growing as
we would prefer. So we wrote
into the Medicaid waiver last
waiver. Medicaid home visiting
would be eligible for Medicaid
reimbursement. The feds approved
that and we were hoping with the
general fund that we have now
that we could go almost
statewide and serve most
families with home visiting,
regardless of income.
We have not seen that
materialize. Most providers are
not Medicaid providers. They're
straight Billing General Fund,
or federal McVee funds, which
means we're losing out on that
70% match right?
And so part of the thing is, we
did an evaluation last summer
and part of it was rates. Part
of it was some of the really
difficulties of becoming a
medical provider in the Medicaid
system. And so we can address
some of that with rates as you
see here, and there's a lot more
work to be done to help
providers become Medicaid
builders and adjust their
businesses that we can really
take the opportunity to really
serve as many families as
possible with the money we
already have. So those are kind
of big
Decisions that happened in the
early childhood department, Um
with the Land Grant permit fund
That's mostly been going to
Pre-kindergarten. So we did, um,
continued expansions of the pre
K program, mostly in three year
olds and four year olds are
basically universally covered at
this point, so we've moved into
threes.
And this is a kind of the big
buzz budget decisions that were
made.
In this chart.
Um, As for the Department of
Health, they also received large
increases. I will note that DDS
D and DH were transferred to HC
A. So that's gonna be a big
change for them, but most of
their increases were really
focused on. Um, the state
hospitals. We've had very low
census since the pandemic
happened. We still have very low
CS. I just checked yesterday and
as of mid last month, we were
only at about 51% average.
Enrollment at the state
facilities. Um some facilities
are higher. Some are lower. It's
an average
And what does that mean? That
means that we're not pulling in
that third part party billing
revenue, So we're still
operating those hospitals. Those
are state employees. It's not
like they have the flexibility
to reduce their staffing as
easily as a hospital can because
they're state employees. They're
covered by, um, collective
bargaining. They're classified
employees and so those costs
remain there, but we're not
pulling in the revenue to pay
for those. So we had deficits in
the Department of Health. We've
had lo, low capacity.
And so that's been a real issue.
So a lot of the money that went
into DOH was to, uh more general
funding to support those
hospitals in hopes that they
will bring it their senses and
those revenues will come back
into the facilities and we won't
see deficiencies or
supplementals going in the
future. Um, there's a lot of
work to be done on those.
Um and then another large thing
that we did in DH was we put
some money into the public
health program to do some
clinical services in public
health offices. Many of you may
be aware that you have local
public offices in your
districts. Um, And so this is
gonna be the hopefully roll out
some family care services in
those facilities as well to
cover gaps.
And then finally, I have the
aging a Long term services
department.
And you can see that on Page
eight of your grief that has all
of the tables.
And you'll see that they got a
large increase 8.5%.
Um, a lot of that was for rate
increases for the AAA S, which
are the ones that deliver your
services for the aging networks
in your local communities. We
did rate increases the year
before, and this closes out the
rate increases that they need to
meet their service plans. Um, I
will also note that aging did
receive some of that grow money
that we discussed.
And that was for the New Mexico
program. Now New Mex program is
a pilot. It's an innovative
approach to aging care. It's
kind of modeled after the waiver
programs and what it is, is it
gives payments to family
caregivers or friend caregivers
once they receive training to
provide some living service
supports to people in rural and
high risk areas, so that they
they can age in their home.
With dignity, OK, And so that's
a new pilot program. That's
gonna be a three year pilot. We
just met with the agency they
have over 100 and 40
Applications are ready for that
program. Um and they have some.
We've had some really
interesting discussions on how
they're going to evaluate that,
um, with a possible RTC, so that
would be really interesting.
Going forward to keep your eye
on And with that I will.
Stand for questions.
Just before we get to the
committee for questions, Where
does the guardianship program
show up on?
Um, Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee of Guardianship is in
D. DC is where, Uh uh, D DC
develop.
Developmental disabilities. It's
not in the aging and long term
services Department. They have
an ombudsman office. Is that
what you're
How about the just the guardians
for elderly people who will they
have the adult protective
services program, But that's not
necessarily a guardian so
because they're adults, you
can't It's not like child
protective services where you
investigate it, and you can say
like, Oh, we're taking custody
because you you can't take
custody of an adult unless they
move it to a guardianship. But
like the contract contracts with
guardianship companies that
provide guardianship
We just did that whole big
reform a couple of about five
years ago now trying to
straighten it up And isn't it an
aging and long term services?
No, no, Mr Chet and
DDD DC development is
called. So Where is that
department show? Is that do we
move that over to the health
health care authority? D DPC was
an agency that has always ran
guardianship and other smaller
programs. We renamed it from
Didi's PC to D DC a couple years
ago, and they run the
guardianship and I can pull the
guardianship numbers separately.
If you would like to talk about
that, so it's not under aging
and long term.
Services is totally independent.
Is that what you're saying? Yes.
No.
Yeah.
No. And it's not in D DS D,
either. It's not in. It wasn't
one of the DDS D programs that
transferred over to health care
authority, and it's not under
aging in long term service. This
is Alice Lou's program
independent to all by itself
somewhere well, it's in
collaboration. I wouldn't say
that they're not in. They have
an oversight committee. They
mean that their budget doesn't
show up under any of those other
departments. No, we can show to
talk about this.
OK, I mean, III. I just did. It
was still under aging in long
term.
Why wouldn't it be under aging
and long term Venus Long term
services?
II. I don't understand why it's
not there.
Do you know why? It's not there,
Mr Chairman. Thank you. And no,
I'm with you on this I. I don't
have an idea Why It's not there.
But Kelly, let's just quickly
Mister Chairman just for
clarification. Kelly, just tell
us and we're gonna move. I know
we're gonna discuss this more,
but, uh, now that you said that
Is it? Somebody asked. I think
it was a chair. That is it.
Completely separate on its own
standing there. It's not under
any department. At this point.
It is its own freestanding
department. It has been and the
Why is but it's not a department
is it's a department. It is a
department under the Under the
organizational chart. When you
get all the Cabinet secretaries
with departments and so on, this
is a department. So who's if
it's a department? Who's the
Cabinet secretary of the staff?
Alice, It's a there is a nanny.
Mr Chairman members, So it's a
council so it's governed by a
council. Right? So it's the
developmental disabilities. It's
an executive branch agency.
So it's an agency and not a
department.
So if you look on page uh, if
you guys look in this post
session that we handed out with
page on page 55
And Mr Chairman, if I may just a
little bit either now or
whenever you want for my turn,
But I can't. I want it to really
just weigh in on this because it
is not in Kelly. Thank you for
that. But Kelly mentioned it's a
department to us. A department
is a department, not a division,
not a bureau, not an agency
Specific under the
organizational chart of
departments. That means the
departments would have cabinets,
their deputies and and on And
on. In this case, it's an
agency. Is it ANR? Uh,
Agency or not, even that it It's
an established agency on its own
separate from all it has its own
agency code. It is not under
department of Health. It is not
under HC.
It manages its own budget. It
has a council it has a director.
It has bureaus. It coordinates
with HC a with DOH, but it's not
managed by them.
And and again if you look at
page 55 line, 132, Mr Chairman.
You'll see the Developmental
Disabilities Council. They've
got a $9.3 million budget.
Uh, that was a 3% increase from
the prior year.
Um and they're they're totally
separately. Budgeted, totally
separate agency. They're not a
part of any other, you know,
they don't show up in a line
item somewhere. They're their
own thing.
So this is this is crucial for
us to to to keep track of these
little commission things here
because I had always assumed if
we have the hearing on the
health department we're gonna
hear about We're up to hear
hearing on aging and long term,
we'll hear, but they're not
necessarily gonna make a report
on them because they're
independent. So if we're gonna
hear from them we need to
specifically
Schedule them on an agenda not
just include them under one of
the umbrella departments. Thank
you. Thank you. Mr Chairman. I
do appreciate that. I think
that's probably key to all these
questions that we have, because
currently from what I can see
and visualize is that they are a
separate agency somewhere but
governed by this council, But
there's not one person um or two
people like we have. Well, I
think Alice Liu is the executive
director of that council, But
we'd like to see the
organizational attract of that
to see how it flows to see.
Supervises. Who and who's
minding the for and I'm sure
they're trying and doing a good
job. But there is this is this
is where people the most
vulnerable people of our state,
Uh, need help, So thank you.
We're going to go to committee
for questions now, but we're
gonna start
Uh, the vice chairman had a
comment for thank Thank you, Mr
Chair, So I was the chair of the
D DPC, Um, when it was still the
D DPC and the guardianship is a
is a program within the D DC
now, and they generally work
with families of people with
developmental disabilities and
and like for us when we got
guardianship of our son, we
didn't use them because we
didn't qualify financially. So
it's for
People who are low income. Um
other folks have to do a private
guardianship where you hire the
attorney. You hire the attorney
for your child and all of that
stuff, and it's not cheap. But
what's within the D? DC is a
program to help families get
guardianship of generally their
people with developmental
disabilities who are unable to,
you know, take care of their own
money or health care decisions
or something like that. So in
terms of I know my sister is a
paralegal at senior citizens.
Center, and they do also do
guardianship, um, on a sliding
scale, but I don't know that we
have a state program for
guardianship for elderly folks
that we are actually funding.
Mr Chair. At one point, the a OC
held some funds for guardianship
for court appointed guardians.
And this might be related to the
competency issue that we've been
talking about.
Thank you.
Which committee members have
questions that they want to ask
is? Does everybody have one or
If it's just a Let's I've
already got started A list of
Sil Lopez down. I have Rodriguez
down.
Lujan.
Chavis.
And me.
Jennifer
No and
Thompson, OK?
Let's start with the Senator
Silvio Lopez. If you could do it
in about three or four minutes,
That would be great. Yeah.
Oh, each of each of you take
three or four minutes. Oh,
each of each of you Take three
or four minutes. I definitely
try. But here, can I. This is a
101. We're not gonna get deep
into you know everybody's
budget. This is just a A, so if
you have personal issues, or,
you know, you have a, uh, a
constituent, We really shouldn't
be going there at this point. OK
to me. This is about
understanding this. So my first
question is how confusing it is
on page 55 to have, um, these
things like the Department of
Health Department. Uh, it's a
representation of that. An
office of representation and
advocacy, Children, youth and
families under agriculture,
energy and natural resources and
not under human services. Is
there a reason it's confusing?
I just wondered if there was a
reason for it, sir. Chairman
this committee so that title is
actually the footer of the
section. So the title so you,
For instance, you'll see lines
Um, 109 through 115. Those are
Yeah. Those are the that fall
under that section agriculture.
I I'm confused. I'm still
confused.
So it's not a title. It's a
footer. Does that make sense?
It's not a It's a total.
Oh, OK, so then so then that's
also confusing. So we have
The minor. OK? Oh, I see so
health and human services starts
on 119 and through 139, And then
it's totaled at the foot of that
That alleviated my confusion,
which raised another, uh,
negative. This is sort of a
small issue. I. I worked last
time on the brain Injury Trust
fund.
And I had the hardest time
figuring out where that was.
I think a similar kind of like
confusion with how this works.
Um is. Is that covered by
anything that you reported on?
The brain Injury Trust fund. It
should be. But Mr Chair senator,
it's located within the health
care authority firmly the HSD.
OK within the healthcare
authority.
And then it wouldn't be here
because it's too small. Or why
would why
It's uh, Mr Chair, Senator.
Yeah, it's it's a It's a pretty
small piece of the health care
authority. Um, we don't break
that out anywhere in here. But
if you need the breakout, I can
get it for you, I. I would
appreciate that. And then it's
it'll be the health when you
talked about backfilling funds
from lots of fees. This was
funded by traffic fees. Is this
so it's the health care
authority responsibility to make
sure that it gets backfilled.
Uh,
Mr Chairman. That's correct.
Thank thank you. I appreciate
that, Mr Chair, and then just to
hurry. I'll make sure that my
other questions are relevant to
trying to understand what was
just presented, Um
I, um
I. I didn't hear And maybe you
you said it. Or maybe it was
somewhere how individuals who
might not be eligible for, um
Medicaid would be served, and
I'm looking at it in the early
childhood education, and this is
Miss Clint when you talked about
it, Um so for example, uh,
Just as an example.
Children of immigrants who might
not be eligible, or maybe the
Children are eligible or their
parents are or how. What's the
outreach to ensure that
individuals? Um
Who
Who have early childhood needs.
Uh, but not might not be
eligible for Medicaid. How are
they served?
So, mister Chair members of the
committee so ECC doesn't serve
Medicaid and depending on the
program at EC CD eligibility is
different. So home visiting
doesn't have any, um,
requirements of income or work
or activity requirements home
Visiting can be for anybody in
the state of New Mexico. Pre
kindergarten doesn't have any
income or activity threshold, so
you can any family can access
pre kinder
In childcare assistance has an
income and activity
requirements. So you have to be
at 400% of the federal poverty
level or below, which is, uh,
quite a high income for New
Mexico and that has to have a
the caregiver going to work or
going to school.
Um, the family infant toddler
program that doesn't have an
income eligibility, but each
child has to have a
developmental delay or be at
risk of developmental delay,
which is actually a very broad
eligibility for most states, so
depending on the program at EC
CD, the eligibility requirements
are slightly different. OK,
Thank you, I. I appreciate that.
I'll talk you offline. A little
bit more. Yes, Mr Chair
Um, the family infant toddler
program that doesn't have an
income eligibility. But each
child has to have a
developmental delay or be at
risk of developmental delay.
Which is actually a very broad
eligibility for most states. So
depending on the program at EC
CD, the eligibility requirements
are slightly different. OK,
Thank you, I. I appreciate that.
I'll talk you offline. A little
bit more. Yes, Mr J,
that chair, Senator, I've got
more on that.
You. Asked earlier on the brain
injury, Uh, fund.
The traumatic brain Injury fund.
So the the balance back in
November 2023 was $2.7 million,
and we had spoken with the
department at that time because
we understand that the, um money
into that fund comes from fines
and fees and that sort of thing
We eliminated those those fines.
Uh, two years ago. I think it
was We know that that fund is
gonna dwindle. The department
said that it had enough funding
in there for this for the FY 25,
but then
Year. We're probably gonna have
to come back and look at it
again to, um
To to work on that and see if we
need to do just to determine
what we need to do with that
fund. So that'll be coming up in
this next legislative session.
Probably OK?
OK, thank you. I'll have to end
there.
Senator Rodriguez here next.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I think
I'm going to pass. I don't have
questions, but I was going to
elaborate a little bit on the
growth fund to make sure that
we're all on the same page as
far as what it really means
specifically, like for CYFD and
on the appropriations. We did,
But you know what? Considering
the time another, uh, it's OK. I
mean, I think I think if you
want to take a few minutes we've
got that. The the The question I
had about the growth fund is,
does it automatically become
become
Occurring after three years of
its working or does something
else have to happen? Thank you,
Mr Chairman, and that's where I
was going to delve in a little
bit on or I'm gonna defer
specifically to one point in
the, um, the shape that says
brief health and human services
and let's go to Page three.
Maybe I can make a little bit of
a dent in there. Um, on when we
speak about CYFD. I'm using
that just for example, OK, and
the growth fund. What we did is
we appropriated 24 million for
CYFD. But 18 million
Has been indicated was into the
growth fund. We put it into this
category called Grow and and if
you look at the amount that over
three years, it's a it's gonna
be happening over three years,
but it is initially appropriated
as non recurring. But then,
after three years if certain
thresholds or performance
measures, that's what we were
intending when we passed. The
legislation are met and these
pilot programs or new programs
are working.
Uh, they get funded the three
years and then very likely they
would become recurring because
they have proven that they work
and and there's uh, there
They're effective and so the
amounts that you see, for
example, in the bottom of Page
three under CYFD 1.69 for a
pilot program and then 4.2 to
expand evidence, uh, based
implementation and 9 million to
implement expand more and 3.5
million to recruit, train and
support. All of those are
To clarify this year That amount
has been appropriated with this
focus, but next year it will be
appropriated again and the year
after for three years, if, in
fact we can work something out
because the performance measures
were vetoed the requirement for
those performance measures and
so the departments is my
understanding are working
closely with, um with and the
LFC working closely with the
departments of trying to figure
out how we can, uh, put
something together.
That would in fact work that we
can track and monitor and make
sure that these programs are
working in order for them to
continue to get the funding. Um,
so that's where it's at in the
now just wanted to to mention
automatic three years if, in
fact they we can track the
progress and then from there on
recurring
So who decides if it is working
Is that you guys you get to make
the decision?
No, we've never. I mean, it's
gotta be some one person on the
LFC who decides, OK, this one
will go ahead and do otherwise.
It gets canned. So who who
really is gonna decide?
Uh, Mr Chair and members of the
committee If if you look on on
that table on page 169 in that
book,
You'll see. Uh there's certain
certain areas on there where the
governor vetoed.
Randomized control study.
And so on. A lot of these, uh,
appropriations. We were
You know, we included in those
larger amounts of like just that
very first one. For example,
early childhood and care
department.
You know the 5 million within
that amount, and that's 5
million over three years, right,
so 15 million total.
Um, within that amount. Um,
there is money in there.
To allow them and it's the
understanding to allow them to
conduct randomized control
studies to determine whether or
not these programs are actually
going to be effective.
Right. And so it's it's gonna be
a collaboration between the
agencies working on this sort of
stuff. Uh, LFC staff working on
this and the Legislature.
Um, and the committee and
everybody else, uh, to to
determine whether or not these
programs are effective or not,
And and that's that's kind of
where this is at, Um
You know, I, I think
We have that veto, but I, I
still believe that we're gonna
try and continue going forward.
He I. I just think Here's here's
I'm gonna make a little
Uh, pitch here.
I won't be around in three years
when this first round of grope
and and thereafter but a lot of
you will be, And I think it's
crucial that this committee
should have a role in that.
Don't just leave it up to to the
LFC.
Come in.
This committee should be also
have a role in it figure out a
way to do. That would be crucial
because you know, in the past
junior money, we all got to make
our own decision about it. Now
we go to grow and we don't we
get to suggest an idea and maybe
it gets incorporated into the
growth process. And after three
years maybe it gets dropped.
And and it's gone and and the
individual senator legislator
who brought it up in the first
place.
Doesn't have a doesn't have a
role in it. This committee would
be the the one little fail safe
protection against that
happening, So I just make a
pitch to those of you who will
be around in three years. When
this first round of, uh, grow
appropriations comes up for
assessment.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Yes. May
I just elaborate a little bit?
Thank you for that. I think it's
very crucial, but also because
the growth um fund that was
established is not only
specifically for one area it
touches on health issues,
Behavioral health issues. Um,
you just name it it, it's there.
And I think that that, um
because our situation with
behavioral health and mental
health issues and substance
abuse and so on and so it's so
big, and we're dealing with so
much now it's thank you, Mr.
Chairman. That's all
Um, Representative Lujan, you're
next.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate the time I have a
couple of questions. One thing
that I wanted to bring up, um to
your interest, Mr Chair as well
as if we were in, uh C CJ
yesterday talking about, um,
competency in our courts and and
the highlights are
For the special session at hand
and how that's gonna be part of,
uh, possibly part of the agenda
for the for the governor. So one
of the questions I have, and you
did touch on it with the on page
the first page page one.
Um
In mentoring, mentioning the non
recurring, Um
Increases.
Rural health and intervention.
Uh, modalities.
Does that include those
diversion programs and
And also, um
Under the behavioral health, Um,
funding as well for competency
diversion projects, including
the civil commitment standards,
Mr Chair.
Uh, revolute Hunt. Um, Mr Cherry
Rhan, Could you uh,
Representative Lou Hunt? Could
you point me to exactly what
line you're referring to?
Well when we were speaking a
line 69 Page one, and it was
mentioned that and then we
started discussing the non
recurring, uh, side of the
budget, and there was a mention
that was 71.6 increases. Uh,
With a $46 million in rural
health and $50 million of that
went to the intervention. Uh,
type of projects. I'm not sure
if that's included. If that's
where we would find it. We need
a, uh
More in depth. Uh, information
on budget for that. So, Mr
Chairman and representative
Luhan, So there's the 46
million, um, health delivery
grants.
And that's on top of the 80
million that we did last year.
So that's that's 11 thing.
In the grow, Um and you can see
it there on page 169.
Line six. That's that other $15
million for that three years. It
shows up there as a 5 million.
But that's because it's it's a
three year appropriation.
Um
That's that's a totally
separate, uh, appropriation. So
that's 46 Plus the 15.
I. I believe the programs that
you're referring to. I'm not,
um, super familiar with those
but I. I do believe that those
show up in
And in the courts, right? So I
think those are separate from
this. Uh what we're talking
about here today. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and I appreciate that, I.
I just wanted to bring that to
light because that this is gonna
be, uh, we need to be preparing
for that. And it is under
behavioral health and and
We have a health budget all over
the place. And so if I could
just zero you in on that, maybe
for a later conversation, but
also to present to this
committee as well on that on
that budget item, and where
where we are with it. How much
has been spent or how we've
increased it and so forth. I'd
really appreciate that. The
other question I have is
Mr Chair.
On page two line 137 talking
about the state health benefits
program, um, moving from GSD
over to the healthcare authority
and one of the things we
We spoke about heavily and and
LC was the, um
The increases there from the L,
PBS and creating and
strengthening the eye back.
So my concern is Mr Chair is
that
With the L PBS. There was a pre
premium was raised by 10%. But
that was only for half a year,
whereas all of the state
agencies and staff were raised
10% for the entire year. Um, I
just like to know that how the
the L PBS, um, are preparing if
there's gonna be another
increase over those discussions
are happening and how we can, um
Really, um, plan for and
project. Uh
Have the scale of purchasing
power, of which the IB, uh, was
intended for and some of the
reforms we had around it because
my understanding Mr Chair is
that the agencies and entities
went to RFPS, and they they
created a collaborative effort,
But it really didn't come to
what? Some of the reforms we're
looking for. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair Representative, so
I haven't had an update on this
since the session. My
understanding of this is that
the amount that was funded? Um,
through both the supplemental,
which was to backfill the
employee benefits fund and then
also the there's also a
deficiency appropriation.
And then the amount that was
appropriated to them for this
operating year was enough to
backfill everything that we'd
had, um, going back. And so
that's that 10% increase in the
operating budget that you would
see throughout all agencies, Um
My understanding is that brings
us back to, um
Back to even
Uh, in that fund, right? And so
we're paying for our costs,
essentially, um
But I, I would say, uh, looking
forward. Um, In this interim,
we're definitely gonna be
looking into that some more and
getting a better information on
that. Um, that's that's
definitely a piece of that's in
our work plan, and we're looking
at it. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
would say it is a concern when
and making sure that those
entities are prepared because
when you're only getting a 10%
increase for half a year, and
just looking at that it from a
budget perspective, then there's
going to be an an additional
increase or something. That
Needs to be, um
Not that filled because we took
care of that, but for the future
payments to to in increases that
are coming. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Representative Chaves here next
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just have
one simple, easy question. I
think.
Um, it's on page two in terms of
income support. Um, I remember
asking the question and I don't
remember of who when we were
talking about, um, increases to,
uh, increases to income support.
tan of, um and I don't see
general assistance in here.
Can you tell me if general
assistance also received an
increase to their, um
The allocation.
Their allocation.
Um
Mr Chairman, and and, uh,
representative
So that we did do a 5 million
increase for the transition
bonus for temporary assistance
for needy families. Um, we
didn't do any so, I. I think the
increase that you might be
asking about was that we did a
Um, the department was trying to
increase the
Eligibility level of tiff, uh to
90% that did not get funded this
year. Um, but
We did fund 14.1 million for the
supplemental Nutrition
Assistance program, which is and
that's for to increase the
benefit for, um elderly and
disabled.
Uh,
OK, but not for this year.
OK, Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yeah.
It's only fair. Thank you, mr
Chair. So let me find my
question. So I, I I've heard
several times. LFC, um, the IC C
for, um, the fit programs, et
cetera about how we are not
getting the uptake that we
wanted in Medicaid, home,
visiting and I know that part of
it is that when people hear
Medicaid, it's like, Oh, my God,
we're gonna get we're gonna get
run out of business, like the
behavioral health companies do.
So many hoops to jump jump
through all that kind of stuff.
So do you know of any any things
that were we're looking at or
working on in terms of
encouraging folks to provide
those services because they it's
a much better match for us than
the other ones.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um that's a
great question. It's something
that I think about a lot and to
be honest, the revenue source
that pays for a family's home
visiting
Family shouldn't even know that
should be like a back office
thing, right? What should be
happening is is a, um person who
is pregnant comes into a health
care appointment and is
receiving that care, and they
screened and they're prenatally
then referred to home visiting
program in that home visiting
program across world picks them
up and starts delivering
services to them in their home,
prenatally, and for the first
few years, the baby's life
And how that provider gets their
money for reimbursement, whether
it be Medicaid, or McVee, or
general fund family should.
There's no reason for families
to know what the billing source
is, and so hopefully we can do
some dmat
of you being your Medicaid
family. You're a general fund
family, cause what they don't
care. Um and secondly, the you
know, we don't want home
visiting to be like a Oh,
Somebody is coming to my house
because I'm somehow screened as
a at risk family. We don't want
that. What we want is a program
that feels universal. That feels
supportive. And that is a
referral point. But right now
what's not working is the
medical referral point. Um
there's no centralized referral
system. So if I was a family who
is already in the know and knew
about home visiting, uh, there's
no like easy way for me to be
like, Oh, this is the provider
in my community.
Has a spot open for me and I
meet their eligibility
requirements. And so we have not
a money issue as Eric was
talking about earlier. We have
implementation issues. We have
lots of money coming into health
and human service issues. The
roll out is what we're all
really working on right now.
Thank you for that. And then my
other question or
Park statement part when I saw
that the governor had vetoed all
of the basically evidence based,
um it was like, Oh, my gosh.
What? So was there a veto
message, Do we? I mean, who
doesn't want to use evidence
based programs and and actually
have data in research on what's
working and what's not working.
It seems like a no brainer to
me.
Um, Mr Chairman said We're
pulling up the house Bill. Two
veto message, OK?
Uh, So Mr Chair, representative
Thom Thompson. John Courtney,
deputy director at all of C.
Um, it's not the first time the
governor has vetoed evidence
based out of the budget a few
years back, she vetoed.
I think almost every appearance
12 out of 13 appearances this
year we were about 5050. I think
she beat her about half of the
appearances and they, it
appeared about twice as often so
our our percentages is getting
better from a legislative
perspective. Um, the the reason
that is often given in those
vetoes veto messages this year
included is that it would um,
uh, limit the executives. Um,
uh, basically decision power.
And um and they may want to in
in the veto message. Uh, it was
so they may want to use, uh,
programs that aren't
Haven't reached that evidence
based threshold but might be
research based, and that's those
two terms are defined in
statute.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, I anybody else on the
committee with questions?
I had a few of my own song. Go.
I try to do this quickly is the
waiting list for developmental
disabilities waiver programs.
Gun or what's the status of
that? Is there still one
Um
Yeah, My understanding is that
it's it's a
Pretty much been worked through.
I think there is still some
folks that, uh, they might have
been offered the waiver.
And they were holding off for
the moment and then I think the
department is kind of working
back through some of that. Um,
but my understanding is
Waitlist has been worked
through.
Mister president, although there
aren't services available, I
mean, uh, that's you. You may
get a lot of a spot on the
waiver, but if there's no one no
PT around to provide the
services you you're not on a
waiting list. But you're not
also not getting services. So
workforce once again strikes
And and one more clarifying
point. There's always new
applicants into the program. And
so there's always that, like
back end of people who I mean
you could describe them as a
waitlist, but they're working
their way through the system, so
there are people who have
applied to D DS D, who are not
fully through ineligible yet, so
there's Yeah, it's a it's a
continuation of services of
systems.
Second question of Hospital, the
state hospitals
At 51%. On average, it
Is that L because they're still
waiting lists for to for people
to get those services aren't
there isn't it? Isn't it? Just a
question of the staffing is so
um, uh, The vacancy rate is so
high that they can't staff it
adequately.
Mr Chair Members Committee. This
is a really complicated question
that we've been trying to delve
into it. We talk about this with
you every single month. Um, in
long meetings. You know some
some facilities like Sequoia
have really low, um, enrollment,
and that's because Sequoia has a
very particular niche population
that they serve. They serve
youth who have some behavioral
health needs but are not JJ
involved.
OK, but like turquoise Lodge,
who is a substance use disorder
in the center of Albuquerque at
50% like that, that we should be
hyper enrolling those, Um the
veterans home has low
enrollment. Um, because of some
facility issues that are getting
worked out. As when you know, we
built those new their time.
They're called tiny homes, but
they they have their mansions.
They like 12 veterans can live
in independent rooms and those
were being built. And we
couldn't um
Occupancy because a fire marshal
issues until I I won't say like
last month.
And so that's been a problem.
Um, you know, uh, behavioral
Health bhi up in Las Vegas has a
low occupancy in their long term
care center, which is we all
know that there's lots of people
who need services there, but
they have high occupancy in
their their forensic ward, which
is a niche population, So it
really depends. But I would say
yes, Overall, we need to do a
much better job of finding the
people who need these services
and getting them enrolled.
Are. Yeah. And the Rasm
facility, which I guess has like
20 people in it. Yeah, Yeah,
OK, Um, I have a particular
opinion about Sequoia. I think
if we change the psychiatrist,
you'd fill it up.
The guy that operates there now
operates it like a private
practice. Oh, I'm sorry. That
person is not conducive to what
we offer. Well,
you're a public facility. You
don't get to pick and choose
your but he does. That's why
it's operating a fraction of its
capacity. And we have kids that
need that facility.
Anyhow.
Uh, last question I had. I mean,
I. I have a lot of other
questions, but we'll get to them
because we have another, uh,
thing on Medicaid tomorrow. We
have behavioral health tomorrow.
Uh, but, uh, I did wanna ask
about the, um
Um
The the the role that state
personnel office plays in the
vacancy rate. What is
I said this the other day at a
meeting and somebody says, Oh,
no, no, no. All those
departments have decentralized
personnel now.
But I think that was not the
case. That's not the case,
right? They all still have to go
through state personnel if they
want to hire somebody.
Can you? Can you, uh, clarify
and for my muddled impression of
what's going on?
Yeah. Mr Chair. My Yeah. My
understanding is that every
everybody, uh, in the executive
branch, um
Except for DP SI. Think
Uh, state police officers has to
go through SPO State personnel
office for hiring.
Um, positions. Um and and is it
your impression that that's as
big a barrier as as it seems to
us?
That, for example, CYFD does a
rapid higher thing. They go out
and they recruit and they they
hire, they sign up 50 people.
But by the time it gets
processed through spo
Half of them have phoned other
jobs. They couldn't wait around
for two or three months. They
they had to.
Put food on the table, so they
they've gone off and worked for,
um walmart or somebody in the
meantime.
Is is that is that an accurate
picture of my
Romanticizing what goes on.
Uh, Mr Chair? I would, I would
say, I would say it's um You
know a lot of times, it's easy
for the agencies to kind of
point fingers at at at SPO.
Um, I would say it's kind of on
both sides. Right, I. I would
say it's
It's it's a large bureaucracy.
There's a lot of paperwork that
has to get done to hire
somebody. And on both sides, you
know you've gotta post a
position and then, um, you know,
you gotta do the paperwork for
that, and I just gotta go back
and forth over and over again.
By the time you hire somebody,
it it has been three months. Um,
I would say that there's plenty
enough. Uh,
Blame to go around blame to go
around, Uh on that? Yeah. All
right. All right. Yeah. You were
gonna add something, Kelly.
You don't want to beat up on
spoke to
Are you gonna leave that up to
us? Those of us who aren't
running for Re-election can beat
up on spo. That's um
Any other questions, then?
Members. Thank you so much for
for for for coming, guys, and
and we'll We'll see some of you
back tomorrow morning.
We're a little more in depth
Look at Medicaid and behavioral
health.
And then in the future in our in
our June meeting, I guess we'll
hear about CYFD more in depth.
We'll have another pro 101
orientation on CYFD.
So thank you for coming up. Some
of you came in after we
introduced ourselves. So we're
gonna ask you give you a chance
to introduce yourself and then
we'll go to public comment and
we're gonna have public comment.
Whenever the lunch comes, we'll
just start eating during public
comment. Uh, the food is here.
So, uh, Senator Rodriguez. You
wanna introduce yourself? We'll
go around. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I'm Nancy Senator
Nancy Rodriguez from Santa Fe
District. 24. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm
Antoinette Cedillo Lopez from
District 16 in Albuquerque.
Representative. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I'm Debbie Sarana from
House district 21 in Berli
County. And I'm just a visitor
today. Thank you.
And Senator
Senator, Um
Good morning, Mr Chair, members
of the committee and Senator
Shannon Pinto from District
three. OK, great. And Senator
Hickey.
Martin Hickey, Uh, District 20,
Albuquerque.
Oh, yeah. So so I'm sorry,
Senator. That's all right, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Linda Lopez
State Senator District 11, the
southwest Quadrant of Berno
County.
And a member of the Children,
Youth and Family Memorial
Committee. Oh, yes, and also a
member. As as my colleague here,
we're both members of the Senate
Memorial five for the CYFD
Restructure Task Force.
And
Did I get everybody Has anybody
OK? Yeah, you know, he he
introduced himself. Senator
Hickey. You introduced yourself,
right?
Um, public comment who's here
for public comment.
Uh,
Here's the sign up sheet.
Nat Dean is first.
Anna Nelson is second. Robert
Cagle is third. Ellen Pines,
Mary Feldblum.
No idea.
I can't read.
Diane, is it Di?
And Alvin. Silly. Somebody is
here from D. SI. Whatever D SI
is
Nobody wants to admit.
OK?
That? Why don't you go ahead,
take three minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um madam
vice care, members of the
committee and members of the
public. My name is Nat Dean. I'm
a person with multiple
disabilities, and I'm also a
disability advocate, and I wanna
give a beautiful shout out.
Because if we don't say thank
you, we ain't got nothing and we
don't keep humor. We ain't got
nothing either. I, uh, do a lot
of assistance. Uh, for
individuals and families I get
or a lot of referrals from a lot
of places. Adult protective
services, uh, on and on and on
and on.
Colleen, Um HSD or ISD right
now.
23 minutes, Max on hold
YAY because it was 23 hours.
And this is not just one anomaly
day. This is frequent calls on a
regular basis to support
people's, um, unmet need or
challenges that they have around
the need that they're struggling
to understand how to have that
need met.
Um yesterday during courts,
corrections and justice. I did
mention, um
You and MH adult psychiatric
services, and I wanted to make
sure that that was not a
criticism of them. Um
This happens a lot where someone
calls to receive services in the
way that the services should be
accessed is explained to the
individual, but we don't always
know that the individual
understands the process that's
being explained to them. And
this was the example that I
utilized, and I wanted to make
sure that it did not offend or
call out anyone. Someone called
needing, Um
Then, um, counseling and therapy
supports how the person heard it
was. I couldn't just go there
any time. Seven days a week, 24
hours a day and see the same
therapist every single time that
I just show up. That's what they
heard. What the entity said. Was
you come and we do an intake. We
determine what your needs are,
and then we try to match you
with services in a timely
manner. We often have to ask the
leading questions to clarify
that they
Stand because we often won't get
the answer to the question.
That's yes, it's I call it. Yes,
ma'am. Yes, I understand. Yes,
I'm going to do that. And, yes,
I'm gonna do that. This
individual is in a crisis
scenario, and there's still five
months with no counseling
because they have this idea They
can go whenever they need it,
And they're not comfortable
calling 988 or New Mexico
Records, Crisis and access line.
Thank you for finding 988. We've
been working on it for a long
time. Thank you for now, having
interpreted services through
988. Thank you.
For the many supports and hard
work that you do. Thank you.
Thank you, Ned. Um
And a Nelson.
And she'll be followed by Robert
Cagle.
Oh, OK.
Oh, I see. Sorry.
And Robert Cagle. Then you're
up, followed by
And that's it.
Yeah.
Or one
So you would say so, some people
said
No, but they do want to talk.
Well, we'll I'll just call your
name. And if you don't wanna
talk you do as Anna did you just
Wave us are
Hi. My name is Robert Cagle. Um
I've been
Yeah.
I hope you do me with a little
time. Um, we I've we've got with
the group I'm working with. We
probably got over 1000 hours in
research since the session
ended.
Uh, we've done a number of
requests. For the most part they
have been obstructed and we've
been refused the information.
Um
First of all, um
Over 11 years ago, I went to a
disability concern Sub-committee
and raise hell over what's going
on The waiver with Senator
Rodriguez being the running that
committee at the time, and I
would like to thank you for all
your years of service and
steadfast, you know, dedication
to the DD people and the same,
um, Senator TC Pino. Um,
September 213 down in, uh,
Sarro. We had real interesting
conversations of what was going
on down there with
This interview, and, uh, the
issue of them, Uh,
Interviewing every person on the
DD waiver with a verbal
interview, and not one of the
interviewers spoke a word of
Spanish
And everybody thought that was
just wonderful and how we were
gonna determine what levels of
service people should get in our
waiver.
So that was, uh, you know, one
of the most obtrusive things.
Uh, unfortunately, in my in a
request to the Legislative
Finance Committee for
information between them and HSD
and DOH for the past three
years, Uh, there's still that
mantra. We're gonna come up with
some, uh um type of instrument
to quote unquote cut budgets.
The, um, issue has been around
with the mantra that we're the
most expensive waiver in the
country. And I spent years
disproving that.
We're
Unique in the sense that we put
therapy in our waivers where
other states put it in their
state plans. We put therapy in
our waivers because we could
limit it and deny people service
while other states had in their
state plans by putting it in
waiver, it makes our waiver look
artificially more expensive, and
that was just one of the
numerous tricks that have gone
on.
Uh, I'd like to thank
legislators over two thirds of
the legislators during the
session signed a request the
attorney general investigate
things and the disability
waiver. These include
investigations of abuse, neglect
and exploitation in the system.
Mortality, denial of fair
hearing lack of providers lack
of services, inadequate provided
rates and violation of human
rights laws.
Uh, in terms of neglecting
exploitation, we've done quite a
bit of research on it.
Where we come down on. That is,
uh, the latest IMB shows that
there was a 60% increase in
confirmed cases of abuse,
neglect and exploitation in the
Didi waiver, which is mostly in
group homes.
60% increase a year to 547
cases.
There have been over 1200
confirmed cases.
Of abuse and neglect and
exploitation in the Didi waiver
under New Mexico criminal code
30-47 1 through 10.
Those are all crimes.
Every one of them.
We've had in the past three
years, 1200
Confirmed crimes against people
in the deal waiver.
After looking at that I we did
request of the Bern County
Sheriff.
The, um
Bernardo District attorney and
the Albuquerque Police
Department. And we asked them
all how many cases they had
caught in the last three years.
The responses were 00 and zero
and zero
None.
I MD reports said that they made
225 referrals for the law
enforcement out of their 547. We
have no idea where those went.
In going back in 214. After the,
uh the problems we had at the
end of the Richardson
administration, where they
illegally cut the waiver and
then had to back into the rate
cuts subsequently to avoid
losing even more Medicaid money.
And they did the CIS evaluation
and all went to the Waldrop
lawsuit. They lost. We didn't
restore the rates and we
couldn't restore the rates
because C MS already knew that
we were probably playing games,
and would they withhold even
more money?
So we have underfunded the
system for years. It is so
underfunded that we cannot hold
providers and staff liable for
crimes committed against DD
waiver people The rates don't
support it. If we start
enforcing that law, we will have
no providers. That's what the
system we're providing now.
Right now. Today, the last two
years I've looked to see who is
in client with the Didi waiver
standards, which residential
provider agencies out of
approximately 80 were actually
in compliance. The answer is
none.
How many agencies were brought
before the Internal Revenue
Committee to
find out why and and why you
have hundreds of cases of abuse,
right? You look through that.
And guess what? Or maybe one or
two right with 500 criminal
victims, and you're not even
bringing them before an Internal
reason committee and the reason
why is the rates don't support
adequate care?
Um
We've had talk about how we're
funding it in the ARPA money. We
just had a discussion about Arpa
money. OK? Last July, 5% of ARPA
money disappeared right previous
to that last not this past
session, one before it passed a
rate increase that they were
supposed to get. One would
assume July 1 like everybody
else like Los Lunas. They
States need waiver program.
That rate increase was provided
to weeks ago.
Instead of giving the money on
July 1, they waited until two
weeks ago and back paid it so
providers could not use money
they didn't have to pay adequate
salaries and rates.
Instead, they they back paid
them based on their billing,
which would make it even less.
So saved a little there.
Then they send them PDF files of
6000 pages for them to go
through page by page, and these
aren't excels that you can go in
and manipulate and add up these
R PDF S and the agencies have to
go through on page by page
because they are responsible
under these new Q or, uh,
audits for every dime. So if you
if the 6000 page adjustment they
sent you is wrong, it's your
fault.
This is like a banana republic.
Where are we like? This is kind
of like, I don't know where, um,
the aqua money.
The last part. I have it wrong.
Here was I have it expiring in
July. It expired in March,
Right? So the money the
Legislature is putting in now
they haven't submitted to HSD
yet or haven't HD hasn't
submitted it the feds yet, so
they're not getting it in July.
So when they talk about how
we're funding things, you know?
Yeah, we
Is that gonna be another year
before they get it?
So you have a system in crisis
that lacks funds. It's so bad
that you can't hold people
accountable for hurting people.
Uh, you can't expect them to to
meet any kind of standard
whatsoever, and we decided that
the an the supported living and
that in the previous rate study
that 45% of the direct care
staff are going to have to be
fired and hired back as
subcontractors with no benefits.
No workers comp. They get hurt
on the job
at
Uh, basically 40 cents less an
hour than we're paying our paid
staff. That is what our rate is
based on the last great study.
I just found I researched it. We
asked which providers submitted
those costs to the rate study.
Uh, D DS D refused to give us
that information. Instead, they
gave us a list of those who
didn't who they'd find.
So after researching it down, we
found that no agency that
submitted a cost study
apparently was using
subcontractors. But in the
system we found five agencies in
Las Cruces that are illegally
using safe subcontractors. One
of them is in a lawsuit now.
Uh, the lawsuit involves only
violations of overtime law. It
doesn't. Um, Excuse me.
It doesn't, uh, address the
issue of the income tax fraud or
the failure Deduct Social
Security or the state tax fraud.
They're five agencies doing down
there doing it, and apparently
all were encouraged by D DS D
staff in the Southwest regional
office to use that because you
can get better service.
We have corporate guardians that
have intentionally placed people
there because they have better
staffing levels because they
don't pay them legally.
So we have that in, Consider
rates. The last I heard. I don't
know what the situation is now.
I asked the Senate to put in
extra money, which we did. I
don't know if that's gonna be
provided to cover to pay people
real salary or the 150%. But
right now is the way the rate
study sits, is 45% of your staff
You have to hire illegally as
as, uh subcontractors and face
criminal prosecution from the
IRS to do it.
I looked up to see whether there
was an attorney general's
opinion did LSC get an attorney
general's opinion they do on
numerous bills to see if that's
correct. No, didn't get it
right. It appears to be
basically on some opinion by
some attorney AD OH, who has
absolutely no business
experience, no experience in the
business field and is clearly a
acting in a grossly unethical
manner.
To render an opinion on a
subject. You have no knowledge
of. You have no business having
a law license.
Yeah, I'm trying to keep this
thing from ringing.
The advisory council has refused
to tell the providers so far.
What rate increase they're
getting, if any.
Which is a violation of our
human rights law. They have to
provide them the ability to
provide the comment at the
ideation at the beginning,
They're not doing that. We
finally got a coaster. Finally
quit. Uh, he grossly abused the
human rights law. And and
finally, with complaints from
the AC Q he was removed.
Um
They re They haven't picked up.
Uh, a person yet. So since Jason
Cornwell left an over a year we
haven't had a person just
recently. They put somebody in
there that knew something about
the DD waiver system.
Um
As I was looking through our
latest application to CM SI came
across a question that says,
does the state or local
government provide duty waiver
services, and they answered no
Which means our Los Lunas
program is apparently in its
existing in some other universe.
The next question they ask is
well Gee, are you pan them more?
And if the answer is yes, well,
how are you? Returning the
overage to C MS for their share.
So that led me to look up the
organizational chart for
employees salaries to find out
what was going on at Los Lunas.
And guess what they list the
salary of every person there and
I can find out what How many
direct care staff they are. I
found out how many people are
are in the program.
Right. I found out how many
people in the program actually
had state jobs.
A cursory look at just the
employment. Their rates just for
staff are twice as high as the
highest rate in the other DD
waiver.
Just for staff.
They're reimbursement rate
loaded, according to the state
personnel Office overhead is
$37.32 dollars and 70 cents per
hour. That's what we're paying
at Los Lunas in over in time,
and you know the benefits and
stuff.
The loaded rate under the waiver
study that we want to pay
everybody else with the
contractors is $19.18, including
benefits the disparities
horrendous.
So then I started looking. You
just heard today how they had
the the backfill funds in our
our facilities, how they were
short, all kinds of millions of
dollars. Well, guess who That
is. That's a little this
community program.
When you have a daily budget of
$480 for a supported level,
intense behavioral person at
$440, and the basic rate at Los
Lunas for staff is almost 800.
They're not by on the rates
there. There's something going
on here, then I find out that
people in the in the government
highly placed people that have a
tremendous amount of control
over the budget and have for
years.
And have been obstructive in
getting rates for that have
family member out there that has
been served at a rate roughly
five times what would be in the
regular community and with a
state job on top of that, when
we looked at our intermediate
care facilities
There was an ever request of how
much they were paid, and there
was issues of them not getting a
raise over the past several
years because those rates under
our federal rules are the are
the limit your way your
community program can't be more
than your institutional cost.
And as we found in previous
meetings
We We reversed those. We have
less needy people in the
institutions and artificially
lower our cost.
The ever request to tell us what
they were paid over the last
five years has gone from DOH
from HSD, who pays them to DOH.
Who says it's not our fault. We
don't have them back to HSD. Who
says no, you need to go back to
DOH.
OK, now, Once HC a starts, we
start all over again Because now
you're talking the wrong agency.
This insanity of the health care
Authority moves Department of
Health Improvement D DS D and
some federal state benefits
program over that is all the
proofs were off for the health
care authority.
DH. I is responsible for
investigating abuse and neglect
in the waiver, and I can tell
you at the one of the most
recent therapy meetings, they
are saying that it is almost
impossible for a therapist to
lodge a complaint against a
provider. They're simply don't
investigate them. And in my
personal experience, that's
true.
OK, so
I I've let Robert go on.
A lo long because he indicated
he was representing several
people who would have otherwise
come up and spoken. I think it
it it balances out over a year
ago, Mary Molero passed away in
a horrific situation.
The two reasons she died was she
did not have a guardian and she
did not have a group home
placement.
The majority of providers for
group homes in the state of New
Mexico are Mon monitor
moratorium and not taking new
clients due to poor rates.
And I think as he discussed and
as far as I know, we have a
grossly inadequately funded. The
office of Guardianship at the
developmentally Dis Disability
Council.
So at at this point
We've got a system that is so
poorly financed it it literally
we have to legalize their abuse.
To keep their providers
providing
And that needs to end
Thank you.
Thank you, Robert.
Um, next.
Is Ellen Paynes.
If it's red. Is it on or is it
off? OK, Is it on now? Can you
hear me? OK, Can the Webcast
hear me? Ok, I guess it's the
question. Um, thank you, Mr
Chair, Ellen Pines. I'm
representing the disability
coalition. We advocate for
persons with disabilities of all
types, and I will try to be
concise in my comments, although
I want to very quickly follow up
on several things that came up
this morning. The first one is,
um, the office of guardianship
and I expect that some of you
You texts from Alice Lou McCoy,
who is the executive director of
the DD Council in regard to
that, Um, I took the time to
look up the citation in case you
want to follow up on the office
of Guardianship. It's chapter 28
article 16 B of the New Mexico
statutes annotated and you will
see in there that the
Legislature has specifically
assigned that responsibility to
the DD council. It's been there
for many years, it had a
tortured history before landing
at the DD.
Um, but they've been
administering it for a number of
years. They do not simply
provide services for people with
developmental disabilities and
their families. It's a much
broader program, and I think
it's one that you would be very
interested in having a
presentation from Alice about in
the course of the interim, and I
hope you'll find time to
schedule that.
Um, the next thing I wanted to
bring up was following up on
Senator Cedillo Lopez's question
about the brain Injury Services
fund and thank you for your
efforts in during the session in
regard to that fund and other
brain injury services, thanks
also to the chair for his Senate
memorial. I believe it was 11 in
the previous session. Um, it is
actually a services fund, not a
trust fund. Money goes in and it
should be going out to provide
services. These are non Medicaid
services.
Short term services for people
who have experienced brain
injuries. And, as noted, it has
been funded by fees added to
traffic violation. Fines and
those fees are ending. I guess.
June 30th along with fees that
go to a number of other funds.
And, um, we had pushed for
replacement funding this year of
the health care authority seemed
totally caught off guard by the
idea that they would have to
look at this, but they
ultimately did. And as Eric
Chenier pointed out, they said,
they've got lots of money in the
fund. It's $2.7 million balance
so they didn't need an
appropriation this year. Um and
I hope you will take the time to
look into that and find out why
they have a $2.7 million
balance. When the, um
Uh, traffic fees were ended the
add on fees, the, uh, FIR on
that bill said that they'd
gotten a range of estimates for
the annual amount going into the
fund, which ranged from I can't
remember the low point, but the
high point was $600,000 a year
and I think the F I used a
conservative estimate of roughly
300,000 a year. That means
they're piling up money. That's
the equivalent of several years.
Of income to the fund from those
fees. And the question is, why
are they not serving people with
that money? So, um, a hearing on
brain injury services and the
funding for them generally would
be a wonderful thing for you to
have, and I hope you'll be
looking into that fund. Um,
specifically as part of that.
The DD waiver. Just a couple of
quick things to underline points
that were made, Um as a
representative, Thompson pointed
out, there's no official waiting
list. But that doesn't mean that
everybody's getting into
services because the providers
are not always available.
So some people are not getting
services. Some of them are
having to turn down allocations
to the waiver. They've been
offered an allocation, but
they've had to turn it down
because the services are not
available. I have a friend who's
the guardian for her brother,
who? Her adult brother, who has
some, uh developmental
disabilities, and he after years
on the waitlist got an
allocation and because they
could not find a group home for
him in Santa Fe, and she didn't
want him.
To Farmington or some other
distant location. Um they were
unable to accept the allocation
so that thats
The wait list may not formally
exist in the way it did before,
but not everybody is actually
getting into services. And, um
Also I wanted to, um, underline
Kelly's comment that there are
hundreds of people. The average
used to be about 300 people a
year. I'm not sure if that's
still a current number, but they
go
They apply for the waiver and
essentially go on to the non
existent waitlist every year, so
it's not like you can just serve
everybody and say we're done
now. You gotta serve 300 more
people every year. Or you once
again have a waitlist.
And the final thing I wanted to
address was, um, During the
interim Last year, I mentioned
in public comment on a couple of
occasions that the federal
agency CMS was proposing some
extensive, um, rule changes for
the Medicaid program that I
hoped you were paying attention
to. They have now finalized
those They just came out in the
last couple of weeks, and I've
been on vacation for the last
couple of weeks, so I haven't
read them, but, um, rather
extensive changes to the
Medicaid program, which includes
Um, some provisions relating to,
uh, direct service caregivers
and, um
The Legislature in recent years,
has had some discussions about,
um
Wages for caregivers and
possible pass through provisions
where a portion of the
reimbursement rate would have to
be paid would have to pass
through to caregiver wages or
compensation and, uh the rules
as finalized, um, incorporate a
proposed provision requiring an
80% pass through so that and
many, many other provisions are
relevant to the operations of
the Medicaid program, and I hope
you'll have a
Presentation during the interim
on some of that. Thank you very
much, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Ellen. Um Mary
Feldblum.
Is it on?
You can hear me, OK, Mary
Feldblum.
That's
It's green. Yeah, the executive
director of the Health Security
for New Mexicans campaign, and I
Rigidly said, No, that I wasn't
gonna do testimony. But I read
the brief by the Health and
Human Services Committee, and
there's a section called
Background that I wanna refer
you to. And you all heard the
incredible, uh, funding that has
been that you approved of this
past session to so many needed
programs and, uh, the first
Talks about strengthening the
financial viability of
hospitals, developmental
disabilities providers, et
cetera.
But it also, uh, proposed, uh,
mentions that there are, um,
significant structural barriers
that remain, uh, to deal with
these problems, and you've
certainly heard some of them,
Uh, expressed by the prior
speakers. There was something
missing in this background.
And that is dealing with the
systemic drivers of rising
health care costs. If you don't
deal with those systemic
drivers, all the financial, um
viability of these good programs
will be in jeopardy.
And I am just so pleased and
thrilled that representatives
Thompson and Chavez have
continued to invest in what you
all began last year was an
investigation into solutions to
rising the key drivers of rising
health care costs, and I want to
thank your work, and I think
it's absolutely critical and
cannot be missing. In this
background. It's really very,
very important and it all
states.
Around the country are trying to
grapple with these problems. And
I think New Mexico is a chance
to be very innovative. So thank
you.
Thank you, Mary.
Then.
I'm still trying to decipher
this. I think it's Mara.
VR
RIAA.
Oh, you signed in, OK?
And Alvin. Did you want to say
anything?
No.
I thought you were gonna say
something. No. OK, anybody
online?
How many people this one.
Hi, Dan and Barbara. Can you
hear us?
Can you hear me? Yes, we can
hear you. You can begin whenever
you're ready.
Oh, that will be very brief.
And maybe to focused on my own
situation than the other
speakers.
Uh, my name is Dan Taggart. And
I am the father in plenary legal
guardian of a 29 year old.
severely autistic, nonverbal, so
living in a Didi way of
supported living group home.
My son Ellos.
He needs a staff member
available.
Not so dedicated to him alone,
just available.
To
Drop whatever he or she is doing
and pursue him when he ops
This implies that the provider
and agency needs at least two
staff members on duty at his
group home.
24 7.
That's a problem in the DV
waiver system.
The DD waiver standard requires
only 28 hours per week.
Focused, individualized DS P
attention.
That's four hours per day.
And
If you try to insist on any more
of that any more than that.
You'll have a hard time because
this the supported living
provider can
Retreat to the standard and
anything more than 28 hours a
week is is kind of doing you a
favor.
Uh, it's difficult for a stand,
Uh, supportive living provider
to find and retain staff.
To make a commitment to keep my
son safe.
And I wonder if that's because
salaries are too low.
I'm not asking for a butler or a
valet just a minimum amount of
shared staffing to respond.
When my son's impulse to elope
intersects with opportunities to
do so.
We really need to find supported
living well enough to adequately
staff group homes based on the
individual needs of the
president's.
To ensure their health and the
safety
That is all.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Taggart.
Anybody else?
That's it.
OK with that we we completed
public comment unless somebody
else wanted to join in.
And, um
We'll move on, then to
Well, we we could take a break.
You wanna take a break?
Take a little break or or just
move right on.
Take a little break. Why don't
we take about a 10 minute break?
Give you a chance to
It. Uh, I did want to mention
two other people.
Uh, I. I already thanked. Um
Um,
Jason weeks for financing the
lunch with two other people
chipped in as well. And that was
Larry Horan and Park.
Uh, so thank you all for for
helping provide the committee
with the meal.
And so we'll take a break. Why
don't we come back at? Um 1230?
We'll resume at 1230.
