Uh, delighted for the
invitation. So thank you, uh,
and welcome to Las Vegas for
those of you who are not based
here, um.
I am happy today to be speaking
about the Las Vegas Community
Foundation, Las Vegas, New
Mexico Community Foundation and
the work that we are doing, um,
you should all have a copy of
the PowerPoint in front of you
so you can follow along.
Um, so the Las Vegas Community
Foundation serves two counties.
We serve San Miguel and Mora
County, which is a fairly large
geographic area with a lot of
small dispersed communities that
are all very, um,
have a keen sense of their own
identity and uh are all vital to
our overall fabric and thread of
communities here.
We span, you know, ecos is are
far, far west corner, right? But
then all wither out in the east,
we've got Conches Dam, we have
Okate and Mora, of course, and
um many small places in between.
So we're really striving to do a
lot of good outreach in our
community work to make sure that
all parts of our community are
served.
Both of our counties have been
strongly shaped by the Hermit's
Peak Caf Canyon fire, obviously,
and the resultant flooding, so
that's been a big part of the,
um,
Nature and character of the
community issues that we've been
striving to address these last
few years, and we're really
defined, I think that, that
resiliency that people here
have, I think, can be summed up,
uh, in the Spanish word
carrencia. So for those of you
who are familiar or or maybe
not, but it really has to do
with a sense of place that's not
just the physical.
Space, but also the kind of
spiritual, emotional
connectedness and how that ties
into identity and that's a, a, a
big part of the resiliency and
character of the people of these
counties.
Next slide, please.
The Las Vegas Community
Foundation was founded in 2016
by a group of
committed, motivated citizens
and the whole kind of vision,
overarching vision has been to
try and cultivate a culture of
philanthropy here. So the, the
community members came together
recognizing that there was a a
gap in, in what the community
needed in terms of us coming
together to, to provide some
internal support, and so the
first few years, they were
really just focused on being a
collector and gatherer of funds.
To try and make community work
happen, um, by about year 3,
they finally had enough funding
to start giving small grants
like $5000 grants to various
community efforts, and so that
was the initial grantmaking
aspect of the community
Foundation's work and then year
4 really, um, took things in a,
put fuel on the fire because
that was when COVID hit. And so
the community foundation really
kicked into like emergency
response mode and did a lot of
coordinating of
efforts, um, to help support
people during that really
challenging, uh, scary time. And
so,
COVID was a big benchmark for us
in our developments and then
just kind of a year after things
started to settle down with that
is when the fires came in year 6
of the Community Foundation's
existence and so this really
again was a huge benchmark in
terms of
Coming in from all over the
country to help people here and
then it was a matter of how to,
how to get those out into the
community as fast as possible.
Also during that time, um, FEMA
actually reached out to the
Community Foundation as an
established community entity and
said, OK, who are the
nonprofits? We need to be
working with, uh, can you help
us get funding to them. Let's do
this as, as efficiently as
possible.
And so at that point, the
Community Foundation really did
come into the, the next more
robust version of itself.
Um, fast forward a little bit to
year 8, that was last year, and
that saw, so kind of as a, as a
result of the fires and the role
that the Community Foundation
has played in all of that. We
did gain a much larger awareness
on the state level, um, and
beyond in terms of our presence
here. And so the Anchorum Health
Foundation based out of Santa
Fe, came and paid us a visit in
our year 8 and the result of
that visit was that we were
selected as one of 5 community
foundations.
in northern New Mexico to
partner with them on a health
and wellness initiative that
they wanted to help launch in
all of Northern New Mexico. And
so we're very happy to be
involved in that initiative. We
have one year under our belts
now, um, doing that work, and I
will be elaborating on that
shortly.
Um, we are now in year 9, and so
we've actually, so sorry to
Also the Anchorum Health and
Wellness Initiative, part of
that was a, a big part of it is
this donor advised fund. So that
was our first big chunk of money
from an as a donor advice fund,
which is a certain type of
funding, right? We have now
received a second donor advise
fund, uh, uh, directly as a
result of our work with Qorum,
that's very exciting. We are
expanding our staff and growing
our capacity as an organization,
so it's a really dynamic time
for us. I'm pleased, very
pleased to be part of the team,
um, helping to do.
This good work for the
community.
Um, so, and then just to kind of
recap.
So since 2020, the Las Vegas
Community Foundation has awarded
more than $1.5 million to local
organizations in San Miguel and
More County, um, either doing
work here or based here, um, so
that's.
One measurement of success.
We have several key initiatives
in the Community Foundation, as
well as some other focus areas.
So of our key initiatives where
we're really applying focal
effort to kind of move the
needle right now. Capacity
building of our local nonprofits
and partners is one of those, so
we would really we are serving
in a position, um, with the goal
of helping to kind of raise the
bar for all of our local
nonprofits, so.
How, you know, board
fundamentals, how do we run
boards more effectively grant
writing and fundraising, how can
we do that better? So we have a,
we have between the two
counties, we have about between
40 and 50 active nonprofit
entities here and um
So being that kind of
leadership, uh, and helping to
raise the bar of our nonprofits
is one of our initiatives.
Another is affordable housing
and lack of housing, so that's
been a big effort of our, um,
current executive director Elma
Baca, who is here in the
audience today. I'd like to
recognize him. And um that's a,
a big need here. We were one of
just
Many rural communities in the
United States that saw an influx
of urban migrants as a result of
COVID. So that, um, placed a
much higher demand on our local
housing situation, and then with
the fire, many people who were
had been living more rurally and
more dispersed, lost their
homes, and those have moved to
our urban center of Las Vegas.
So there's a big tax on housing
here in terms of the demand and
there's, there's just not enough
housing.
Which leads to issues of many
people being underhoused, as
well as uh a rise in
homelessness and it just being
very uh difficult to find
affordable housing for people
here, so that's been um.
A key initiative for us. Long
term recovery is another key
initiative we have really taken
a leadership role in trying to
help envision this 20 to 30 year
recovery plan and time frame
and, and to help get in place
many of the supports, um, that
are needed to do that.
Well, and so that's a a torch
we're carrying and the health
and wellness initiative as well.
All of these tie into each
other, right? But the health and
wellness initiative has become a
big focus with the Aorum moneys,
obviously, um, and we've been
doing some really significant
work in that area this past
year.
Our other focus areas include
agriculture and environmental
sustainability, arts and
culture, community development,
education, and historic
preservation, and those are all
selected and informed by the
unique character of the
communities in our counties
here.
Um, so given that this is the
Health and Human Services
Committee. I'm going to now
speak more specifically about
this and Qorum Health and
Wellness Initiative. So to give
a little bit of context, and
quorum, the Anchorum Health
Foundation was previously part
of the Christa Saint Vincent
Hospital Foundation and after
doing about 15 years of focused
work trying to improve the
quality of care and services at
the hospital. There was a
recognition that while the
hospital had seen dramatic
improvements, the surrounding
communities.
and the baseline level of health
in those surrounding communities
had not. And so the decision was
made to actually split the
foundation and then Quorum split
off and, um,
is now a stand-alone foundation
with a focus on trying to get
money and support outside of
Santa Fe and outside of the
hospital setting and into the
surrounding communities to raise
the baseline level of health in
those communities.
And so we are, I think, very
fortunate that a number of the
leadership personnel of Aorum
have backgrounds in working with
community foundations.
So their vision was to approach
the community foundations as
partners because the community
foundations are much more
attuned to the needs and their
specific coverage areas than a
body of
Office folks would be that are
just based in Santa Fe. So that
was the vision behind how this
program would work and then
beyond that, taking an
additional step they wanted each
community foundation to hire a
fellow whose job was
specifically to go, you know, be
boots on the ground in, in the
communities, in the field,
gathering data, talking to
people, and really learning
about what the, the most urgent
pressing needs are in that
community and being a point of
liaisonship, a liaison between
residents, nonprofits, the
Community Foundation, and the
Anchorum Health Foundation. And
so that has been my role for the
past year. I'm, I'm one of two
fellows that, uh, works with the
Las Vegas Community Foundation.
So that's kind of the model and
the bigger picture is that the
Angorum Health Foundation has
lost this launched this
initiative, um.
With 5 community foundations
serving 13 counties in northern
New Mexico and all of the
sovereign nations. So that's our
coverage area. So for me
specifically, I'm San Miguel and
Mora County, but I have
colleagues covering those other
13 counties, um.
And all the, the tribes and
pueblos. So that's where these
monies are going and they've
allocated $25 million over the
next 4 years. It was 5 years,
but now over the next 4 years
through the community
foundations into health and
wellness initiatives that really
are aimed at addressing the
social determinants of health.
So not just health and a medical
sense, but all those many
complex and supporting aspects
of health, um, the, the
economic, economic health and
well-being, um,
housing and homelessness, food
security, uh, the built
environment, all of those kinds
of, uh, issues.
So we're, we're really have been
pretty uh delighted and pleased
with this kind of co-strategic
philanthropy approach. It's,
it's very different than a
traditional, um, control
centered approach to
philanthropy and, and we've,
it's been a little, you know,
muddy as we all figure out our
roles and how it all works
together, but it's really a, a
pretty,
Um, pioneering approach to
effective philanthropy at the
community, local community
level.
Go ahead with the next slide,
please.
So I mentioned I'm one of two
fellows, uh, that are working
with the Las Vegas Community
Foundation. My name is Ariel
Hani and my co-fellow's name is
Arielle Cordero. So ironically,
we're both Ariels, uh, so we go
by the A team for simplicity.
Um, my co-fellow is a native New
Mexican. She was born, uh,
outside of Albuquerque on the
land, you know, uh, grew up with
an outhouse and is fully
bilingual and has 25 years
experience in social work.
And, um, brings that, um,
experience to the team. I come
from a different spectrum. I'm,
I'm originally from Washington
state, but I've been in Las
Vegas for 19 years, and my
background is more in community
organizing and advocacy and
natural and preventative natural
foods and preventative kind of
approach to this work. So we
complement each other really
well.
Go ahead with the next slide.
I just want to give a bit of an
overview of what this first
year's process has been for us
as fellows, so we were hired
back in November, so we've
actually only been on the team
in this work for about 9 months.
We've done a lot in 9 months.
Um
I think the biggest, uh, well, I
can't say it that way, one of
the the biggest things that's
been our focus was people had
been hearing about these Acora
monies for a little while, but
hadn't seen anything. And given
some of the challenges around
FEMA money and people's level of
kind of trust and concern. It
felt really important to us to
actually get money flowing in
the community with existing
needs and projects. So we were
fortunate to be able to get
grant money circulating into the
community back in February,
which
It was really, you know, just a
few months after we had had
Joined this effort and
Um, so that was to support a lot
of kind of currently existing
projects and organizations and
what they were already doing.
Alongside that, we've also been
doing a lot of community
outreach and listening sessions,
trying to engage different
community partners to learn
about what the most pressing
needs are for our county
specifically. Of course, there's
a lot of patterns that are
showing up across the whole of
Northern New Mexico, but we also
want to find out what's going to
make a difference for people in
Conscious Dam. That's going to
be different.
than for folks in Las Vegas,
right? So trying to have those
conversations and do that.
Deep and pretty intimate level
of data gathering and
conversations, um, we, that's
been a big part of our work. We
also have been involved with two
targeted task forces, one on
mental health, behavioral
health, um, issues and another
one on women's health issues
that are
Looking specifically at San
Miguel and Mota County.
We have been offering capacity
building and technical support
for the various nonprofit
partners in our service area.
We were able to have a really
insightful roundtable discussion
with Attorney General Raoul
Torres a couple of months ago
with a lot of our um key
providers and admins, the
hospital Alta Vista Hospital,
Sunrise Clinics, um.
the Pecos Medical Clinic, we're
all in the room for that
conversation, and we learned a
lot from that.
We have been working on
developing and kind of building
out this whole Anchorum health
and wellness grants program and
what that looks like for our
community foundation here. We've
had the liberty to shape it as
we see best suited to the Las
Vegas Community Foundation, so
that's been quite an
undertaking.
Uh, and it's all been a very
steep learning curve for, for
all of us from the Angorm Health
Foundation, you know, through
the community foundations into
the fellows. And so there's been
a lot of back and forth
conversation and building out
policies and figuring out work
flows and all that kind of those
pieces that are critical to the
formation of any new initiative
has been a big part of our work
as well.
Uh, next slide, please.
So from the listening sessions
that we've done.
And the community conversations
we've had, we are seeing some
recurring themes emerge from
those. Most of our conversations
in San Miguel and Mota County
have been with providers, um.
With kind of targeted community
groups like the San Miguel
Family and Community Health
Council, um,
And, and then we've had some
general population surveys as
well. So we have made efforts to
have listening sessions just
open to the general population,
and those were not very well
attended, but we're not giving
up on that. We'll be having more
of those, uh, in the months
ahead and the years ahead, so.
But from those conversations,
Some of the emerging priorities
have been behavioral health
supports, um, both because of a
lack of providers and because
the need has changed since the
fires. There's been a
significant increase in PTSD and
trauma symptoms amongst our
population and not all of our
providers have the appropriate
training for that, especially
for children and youth. So
that's one thing that's come to
the surface.
Women's health and maternity
health services, so really all
age, uh, care for women, but
particularly because there's no
delivery unit at our local
hospital, and our hospital
serves a five-county region.
That means all of those five
counties have to travel
significant distances to deliver
their babies, um.
And if they don't make it, then
there's sometimes additional
risks and complications, right,
if they can't make the 120 mile
trip to the hospital timely or
that kind of thing.
Food security and nutrition
literacy is a recurring theme,
um, from our first round of
grants, we gave out 13 grants
and 8 of them had something to
do with food security, which was
really a surprisingly high
number to me. I wasn't thinking
it would be that high, so that
speaks to that growing and
significant need here despite
the fact that we have, you know,
a number of pantries and soup
kitchens and Food Depot is here
with their mobile pantries and
that kind of thing, so.
Substance use and recovery
support, uh, specifically
looking at holistic and whole
family recovery is something
that's come up.
Again, affordable housing and
homelessness. We have one,
homeless shelter that serves
both San Miguel and More
counties. They're only open
seasonally due to lack of
funding, so they really only
operate as a cold weather
shelter in terms of overnights,
and then the rest of the year
they do offer access to showers
and laundry and, and meals, but
they're not offering overnight
services.
Um, transportation, this is
something that's been big across
all of Northern New Mexico, but
one, because people have to
travel such distances for
services, and 2, because of the
poverty levels, a lot of people
might not have a reliable
vehicle one or any, you know, I
mean, if there's one reliable
vehicle for a whole family
that's 2 working parents and
others. What happens when one
person needs the car for a
medical appointment in
Albuquerque, you know, the other
person has to not go to work or
do they get dropped off? I mean,
it's
those kinds of issues that just
make, make it very difficult to,
um,
Access services and have a, um,
you know, a baseline quality of
life that we would like to be
accessible to everyone, so.
Lack of rural providers and
retention of rural providers has
been a big point, you know,
looking at how much people have
to be offered in, in terms of
compensation just to even
consider an interview here, um,
is something that's come up. How
do we keep, how do we grow and
keep and retain providers, I
believe Matt Prope spoke with
you all yesterday about Samis de
salud, which is, I think, a
really great program. So there's
some efforts to try and build
that here, but it is a
challenge.
Again, long term fire, recovery,
so both economic, environmental
and social recovery on all three
of those levels.
And then more recently because
of national political dynamics
just a concern about how our
federally qualified health
clinics and our regional
hospital might be affected by
changes in, in budgetary
allocations. That's a very real
concern for us. And if we lose
that hospital, then there's, you
know, 5 counties at least that
are immediately affected by, by
that, so.
Um
So zooming in for a minute, go
ahead to the next slide on the
Women's Health Task Force. This
has been a really, um,
Pretty inspiring community
effort that's come together just
since January, so, um, the, at
the time, the interim CEO of
Alta Vista.
Kind of pulled this task force
together saying, OK, we know
women's health issues need more
support here. There's a lack of
them in general. Let's have a
conversation and bring people
together about what we can do
about it. And so,
That group has met pretty much
monthly since the start of the
year. It's included the
Altavista CEO and other
administrators. It's included
other providers, um, including
our one nurse midwife that's
located here in town from El
Centro and Rugi as well as us as
in quorum fellows and some
other um key community players,
folks from the San Miguel Family
Health council, the board of the
hospital, so those, those have
been some of the people in the.
room and we've realized it's
been really valuable to be
talking to each other. Many of
those folks are so involved in
the day to day management of
their organizations or seeing
their patients that sitting down
to have a conversation about
who's offering what and where
the challenges are, doesn't
happen very often and so that's
been really valuable to help
identify some of these and to do
some brainstorming around
possible solutions.
We've also been doing as Zanorum
fellows, we've done some data
gathering and uh research
gathering.
Looking at trying to, you know,
Assess the need and build a case
for bringing additional women's
support, women's health service
support to our communities. One
of the things that we did was
issue out a survey, conduct a
community survey that was open
to the public. We ran it online,
we had paper copies, we had
providers at El Centro helping
us with getting data from
patients.
And we had about 300
respondents, about 10% of those
were from Mora County, and there
are, if you move to the next
slides and there's um some
survey results that I want to
share.
The main takeaways.
Are really that there's a a lack
of local OBGYN services. The
delivery, the
Yeah, so labor and deliveryward
at the hospital has been closed
several times over the last
handful of years. There is
currently not one here. So to
have a baby, you have to go to
Santa Fe. That's the next
closest place.
Um
And
That also, because of that, it
also means that a lot of women
end up shifting their prenatal
care to Santa Fe sometime along
their pregnancy because
whoever's delivering your baby,
in most cases, they want to be
keeping tabs on you and not just
have, not just have you show up
for the birth, um, in an ideal
situation, right? So
There is a lack of support for
pregnant women here and maternal
health, but also women of all
ages have felt a lack of care,
so especially um postmenopausal
women, uh, we have an aging
population here. Most of our,
you know, we have more seniors
than we do women of childbearing
age. And so it's really
important that they have access
to the services they need as
well, and that is also lacking.
Um, 60 60% of our respondents
reported having to travel 1 to 6
times for women's healthcare in
the last year.
And, um,
60%, I think it was, sorry, 60%
also reported needing specialist
services, which, of course, none
of which are offered here
locally. That's a trip to Santa
Fe, Albuquerque for sure.
There is obviously a significant
travel burden if you're having
to leave town for those
services. So I mean, if you're
here in Las Vegas, you're
looking at least 120 miles round
trip to get services in Santa
Fe, if you're in Mora or Oate or
Wagon Mounder. It's a much
longer trip. That's time off
work, that's expensive gas,
that's needing a reliable
vehicle. That's sometimes
needing somebody to go with you
to drive you, so it's not just
one, but it's 2. What about
childcare? I mean, there's all
of those variables that make it
very challenging to pursue, um,
the
support you might need or, or
services that you might need.
As well as the enhanced risk. I
mean, my personal story, I, I
have a 2 year old and the day
before she was born, I had to go
for a prenatal appointment and
on the way back, we hit ice and
ecos and went off the road and
we're lucky we didn't flip. Um,
there were 6 vehicles in a 1.5
mm stretch that were all off the
road from that unexpected ice
patch. This was in March, right
before our last big snow of the
year. She was born the next day.
It had snowed overnight and it
took us
2.5 hours to get to Santa Fe
from Las Vegas because we could
only go 20 miles an hour on the
highway to get there. So luckily
she was born safely, you know,
we got there safe in one piece,
but those kinds of risks aren't
necessary.
So it would be nice to be able
to reduce them.
Um,
Limited access to specialists,
not only because they're not
here, but because there's a lack
in the state overall, so getting
in to see them is really onerous
and difficult and sometimes
booked way out in advance. If
something happens and you miss
your appointment, then it's
like, oh, my next chance is in 4
months, you know, that kind of
thing.
Um, an erosion of trust in local
healthcare. I think this is
mainly because of the touch and
go services in terms of OB at
the hospital, people don't trust
that that's something they can
get here now, um, or have a have
doubts in the quality of care,
which is unfortunate and I think
the hospital is making good
steps and changing that, but
that takes time.
And of course there's
community-wide impacts like
people question whether or not
they even want to move here if
they're of childbearing age, for
example, or elderly because
there is a lack of, of quality,
um.
Health services for the aging
population as well. So it
affects those kinds of things.
From the survey some possible
solutions that came up were the
idea of, I mean, one we've
talked about isn't viable to
actually have an OB unit at the
hospital, and that's still in
debate, but an alternative might
be a women's health clinic with
a birth center because that has
some less barriers to it. So
that's one idea that's come up,
um, recruitment of women health
specialists, not only to the
state of New Mexico overall, but
might it be possible for
specialists to travel to Las
Vegas and offer services once or
twice a month rather than
patients having to
traveled to them in Santa Fe or
Albuquerque.
Um
Uh, I, I'm aware of the time, so
I'm gonna kind of move through
this, but also, I mean, there's
just many potential ideas to
explore, um, that could be
highly beneficial for our local
population here. I will note
related to this, we have no
urgent care clinics, so that
means that folks end up going to
the hospital and to the ER for
things that are totally
unnecessary to go to the
hospital and ER that results in
higher costs and more demand on
the service, so an urgent care
clinic is something that's been
discussed as well as better
EMS services for rural areas,
um.
If I remember correctly, only
about 17% of the airlifts from
both the Santa Rosa Hospital and
Alta Vista Hospital where trauma
incidents and the other 80%
didn't necessarily need a
helicopter, but because the
ambulances weren't available,
there weren't enough of them. It
wouldn't have been timely
enough. They had to use the
helicopter, so that's an
unnecessary use of resources,
uh, unnecessary cost, that kind
of thing. So what can we do to
make EMS EMS service.
This is
More, uh, present and effective
in rural communities.
Moving on to the next slide,
please.
So again, uh stepping out of
women's health specifically and
looking at just a few of our key
highlights from the Angorum
Health and Wellness initiative
for year one.
We were privileged to have an
opportunity in February to go
represent this work and the
state of New Mexico at the
philanthropy Southwest
Conference where my colleague
Ariel Cordero and Elmo Baca
represented our work.
We in May hosted about 20 folks
from the Anchorum leadership for
a site visit here to Las Vegas.
We took them to a few specific
grant locations, so they got to
see their grant money, uh,
working. One of those was
Samaritan House and one was up
at Luna Community College, where
we have several grant projects.
Located.
Total for year one grant
expenditures from the donor
advice funds from Anchorum was
332,000 for 18 projects in San
Miguel and More County. So
that's a big, uh, influx of
resources for our communities.
Go ahead with the next slide.
Just to give you a sense of the
impact we're striving for with
grants. We are aware of needing
to both address basic emergent
needs as well as long term
upstream solutions. So we're
kind of balancing this and
trying to, trying to do both
with our allocation of funding.
One example of this is the
Samaritan House shelter. So this
past year, they needed a, an
emergency grant of $25,000 just
to be able to keep their doors
open through the cold season.
which we were happy to be able
to grant to them, but at the
same time, we're also working on
upstream solutions on affordable
housing, right? So, we also,
we're able to secure uh
$100,000 in seed money for a
housing and land trust.
And that money is, um,
Now working on the issue of a
more upstream solution, just,
uh, last week, two weeks ago,
the Community Foundation
actually acquired a 1.2 acre
lot, right behind the backside
of of Bridge Street on Valencia
Street there to develop into
affordable housing units, so
we're, that's a really concrete
exciting example of how we're
doing both basic needs and
upstream solution work through
these monies and the community
foundation.
You turn to the next slide,
please.
Looking ahead at year 2 for the
Anchorum monies. We have a few
strategic goals that we're
working towards. One of those is
to really work on leveraging
regional partnerships and
relationships. So even though
we've got county lines, these
issues don't stop at the county
line, right? And so looking at
how to work collaboratively to
build a resiliency and a
strength in the local community
response for some of these
health and wellness issues is
one thing.
Uh, working across fellows uh in
our coverage areas is on the
agenda, also looking at, you
know, considering things like
the sunrise clinics is based out
of Santa Rosa. They have clinics
here and in many other locations
in our county, so they reached
beyond the borders of San Miguel
County, right? So how can we
strategically and smartly
leverage funds and support.
For the betterment of, of all.
Another is more of these kind of
task specific
subject specific task force
groups like the Women's Health
Group, one of them that we're
hoping to launch in the next
month or so is focused on food
security. So how do we come up
with, who do we bring together
to have the conversation about a
more effective approach for
sustainable food security
issues.
We will also be continuing with
community engagement to do more
of that outreach to the far
stretches, far reaches of our
coverage areas in San Miguel,
Water County, make sure that
everyone's getting heard and
hopefully not being left out of
these resources.
Looking at next slide, looking
at the Las Vegas, New Mexico
Community Foundation overall,
we're in a really dynamic stage
of growth, which is very
exciting. We in the, in the time
ahead, we are hoping to elevate
local capacity of nonprofit
organizations and partners, as I
mentioned, as well as our own
capacity for growth to help.
facilitate and conduct this kind
of community work.
We will continue to invest in
long term recovery and support
and be a community leader in
that work, carrying that torch.
And we hope to attract and
leverage additional and larger
funding partners, given the
success that we've had the last
few years and the success that
we're able to demonstrate in the
good community work that we've
been doing and been helping
others to do.
So
You know, as our elected
officials, we do have a few
specific asks that we would just
appreciate your attention to and
consideration of in the times
ahead.
One of those is to continue
funding the maternal Health
Bureau at the Department of
Health.
Another is to support the
maternal mortality Review
Committee, which investigates
every maternal death and with a
particular interest in accurate
data for Hispanic and indigenous
women.
Another is to provide funding to
establish strong telehealth
services in rural communities,
um, from maternal and fetal
medical care, especially. So for
example, an expansion of the
roams program, the ROM stands
for rural OB Access and maternal
service, and they are currently
operating in Mota County and
Taos County.
And I think Colfax County, but
expanding that proven model
would be useful. It takes
resources, right, to get that
set up, but they've been doing
really good work, so that might
be a good option for rural
healthcare support.
Uh, supporting any efforts to
establish and retain providers
and services for rural and
frontier communities, you know,
this is really a unifying
nonpartisan issue. I mean,
health, health and well-being is
something that everybody can get
behind. How we do it, we might
have differing opinions on, but
the, the fundamentals of, of the
fact that people deserve to be
healthy and have a, a, a basis,
a certain standard of well-being
is a nonpartisan issue, and 26
out of 33 of our New Mex
Mexico counties are considered
rural or frontier areas. So,
this is a huge issue for most of
our state. It's not just us, you
know.
Supporting, uh, the potential of
capital outlay requests to help
fund a women's health center
here in Las Vegas to accompany
Alta Vista Hospital is a
specific request that I think is
being worked on. I don't know
exactly where that stands, but
you might see that coming up.
And again, noting that Alta
Vista serves 5 counties in our
area, so it's not just San
Miguel and Mora that would
benefit.
Supporting rural transportation
efforts and innovative solutions
because it really is a pervasive
issue that affects so many
different aspects of quality of
life for people.
And then to consider the Las
Vegas, New Mexico Community
Foundation as a potential
partner in distributing and
executing Senate Bill 2 funding
that was passed this year,
particularly pertaining to
behavioral health and affordable
housing needs as those are two
issues that we're already
actively working in, so.
Um
Especially given the status of
being in fire recovery and how
that factors in.
So, in conclusion, the New
Mexico, Las Vegas, New Mexico
Commune Foundation is very proud
of our efforts, uh, to be
stepping up in in a leadership
role and helping to support our
communities to recover and to
grow.
Um, the overall mission is to
help the Greater Las Vegas area
to thrive, you know, so really
the vision is thriving
communities throughout our two
counties and, and beyond, but
that's our service area. We are
grateful for our partnership
with Anchorum and this health
and wellness initiative and what
that has meant for greater
opportunity and greater
resources to do valuable work
and we are
Really grateful and excited to
have had this opportunity this
morning to share some of our
work with you. Uh, we appreciate
you taking the time and being
here and providing the
attention.
To these issues.
So thank you so much. Um, it is
not on your printed copy, but my
contact information is on the
screen behind you. I don't have
cards, but if you want to reach
out to me directly, feel free,
uh, my email is honiha A W N E
Y.
At LVNMCF.org.
And my phone number is
505-4988365.
If you would like to follow up
on any of these topics that I
touched on today, I would be
delighted to speak with you.
That said, I welcome any
questions or comments, and
again, thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you so much, Ariel, and if
you can turn your mic off uh uh
unless you're speaking, um, so
we will go to questions. I will
start with Senator Pope.
OK, Senator Sadia Lopez, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, this is
very impressive work. Did you
say how many assets you have?
You know, I did not.
Elmo remember just one mic on at
a time.
About 2 million.
What's your plan for
sustainability?
Would you know have have you
done that kind of planning.
Um, I, I mean we did
fundraising.
see
regularly
Yeah, we do fund fundraising
campaigns twice a year. Uh, we
actually just sent out a round
of letters for that right now in
anticipation of our December
grant making cycle.
We also have a solid base of
funders that are reliable
regular donors, so that is kind
of like the um
Meat and potatoes, I guess, of
our operation, and then we have
actively pursued other grants,
uh, when the opportunity has
arisen and we are actively
working on cultivating
additional relationships with
entities like Angorum through
these donor advice funds, um, as
I mentioned, we just had a 2nd 1
come on and at a meeting we had
on Monday, there was another,
um,
Foundation representative there
who's interested in supporting
this kind of work. So we're
working on cultivating those
relationships as well.
Excellent.
I just had one more question
and, and, and I congratulations
and excellent work. I thank you
for the presentation. It's, it's
very exciting, um, but one more
question had to do with the uh
emerging priorities, um, when
you said substance use and
recovery support whole family
and holistic recovery. Did you,
um, breakout alcohol?
Um
No, that's, that's included.
That's it's just it's included.
I know, I know there's often um
There's often both alcohol
misuse and other substance
misuse, but um.
One of the things is that
alcohol actually cause, causes
more death in New Mexico than
all of the other substances
combined, um, and it's been a
priority, um, for me and just
thinking about how
I mean, this is very exciting to
think about how
If we actually had a tax on
alcohol.
Um,
how these funds could be used
and, you know, just another,
another uh way of thinking about
About I, and I liked what you
said, talked about upstream, you
know, prevention is so much more
important.
Well, I shouldn't say more
important. It's so important and
it's what we neglect. Everything
is important, but we often
neglect it, um, if you had
separate data on alcohol at some
point, I would be very
interested in it.
OK, yeah, thank you for pointing
that out. I know in in
conversation with one of our
providers at El Centro, that is
a point that he raised in
particular that he has seen and
treated, uh, more people with,
um,
Liver and kidney failure issues
because of alcoholism, then,
then other substances and that
that does need more of a
spotlight on it because it
really statistically does affect
more families and more
individuals. So thank you for
bringing that to our attention,
and I will happily follow up
with some more data as we move
forward looking into that
specifically for, for our areas.
The death rate from alcohol
related deaths in New Mexico is
the highest in the country.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you
And you will notice I'm not
keeping a timer.
So don't take advantage, but I
can always, I can always turn it
on, so.
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Now that
I don't have a time right now,
I'm just kidding, but uh, um,
no, um, being here, um, first I
want to thank the Community
Foundation, um, since you guys
have arrived on the scene,
you've done such great work
within our community and I can
tell you firsthand you were
instrumental during our.
Have Canyon and Hermit Speak
fire, um, and just getting funds
is a flow through. Um, I don't
think we would have had, um,
nearly as much immediate
response or any response had it
not been for the flow through
and support of the Community
Foundation, um, and then now
with your inclusion with Inorum,
we've really been able to make
headway, um, and a lot of issues
that are personal priorities,
um, for me, um, also in my role
as a legislator and so I, I, I
wanna thank you. This is the
first time I'm seeing some of
the survey results. I know that
survey was launched.
At the start of the year, so.
This is, I think, really
important to laying the
framework as to hopefully
inviting support here, um, and,
and you know, and just speaking
out loud, speaking into
fruition. I know there have been
many out, you know, just really
trying to bring back
reproductive healthcare services
here to Las Vegas in different
capacities, um, you know,
looking to bring back what an
what an OB could do to change
the landscape of our, of our
healthcare community, you know,
both with midwifery or, you
know, just being able to
deliver.
babies in a safe environment
would just be game changing for
this region. So should that come
out the need for support, um,
you know, calling out the ranks
to just be able to offer you
whatever support support you may
need and also throwing in that
inclusion. I know in our
discussions also in some of the
women's task for task force
discussions, um, also something
that maybe wasn't mentioned in
here, I know if it was included
in your survey, but just uh
sexual abuse also resources here
for our community are also
extremely lacking, so again with
the center with the reproductive
health
Care center, you know, what that
could do to, you know, to be
able to provide a sane nurse in
the region, um, as well as, you
know, delivery options as well
as any other reproductive
healthcare needs we would need.
In addition to all the mental
health and all the other good
stuff you were doing, so, um,
just wanna echo congratulations
and just thank you for being
here and sharing, sharing the
works and hoping to become a hub
in the near future for
northeastern New Mexico. So
thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation as
well, um, especially the
highlight and focus on OBGYN,
uh, making sure that we have
birthing centers, making sure
that we have the full spectrum
of reproductive health, um, the
concern that I have in the back
of my mind is actually with
Aorum, so I know y'all are the
community foundation. There's
Anchorum as well, um.
But my understanding is that in
quorum is still very much
heavily funded by Crius itself,
and so when I think about
Christus, I actually think about
their restrictions on abortion
care.
And so I'm just really worried
and concerned that, you know, as
we're thinking about full
spectrum reproductive care,
which yes, is abortion and so
many other things. I just want
the foundation to just be very
aware of that, um, because I
know Mission Creep also happens,
right? I worked in nonprofit
spaces and I want to be sure
that, you know, when we're
receiving um donations from
donors, um, with religiously
affiliated organizations that
we're just able to put that in.
perspective and we might be able
to push back on some of the
things that we know is best for
reproductive care generally, um,
this way if there are any donor
concerns about abortion care in
particular that we'd be able to
push back on that and say no,
like abortion care is absolutely
part of the full spectrum of
reproductive care. And so I just
wanted to put that out there
because I do know that inorum is
still very much funded by
Christa Saint Vincent and we've
had different instances in which
folks are, you know, um,
Uh, providers in some of these
spaces, they want to practice to
their full scope of care that is
also a part of attracting and
retaining, um, OBGYNs, midwives,
uh, nurses, and so I just want
us to put that into perspective,
um, as we're receiving donations
from these type of folks, um,
and it's not a question
necessarily, Madam Chair, but if
you have a response, happy, um,
happy to listen to that as well.
Thank you.
Yeah, if I may, Madam Chair,
thank you and Representative
Anaya. I know to the to the
extent of my knowledge, um
the relationship between
Christus and Anchorum.
is slated to feather out and
phase out over the course of
this 5-year commitment. There
was, there's an oversight period
built in where they are more
closely tied, and that should be
coming to a point of dissolution
down the line. Excuse me, is my
understanding in terms of that.
This has come up as a topic
before, and I'm trying to
remember the details of the
conversation right now. It has
not been an issue to date, just
to say, you know, but I don't
know that there has been a
project that's been brought for
funding that was specifically
include
of abortion.
So I'm not sure if that would,
you know, man if there would be
issues that would manifest
differently, were that the case,
but I'm happy to follow up and,
and revisit that and certainly
we'll keep it, uh, in our
awareness, but it did come up in
conversation at one point and to
the best of my recollection, it
was not going to be problematic,
but it's only in theory at this
point, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
to add to the conversation,
please also protect
gender-affirming care as well as
a part of that full spectrum of
repro Health. Thank you.
OK, Representative Kates.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you again for the
presentation, you know, um, the
community foundations in general
are essential for all
communities, but such as
Um
Las Vegas, who is growing, who
is out of the village into the
town and growing towards the
city, um, a foundation, a strong
foundation is essential in that
growth, um, and I very much
appreciate uh the work that you
do and the growth and the
support that you're getting. I
just wanted to bring a couple of
things to your attention. I know
that you, um, uh, you know, I
won't, I won't send, uh, steal
my, my thunder of my rep here,
but H
56 and HB 214. It is not
uncommon for foundations to work
closely with chambers and
investors to point out to
investors that there are uh new
policies where you can get
Medicaid billing at the same
rate as a hospital and um these
other incentives to be able to
put in birthing centers. I think
birthing centers are, I, I, I
like your presentation, you
understand that they're going to
be essential in being.
being able to serve your
community. Um, I just also want
to point out to you something I
just learned this week. OK, so,
so, uh, Las Vegas for over
12,000 here. Socorro is a little
over 8000 and their public
transportation are cabs and
they're free.
They're free for everyone.
Um, uh, and so I don't know how
they do that yet, but if I was
you, I'd try to find out, um,
uh, it because it's not just for
the elderly or for the dis
disabled. It is part of their
public transportation. It's
cheaper for them, for the city
to pay for those individual cab
services than to try to put in
some kind of bus service, and
they only have over 8000 people
in, in that area. You guys are
bigger. I think that you might
have, um
opportunity there and then I'm
so sorry this is an echoey room
and I don't always hear all the
words of the presenters. How
many units in the proposed
affordable housing that you uh
uh provided information on.
12 apartments, 12 apartments on
1.2 acres. Thank you so much,
um, when we come back here and
we will, I'll keep asking you
questions on that such as do you
have a solar array? How many
Section 8 individuals are you
gonna take? What is the AMI that
you're serving on that, um, and
so, but I want to thank you
again, thank Las Vegas for
understanding that a strong uh
community means a strong
foundation and so thank you.
Representative block, I don't
know when you came in. Did you
hear the presentation? Madam
Chair, I did not. I just came in
a couple of minutes ago. I, I've
been in education committee
today, so I've been going up and
down the stairs.
I'll be, so you, you were very
stealthy coming in, uh,
Representative Herndon, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation
today. I thought the concept of
putting fellows in place, uh, to
carry out some of the work here
is excellent. Now did you grow
up in this area? Are you from
one of these communities?
I am not. I came here as a 17
year old to go to the United
Royal College actually, and fell
in love with Las Vegas and I've
been here ever since, so I mean
I did leave for my undergrad and
but I've kept coming back. So
I've been here about 19 years
now. I am not of this community,
but I have a big heart for it.
Thank you, thank you for that.
And looking at your priorities
and thinking about data, can you
tell me in these 5 counties over
the year, how many births have
actually been uh occurring.
I do not have data on all 5
counties.
If I, I'm trying to jog my
memory because we did have data
on Mora and San Miguel County,
and I believe the hard numbers
were only about 22 births,
something like that, but here's
the problem is where do the,
where did the bursts get logged
as being credited to when the
baby is born in Santa Fe,
Albuquerque. They don't
necessarily get logged through
the vital statistics Bureau as,
as being tied to San Miguel and
Mora. There's some issues there
and how the data is collected
and represented.
So I don't think we have a very
clear
Sense of the need, honestly, um,
uh, certainly not accurate as to
the last handful of years
because we haven't had any
delivery services for over 5
years, I think.
So that's something we probably
should work on with vital
statistics. I think that's
important. The other item that
you brought up.
The other item that you brought
up was uh with respect to
transportation and needing more
help with that. I mean, you
talked about the fact that you
do have access to a helicopter
now, which might be faster to
get a, a woman to a hospital if
we're utilizing that process. I
wonder, is that something that
you would like more of? Do you
think that would be helpful in a
five-county area rather than
trying to put somebody on the,
uh, uh, we don't have any other
transportation plan that I can
see right now that's gonna be
effective in the very near
future.
So,
so tell us what you were
thinking.
Um, I think the
To my understanding, again, this
was coming from a conversation
with uh hospital admin and
providers, but the issue with
using the helicopter is one the
huge expense for the, for the
patients and the huge allocation
of resources, you know, from
that, the hospital in the state
to make that happen, especially
if it's a non-traumatic need. If
there's not in other
circumstances where there were
more ambulances and, and more
EMS infrastructure, those people
wouldn't be helicopter.
out. They'd be transported, you
know, by a more economical
means, right? And so that was
the issue. I don't, I don't know
that it's, that we need more
helicopters. I think it's that
ideally there would be more
alternative EMS infrastructure
and support so that the
helicopters were less needed. I
think we only have 2 or 3
ambulances for our area, which
means one has to stay on call
with the hospital, right? One
can be in the field, and then I
forget.
Maybe there's only 2, but the
issue is there's not enough
ambulances to address the actual
needs of transporting. So they
can't take the time to drive
somebody down to Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, the helicopter them
instead because they can't
afford to, to allocate that
resource out of town, if that
makes sense. And so, um, having
more EMS in infrastructure is
one piece of it, and I know
that, um, Doctor Brown from
Sunrise Clinics talked about the
challenge of getting EMS.
services and providers because
the pay is low, the
certification process is arduous
and long, and, um,
Because of the distances that
have to be traveled by the time
you get an ambulance or EMS
responder to a certain location,
there's issues there with them
getting them to the hospital. So
rural, uh, it's a challenge for,
for rural populations to come up
with a, a good viable responsive
solution. I don't think we have
the answer, but clearly there is
a a problem there that affects
much of the state.
We will keep working on that.
Uh, Madam Chair, just two quick
more questions if you don't
mind. Number one, you talked
about food insecurity, and I'm
just wondering, so we had this
free lunch program with
students, and I have often
wondered how students felt about
that. Has that been an issue as
a part of the food insecurity in
terms of the availability of
healthy food for our students.
Um, can I ask you to clarify
what you mean by an issue? Would
it be an issue?
Well, so some of the students
that I have met with in, in
nearby counties have talked
about the fact that the food was
prepackaged. There were no fresh
fruits, no salads, and that the
food that they were given was
not one that would be, if you
looked at the list, it it meant,
of course, basic standards for
the uh USDA, but for purposes
of, is that what you would feed
your family on a daily basis.
Yeah, that's a good point. I
mean, I, I don't know the
particulars of that for our
local community in terms of
what's being served, I think it
would be important to bring it
into the conversation when we're
looking at sustainable food
security and our counties here.
I do know we have a, a fairly
decent local food network here,
and there's a great program that
brings, um, it's called the New
Mexico Provider.
Approved provider program and it
connects local farmers with the
schools, the senior centers, um,
and institutions of higher
learning, I think, at the state,
you know, state schools that
way. And so we do have a number
of, um, growers here that would
help to bring fresher food into
those contexts. It takes
staffing, I know with our senior
center, there have been farmers
interested in getting that
program.
In place, but there hasn't been
the staffing to actually meet
with them. So for two seasons
now, they've been
pushed to the back of the line
in terms of priority because
we're so understaffed in that
regard. There's one director for
3 senior centers, and she just
can't find the bandwidth to meet
with them. So,
I'm going to ask both of you to
please be brief. Yes, OK. So
it's something that I would
definitely like to look at
further. Thank you for raising
it.
Madam Chair, thank you. I will
speak with uh Miss uh Haney
later on offline
and, and I'm glad you brought up
about the air ambulances several
years ago, um, I learned that
there are no restrictions on
what air ambulances can charge.
Absolutely none. We had a member
who had a family member
airlifted from grants to
Albuquerque and it cost around
$70,000. So, um, and I did not
know.
There were so many air ambulance
providers in the state, but when
that bill came to the first
committee, the room was full of
people saying the sky is falling
if you do anything and so my
bill never went anywhere, and I
didn't try it again, but air
ambulances are for the, we need
to reserve them for the most
crucial life or death because
they can put a patient into
medical debt for the rest of
their lives. So thank you for
your presentation and uh we
will.
move along now to um,
To San Miguel County Family and
Community Health Council, and I
will say I got a text from
Valeria Alarcon and said thank
you for including um could you
please turn your mic off? Yes,
thank you for including the
health council, so we are
anxious to hear from you, uh,
Raymond Sanchez, a different
Raymond Sanchez.
So welcome and whenever you're
ready.
Awesome. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I really appreciate the
opportunity uh to be able to
speak before you all today, uh,
particularly this morning in
regards to the Health council.
Uh, my name is Raymond Sanchez.
I am the director for the
Montana of Note Area Health
Education Center, AEC, uh, for
15 counties in northern New
Mexico, uh, my work is carried
out through the University of
New Mexico's Office for
Community Health, and I am also
a partner hero while I was a
partner hero until yesterday.
Now I'm a regional hero as I met
with Dr. Art Kaufman.
And his team yesterday and so
again, I am also a regional
hero, um, through the Office for
Community Health at the
University of New Mexico. My
office is located on the campus
of Luna Community College. And
so again, I'm um the person that
I answer to at Luna Community
College is Doctor
Carol Lintern please briefly
explain what the hero is.
We know you're a hero, but we
want to know officially why
you're a hero. No problem. I, I
want to go into exactly what I
do with AEC and then heroes as
well. And I think
There'll be a perfect flow of
what we do as far as our San
Miguel County Family and
Community Health Council. And
so, um, again, to answer your
question, Madam Chair, as far as
heroes go, how the extension
role officer what I am is
basically a resource uh from San
Miguel County, uh, Quay County
and Mora County to be able to be
a voice for these counties going
to the University of New Mexico
asking for resources, advocating
for resources, but more
importantly, advocating for my
communities and my counties.
Um
When we talk about AEC, uh, AEC
Health Education Center, uh, AEC
is federally funded and so
again, money coming from HSA,
those kind of things as well,
um, but again, the impact of AIC
is just exactly what I want to
highlight. Um, and so I have 3
areas that I serve with AEC, uh,
number one would be the
recruitment of our AEC scholars
program. And so what that
happened, what that does is
that's actually a um a program
for people who are immersed
within their health career
field. And so again, if
somebody's going to be a
physician assistant, a medical
doctor, behavioral health
physician, or um psychiatrist or
any other kind of avenue
dentist, whatever it is, um,
this program is geared to assist
those that are already enrolled
to be able to serve rural
communities. And so, again, when
we talk about the state of New
Mexico and we're looking at 32
of the 33 communities being
designated as health profession
shortage areas, um, most
definitely we want to
incorporate all as much
partnerships as possible and so
when we
We talk about um
Getting homegrown providers,
people from our state to be able
to stay within the, the, the
counties, the communities that
they're from, but specifically
being able to treat and cure uh
people that are living in rural
communities because as we know,
uh, those are some of the
communities that are at a
disadvantage for health care
behavioral healthcare, etc. etc.
Um, another aspect of my, of my
role with AEC is uh continuing
education. And so again, as I
mentioned before, uh, AIC is
federally funded, but that, but
that money goes back to
different programs that we
support here in New Mexico. So
when we talk about continuing
education we're talking about
AEC being able to be a sponsor
of various conferences that
assist providers in keeping up
with their CMEs slash CEUs, um,
and so again when we're talking
about a conference, we talk
about the, the, the wellness
symposium that was on.
campus in this building, in this
room, uh, last week, right,
talking about last Friday and so
again, tons of behavioral health
providers, physicians, those
kind of things, those kind of
people were actually here
discussing how we can move
forward in the state of New
Mexico, um, and so again being
able to support conferences like
that, New Mexico Academy Family
physicians, our annual winter
refresher, um, National Latino
Behavioral Health Association's
annual conference, which is
actually coming up in
Albuquerque on August 9th, uh,
we're actually, uh, sponsored
the health.
Climate and um I can't think
right off the top of my head
the, the, the name of the
conference, the Healthy Climate,
uh, health and um something
converse, but again going back
to the environment is another
conference that we sponsored,
um, and so again being able to
sponsor conferences such as
NMPHA, those kind of things, um,
again, being, uh, being able to
be supportive of the people that
are providing education to our
providers within our state, OK?
Number 3 with AEC is going to be
Health career pipeline, and
that's actually my personal
favorite. Why? It's because I'm
actually in the schools. I'm in
the middle schools. I'm in the
high schools. I'm on college
campuses on university campuses.
I'm in the community being able
to provide education, being able
to provide presentations in
regards to, say, suicide
prevention. I'm a trainer for
trainers or trainer of trainers
of QPR question, persuade and
refer. so I am doing those type
of trainings at Luna Community
College, uh, within the middle
schools at West Las Vegas,
Robertson.
Pecos, same thing in the high
schools, um, mental health first
aid, that's another one that I'm
certified in, and again, being
able to really, really pass on
the message and being really
able to not only communicate,
but also being able to put
myself in a position of where
these students are at, OK? And
so when we talk about the state
of New Mexico going back to New
Mexico leading the nation in
ACEs averse childhood
experiences. Um, that's
something that we definitely,
definitely want to shine a light
on. Um.
The idea of uh of being able to
certify and being able to train
kids, middle school aged
students right before the summer
comes was definitely a goal of
not only of AIC but also of the
San Miguel County Family and
Community Health Council. Why?
Because a lot of these kids are
by themselves during the summer.
A lot of these kids while their
parents at work, grandparents at
work, etc. etc. um, they have a
lot of alone time, a lot of time
with friends, those kind of
things too. And so again, we
want to make sure to instill in
their minds that, hey, suicide
is a real thing. Suicide.
fight happens, but again, what
do you do whenever you're in
that position, um, to be able to
be feeling those type of
feelings. Do you go with the
feelings or you do go out and
try and seek help. And so again,
being able to train students
within that regard, that's just
one of the presentations that I
do in addition to health career
presentations, um, with AIC,
that is actually one of my
deliverables, is actually going
into schools in 15 counties in
northern New Mexico and
preaching about health careers
that are available to the
students, specifically in rural
communities.
Oh, I actually even have help,
um, that was able to assist me
this year. She's actually an MD
student. Her name was Nicole
Martinez, uh, she's from Las
Vegas and is actually immersed
in that MD program at UNM right
now. And so again, the reason I
bring her up is because she adds
that level of expertise that I
can't being able to talk to
students, um, and letting them
know the pathway of being
accepted into medical school,
um, the work, the hard work, the
dedication, all of those other
kind of things in addition to
having a new family member being
born into her family. And so
again,
Those are the messages that we
are trying to convey to our
students um coming up and not
only urban communities but
specifically rural communities.
And so we're talking about
mental health for state. We're
talking about QPR. We're talking
about the dangers of bullying,
dangers of vaping, um, how about
alcohol, uh, dangers of binge
drinking. Um, I've also
presented to the United World
College students on the dangers
of binge drinking. And so again,
not to leave out drinking as I
met as I heard uh Senator uheda
Lopez mentioned in the
presentation before me she is
correct. Alcohol
that surpassed the deaths of
cigarette smoke, um, in 2024,
2023, actually 1000 deaths were
attributed to alcohol and 800
deaths were attributed to
cigarettes and so again she's
definitely spot on, but what we
want to do is definitely
highlight that and say, hey,
what can we do to stop the binge
drinking, to stop the notion of
um substance abuse. That's our
other presentations that we get
into with AIC as I've done
psychedelic drug presentations,
the dangers of psychedelic
drugs, the dangers of
psychoactive drugs, uh, dangers
of fentanyl, training
students on Narcan, those are
all things that have been done
by AEC. And so again, by me
being elected as board chair for
the San Miguel County Family and
Community Health Council. That's
just one avenue that I bring to
our entire team that is working
diligently to be able to
incorporate and to be able to
increase access for people in
San Miguel County to be able to
get the behavioral health needs
of the the the behavioral health
needs concerns that they have,
the health needs concerns that
they have. The dental health
concerns that they have, um, and
so again.
Um, I'm not limited to
addiction, but one more piece
that I'll add into there too and
far as far as presentations go
and we can put this towards
behavioral health as well,
chronic disease as well. Let's
do, um, nutrition, exercise, and
diabetes. And for somebody to
have diabetes and for somebody
to change that kind of behavior,
whether it's triggers addiction,
those kind of things that falls
all into behavioral health. So
how can we help people being
able to help um uh eliminate
the, you know, pre-diabetes,
type 1, type 2, those type of
things.
Um, when I come into those kind
of education, I've also done one
on one education as I worked at
the Federqualified Health Center
of the Central Family Health,
and I've done one on one
education with people from
Springer, from La Loma, from Las
Vegas, from Wagon Mount, and so
again, I know firsthand stories
of how people live out in rural
communities and more
specifically, their health
concerns. And so now we'll get
into the San Miguel County
Health Council. OK, so being
that we have a different amount
of people, um, being able to.
Serve, one thing that I
definitely want to do is I want
to give uh a lot of love and
respect to Chairman Thompson and
Senator said the for being a
champion for health councils in
the state of New Mexico and
being able to allocate that $4
million to each of the county
and tribal health councils, as
you may know, AEC doesn't just
work with people within
communities of states such as
Las Vegas, Springer, whatever
the case, we're also working
with pueblos training people on
Pueblos. I am a certified CHW. I
was a certified CH.
Health programs manager for El
Centro Family Health, and that's
where I did the one on one
patient education but also being
in the room with CHWs being able
to train them and not only them
but also CHRs and Pueblos and
Pueblo communities being able to
train them on QPR mental health
first state, diabetes, exercise,
nutrition, etc. etc. and so
again I just want to read to you
some of the names that are on
our health council and exactly
what they do. So again, what's
great about our health council
is that we've built it pretty
much.
From ground up um to where at
one point our healthcare, our
health council coordinator
departed, uh, we had to redo our
resource guide. We have to do a
lot of things to rebuild, but
guess what? We have a strong
foundation and we're definitely
moving forward, so Louis Huger
Hughes, uh, first born of
northern New Mexico, so again,
being able to serve people
within that maternity realm,
right? Um, Alice King retired
from DVR. We'll talk about
Rosalie Lopez, housing
opportunities for the elderly.
Pat Leehan from the Las Vegas
Peace and Justice Center, Doctor
Carol Linder, who is also my
supervisor and boss at Luna
Community College. Um, myself
with AIC, Megan Iring, who is
our health council coordinator,
uh, Miss Anita Gonzalez, uh,
sitting right before you all
right there. She's actually one
of our members as well, and
Vidal Christine, who was
actually the dep uh the director
for DWI and again, Miss Anita
Gonzalez, deputy director for
Mesla. We definitely appreciate
the work that she's brought to
the table for us as well too,
um, but again,
When we talk about different
kinds of things that we've
supported, um, in regards to the
health council, we're really
looking at behavioral health,
mental uh mental health, 988
prevention, those kind of
things, and those are some of
our of our deliverables that we
have accomplished this year. And
so we're talking about QPR.
We're talking about my mental
health first state. We're
talking about all these other
kind of trainings being immersed
in the schools and so with me
being the one who has been able
to do the trainings sometimes
for pretty much all the time
I've had.
do the same presentation 6 times
in a day. OK, why? Because QPR
only allows me to train 30
students at a time or 30 people
at a time. And so with that
said, I get into somebody's
English class again with a
communication with, say, for
instance, Miss Donna Breo or
Miss Melissa V. Hill at
Robertson. Um, again, I know
these counselors on a first name
basis because again, they're
calling me and say hey Ray, we
got a problem with vape. We've
got a student, you know, this,
that, whatever it is. So again,
me being knowledgeable about
what's going on in the schools
in addition to having my 14 year
old daughter and
friends within the school realm,
um, definitely is a big plus for
me because I get to see what's
going on, not only from the
teacher's perspective, but from
my daughter's perspective as
well too, but again going back
to these presentations within
the schools and highlighting
QPR. One thing that's great
about QPR and again, I did, I do
these trainings, um, again, the
northern part of the state, the
last training that I did was
actually for a health careers
opportunity program in Sandoval
County. There we had students
being bussed in from Cuba, New
Mexico, um, again, which was
actually part of the AEC funding
going back to.
cop to say how do we create more
access to students living in
rural communities and so again,
being able to teach these
students not only about QPR, the
different kinds of situations,
those kind of things, but
waiting for their feedback after
the presentation. That's what's
important to me anyways. And
again, so to be able to talk to
students and be able to see
where they're at, what kind of
things that are going on in
their lives, whether it's
domestic violence, substance
abuse, um, neglect, whatever it
is, those are the kind of
aspects that we're being talked
about or being told right after
the presentation from
students themselves. And so
again, I think that's really,
really key and again being able
to talk with students who are
immersed within their, um, I
guess with their peers, um, when
we talk about behavioral health
as well, um, as of June 30th,
2024, 18.99% of mental health
need was met in the state of New
Mexico, 18.99%. What about rural
communities? This is a state as
a whole of what I get this uh
this, this, um, this figure from
national.
26.74% of people with behavioral
health needs were met. And so
again, we're behind on that, but
what I'm more interested in is
what's happening in rural rural
communities frontier communities
such as the one I live in, OK?
Um, when we talk about used
substance use. And again, this
is going back to our chip. These
are kind of the priorities that
we find and again working with
New Mexico Department of Health,
or health promotion specialist,
Ms. Valentina White. She's been
instrumental in being able to
direct us, guide us, being able
to.
Hold our meetings, host our
meetings, all those other kinds
of things at the public health
office on Gallegos Road, um, but
again, being able to have her
include her expertise and what's
going on with our health
council, that's definitely kind
of like a North Star or kind of
like a guiding compass for us,
OK? Uh, but again, when we look
at statistics.
Youth experiencing major
depressive disorders, I believe
New Mexico was 33, uh, on the
total pole, um, last year they
were 44 or some some figure like
that both youth and adult
substance use disorders, youth
substance abuse, dead last in
the nation. And so when we're
talking about substance abuse
and we're talking about all of
these adverse childhood
experiences, alcohol abuse, all
these other kind of things,
those are contributing factors
into our students' mental
health, whether they're
experiencing them in 6th grade,
7th grade, 8th grade all the way
into high school, even in a
college.
Um, our goal is to prepare them
since now working upstream, if
you will, right? And so again, I
really enjoy working upstream
because again, it's not really
treatment, it's prevention. And
so again, that's really why I
like that avenue, um, but again,
going back to some of the things
that we did around behavioral
health again, talking about
talking to students within Pecos
West Las Vegas, Robertson within
San Miguel County around the
dangers of vaping, teaching them
about popcorn and teaching them
about all the adverse effects
that can't happen from the
aerosol and those things that
you're getting from.
the inhalation from vapes, and
then specifically, and I always
think about this, cigarette
smoke, cigarette smoke has
killed more people in the United
States again, more than any
World War all the World Wars
combined, um, all of our
country's wars combined, uh,
domestic violence, all those
other kind of things. Alcohol is
the only one that trumps that.
And so again, we're being able
to to focus on those behavioral
health um things, especially in
the schools. One thing that I
did notice again going into a
school, being able to give a
presentation on vaping. I go to.
Take a bathroom break and guess
what, the bathroom is filled
with vape smoke. OK. So again,
that's how you know, again,
we're in the schools and we're
definitely seeing what's going
on, OK? Um, how about um the 988
dissemination of materials,
right? And so again, every time
a QPR presentation is done,
mental health first aid
presentation done is done a
messo walk, um, how about, um,
some of the other events such as
domestic violence, child abuse
awareness, those are just some
of the events that our health
council has a table at and again
it's passing out information and
is.
Looking for relationships to
create, looking for
relationships to collaborate
with. And so again, I think
that's really a huge aspect of
our health council is being able
to talk with people, being able
to invite people to our
meetings, being able to pass
out, send out the invitations
and say, hey, we're here, we
meet on the 4th Tuesday of the
month from 10 to 11:30 we go
into the executive session from
11:30 to 12, but again, the
community is more than welcome
to attend. Um, again, now
whether the community attends
and those kind of things, that's
something that we're
continuously trying to work on,
but we've developed.
our partnerships and we're
continuing to do that. Um,
again, when we talk about uh
different kind of health fairs,
I know Lunar Community College
has a wellness fair, health and
wellness fair, again, to be able
to reach the population at Luna.
Um, so again, Health council is
there and there are some other
kinds of um other, other fairs,
other kind of community events,
um, that also happened as well
that we are involved in again
the walk for hope for suicide
prevention. That's another huge
one that actually takes place at
the campus of Lunar Community
College, um, but again, just
being able
to reach the people of where
they're at. Um, what else about
the health council, uh, again,
just working with DOH I think
the DOH, the partnership with
DOH is absolutely beneficial to
not only us but also the San
Miguel San Miguel County in
itself, um, but again, being
able to talk with people and
meet people where they're at.
Um.
I think that is all I have as
far as um presentations go but
as as far as our chip goes for
2026, um, we're actually going
on and we're looking for
behavioral health at 988 once
again. But what's great about
that though is that
presentations can be geared to
so much more than just.
QPR or mental health first aid,
right? We're dealing with and
we're serving all kinds of
presentations going into the
behavioral health realm, just as
I mentioned before, whether it's
Discussions on diabetes. I'm a
national trainer for the
diabetes prevention program, uh,
certified CHW. I am a member of
the national seats or not the
national, the state of New
Mexico, DH uh Department of
Health CHW board of directors.
I'm also a member or a part of
the New Mexico Health Resources
Board of directors and they see
the secretary
for the New Mexico chronic
disease Prevention Council, and
all that work goes into my
hero's work, but eventually all
of that circles back and flows
into the San Miguel County
Health Council because all
that work works in a circle and
my predecessor Elaine Luna, uh,
taught me that and so I just got
to give respect to her name as
well, um, but I will stand for
any questions that you may have.
Thank you. I, I just told
Xander, you could be an
auctioneer, man, you, you just
go. You got a lot of information
in a short time, much
appreciated. So we'll start on
this end. Um, I think I will go
with the, well, let's see how
are we?
I think I will go with the
timer. Representative and not
because of you, just because of
the clock. You guys had one
presentation.
We are roughly on time and
hopefully we'll stay that way.
So Representative Herndon, 3
minutes. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for your
presentation. I can see why you
are a hero. I just wanna focus
on three items that I heard you
talking about. One was suicide
prevention within our schools.
And are you working at all with
the yellow ribbon program which
is highly
engaged in rural areas to
prevent suicide with students.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon, I have also been
trained uh by um uh oh man, the
yellow rib. I've, I've received
the yellow ribbon training and
her name is right at the top of
my head, and how can I forget it
right at the top at a time like
this. I went to school with her
here at Highlands and uh again,
I'm just, somebody help me out,
please. Ane Romero, yes, Miss
Anne Romero. I went to
Albuquerque. I went to
Albuquerque to actually be
trained by her and yellow
ribbons. So all of those kind of
logistics from Yellow Ribbon are
also taken into account in some
of my all of my mental health
first aid QPR presentations as
well. And so again, Anne was my
classmate here at New Mexico
Highlands and um just putting
that out there right there. I
only have 3 minutes. I just want
to ask one other quick question
and with respect to the work
that you're doing, um, with kids
and training them. We had a
presentation from Luna Community
College, and they don't really
have the staff and outreach to
help with the training of a
number of CNA opportunities.
for students that maybe in high
school or even EMTs, so I don't
know how big your staff is with
a hag, but are you able to
assist them at all. I think that
would be helpful.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon, uh, for me, I'm a one
man show. I represent or I serve
15 counties in northern New
Mexico by myself. I do not have
a program office. I do not have
a program specialist or any kind
of people like that, but again,
my goal is again to hit every
kind of school out there to be
able to pass on the message and
more importantly give them my
information back just in case
they have any questions or any
kind of feedback for me to get
better.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, Mr.
Hero.
Mr. Hero, I like that. I think
he's got us all speeded up.
But we who needs caffeine when
you have him. Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for, for that. You know,
when I talk really fast in my
questions, I feel like I'm just
like this guy, Mr. Sanchez over
here. He's, he's doing the good
work. So I only have one
question so I can talk a little
slower, but, uh, upstairs in
education committee, we just
heard from West Las Vegas and
Las Vegas schools, and I think
West Las Vegas, they have about
80% of those kids are taking,
uh, dual credit classes, and
then about 30% in Las Vegas city
schools are taking those dual
credit. So I'm wondering when it
comes to your presentations in
front of the
local schools. What are you
doing and what, what's your
organization doing to help kind
of get these kids involved in
healthcare and want them to have
these healthcare careers,
because we're talking about our
pipeline, we want as many people
to get in our pipeline to be
doctors and nurses and, and all
these great things. So I'm just
wondering what, what kind of
aspect do you guys take when it
comes to getting these
youngsters involved in
healthcare and potentially a
future in their, their next
career.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, I like that question. OK,
so what we're talking about
health career programs, again,
what I do is in just a little
bit of it is number one, provide
funding. We provide funding to
both Robertson High School and
West Las Vegas High School dream
makers. Me, myself, I am
actually uh the former community
preceptor uh for the BAMD
program for Las Vegas, so again,
they would send their students.
I would be in charge of those 3
students, showing them around
community presentations, all
those other kinds of things.
I've also was the
preceptor for the health careers
Opportunity Program in San
Miguel County, Las Vegas. And
again, this was part of the
Centro but again what we're
doing to increase that kind of
notion of, of students going
into health careers is letting
them know about it first of all,
number one, the type of people
that you're going to be serving,
the kind of work that you're
going to be doing. Number 2, how
about the type of money you're
going to be making, and to me
that comes second because
helping people comes number one
and, and again, whoever's going
into the health profession
field, they can choose whatever
it is, but again, we want help
for our people. Um, but again,
letting them know the
opportunities.
The nursing shortages, that's
one thing that I definitely
advocate in schools is that if
you're looking for a 2 year
program here in Las Vegas, Lunar
Community College, to transfer
to Highlands for nursing. Well,
guess what? You can do a 2 year
program and nurses right off the
bat are making 750 right off the
bat and we're 6000 short in the
state of New Mexico and so
that's something else that I do
is let them know the demand of
PCPs, nursing, all these other
kinds of things um within our
rural frontier communities. In
addition to sponsoring programs
such as HCOP, um,
uh health uh HCOP, New Mexico
Mesa, uh, Girls can program,
those are all programs that we
want to be able to uh put out
that information to instill
information to our young folks
that these are types of careers
that are available.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
wish you could serve even more
counties cause we'd love to have
you down in Otero County, but
thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you for the
presentation, Mr. Sanchez. I
appreciate you, Senator I mean
Representative Block. Thank you.
13 seconds to spare. You're
getting good. Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much for your
presentation and your
enthusiasm, uh, for, uh, all
your mission-driven work. It's,
it's wonderful to see, uh, that
it is what gets you up in the
morning and so I'm sorry, just
one mic on at a time.
So I very much appreciate that,
um, I also want to say that I
myself, but I believe this whole
committee shares your value on,
you know, uh, substance abuse,
um, disorders and, and being
able to provide that information
to youth also access to mental
health providers. I probably
realized more and I've been in
and out of social services for
25 years. Um, I would say, uh,
access for consistent, uh,
mental health providers.
from adolescence through the
twenties. I'm starting to
realize how essential it is and
we don't really think of it at
that age unless they're in
crisis, but I think um that
online is very much I am just
providing you some feedback
since you are a gentleman who
does a lot of presentations. Um,
as a legislator, I go home with
2 or 3 of these a week.
And um I have a file and I have
staff and I referred back to
them when we're developing
bills, thinking about where to
fund, who I need an expert on a
subject, and I don't have any
handout from you.
I, I need a handout from you if
all you have on it is your
contact information, that's
something, but especially a
gentleman who I really
appreciate the respect from
talking so fast cause it's very
good, but not all of us listen
that fast. So being able to
refer to something that's
written, and I'm just
respectfully asking you to
prepare a handout, especially in
front of this committee, but
maybe in all your presentations,
those kids, I know that you're
gonna see them on the ground,
but
Having a card, who knows what
ends up in their wallet or their
pocket and knows that there's
some phone numbers or contacts
they can refer to. So thank you
very much for coming out here.
Thank you. And just a reminder
to, to all that um Xander and
Andrea and Grace can always help
you get in contact. They have
the contacted go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
for Representative Cates, that's
something that we also pass out
or whether it's QPR cards, uh,
school-based health center
cards, counselor's cards, and
that's something that we really,
really emphasize to these
students is really taking
advantage of your school-based
health center. I've worked in
one before and I definitely know
the the benefits and the
advantages of the school-based
health centers and having access
to these students. So again, I
thank you for, uh, you know,
thank you for your feedback and
I'll definitely provide you with
that information as well,
Representative Cates, thank you.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
Uh, no question, Madam Chair,
but I do just wanna thank you
for uh bringing up 988 in
particular. Um, I know with the
federal cuts, the LGBTQ specific
service was cut at the federal
level, but we do still have it
here in New Mexico with those
local resources, so that's more
of a PSA, but thank you for your
work on that and thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you Madam Chair, um, and
thank you, Mr. Sanchez. I'll be,
I'll be professional in this
setting now, but, uh, no, I, I
just wanna say I thank you for
all the work that you've been
doing. I know as our counsel,
when I got involved, I got
involved with that pre-college
pathway program, um, trying to
build up our health careers
that, that, you know, we both
share that same shared vision,
you know, in that work, um, I
would like to say as a member of
the council, I think the beauty
of the council is the
collaboration of resources. So I
think with everyone on the
council being in a particular
area,
niche of healthcare services or
healthcare prevention, I think
in in our county or San Miguel
County Health Council is that
has been the biggest benefit is
being able to share, share
resources and share happenings
and share events, um, and be
able to contribute to community
events as a whole. Um, I know
there are a lot of offerings and
happenings, um, that I've been
able to take a part of because
of being a part of the council
and because someone else brought
it to our table, right, as a
need for the area. Um, I also
want to pinpoint, you know, you
mentioned all
Behavioral Health initiatives. I
know that was the focus of our
council.
This past year, being, you know,
being the hub of where we were
at, so um just thank you for all
your work, thank you for being
willing and able to chair the
council, um, and all the work I
think pairs wonderfully with
your work with AEC, which I so
appreciate, um, you know,
personally and also as a member
of the council, um, but just,
you know, look forward to, you
know, lots of good works and
again being that hub for for
health initiatives here within
San Miguel County. Thank you.
Senator Sidi Lopez, Madam Chair.
I just want to be able to just
say, say thanks to
Representative Anaya and then
Representative Gonzalez for
their comments, um, and again I
appreciate Representative
Gonzalez being member of our
team and representing San Miguel
San Miguel County to the
fullest. So thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for that
dynamic presentation, I think,
um, Senator Cass right,
sometimes we, uh, can't listen
as fast as you can talk, so, but
it was very dynamic and very
helpful. I wanted to, um, kind
of dig down a little deeper with
um the behavioral health issues
that your council addresses. Are
you guys involved with um with.
The
Planning process that was
created in SB 3.
Um, that is the, the the process
of planning for behavioral
health needs um through the AOC,
the, the administrative office
of the courts and every judicial
district having, uh, you know,
doing some planning.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Cedilia Lopez, no, we were not.
Not to my knowledge.
I think it's really important. I
want to encourage you to get
involved with that planning
process and contact, I don't
have it right in front of me,
but they hired a coordinator,
uh, if you call the
administrative office of the
courts. um, I forgot her name.
Do you remember who did
somebody?
I was actually reading about
that last night at the AOC and
the taking over of New Mexico
behavioral health and since June
for July 1st, that kind of
thing? Well, they're not taking
it over.
They're uh.
They're leading the planning
process. That's the intent of
the bill. Is that they're going
to lean the the planning process
and they're going to desi
they're going to um.
Have each of the regions develop
priorities for funding. They're,
it's gonna be a feedback loop
for us in terms of funding
behavioral health programs, um,
and there, it's the idea is to
build, um, a stream of income
like right now it has $100
million but the goal is to
eventually have a billion
dollars because the income
generated from $100 million
isn't sufficient.
To make a dent anywhere, um,
and, and so I really encourage
you to be involved, um, with
them and and be at the table
because the bill itself ident
because one of the things I was
gonna ask you is what have you
developed, uh, in the council
priorities because you amaze me
with everything you touched on
everything that I could think of
except maybe not as much with
LGBTQI and gender reforming
care, um,
But it was just like.
There's so many needs in the
community, so many needs. And I
loved what you said about
addressing individuals' needs,
where they are at.
I think that's the most
effective at an individual
level, but we, we don't operate
individually. We operate with
funding and with programs and so
I really wanna encourage you to
get involved with that planning
process, um, and you, you know,
the contact person yeah what
Lucero, yeah, the name Esperanza
Lucero and I got the number.
Great. OK.
Thank you. um, Esperanza Lucero,
I don't know why I forgot that,
um.
But yeah, she, she gave a
presentation. She's giving a
presentation to us, and she's
going to continue to give
presentations about how these
AOCs are going. One of the
questions I asked her was about
outreach.
Um, and so.
They need to do outreach, but
also
Uh, you need to be at the table.
So, uh, and thank you for
everything you do and I'm
looking forward to to hearing
more about future work.
Madam Chair, and thank you
Seddio Lopez. I uh I really
appreciate the comments coming
from you and really, really,
really saying that the things
that you said and we're really
talking about um you know, the
behavioral health issues and all
of these are the kind of things
I'm actually the representative
for the Northeast region for the
New Mexico Public Health
Association and I haven't done,
we haven't uh touched on that
subject either, but I will
definitely bring that up and and
see inquire about how we can
work together to to to
collaborate on that and
especially with uh with
Representative Gonzalez as well.
Madam Chair, I think this is so
important because we're gonna be
getting that information from
the AOC. They're gonna each,
each of the districts is gonna
have a report and they're gonna
be super influential and I'll be
disappointed if we get this
report and, and they haven't,
they don't really touch the
needs in the communities as they
should. So, you know, but it's a
two-way thing. So, thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and on that
point, Valeria is a dynamo. She,
she's the, the, I don't know.
what our title is executive
director of, uh, county and
tribal Health councils, and she,
She
No moss grows under her feet,
shall I say, so she's a mover
and a shaker, and, and I have no
doubt, but she's she's texted me
this morning to thank me for
having this. So she's on top of
things and I expect that she
will continue to be great to
hear. Thank you, madam. Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, no
questions, just, uh, thank you
for being here. Thank you for
the enthusiasm. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative.
Torres Velasquez, and I hope
you're feeling better. I am,
thank you. It was a little slow
this morning, but much better.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, and, um, Mr.
Sanchez. Wow, that was an
amazing presentation and I
really, really, I cannot tell
you how much I enjoyed hearing
everything you said. And I have
just retired from the University
of New Mexico College of
Education and we once had health
education in our college. And so
I worked with, um, a number of
people that you might be
familiar with, but some things
came to mind and as uh Senator
Zido Lopez made a recommendation
I would like to make one.
as well, and that is that I
would suggest that you connect
with um um CBPR which stands for
community-based participatory
research, because this would be
an excellent time to share the
things you're doing through
research. And what they do is
they work with the community to
design the research project and
to implement it. And so it seems
to be the same style that you
are using in terms of reaching
your, your clientele.
Um, so I, um, Lorenda Bone,
Doctor Lorenda Balone works with
Native American students and
Doctor Vitoria Sanchez tends to
work with Northern New Mexico,
Latino Hispanic populations, uh,
groups, communities, and, um,
and through my work at UNL I
mentored someone who, and I'm
having a hard time with names
right now too, so I apologize. I
know her as Christina and um she
had been the chair of the
Department for Health Education
and now I can't remember.
Her last name, but she taught
this amazing class. And so I got
to observe, um, and learn from
her how difficult it is for most
health providers to talk
individually with patients.
And also with people in the
community in ways that one, they
show that they're listening in
ways that too, they establish
relationships of trust and in
ways of three that they follow
through that the, the clients
that they're that they're paying
attention to actually learn what
it is that they're dealing with,
and they follow through with the
health recommendations, or at
least they work with the
provider. And it sounds like
from the things that you
described, that that's something
that you have learned to do or
automatically did really well.
I liked how you said that you.
Never present to groups of
larger than 30.
I think that's really important
and how you work on the first
name basis. And I think that's
really important. Um, and I was
wondering if there are other
things you can share with us
that you make sure to do because
you've obviously from all the
things you're doing and from all
the people, the ways that you're
reaching out to the community,
you've obviously got a set of
tools in your tool kit. What
else do you do? What else can
you share with us that you do?
To establish that trust with
your community.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Tolores Torres
Velasquez, uh, for me, what I do
is I share specifically on my
community is the first thing
that I'll share is I'm from the
Criston Circle West Las Vegas,
green and gold, um, I played
football there and so again went
to school there, graduated
there. I also was a student
athlete from Mexico Highlands
University. I played football,
uh, for the school and again,
one of my actually my one of my
head coaches is actually a
special teams coordinator. He
was the special teams
coordinator for the Dallas
Cowboys. Now he's with the
Tennessee Titans. But
But when I'm reaching,
Just depends on the population
that I'm speaking to. And so
again, if I'm talking to a group
of athletes wanting nutrition
education, exercise education,
those kind of things. I bring up
those kind of things, but I
guess the main thing that I can
say is I bring up things that I
can relate to them in my lived
experiences, my past
experiences, to be able to say,
hey, this guy knows exactly what
he's talking about. He's from
here. Um, he knows the
experiences that we all face
living in San Miguel County,
particularly Las Vegas.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am just amazed by you and I'm
thinking about a coach thinking,
this is the guy I want. He's
like Mr. Spark plug, Mr. Get
everybody moving, so I, I envy
your coach for having you on the
team, uh, Vice Chair Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Sanchez, thank you for your
energy.
Um, I know you've been here in
committee and I've seen you
here, um, the last couple of
days, so I appreciate you being
here to listen to the rest of
the, uh, the presentations and
information.
Um
The, um,
For all the work that you and
the other members of the health
council are doing, and
everything goes back to money.
Funding, no matter what we do,
it all goes back to the dollar.
So when, when we talk about
funding, what is the budget that
you receive.
And
Um, where you mentioned
something I think about RISA
funding from HRSA, but where
else do you?
where else do you get your money
to uh do the work that, that
you're doing.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
uh, the all the money that I
received comes from Hesla State
grant. So, uh, what I do as, as
part of uh my position with AEC
director, I managed 3 grants.
One is federal grant, number 2
is a state grant, 3 is a CHI
grant Center for Health
Innovation. That's the money
that I received to do my work.
I don't receive anything as part
of San Miguel County Health
Council, nothing from the county
or anything like that.
OK, and Madam Chair, so going
back to RISA, HRSA, um.
Um.
There's anticipated cuts, of
course, or grants that will be
non-existent.
Or are not existing anywhere,
um, how does that impact the
work that you're doing
Madam Chair and Senator Lopez
tremendously. My program is
actually on the verge of being
cut as well. So AEC, um, and all
of the programs that we have
across the nation, um, that
program has also been in danger
of being cut. And so again, um,
that's one of the biggest
barriers that I see coming in
from San Miguel County is
barriers to funding. They asked
me what kind of barriers do you
have within your county of
access is that and whatever
but to me it's going to be the
funding. What happens if we do
take away funding not only from
AIC but also from the hospital.
What about other programs that
are helping people and and
helping people get by those kind
of things to what happens to
their funding. So again, um, AEC
is just one of many who will be
in danger of being cut.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I just ask this just again,
it's, it's something on our
minds as we move forward for
this upcoming legislative
session in January.
Um, or maybe sooner, we'll see,
but um there is uh a
subcommittee called the Federal
Funding.
Stabilization subcommittee that
has been organized for the
legislature for, and I'm honored
to be sitting on there, uh,
where we're, uh, reviewing the
different uh
How would I say that the print,
the blueprint that is already
laid out for us based on some
legislation that was passed in
DC. I know that there's a
federal budget currently being
worked on.
And we're keeping an eye on that
at this point to see where more
cuts will be potentially coming.
So, um, just please know that
that this members of our
committee here, but I know that
even on the subcommittee, this
is on the list, um, when we talk
about infrastructure and you and
other health councils are part
of the infrastructure. I was
just sharing with our
chairperson.
That without
The work that you and others are
doing, um.
On the ground, boots on the
ground. Nothing gets done.
So I want to say thank you and
if I may ask you, Madam Chair,
um, maybe, um, sending us some
financial information that you
have financially. I think that
would give us some more um
Another perspective, something
else for us to keep on our radar
as we look towards whatever.
Recommendation comes up about
sustaining programs in the state
of New Mexico. So on that and
then just one more question,
Madam Chair. I said I didn't
have any, but you know, more,
more show up, it's who we are on
the health council that you have
here, um, and, and I, I didn't
go look this up, but
Um, is there a health counsel
for the other uh surrounding
counties, so that's Mora,
Colfax, Union, and Harding and
Guadalupe or are you the central
Um, you know, gatherer of
information for the other
counties.
Uh, Madam Chair and, uh, Senator
Lopez, no, these uh these other
kind of counties, Mora County
specifically, they all have
their own health council as
well, in addition to ours in San
Miguel County, but that's one of
the benefits that I'll have as a
hero. And now again linking all
my work to flow in a circle,
what's going to be happening now
is that since I'm a regional
hero now, um, all of the
Northeast region, I'll be
collaborating with them. So
again, my first thing and my
meeting yesterday was if they're
not part of that part of the
health council within their
specific community, how do they
get on their health council and
participate?
Paid in the specific community
because again, I want to know
not only as chair of the San
Miguel County Health Council,
what you guys are doing in your
respective communities, but also
a hero and AEC. What kind of
needs do you guys have in your
community that either heroes or
Aha can take care of, but in
addition, working in
collaboration with San Miguel.
No, and I appreciate that. I
just wanted to see because um of
the this particular area of our
state, it's rural, very rural,
um, but the communication, which
is so important, so I appreciate
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so I just
I don't know how many years I've
been carrying either
The primary sponsor or lately
the co-sponsor as I pass it off
because I have other things to
do to get more funding for the
county and tribal health
councils and I think we ask for
$43 million this year, which
we've done around that amount
asked for for many years and I'm
not sure what the final
appropriation was 4 something,
so, um, 10%, not good enough, so
I'm the reason I'm saying this
is to
out into the world and also to
the committee that um you are
more than welcome when I carry
this bill again. I beg you to
sign on as co-sponsors and start
talking to the money people and
tell them how important it is
the work that these folks do,
they, they were so instrumental
in COVID in many counties they
were, they were the front line
and they do so much important
work, they bring us so much
important information about
what's happening in their
communities. We need them and
We need to start paying them. He
should be getting some funds
from that, but there are it's
such a, I mean to us 4 million
sounds like a lot of money, but
um, when you start giving it up,
it doesn't come out too much, so
just, just a plug to please
support funding for the county
and tribal health councils and I
know Valeria will be texting me
saying thank you, thank you with
a lot of hearts, um, because
that's who she is. But thank you
so much for the work that you
do. Thank you for being a hero
and thank you for.
This dynamic presentation.
Madam Chair, and to the rest of
the community and everyone
that's sitting in these tables
before me, I just really
appreciate you taking the time
and listening to the voices of
people from San Miguel County
being able to dedicate your day
or days to be able to be sitting
there and listening to the
stories coming from us. So
again, I just want to thank you
for everything that you do and
thank you for always keeping
some of your County in mind.
Thank you.
Thank you. And next we will
have, um, Alta Vista Regional
Hospital, Helen Ballantyne and
Ed Henry.
So whenever you're ready, you
can begin.
I'll give them just a second to
get the handouts passed out. We
were, we were late getting them
here. We had a, uh, printing
snafu this morning and so Helen
and I had to go through and tear
all these apart and put them
back together manually, so we,
we, we definitely know what our
slides look like now though, so,
in what order?
All right.
Uh, my name is Ed Henry. I'm
with Dava Health and, uh, if
you'll on your slide here, I'll
kind of go through just a little
bit about who Daba is and
And how we got here as a, you
know, then, then I'll turn it
over to Helen and she can kind
of talk to you a little more
about operations and what the,
the actual
Uh, situation looks like on the
ground here in, in Las Vegas at
Alta Vista Regional Hospital.
Dava Health is a nonprofit. We
are headquartered in Nashville,
Tennessee, uh, all of our board
members are actually in, in
rural areas. We have our
headquarters there because most
of the uh healthcare operations
that are failing across the
United States or headquartered
in Nashville and so they, it's
easier for us to communicate
with them and see what's
actually happening nationwide
and
And DAA doesn't come in until
the hospital is failing or
really we don't come in until a
hospital is slated to close. Uh,
we're kind of the last, last
ditch effort to save a hospital
and, and Alta Vista Regional
Hospital before we got here was
losing about 6 to $8 million
annually.
Um, we've been here 1819 months
now. We've got it stabilized.
It's uh it's still not a.
Um
It's not, not generating revenue
to be able to turn back into
the, the repair and, and that
kind of thing, but they're
breaking even and so we feel
really good about stemming that
that loss that was, that was
definitely heading toward a
closure, uh, but we're, we're
not out of the woods and with
everything going on in DC we're
not sure, you know, what it's
gonna look like in the future.
We do feel good about the, the
stipend that they're they're
going to send to rural
healthcare, you know, we just
don't know what that's gonna
look like and, and I know you
guys are in the same boat. Um,
Like I said, we're preserving
to, we're, we're, we're
committed to preserving health
care in, in rural communities
and right now we have 4
hospitals, one in Alabama, one
in Tennessee, one in Georgia,
and then our outlier here in New
Mexico. Uh, how we ended up with
New Mexico. We were in
negotiations to take over a
hospital in Blue Ridge, Georgia
that a company called Quorum, a
for-profit entity that was a
spinoff of CHS.
They were, they were closing
that hospital. We were trying to
save it when we started getting
all the paperwork together, they
said, would you be interested
in, in New Mexico and we said we
don't know anything about New
Mexico, but we know about rural
health and we would do, like to
do everything we can to, to keep
that hospital open as well, um.
So
At the end of the day,
You'll notice that
Probably one of the largest
employers in any rural community
is the hospital.
And, and if that hospital
leaves, it's, it's, you know.
A large chunk of the economic
development in the community and
it prevents further economic
development because if uh, if
you're looking to bring
manufacturing or any type of
large business into a community,
one of the first things they
want to know is what's your
healthcare like? And, and, and
if you don't have a hospital,
it's a, it's a definite negative
toward them relocating or or
starting a business in, in that
area. And so we try to fight to
to to keep those jobs in the
community, uh.
Um, and because, and we also
know that if you don't have a
local hospital, if you don't
have a local hospital.
You don't have local emergency
care. You don't have easy access
to, to that emergency care that
that's going to be needed and if
something happens here and you
have to get all the way to Santa
Fe. It's, it's, that's gonna be
a problem, especially in, in
certain times of the year going
between the past and, and it's
just we want to keep everything
that we can do as local as
possible. That's kind of one of
our mantras at at Dava is we
don't try to tell a community
what you need. We listen to what
a community tells us they need
and we do
everything we can to fulfill
that need.
Um
We partner with a company called
Java Medical Group. This is on
the slide, why Java Medical
Group, um,
Java is a is a, it's a
for-profit management company,
but they've been in the space of
rural healthcare for over 15
years and they've, they've
really learned how, and they
bring everything. They bring
management, financials, uh,
policy compliance, all of that
to the table and they're
extremely light. They do not
have a heavy burden that they
put on the hospital locally in
any kind of management fees or
actually Java has
We've got an arrangement with
Java and this is exclusively
with us. Until a hospital is
profitable, Ja Java doesn't take
any management fees and so it's
a, it's a very good uh synergy I
guess between, between us and
them and that we can, we can
turn a hospital around quickly
and, and, and Java has proven
results, so one of the
First hospitals that that I
became aware of, of Java was
that a, a small hospital in
Lakeland, a lake called Lakeland
Community Hospital in
Haleyville, Alabama. Anybody
ever heard of Haleyville,
Alabama? Anybody know what 911
is?
911 was started in Haleyville,
Alabama.
Believe it or not, they have a
big telephone like a, like it's
a, it's a big to do there. It's
like their only claim to fame.
But their hospital was slated to
close in 2017, the company that
owned them is another CHS uh
spinoff.
had announced the hospital was
closing, um, there were, there
was a lot of concern from local
representatives, from the mayor
uh uh county commissioners to,
uh, congressmen and state
senators and state
representatives to try and save
the hospital and, and they ended
up getting in touch with Java,
with, with Bapa Mukherjee and,
and we had a sit down and, and
the whole, the whole process
like we, we really had.
just a a small window to save
this hospital because they had
already made the announcement
that it was going to close and
employees were already trying to
find new jobs, right? So this
hospital was closing. It was a
90 day announcement, Java came
in, they were able to
Put all the pieces together, one
of the really neat things they
did. They called around to every
hospital in the area where all
of these employees had found
jobs and, and
Convinced the hospitals to put
those jobs on hold and let those
people stay at the hospital for
the 90 days that we needed, we
felt like we needed to turn it
around and every single CEO for
every single hospital in 100.
Probably a 100 mile radius
agreed to keep those people's
jobs in place, but let them stay
with us and see if we could turn
it around and, and we were able
to. So when we, when, when
Lakeland was closing, they, they
told the community they were
losing $2 million a year and
once Java came in, it was a
county owned hospital. They, the
county ended up taking it back
from this for-profit. And, and
Within 2 years we had the
hospital profitable or they had
it. I wouldn't really, I, I was
an observer and
And then,
Jabba turned it back over to the
county, right? And so there's a,
there's a mindset there from,
from job, and this is why we, we
partner with them is, is.
They're, they're
They're very concise in what
they do, and they're very
particular in what they do. They
don't take on a whole lot of,
uh, of extra tasks that they
can't complete and so.
And, and then once they get one
stabilized, they move on because
there's, there's a hospital
failing every week, every month
in this country and so all of us
are just trying, we're, we're
trying to treat and stabilize
each hospital and then we move
on. We're, we're, we're just
there.
To help get hospitals back on
their feet, keep them alive,
provide for that community and,
and on this national impact, uh,
slide. I put this up because
right now, for Dava and Java
because these are the four
hospitals that we, that they
manage for us. We see over
50,000 patient encounters in 4
different communities.
There are over $200 million in
revenue annualized
across those hospitals. That's
money that stays in the local
community, right? If that
hospital closes, all of that
revenue, it, it leaves the
community. It's not gonna be
there. Uh, one of our board
members always points out,
there's 200 million annual
hospital revenue and about 205
million in bills, but you know,
that's, that's the world we live
in and, and we, we navigated as
best we can and plus we.
retained over 22,000 jobs in
those four communities. Um, like
I've said before, uh, on, on
this turnaround strategy. Java
has the mechanism and the means
to turn a hospital around
quickly to come in, evaluate.
They've done it enough, they can
see where all the pitfalls are,
where the bad contracts are,
that type of thing. And so, um,
by the time we come in,
Literally, there's months.
To save a hospital and so we do
everything we can to to act fast
and turn it around. So we just
have a, a very good synergy with
with Dava. I mean with Java and
Java Health and
Our impact is
Um,
It's significant because these
are, these are institutions that
if we don't have them here,
there's a lot of things that are
going to fall apart. The
hospital is the hub of health
care in any community.
And moving forward, we have
Really
tried to reach out to to
People at the state level, at
the county level, at the city
level. Uh, I've really
appreciated this forum because
it's actually opened my eyes to
a few other things that are out
there that I can see other
collaboration and other, other
opportunities for uh partnership
and, and
Honestly, if I, if, if I weren't
sitting in here listening to all
these things, I don't know that
I would have found out about it.
And so, um, we're thankful to be
here. We, I've, I've told many
people this, there's some, there
has been some concern that we're
an outside entity. We're, uh,
uh, we're not formed here in New
Mexico, and if we are the
problem.
If we're the problem with
funding this hospital and
funding this community, we will
get out of the way. We are, we
do not want to be a detriment to
whatever happens in this
community because this community
needs health care. They need
this hospital. It needs to be
vibrant. It needs to be
productive and, and if, if, if
ever we are the problem.
We will get out of the way, um.
With that, I, I won't say
anymore. I'll leave, I'll let
y'all ask questions, but I'll
introduce Helen Ballantyne is
our CEO at Alta Vista Regionals
Regional Hospital. She is, uh, I
don't know if she, I guess you
can go into your own thing, but
we're, we're very thankful to
have her. She's, uh, she's been
a great asset and I will turn
the rest of this over to you.
Could almost afternoon
everybody, Madam Chair, the
committee. I'm, um, extremely
pleased to be here and have the
opportunity to put names to
faces, to meet everybody, um, to
be heard.
I really appreciate, uh, Ed
Henry for coming down and
supporting, um, this, uh, piece
of explaining to you who we are,
um, I
I am new here. I came on board
in March of, uh, this year. I, I
retired after 22 years being
active duty with the United
States Public Health Service. I
retired on February 28th and
started, uh, work here, uh, in,
on the, on Monday, the following
Monday.
So I have not had really any
time off, diving in really deep
to some of these challenges that
we're having here at the
hospital. Um, meeting our
community stakeholders, um,
communicating and sharing
experiences, working with the
community foundation in
Anchorum, uh, to try and get
community health needs
assessments done, uh, meeting
with, uh, Representative
Gonzalez, thank you for all your
support.
Uh, and Senator Campos has been
amazing, um.
We've had a lot of interesting
talks within Mexico Behavioral
Health Institute with, um,
Highlands University with the
UNM UNMH, uh, trying to create
partnerships, learn about what
the community resources are,
learn about the needs. So I'm
just gonna kind of overview
quickly. I don't want to go into
a lot of um, kind of in the
weeds information unless you
really want me to do that.
Currently, we're a real, um,
critical access hospital. So
that means that we are licensed
for 25 beds, um, we're currently
providing emergency department
services, inpatient.
Uh, intensive care swing beds,
orthopedic surgery, general
surgery, interventional pain
management, 3D mammography,
family practice, bone density
scanning, medical imaging, lab
services, cardiopulmonary
services, cardiology clinic,
physical therapy, occupational
therapy, uh, we have a sleep
center, pediatrics and case
management. So we have, um, a
whole host of services that
we're providing right now. Um,
if you turn to the maps page.
Um, you'll see that we are
Located.
Just before the mountain range.
And if you look back, you can
see that the other hospitals
that are in our region are
miners Colfax up in Raton, and
you've got, um, Union County
General in Tucum Carry and you
have Guadalupe. Guadalupe is not
an inpatient hospital. They
don't have inpatient beds.
They're emergency, um, access,
uh, hospital.
And then you have us, um, so,
As far as a comprehensive um
full service hospital goes. We
don't have access to that until
you get across the hills to
Santa Fe or up to Holy Cross or
down to Albuquerque.
Which makes us very, very
isolated out here. So when it
comes to being able to provide,
um, much-needed services, Alta
Vista is servicing a population
of approximately 33,000.
And um Ratton is servicing, I
think, somewhere around 4000,
4500, um, to carry is somewhere
around the same, the same
population base with the same
services offered. So as far as
we kind of see it where the hub
of healthcare for this region,
often we isolated by, um, storms
where it makes it um the uh the
past going between, uh, Glorieta
through Glorieta is not passable
by ambulance. Sometimes it's
not.
passable by helicopter or fixed
wing, um, our local EMS
services, um, AMR specifically
will not transport by ground to
Albuquerque.
They'll only transport to Santa
Fe. They won't go more than 60
miles. So we have many
challenges, um, I also just kind
of overlaid, and I'm sorry that
this next um picture slide is a
little bit rudimentary, but it's
just me using my own graphic
skills to try and show you that
these counties, um, where, where
we service these counties.
So I think you'll find that, you
know, between Altavista, um,
servicing parts of Colfax, parts
of Union, Harding, um, San
Miguel, um, and Guadalupe for
that matter. So this is, we're
kind of it. So when we're
starting to look at resources
and look at services that we can
provide, we're really going to
rely a lot on, um, help with
grants, help with funding, help
with, um, stakeholder
partnerships.
Um
So some of the initiatives that
we're working on to try and meet
some of these services because
we're, you know, in this very
unique position here located in
Las Vegas is we're really
working on expanding our
surgical services. We have a new
orthopedic surgeon starting on
Monday, Doctor Kaloub, who were
extremely excited to bring in.
We have another general surgeon
that's gonna be starting with us
in August, Doctor Brown, um,
very excited about the services
that they're going to be able to
provide. We're really focused
heavily right now on expanding
women's health services, uh,
reproductive services, possibly
if we can figure out how to get
the resources we need an OB
reopening an OB unit, you know,
it's been closed now for, um, I
don't know, 4 or 5 years, I
think, um, so.
You know, uh uh Arielle was here
with Anorum, and I'm so glad
that I was able to catch the
tail end of her talk because
we've been working extremely
close with, um, both of the
aerials, Ariel and Ariel, um,
from the Community Foundation on
doing the community needs
assessment for the women's
health, um, and I did use some
of their slides here, not
knowing that we were both going
to be presenting back to back,
so I'll just kind of buzz over
those because I think that you
know the challenges that we have
already.
Um, we're also looking at, in
light of the, and I've touched
on some of the data, the data
you'll see further in my talk.
Looking at an umbrella of
behavioral health clinic.
That is associated with the
hospital because of the high
density impact of behavioral
health patients that we see
bouncing in and out of the ED,
we're thinking of how can we
provide umbrella services for
these folks that is not mandated
by a court order.
Um, how can we manage some of
the patients that we're seeing
that are occupying a lot of our
emergency department resources
as these bounce backs, so that's
another point that I wanted to
kind of touch on. Um, and then
improved access for
transportation. And when I say
transportation, I'm not meaning,
you know, buses to get to and
from the hospital, although we
could like, we would like that
as well.
Talking about transporting our
patients because it's a critical
access hospital, we're never
gonna have a neurosurgeon. We'll
never have a trauma surgeon.
We're not gonna have, you know,
super high level intensive care
units. Those are things that we
will not be able to provide
here.
Without significant resources,
and I don't have any idea how
that would happen. But um what
we are going to be doing is
looking at ways that we can kind
of bolster and enhance our
ability to transfer those
higher, those patients that need
a higher level of care.
And then enhancing our primary
care access, just basic access
to routine daily health care
that people need. Um, so with
the, um, increase in surgical
services. I touched on it. We've
gotten two new surgeons coming
on, um, we're trying to improve
timely access for treatment
earlier interventions,
preventative health,
colonoscopies, that kind of
thing, um, we're also going to
be look at, you know, how can we
get the underserved populations
seen to reduce, reduce health
dis
um,
and provide that critical
preventative health that you
need to have without having them
have to go outside of our
community to get it. Um, we're
also, uh, partnering with our
local primary care providers
with sunrise and El Centro to be
able to have good partnerships
with those providers so that
they trust us, so that they feel
that they can refer those
patients to us, and they can get
that really nice sound, um, safe
medical care that they need here
locally.
And then we're also partnering
with, um, this hos this
university, uh, to provide
sports medicine. So Doctor, um,
Ula and I had a meeting
yesterday with Isaac, who's the
sports medicine, uh, chair here
to, uh, create, uh, that
partnership so that.
The sports medicine program is
being managed by our orthopedic
surgeons. So that's exciting.
And then, um, just moving
through the community foundation
slides. I did want to point out
you'll see a slide here with
these, uh, the progressive
progression of women's health.
So, you know, when you think
about women's healthcare, you
really do need to take into
account that it is more than
just birthing.
So women's health starts as a
young woman, and it goes all the
way through the life, the life
cycle of a, of a, you know, a
woman living and it is something
that we don't have access to
here.
There's no actual dedicated
women's healthcare services. And
there's over, uh, 10,000 women.
Between the ages of 15 and 50
who are are needing that kind of
care. So, um, what we'd like to
do is, um, work on looking at
ways that we can collaboratively
bring those resources in and
have these things be available
to our much-needed population.
So going back to some of the
slides that Aorum had shared
with you, approximately 60% of
the respondents, uh, travel from
1 to 6 times a year to the
close.
point for women's healthcare,
which is Santa Fe.
Um, for their healthcare with
their, with their healthcare
needs. There were 262 women that
were among a really good age
spread among the people that
responded to our surveys and we
got them from all different
walks of life. So we didn't just
target one place we went to
Walmart, we went to all of these
different areas. We use QR codes
to try and gather data for the
full age spectrum of the people
that we're serving.
So I'm not, I don't want to go
too deep into the slides. I know
Anchorum has already done that
for you. Um, but you have that
data there. I know you've
already seen it, so literally I
don't want to double do.
I don't want to spend time in
there, um, so women's
healthcare, surgical and
surgical services. So that's the
one thing that I think that we
can provide because we've got
ORs, because we've got OR teams,
we'd like to be able to bring,
uh, you know, a woman's health
surgeon in that can do, um,
hysterectomies or who can do
other needed women's health
surgical procedures, which we
don't have right now, and there
is nothing in any of that
northeastern region that we had
talked about.
Um, on September 15th, we have a
new full-time women's health
nurse practitioner starting and
we're very, very pleased to have
her coming on board. Um, we, we
are desiring partnership with
UNMH for a residency program to
try and get those residents that
are doing, um, women's health to
be able to do women's health
residency here, um, telehealth
for Women's Health, surgical
support, and I think that that
partnership could be very
valuable for the community and
for all of
the stakeholders that are
involved, um, we're also working
on submitting our rural
healthcare delivery fund
application, which is due on, I
think April 15th, um, looking at
obtaining some of those fundings
from the 2 fiscal year 26 to 28
revenue cycle.
So, um, this would be my very
open plea for your support with
that. I'm not gonna hold back.
We really, really need your help
with this. Um, the next slides
we wanna, I wanna talk about and
look at our behavioral health.
So, um, we are so thankful that
uh we have New Mexico Behavioral
Health Institute. Um, they've
been here as, um, you know, Tim
said in his talks yesterday, um,
they've been here since the
1800s. This is not a new, a new
topic for last.
Vegas, um, but we do have a very
high density of mental health,
behavioral health challenge
individuals living in our
community. Many of those
individuals that are living here
have polysubstance abuse issues.
They have chronic healthcare
problems. They have severe
mental health disable, you know,
disabilities, and they are
unhoused and they don't have
medical resources.
Hence, the challenge that we see
is that they end up using the
emergency department at our
facility to meet their medical
needs, um, and to get access to
the outside resources that they
need. Often these folks are
getting transported out and
right now, uh, in 2024, 17% of
all of our transfers were people
that had a primary diagnosis. So
when I say primary diagnosis,
they came in to
the ED because they were having
a mental health crisis.
That's 17% of our transfers.
That does not take into account
the people who are found down in
the community.
who are brought in for a uh for
a medical problem, who have all
of these compounding challenges
on top of that so we can take
care of their medical problem,
but now how do we manage their
mental health situation.
And those things all become
exacerbated when they're in an
emergency department when
they're, you know, physically
compromised.
So far in 2025, we're at an
18.8% transfer rate for these
folks because we cannot keep
them here.
Um, and the national average for
ED visits resulting in
behavioral health transfers is
between 1 and 2%.
So right now we're looking at
almost a 20% transfer rate.
And the rest of the country is
looking at 1 to 2%. So we, this
is a real challenge for us. Um,
we're seeing, um, approximately
5.4 per week, and this is of the
primary diagnosis of mental
health.
Not a secondary diagnosis. So as
a critical access hospital, we
have limitations from our CMS
deemed status where we can't
keep patients for more than 4
days. On average, over the
course of a year.
So when you have somebody who
needs a 7 day hold.
And it's not court-ordered.
We can't keep them here. We
can't keep them at our facility.
And because NMBHI is only able
to admit court-ordered patients.
We don't have any beds available
to us in our local community.
And what we really need are
local beds. So I've, you know,
talked with Tim Shields about
that and I really do want to
posit to you that this is
something that we really need
support with, especially with
the density that we see here,
and I know that this is a state
hospital, so all communities
having mental health patients
that need to have admissions
need access to that, but they
all don't live in the same,
they're, they're not all in Las
Vegas.
I don't know from a legislative
standpoint, exactly how that
looks for you, but we really
need to be able to admit.
Um, we had, and I'm, I'm gonna
just share this with you on
Friday night, we had a mental
health patient come into the
facility who was homicidal.
Not suicidal, homicidal.
And ended up, um,
Strangling one of our staff, who
is still hospitalized from that.
And we had to hold this patient
from 10 o'clock in the morning
until 1 o'clock in the morning.
And it was about midnight.
Before and when this occurred,
when this event occurred.
We can't sedate them.
Because if we sedate an agitated
patient, we can't fly them out
in a at the receiving facility
won't take a sedated patient.
We can't
Hold them or admit them here
because there's no beds.
And the only way we can get a
bed is if it's court ordered.
So now we have an agitated
patient that we can't sedate.
The airplane, the aircrafts will
not take them because they're
agitated, but we can't really
sedate them.
And we ended up with a really
bad outcome.
And it would have been perfect
if we could have admitted this
patient directly to NMBHI rather
than holding on to them, waiting
for an opportunity to be able to
get them transported. And I'm
reluctant to share those kind of
stories, but I think that it
needs to be said. And you guys
really need to know what the
reality is.
So we end up, you know,
stabilizing a lot of these
patients and then getting them
back out into the community.
And they don't have access to
healthcare or to um not
healthcare, but mental health
care oftentimes, so they end up
bouncing back in. So we're in
this cycle with a lot of these
folks where they're bouncing out
and they're bouncing back.
So we're talking about, you
know, how can we get access for
our patients that we're seeing
to try and keep them stable so
that they don't end up bouncing
back.
Um, and we'd like to consider a
behavioral health umbrella
program so that we can start
providing a comprehensive
program where they've got access
to critical, uh, to social work,
access to, um, uh, case managers
who can
coordinate the resources that
they need so that they've got
access to um counseling
services, Suboxone treatment if
they need it. You know, many of
these patients are not going to
be willing to go through
Suboxone treatment, but they
still need mental health
support. So we're, we're really
looking seriously at what we can
do in coordination with NMBHI.
I'm meeting again with Tim this
week, I think tomorrow actually.
um, so these are some of the
challenges that we're facing. I
did add a slide about the
transport with the helicopters.
Um,
we are in, in communication and
um negotiations with a
The company that flies
helicopters for a living so that
they can base one of their
helicopters here and those
helicopter transport teams are
extremely, um, highly qualified,
uh, paramedics so that they can
also work to as a critical
transport on the ground.
So if they, if they're not able
to fly, they can transport with
the ground team, critical
critical patients, um, they'll
also be able to provide training
to the local, um, uh, AMR staff
to our staff to manage critical
patients, um, you know, during
the transport, so that's also
exciting.
I think that some of the
barriers that we are having, um,
are, you know, the
transportation difficult
difficulties are geographic
distance, um, we're also having
a hard time, uh, with
recruitment and retention
because we're so we are so um
remote.
Uh, we're also having some
challenges with, uh, the
Medicaid MCOs, and I know that
there was a big change that
happened, um, primarily, uh,
when turquoise care changed to
this yes, New Mexic New Mexico
portal. Uh, it caused a lot of
the, uh, provider and NPI
numbers and credentialing to
fall through. Right now, we're
at a $3.3 million unbilled,
uncollected with turquoise due
to the specifically to the
Credentialing issues that
they've had. I'm hoping that
they've been able to get that
resolved, but these are some of
the things that are also
networking kind of against us
right now is that I've got $3.3
million sitting in an unbuilt
because we can't get our, our
Medicaid bill through turquoise.
So we really need some support
with making sure that we're able
to get those, um,
Some of these things, um, you
know, sorted out. So residency
program would be great. We're
looking at, you know, uh,
working with, we do work
commonly every, all the time
with Luna Community College. We
have one of our, our chief nurse
executive works as one of the
instructors at LUNA, so we're
using that as a, um, a stream to
bring the new grads into the
hospital. I'd really like to be
able to partner and have, uh,
Alta Vista be a residency source
for rural residency programs.
Um, we've been working with Matt
Probst, um, on some of those
topics so that we can, uh,
figure out how to get a
Full spectrum residency program,
that's one of the things, one of
the challenges that we have is
we don't have pediatrics and OB
to offer in the rural residency
program. If we had that, we
could get actual residents into
our community.
So these are some of the
challenges from you. I'd really
love to have a direct admits to
NMBHI. More robust loan
repayment programs.
Rural residency program support
and behavioral health program
funding for real critical access
hospitals.
That is it.
A lot. I tried to pack it in
quick. I hope I was able to do
it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much. There is a lot
here, um.
And we will digest it.
I'm sure ongoing, but I will
start with questions from uh
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you for the presentation
as I listen to you and and
working with hospitals, uh, in
these areas. I wonder is Project
Echo a part of some of the work
that you're doing to help make
these more um sustainable.
Um, yes, Project Echo, um, is
actually a very helpful resource
for sure.
And then as a part of helping to
make these hospitals more
productive, uh, I guess, um.
Not productive, but uh make them
more sustainable. Do you also
help at all with any recruiting
of doctors to come to these
hospitals and to come to these
ways. Is that a part of the
work?
Uh, it's not part of the work
with Project Echo, if that's
what you're referring to. Oh,
OK. Yes, absolutely, um, and in
fact we're spending a ridiculous
amount of money, um, hiring out
recruitment companies to try and
help us bring providers in, um,
and we are, we are able to, to
do that. We are able to recruit,
especially if we can incentivize
loan repayments. That's a huge
one. And when I mean
incentivize, I mean like a
really strong loan repayment
program.
Um, and, uh, housing, of course,
housing is a big challenge when
you're trying to bring providers
in and they're bringing their
families. They really are
looking for, um,
Accommodations that are suitable
for them.
Uh, right now we're extremely
challenged in this community. I
know Senator Campos is working
on that. Highlands is working on
that and Quorum is working on
that, and that's a conversation
that we're all having all the
time is housing. So that's
another recruitment tool that we
use, but residency programs are
huge. You know, residents come
to a, a community, they
establish, um, networks that
establish relationships. They
may meet their partners, um.
And they end up staying in a lot
of those communities where they
do their residency. So residency
would be another really great,
uh, tool to be able to have to
incentivize, uh, recruitment.
Well, thank you for that. I do
know that UNM is working to
increase their residence and
that 90% of them are from New
Mexico. You help with that
incentive program, that would be
great. The only other question I
just have, you told us a story
about the incident with the
person who
I was having a mental health,
but you said it had a really bad
outcome, but what was the
outcome?
Uh, one of our employees was
strangled.
Yeah, and there's still
hospitalized. OK. Thank you. And
that was on Friday night, so
it's been almost a week.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you.
Representative Cates.
I thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for your
presentation. Thank you for your
asks, your detailed. I very much
appreciate all this, um, I, I
just as a, as
A representative and, and I'm,
and I'm very happy that you have
lived up to a representative
Gonzalez's bragging about you
and so thank you as well. um,
and, um, there's several bills
or or process I wanna see if we
can help legislatively with one
is is isn't, doesn't the NCOs
provide credentialing, uh,
liaisons.
Theoretically.
To be honest with you, I can't
answer that question. I don't
know the answer to that. I have
a, I have a staff member who
does all of that credentialing.
And
I don't know exactly.
How her process works or who she
works with, but I can certainly
look into that.
I think our mics are tired.
Thank you, my mics are tired.
This is bad. This is a bad sign
for how much I've talked to this
committee, um, thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair, um, yeah, I, I
will reach out to you because uh
this is something that you are
not, I've, I've heard many
Um, concerned about the lack of
technical supports during
credentialing and this is
ridiculous. This is something
that we can work on for that.
um, can you tell me, uh, and,
and, and I am so looking forward
to increasing residency slots.
Good, thank you. Thank you. Good
for you for working with UNMHS.
I applauded when you were
talking as well, um, we
definitely need to increase
residency slots. I know a lot of
New Mexicans.
Who went to medical school at
UNM and have to do the residency
in another state because there
are only a few slots. So, um, I
applaud you on that housing, um,
I, and I'm glad that Senator
Compos is working with you. Uh,
I would think of some workforce
housing as well. There's a great
housing motto, believe it or
not, at Santa Fe Opera.
They are working on, they have,
they do 70 interns in short
term, but great housing. They're
putting it in Santa Fe. I want
to take that model to medical
providers around, um, and then
you said that you need more
local beds. Is it that you don't
physically have enough local
beds or some sort of policy or
law tying your hands and only
being able to provide beds for
for court-ordered.
Which one is it, is it, or both?
I think it's both, and I know
that NMBHI is really working
hard, um, with state support to
expand their, um, occupancy and
to expand their, um,
Drug rehab programs, inpatient
drug rehab programs, but to the
best of my knowledge, it,
they're their court-ordered.
rehab programs and, um, we
haven't been able to.
Figure out how to have these
non-court ordered.
Um
Behavioral health patients
admitted directly to NMDHI and,
you know, we try to transport
them to Christus or Presbyterian
or, you know, one of the other
hospitals that can accommodate
those type of patients. We can't
accommodate those types of
patients. So when it comes to
that challenge, uh, often they
don't have beds for them or as
in was the case with this. We
can't sit, we, they won't accept
them sedated, they, you know, so
there's there, there's these.
Idiosyncies that that go on with
how you can and cannot use those
beds.
So that those are the
challenges. So thank you, Madam
Chair, you know, it's July and
so we just uh uh we just passed
unprecedented amount of funding
and investments in this in
behavioral health and and
infrastructure and one of the
reasons why we
In the go in the executive was
able to
Reassign some of the funding
that was originally was to
ensure that they don't all go
through the courts, right? So
because not ever let let us
provide the service before.
It goes to the courts. So I, I
want to continue this
conversation with you, uh,
because we haven't given them
enough time to show me that they
have implemented in the
investment and being able to um
provide the resources that is
needed before it hits to the AOC
and so, um, but I, I don't think
we can wait. I think we need to
continue conversations to make
sure that everyone is aware.
that this is very much needed,
just not just in physical beds,
but in your ability to be able
to provide access, um, you know,
shipping them someplace else
away from their support system,
away from their family, they're
young, away or old that they
definitely need is not
necessarily uh the best um.
Uh
I don't know, opportunity. And
so we would want to uh to look
at how we can provide them here
in their local community as well
and thank you again and thank
you for the information.
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. It was
really interesting. It seems
like there is definitely a niche
for this kind of service, um, so
Dava Dava is a Dava or deva? OK,
do.
Dava's a nonprofit. Is Java?
A nonprofit? No, they're,
they're a for-profit management
company.
So how, how is this relationship
and how is it, because we've had
a problem with for-profit
hospitals coming into the state,
um, stripping them pretty much
and leaving a mess, um, and
having, you know, really bad
outcomes. So how is this
relationship work and how does
it, how can we ensure that
Dava, which
has a good mission.
Java, whose mission is
Profit
Uh, work together well and, and
don't exploit our state.
It's thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Lopez, the, the easiest
way to answer that is from, from
the DAA perspective, our board,
what we do is we make sure that
it's a, a, a good financial
situation for the hospital.
That's our, our job is and, and
the reason we contract with Java
is that they have the tools and
the mechanisms to pull it off.
And they don't
I was going to use a word, but
they don't take advantage of the
hospital. Uh, we've seen time
and time again, these for-profit
entities come into an area and
they literally strip everything
they can out of the hospital.
They never return funds back
into the development of any of
the infrastructure, and then
once it's all obliterated, they
closed shop and they move on.
That's the reason hospitals are
failing across the United States
is because honestly of greed,
that's
The, the primary reason.
And
We from DAA take it very
seriously to be a, a, a good
steward of, of the community's
resources of the of the hospital
and, and we've hold Java
accountable. They have to report
to us quarterly on what they're
doing, what they're paying,
where the money's going, how
much we're rolling back into the
facility because that's our main
mission is to roll money back
into the mission. Alta Vista has
a beautiful hospital like a
lots.
Vegas has a beautiful hospital.
That's not always the case, and
most of the time we're trying to
teach communities how to
Not only keep their hospital
afloat, but put a little bit
back because you're going, going
to have to replace stuff. Some
of them need to build a whole
new facility, right? And so it's
It's that that is, it is our job
at Dava to make sure that we
are, uh, managing the funds
appropriately and we are
returning resources back to the
community. That is our sole
mission.
Thank you. I appreciate that
response, uh, but.
What is the relationship between
Java and Java. Is it, are they
totally separate so just
hypothetically, if Dava thought
another entity, um, maybe UNM,
maybe Presbyterian could do a
better job.
We'll work with,
but it looks like Davis selects
them, right?
Yes, we select Java to contract.
And, and if of course we've had
and I know in Alabama we had
discussions with the the main
university there, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, UAB.
About managing hospitals and we
actually tried to get them to
take over at Lakeland.
Um
There in Haleyville when they,
when they pulled out, but you
know, there was, there wasn't an
appetite for the university to,
to do that if UNMH is and, and
Like Helen said, we're, we're
working very closely with them
and we're
If, if UNMH is what is needed to
make this hospital sustainable,
we will absolutely 100% choose
UNMH to come here. It's not.
I just don't know if UNMH is
ready to take on a
Small struggling rural hospital.
Well, I saw the partnerships and
I thought that that was really
good because that's, I think
coordination.
May be an answer. I don't know.
I mean, we have so many health.
Access issues, health care
access issues and I'm one of
these individuals who believe
that health care is a human
right. So it, it just bothers me
that it's become this for-profit
industry.
That um
Sucks people dry, um, and then
the overhead is concerns me, um,
you know, because
The overhead for Medicare is
about.
5 to 6% and the overhead for
private insurance is like 16 to
20%.
And all those dollars are going
to people who are not making
Or not working with people who
are sick.
Or we need the healthcare. So
So I'm always kind of suspicious
when I see a for-profit, which
is Java coming in. I mean, I
understand, I like the, the
mission that Dava trying to get
this straight, Dava um
enunciates, you know, striving
to
To help the community and to
keep the funds in the community
and, and to keep that, um, but
I'm kind of curious about the
relationship with uh.
That's unusual to have a
nonprofit partner with a profit,
a for-profit, and I, I, it would
be, is there a common
Uh, board membership, for
example, I'm just thinking of,
of.
There is some
Like I know there's probably one
board member on Java that is
married to one board member on
DAA. So, because while we're
based in Nashville, Tennessee,
we're really out of McMinnville,
Tennessee, Manchester,
Tennessee, small communities in,
in rural Tennessee and North
Alabama. That's where the, and
the board members come from
there and so you're you're, it's
kind of like here, you're
drawing on a fairly small pool
of.
people and so, you know, like
the gentleman before us, he had
so many hats, right? He, he had.
I, I couldn't keep up with how
many hats he had, but he, he did
a lot and it was phenomenal.
It's the same kind of thing in
our, in our, uh,
In Manchester McMinble where
when we ask somebody to do, you
know, be on the board. Yes,
they're.
But that's the, that's about as
close as it is on, so it's just
we don't have any real sway to
say do this or don't do this,
other than if they don't.
If they aren't.
Responsible with their, their
finances, then we would move
away from them. That's the
From Java Java, right? That's
the, that's kind of the stick,
right, is you have to maintain a
certain level. You have to pay,
we, we require, you know,
Pay raises. We, we, we really
from the board, it's a, it's a
push on to the for-profit. And,
and
the reason we're separated is
there's kind of a mindset
difference almost in, in our
mission and then the actual
ability to carry out the
struggles of day to day
management in the hospital. You
can get bogged down in, you
know, I've got to pay my, my
food vendor. I've got to do all
these different things and
And, and so we turn that over
to, to the management company
to, to deal with that so that we
can stay in a, a more of a, I
like to think of DAA as the
heart of the hospital. So we can
truly care about our employees
and, and focus on those kinds of
things and not worry about the,
the ins and outs and, you know,
do we have a nurse to work the
ER today. Those are, those are
the struggles of the management
company and I know some of
these, you know, there are
organizations out there that are
nonprofits that do.
Both,
but they're very large. They're
very large organizations and,
and, and honestly they don't
move quickly, they don't move
rapidly, and they don't have the
ability to truly help a rural
hospital that's in trouble. Are
the providers from Java, where
are they from?
The medical providers.
So the medical providers are not
through Java. So those are all,
um, through the hospital or
they're from a locum's company.
Um,
as Senator, please turn on.
Um, so we, we contract like with
Doctor Kalu and Doctor Brown,
they have contracts directly
with us.
With Alta Vista.
So what do you do that Alta
Vista can't do for itself.
I am Alta Vista. I'm sorry.
One mic at a time, please.
So you're also to Vista?
So what's Java do then?
So Java is um what we call
corporate. So a lot of our, um,
HR support
Um, some of our, uh, CFO or our
financial advisors, um, come
from corporate, um.
My boss is at corporate.
So when I have issues, I talk
to, um, uh, Martha, who has
oversight over, you know, 4
different hospitals with a ton
of experience, so I can use her
as mentorship if I have
challenges that I need to talk
about, um, let's see what else
do we have there? Compliance. So
if I have, when I have, I
shouldn't say if, I'm dealing
with this all the time. When I'm
doing contract negotiations for
any of our providers, um,
Any of our services. We have,
uh, compliance and legal
support.
From, from Java so I can rely on
them to help.
You know, um
Craft, uh, solid contracts, um,
compliance from uh accreditation
standards, so we have very
experienced compliance people
that can lend their expertise
and help give guidance, um,
they're actually a really, um,
um, a pretty amazing resource
for us is what they really are.
They're a resource for us.
And how much do they get paid?
Nothing right now.
Right now, I don't think there's
been any, any management fees
taken in the 18 months that
we've been here because the
hospital's losing money.
I believe
Can I, can I get back to you on
exactly what it is, but it's,
it's very, very minimal compared
to what you would see anywhere
else in the country, anybody
else doing even, even in a, a
nonprofit.
Scenario, you're going to have,
um, management. You're, you're
gonna have a system, let's say
Saint Vincent's. They're going
to offset if they're, if they
oversight.
They're doing oversight
management from a central
location, they're going to
require that.
Uh, remote location to pay a
fee.
Even if it's just money moving
around on books back to, you
know, where the headquarters
are. And that's why we like Java
is because Java is a very light
management company. They
They don't have hundreds of
people that they're trying,
we're trying to float. It's a
very small focused group that
provide assistance to the local
staff.
To perform their duties and I,
I, I will get you the, the exact
number of what the management
fee is here at Alta Vista. I,
I've got an idea, but I don't
want to misquote because
I'm wrong a lot.
I appreciate that um.
I'm sure who who hired
Who made the decision to hire uh
Java and and Dava.
Madam Chair,
Senatoreo Lopez.
I'm sorry.
My, my southern, uh, draw is, is
horrible. I, I understand. The,
um, the decision for DAA to come
in was based on the company pre
that preceded usorum.
They were, they, they had filed
bankruptcy. They had, they were
being uh taken over by
You know, like a,
What, what are these? Anyway,
they were, they were being
dissolved and this hospital was
closed, and they reached out to
us. They had, they had floated
it to about 4 or 5 different
entities.
Everybody would come, look at
the numbers and say no thank
you. And so Korum was going to
close it and they just told us
offhandedly while we were buying
another hospital from them that
they were closing, that if we,
if we really wanted another
hospital, they had one in New
Mexico that if somebody didn't
step up, it was going to be
announced that they were going
to close. And so we flew out
here and, and
Surveyed the area and walked in
the hospital, met the people and
saw that it was full of
energetic, enthusiastic
individuals who truly cared
about the community and, and the
people that live here and
Once we see that, we know that
we can win. So then Dava
acquired the hospital from
Quorum. Correct. And so Java is
provides.
It's just, yeah, it's just
right for the ownership by the
nonprofit. That's right. This is
a, it's a very interesting, um,
Uh
Interesting way to deal with all
of the problems with the rural
hospitals. Um, it'll be
interesting to see how
successful it was. I asked these
questions because I don't know
where the due diligence was in
terms of asking some of these
questions like, where's the
money going? What are the fees,
um, what's the relationship
between the nonprofit and the
for-profit, um, you know, and
just really protecting the
community. I like the mission
of, of DAA, and it seems like a
very interesting niche and
something that's gonna be
more and more required around
the country has more and more
rural hospitals close,
especially in light, I mean, the
numbers are only gonna get worse
with, um, the cuts over the next
few years, which I really hope
and pray can be reversed.
Um, but thank you, Madam Chair.
I know I exceeded my time. I
appreciate that.
Representative um Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, you
know, I just want to thank you
since, since I've gotten on
board, excuse me, since y'all
have gotten on board, um, both
as, as a residents of this
community, both as a legislator
for this community, I think one
of my main priorities was just
establishing healthcare for this
area and so um we have been in
constant communication, um, as
well as working with the
employees of your hospital, also
in constant communication.
um, just trying to see where,
where I can lend support, you
know, and also bringing to you,
I think over, over time, we've
had some honest and candid
conversations about what the
needs are here and what the past
issues have been with hos the
hospital here in the past and,
and, and you all are dealing
with, you know, a lot of, uh,
snowballing effects, you know,
here at the hospital, um, you
know, but I, I thank you for
sticking in, um, and again,
just, just putting, just putting
it out there that, um.
Just my wholehearted support for
this hospital because without
this hospital economically, um,
socially, you know, health wise
within this community, I think
this, this, that would just be a
major hit to everything that we,
we've got on. So whatever we
need to do to sustain healthcare
in northeastern New Mexico. I
think you all are, are at that
critical hub for, for healthcare
here in our area and so I just
thank you for that and so, um,
you know, my work will continue
to support, you know, our
employees of the
area that healthcare pipeline as
well as supporting the works of
the hospital and other
healthcare entities, um, but
just thank you for your
presentation, um, won't go to
ask any more questions because I
think we've had lots of chats,
but I'll go to pass off my time.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you to the presenters as
well. There are two things I
want us to follow up on because
I know there will be a much
larger conversation about it,
but one is of course the
court-ordered holds for or lack
thereof, and, um, 2 is the
credentialing piece, which I've
taught like it's been a huge
barrier for so many people and I
think there's a lot of nitty
gritty we have to get into, um,
when it comes to that. And so
much larger conversation, happy
to chat with you offline, um.
I
I, I will be one of the people.
I, I feel like I'm always very
straight up, but I'm always very
straight up and willing to work
with people and talk through
things, but one of, one of the
disappointments that
It was
I guess failed to be recognized
in the uh questions that Senator
Sidia Lopez had.
It's actually something I hope
that you would be really
straight up with, and that's
the, the CEO of Java Medical
Group is also the chair of Dava
Health, and I don't know it.
That is what I understand to be
true, and that to me, this
creates a conflict of interest,
right? Like if you're
If you're management essentially
and
Have the ability to be the chair
on another board. And so can you
speak to that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya. So Bapa Mukherjee is the
chairman of the board of DAA
Health, and he is the current
CEO of Java Medical Group. He
has been trying to step down
from that since he started DAA,
but it's a, it's a, he's, he's
needed in both places. He's one
of the most dynamic intelligent
individuals I've ever met. He
understands rural health care in
inside and out, um.
I, I, I get, I get the
transparency is what I'm saying
like to kind of skirt around
like, well, we might have one
person who has a spouse who
might do a thing. I'm like, just
be straight up. And I think
that's been part of the
difficulty on this committee
generally is we have, we do have
people who come into our
community. New Mexico has a
whole history of just people
extracting resources from our
people, right? And I don't just
mean healthcare, I mean a whole
history of conquest, right? So
that is part of what you're
stepping into.
when you come to New Mexico and
so, you know, as someone whose
family has been here for
generations who now sits in a
seat where I can say, you know
what, like we can both be
grateful for people wanting to
come in and help the community,
but we shouldn't be thankful for
crumbs.
Right? And so like there's a
difference between coming in and
saying, well, we're just helping
everybody here and I'm saying we
deserve a higher quality. We
deserve quality, we deserve a
higher standard because for
generations, we have just been
taken advantage of and so when I
come to you, I come to you very
straightforward in telling you
that part of the reason I'm here
and part of the reason I'm
elected to serve this community
is because I'm gonna stand up
for the people of the community
and demand more.
And so part of that starts with
building trust.
Um, starts with being
transparent, right? If something
like that is a conflict of
interest, to say it.
Um, but the other piece of it
that I'm concerned about is one,
like one of the things that you
said during your presentation.
I'm always wary of the phrase
turnaround.
Because that is very private
equity, right? Private equity
comes in, you, you know, you
named it, come in, extract, make
money for, um, profit and then
they leave and that was one of
the things you said you did is
then we move on.
was and I quoted that and so I,
I just hope you know that I do
have concern with this, not
saying that we don't want you
here, right? I believe that
there could be value if this
partnership and this trust is
Transparent upfront.
The
One of the pieces that I wanted
to touch on.
In relation to like the
Um
difficulties that we've been
having in New Mexico.
Um, and especially retaining
providers is the staffing
levels.
And I saw y'all in the newspaper
recently, and this is actually
something of one of our biggest
concerns because many companies
such as yourself come in, they
say they're gonna turn things
around, they cut, um, staff or
they increase the number of
hours that people need to work
and they say, you know what, if
you can't hack it, then you're
out of here, right? We'll get
someone to replace you. And so
what I've seen is that staffing
levels are a concern, right?
There was a quote that said 12
hour shifts.
For 3 days, you're tired, 4
days, you're really tired, 5 to
6 days, you start hurting
patients, right? And so, we have
had this long debate about
medical malpractice here and to
me, one of the things that I'm
gonna start questioning
employers on is what you're
doing to mitigate risk.
In terms of patient care, what
you're doing to mitigate risk,
to make sure that your employees
are working safe staffing hours,
um, are, are working hours that
help patients that are um seeing
a lower number of patients. What
are we doing to work towards
those goals as well, because as
we talk about medical
malpractice here in this state
and insurance costs increasing.
My question back is what are we
doing to mitigate risk? What are
we doing to keep those, uh,
medical.
insurance rates lower.
And so I believe that's a really
foundational piece of the
conversation that we've been
missing, um, especially knowing
that here in New Mexico, we are
leading the nation in terms of
deaths due to medical
malpractice. And so as we're
watching kind of this corporate
takeover of our medicine and our
healthcare here in New Mexico.
These are the questions that I
will pose, not just to y'all,
but to everyone who starts
coming in and everyone who's
presenting before us. So feel
free to, to respond.
Madam Chair, Representative
NAYA, so real quick onAPA, I I.
I don't, I don't think of BAPA
even in uh that type of
position. He's until you get to
know him, until you get to see
who we are and what we do. I, I
understand, and, and that's
fine. You'd be, you're a good
steward of the public's trust
to, to do that. And that's
perfectly fine. I, I get that.
We're, we will, we will prove
ourselves.
And that's the only way we can
do it, right? I, I, I, there's
nothing I can say that's gonna
make you feel more comfortable
with us. It's just gonna be a
relationship, right? And so I'm
fine with that. I get it. We'll,
we'll work through that and,
and, and as I said, if, if there
needs to be some type of public
entity that wants to take over
the hospital. I, I get it. I get
your concern and your fear, and,
and we will help you do that.
When I say that we move on, we
don't just drop a hospital. We
turn it over and those hospitals
are still thriving today, and we
still give them guidance when
I'm
One of the things that Dava does
is we lobby in DC and when I'm
there, I'm not lobbying for just
our hospitals. I'm lobbying for
every rural hospital in the
United States. And, and
Because that's what we do. It's
a, it's altruistic and it's,
that's, that's what BAPA decided
we were gonna do and that's what
we do, um, so one day,
hopefully, hopefully, one day
you'll see that, that we do what
we say and we say what we do,
but just.
I ask that you give me a little
bit of time, uh, with that, I'll
turn the rest of the staffing
and all of the that over to, to
Helen.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
NAYA, I want to first apologize
for not addressing Madam Chair,
because this is the first time
I've sat in a legislative
setting like this, so I'm, I'm
really sorry if I, if I
overlooked that. Um, so
unfortunately,
The article that you were
reading had an awful lot of
mistruth in it.
Very unfortunately, um, our
average ratio, nurse to patient
ratio is for patients to 1.
Almost never have we seen them
go over that.
Um, we are extremely challenged
when it comes to nursing staff.
Um, we have
Nurse contract nursing staff, we
have, uh, full-time staff,
part-time staff, um.
And
We can't and don't require any
of our staff.
To work more than their 40 36
hours a week as an RN.
We offer overtime shifts we
offer um
a lot of overtime shifts if they
want it.
They can work as much overtime
as they like, so if, as if a
nurse chooses to come and work
in overtime shift.
That's absolutely at their
discretion.
Um
And yes, if we were requiring
people to work.
4 or 567 days in a row, it would
be a risk. It would be extreme
risk. I've done it. I'm, I've
been a nurse since forever, for
decades.
Um, I also know that I love
overtime.
So if the, if the opportunity
presented itself for me to work
3 or 4 days in a row, I would
take it.
Um, but I've never been, um,
required to work extra shifts,
and we don't either.
So, um, we're again working with
recruiting companies or you
know, recruiting local um nurse
new grads. We've got a new grad
residency program that we're um
actively working on, uh, with
new graduates in the hospital so
that we can kind of grow our own
from our local community.
Um, we're
Doing everything we can to
recruit.
But I can guarantee you we're
not requiring anyone to work
more than their 36 hours a week.
And they're not having more than
a 4 to 1 ratio on any of our
floors.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
also just like to recognize that
I believe some of the union
folks are in the room as well.
Thank you. Thank.
Thank you and um when we finish
with our questions, I will have
Yolanda come up and give us a 5
minute um
Quick, yeah, not, not, not yet,
not yet. Uh, we will finish with
um Madam Vice Chair, and then I
have a few questions and then we
will, we will ask you to give us
a, you're not on the agenda, but
we can do what we want, so we're
going to.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and I appreciate the
presentation. Uh, gives us some
good information. Um,
The uh uh the issue on the 3.3
million that sits there waiting,
um, Madam Chair, I know for
another couple of other
organizations in Albuquerque,
there's some money that's
sitting on the table at this
point in time. That is critical,
um.
One of them is, is, uh, an
entity that provides services
for our unhoused population as
another chunk of millions that
sits, so, uh, this, um,
I'm hoping, um,
That Secretary Armijo and her
team are truly working through.
Some of these issues, um, Madam
Chair, I know there's some other
concerns that I've heard, not
just from here, but from other
entities about some of the
coding.
Um, and some of the other
Detailed, right, uh, information
that needs to be entered and in
rejections and some of the other
things, so, uh, I think, and I'm
hopeful that Secretary Mijo and
her team are working on this
because even if it's just 3
million, that 3 million makes or
breaks.
Um
Many entities, especially for
nonprofits.
And I know for, for you, that's,
you know, 3 million's a big
chunk of change that helps to
make or break your budget.
So I wanted to mention that. Um,
just a quick question, and I
didn't see it on here, but what
is your payer mix? In other
words, what's the breakdown, you
know, with regards to Medicaid,
Medicare, private insurance. Do
you happen to have those
numbers, Madam Chair?
Uh, Madam Chair, and, um.
Senator Lopez, I don't have
those numbers with me today. I,
I'm very sorry. Um,
I honestly don't know what they
are. I can go and look them up
for you.
Um, and I can provide that
information, but I don't have
it.
To give at this time and I would
ask that you provide that
information to Xander so he can
um he can share it with the
entire committee.
And Madam Chair, I just ask this
because um again on that federal
funding uh stabilization
subcommittee.
One of the presentations we
received um from Secretary
Armijo from the Healthcare
Authority is looking at the mix
of Medicaid.
And the impact, of course, of
what that has in our hospital
systems, especially in rural New
Mexico and and Alta Vista is on
the list, as is uh some of the
others that are on the map.
Thank you for the map that you
provided. So if you could share,
I think that would give us
another perspective, um, as to
what your, your payer mix is.
um.
Because Madam Chair, as we look
as to what's happened in
Um, with that wonderful
resolution bill in Washington DC
and the anticipated cuts that
are coming, it's gonna hurt. And
I think that's something Madam
Chair that we on the federal
fundings, I can't say FFSS. I
have too much on that. Um, it,
it's part of what we need to
have. I think that the
Uh, drilling down to the numbers
as to what we need to really
look at, um, especially as we
come up to our budget cycle and
what we need to do to stabilize.
The cuts that are coming from
Medicaid.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you so much for
your presentation. I do have a a
few um comments and questions.
So I hear you on the, the, the,
the violent patient uh where
does law enforcement?
Come in in that kind of
situation.
So, Madam Chair, that, that's a
911 call.
us.
OK, and, and did law enforcement
bring them to you? Could you
have had law enforcement take
them. They did bring the
patient, yes.
And, and when you were unable to
manage.
I mean, I, and I guess what I'll
say is I, I would check with
other rural hospitals. I, I know
that Las Vegas has the, the
majority of um.
Or they have an outsized share
of people struggling with
behavioral health issues, but I
would, I would see just, just
check in with some other rural
hospitals and see what, what
their solution, I mean, I know
it's probably not a great
solution because um
Because of the ruralness, etc.
and looking at your requests,
I'm not sure I don't know who,
who is responsible for who gets
admitted to the Behavioral
Health Institute. I don't know
that that's a legislative fix.
It may be a fix with the
healthcare authority or I, I
don't know, but, but I'm not
sure that that's something we
can, we can, um,
Do as a legislature and then in
terms of turquoise care. I'm so
sorry. I mean, most uh most
folks, most companies, most
hospitals can't float $3
million. That's ridiculous. Um,
this has been going on for way
too long. I know that when,
when, uh, uh, you know what
started hitting the fan with
this. I got a lot of um
Contexts from the uh
developmental disabilities
community who were panicked
because they do not have those
kinds of, I mean, they, they
work month to month, so I'm
disappointed that that's
happening, please uh keep uh
keep us informed if you are
experiencing further
difficulties and I'm putting it
out to the healthcare authority
and particularly to the MCOs to
get your acts together because
it's ridiculous, um.
And then, uh, just there, there
were some questions before about
how job about paying Jabba, how
is, how is what Java charges
determined.
Madam Chair, it's a flat rate,
um, and it's just a, it's a,
it's a flat rate for services.
So as the hospital makes money,
it doesn't go up. There's no
Uh, increase or share in profit
or anything like that. It's a
flat rate.
So is there um
Are there like plans or I mean
it your flat rate, does that
cover everything even
unexpected. Everything. OK, OK.
Um, and, and just doing some um
quick research.
It's kind of concerning that
Java, I'm getting confused,
which is nonprofit so does Java
have shareholders?
No. No. OK. But there was some
concerning information that uh
but Java Dava, there's husbands
and wives, there's brothers,
there's um it's.
It's a little bit.
Like,
That maybe this isn't um, so
just saying we are gonna be
watching all of our hospitals in
New Mexico, um, because we don't
want New Mexico healthcare
dollars to go to Tennessee, to
be perfectly honest, they don't
belong in Tennessee.
And we don't want them in
Tennessee because we need them
here, um. Can I say amen?
Sure. Um, so I think that's it
and so thank you so much for
your presentation. I will have
um Yolanda come up for 5
minutes. We do have public
comment after this, and there's
a lot, we have a lot of public
comment, so I'm gonna limit you
to 5 minutes.
I'm sorry.
she
Thank you, Representative.
And so,
I think there's a lot of truth
to some of this.
Um, the nurses are in dire need
of help out here.
District 1199 has been
negotiating a contract with Alta
Vista Regional Hospital before
when it was CHS.
Danorum and now Java Dava.
We've tried to initiate staffing
ratios, because it's a need and
we need it. This community needs
it.
We are tired of everybody being
diverted out because there's no
staff.
We do need the help here. We
need to keep our hospital
running. I do live in Las Vegas,
New Mexico, so it's a big issue
for me.
We are trying to work with.
The hospital with management,
um.
It's kind of a challenge, you
know how it goes with
negotiations.
Um, we're being shut down for a
lot of the stuff that we
proposed, um, coming to safety,
coming to nursing ratios.
And other stuff in the contract
that we know that will work,
that's working in our other
hospitals.
But we're not here for this
today. What we're here for is to
see if we could keep Altavista
running. And that's what we need
to do. We need to keep Altavista
running because other than that,
you have Saint Vincent's, you
have Taos, where 199 represents.
We represent Saint Vincent's as
well. We represent 6 hospitals
in New Mexico.
Everybody low income people are
being diverted out. So we do
need the funding, we need to
figure out how we can do it. And
1199 is here to help and how we
can do that.
Thank you so much. And can you
just tell us your name and your
affiliation. My name is Yolanda
Olmer. I am the District 1199
CEO.
Thank you so much. You're
welcome.
And I think we will go ahead
with um public comment and so
the first thing I'm gonna do,
Davina that we had online
yesterday had some
Um, had some mic issues, so um I
will just read what she emailed
me. um, I'm submitting written
testimony regarding Dorothy
Mueller's presentation to the
committee yesterday. Although I
was present to speak, I was
unable to do so due to a
technical issue with my
microphone. I kindly ask that
you share this with the
committee. I am a pharmacist
clinician in Las Cruces, serving
patients in both hospital and
family medicine settings. Rising
healthcare.
drug costs are deeply
concerning, and I appreciate
LHHSC's efforts to explore
meaningful solutions. I offer
the following observations and
recommendations. Number one,
Dorothy Mueller's report. I was
very impressed with her report.
It demonstrates the value of
investing in expert consultants
to analyze key cost drivers in
healthcare. I hope she will also
present her findings to the LFC
continued funding for this work
is essential, and I, I second
that emotion.
Um, roadmap.
I support Mary Feldblum's
proposal to form a committee of
experts to develop a strategic
road map. I recommend including
a pharmacist such as one from
New Mexico pharmacists
Association or the UNM College
of Pharmacy to provide valuable
clinical and policy insight. 3,
purchasing strategy and pricing
models. I agree we should
explore joining a purchasing
consortium or establishing a
state pharmaceutical purchasing
board. Additionally, reference
pricing and value-based
contracts for special.
drugs warrant consideration for
polypharmacy and medication
management. I appreciate the
discussion on polypharmacy and
adverse drug events as part of
my role, I conduct comprehensive
medication management, reviewing
regimens to address drug therapy
problems such as drug, drug and
drug disease state interactions.
I frequently deprescribe
medications, incorporating more
clinical pharmacists into care
teams can significantly improve
medication safety and
effectiveness. Thank you for
continued work and
consideration. Sincerely, Davina
Norris with a whole bunch of uh
letters after her name. So, so I
will, uh, if you are on Zoom and
would like to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
We have, we have some.
Just, and we will, is there
anyone in the room with public
comment. Jim and Ellen.
Wow
We'd better mark this day on the
calendar, so, so Roberto, if you
want to, do you have a mic to
call on folks?
Oh, nobody's oh, OK, OK, so we
have 12, we thought we had 12
people for public comment, but
since we don't.
Um,
OK, 7 attendees, but no, no, OK,
so I guess with that, um,
committee, we will call it, we
will call it a meeting, we will
be adjourned and we will see you
next month in Gallup. Thank you
all for your attention. Thank
you all for being here.
Meeting adjourned.
