welfare sub committee if you
wanted to talk about water
you're in the wrong place
we are going to cover two agenda
items today the first is going
to be our legislat with cyfd
with the department and then the
second agenda item is a
discussion on child welfare
system improvement and oversight
and we've got a guest from the
any case he foundation
for for that agenda but to kick
us off with the legislat we have
rachel and our cabinet secretary
miss
so rachel
and good afternoon madam
chairwoman members of the
subcommittee what I will do is
just do a little bit of stage
setting for the legislat focused
on child welfare this interim
with and that I will pass it
over to cabinet secretary teresa
costados um just as I can have
contact setting for legislat it
is a practice that we have at
the lfc to be really focused on
specific performance challenges
within state agencies we
identify key performance
challenges for an agency and
then over the course of the
interim focus on data related to
that challenge and engagement
with the agency around
actionable steps the department
might be taking to address those
performance challenges for the
child welfare sub committee this
interest were focused on three
key challenges and I am going to
walk through a little bit of
data that you have in your
binders in a breath that looks
like this legislat.
It'll be today
that just gives you a little bit
of context for the three
performance issues we're gonna
talk about
just wanted to give people a
second to get to tab I make sure
that they had it
all right and so in your binders
you have this brief it outlined
three key performance challenges
where focused on this interim
the first one is children out
treatment and repeat mail
treatment that key outcome
measure for kids are engaged
with a child while per system
the second one is work force and
the third is of the availability
and access of community based
placement either resource when
we're faster homes or behavioral
health services for children and
youth involved in the child
while per system so those are
the key three key performance
challenges what i'm reduced just
share a little bit of data and
point out investments the state
has made to address those key
challenges as well as summarized
a little bit about what we
talked about in the last
legislat before I turn it over
to the secretary to feel get
your brief
i'm page one of your brief that
says childhood treatment you'll
see some key trend data i'm
gonna talk about children and
treatment first in new mexico if
you look at the very first chart
your cristies rate i've children
treatment that data is from
twenty twenty two it is federal
data and it allows us to compare
or benchmark new mexico against
the rest of the country and new
mexico is your has persistently
had a rate of child male
treatment that's considerably
higher than the national average
that is a rate per thousand
children
if you look at the chart below
that that is our state to read a
repeat now treatment that is the
rate at which children have a
case of substantial i've used
their neglect and then have
another case within twelve
minutes there as well new mexico
has persistently had a.
Higher rate than the national
average we do have data that is
more recent and then the charter
bath and it is a performance
measure that tracked and see why
fd's performance report card cfd
will end the year with a repeat
male treatment rate that about
fifteen percent it's slightly
higher than the prior and so
that is a key metric that we
look at to measure how is the
system doing when it comes to
child while being the state has
made some significant investment
in that area and what you'll see
in kind of if you walk through
their brief is over time lfc has
made some recommendations to
invest in evidence based
approaches at the front end of
the system prevention and early
intervention efforts to address
repeat my treatment in
particular
in our last legislat hearing we
talked about a variety of things
and a highlight two key areas
the first is
the federal family first
prevention service this act also
known as the title for you
prevention plan which is an
opportunity federally for states
to begin drying down federal
revenue to implement evidence
based programs to address and
prevent child about treatment
up until this point new mexico
is one of the handful of steeps
that has not had an approved
plan during the last legislat
you are engaged with the
department about the current
status of that planet
you asked are staff team to
review the current plan and and
we did so and provided some
summary about some of the kid
things that we signed up you are
also asked to either pre
requisite to do this sub
committee hearing an update a
copy of that plan that seem to
provided to you up um i'll point
out a couple of key and
investment to the state has made
related to preventing child
mouth treatment in particular in
the last couple of years at the
first is.
In the in starting in fy twenty
five there is an appropriation
of three million dollars in the
grow to implement evidence based
prevention and early
intervention programs over the
next three years
in addition you'll see in their
brief some discussion about
differential or more time level
of response that is an evidence
based approach that is an
alternative to a traditional
investigation and back in twenty
eighteen there was statute that
enabled a more time level of
response in new mexico but it
has not been implemented up
until this point
at least not with the dollar you
to have an evidence based
approach or with statute during
the last legislaturing you heard
from cyfd i'm seeking of
technical assistance from kc
family programs to implement a
differential response and there
was a an appropriation of one
point four million dollars for
three years in the grow as well
to support evidence based
implementation of differential
response so those are the some
of the key areas you are focused
during the last legislaturing
and we asked direct you to share
updates about the status of
those things that's kind of high
level on child now treatment and
repeat mark treatment a second
topic in terms of key
performance challenge and for
the sub committee to discuss and
focus on this interim is work
forced you all heard this
morning about some of the
investments and within the
schools of social work aimed to
address thing shortages in the
state related to social workers
see why if d and particular
experiences significant
challenges when it comes to
recruiting and retaining a work
force in protective services
some of the key data that you
will see in your brief and I
spoke is done and turn over
rates in particular among
protective services and see web
df.
Shared with you last time it has
continued over the summer to
engage in hiring within
protective services and there
has been some improvement in
turnover rates among protective
services workers and yet that
remains a significant challenge
the turnover rate at the end of
that by twenty four was about
thirty four percent and so that
really presents a challenge to
stabilising and improving the
system
also in that brief you'll see an
appropriation history of both
investments made and personal
and services with ncyfd as well
as filled fte within the agency
I will note that currently and
you heard this last time cfd has
does experience some constraint
when it comes to higher in
because federal revenue is
currently coming in
significantly below budgeted
levels and that does constrain
the ability to hire and fell
positions within protective
services
during the last legislat hearing
you heard of a radio potential
strategies fd is considering
when it comes to work for us and
i'll point two several different
appropriations that you all is a
legislature have made in recent
years to address work for us
challenges within the department
and
in addition to investment and
the recurring budget
particularly in fy twenty four
there were several specific
targeted investments within the
grow and specials over the last
year a couple of years i'm first
there was a three million
dollars appropriation to support
the department to work for his
plan and back in twenty twenty
three that has largely gone and
spent and was re authorized for
fy twenty five you are also made
some target investments through
the grow that will come and line
this fiscal year one point seven
million to incentivise a masters
level a license at masters level
social work basement your amount
protective services.
Workers you are heard for
example friend at schools of
social work some of their
efforts to increase so short but
this is also an investment
directly within ca fd to address
that as well is that sort of a
summary when it comes to work
force and then the last area of
focus is community based
placements specifically what we
mean there is the availability
in access and adequate numbers
of resource homes or faster care
providers in new mexico to meet
the needs i've children in
faster care needing placement as
well as the availability of
community based but he grew up
health services and
the mexico has not had in recent
years sufficient numbers of
resource homes or **** parents
and you will see on page two
that trend over time with the
number of foster parents or
resource homes in this state
remaining relatively flat and
just over a thousand within the
last year
and a lack of resource homes is
conducted to corrective action
planned and as part of the kevin
s settlement and commitments the
state has made at two address
insufficient numbers there in
addition and have an s I set on
an identified a lack of
community based behavioral
health services available
specifically children's
behavioral health services
available in the state
to address them of those
challenges you all have also
made some specific targeted
investments and i'll point out a
couple that are mentioned in
your brief and the first is that
twenty million dollars special
appropriation that was me two
years ago to the human services
department to increase capacity
and specifically expand or start
up and more behavioral house
services through children
that appropriation was made to
the human services department
who then partnered with.
And initially that that
appropriation went on spent and
it was reauthorized in the most
recent legislative fashion with
directed language that the the
appropriations should be used to
invest and start up capacity for
evidence based services that
should be alleged off for
benefit or ten or four
reimbursement you'll have
previously heard from us that
again that appropriation had
gotten relatively and spent
there has now been more spending
in that area but primarily for
purposes outside of the intent
so far things like the only
resource centers that may be
good for children but are not
actually behavioral services
zero d has recently released an
rfim to start some behavioral
house services for children and
that appropriation was also used
to support a group home and for
alleviate some of the office day
challenges the has experienced a
second appropriation I will
direct your attention to an is a
three point seventy five million
dollars appropriation and within
the grow this year to
specifically recruit train and
support faster parents or
resource homes that becomes
around that became available to
the repairment starting in july
and and so and will I see if you
talk a little bit about how the
department is going it out
recluning retaining it
supporting business parents you
heard during the last
legislation and see if you talk
about a variety of events
specifically intended to recruit
resource homes that may not have
resulted in significantly higher
numbers yet so that is sort of a
summary of the key work force of
the key perhaps i'm sorry they
keep performance challenges
persistent repeat mel treatment
work forced and and a sufficient
numbers of community based
services for children
in care I will now could have.
Pass it over to their secretary
who will talk through key
actions and initiatives the
department is taking to address
those
think you rachel good afternoon
manager members of the committee
thank you very much for the
opportunity to day to be here
again talking about cyfd and
some of the challenges that were
facing I feel like you know
we've had these conversations in
the past and we keep having the
same conversations about the
same challenges so I want to
really highlight some of the
areas that regional talked about
in some of the things that were
doing that are you know a little
bit different to really try to
uhm change where we are we can
do presentation
we can't get it up on the screen
but they
are equipped okay
does everyone have the hand out
yes okay great
I right so before we get started
I just want to make sure the
first slide that I guess the
second slide that you have there
is our leadership team and so
just want to make sure that you
have contact information for all
of that team I have many of them
here with me today but just want
you to know that myself and my
team is available to you at any
time to talk about concerns that
you have you know in your
specific communities or just in
general with respect to cyfd um
and some of the things that
you're hearing or that you you
know want updates on so that
gives you the leadership team
with their contact information
cell phone email
and feel free to reach out to
them.
I want to start off with our
work force because I think
that's been incredibly
challenging and I think that
really leads into a lot of the
other issues that were seen with
respect to some of the topics
that we consider considerably
talk about so our work forces
essential to strington in the
child walker system in new
mexico building a strong
workforce of dedicated
professionals is crucial for
providing high quality care and
support to children and families
it's something that we work on
every single day we continue to
face challenges and hiring a
retaining staff you know we
start to see that things are
getting better we're hiring and
then we have like six or seven
investigators quite and
replacing those investigators is
not just a matter of hiring
somebody new and handing them a
key slow it takes out least six
months of training and getting
them up to speed before they can
start you know to take that full
key slow they can work on
graduated rates but we're really
trying to stick to that so that
were not bringing them in
dumping a key slowed and then
they're leaving and were
consider it continuing to see
that revolving door so our
vacancy rate right now in the
agency as a whole is at twenty
eight point six percent i'm in
protective services it's twenty
seven point three so that's
lower than its been but it's
still incredibly high and as you
can see we have two hundred and
ninety seven authorized fts that
remain back um as rachel said
earlier some of those are
unfunded positions but their
positions than the less that we
felt we need to work on to make
sure that we can fulfill the
needs of the department
since january we hire or we've
participated in sixty two hiring
events and job for a statewide
so these include community
events
local events at universities
where they're looking for
they're doing job fears and
posting we're having more
conversations with universities
um
are staff is a.
Any community events that they
can you know purchasing so I
don't know if any of you
recently went to the state fair
or saw our boot there but they
were there throughout the fair
with lots of marketing materials
they had a code with people
could scan and look at jobs we
had people from hr on site every
day we talked with people also
about
faster parents and reached new
mexico to make sure that they
know what's um available to them
we also were participating at
the private insanity and zobra
and any other large events will
be at balloon festival where
there's large crowds of people
large family gatherings where
there could be interest in
people participating as fast
your parents and how people on
site to give them information
and talk with them at that point
in time if they're not
interested in faster
parenting were immediately
talking to them about me
becoming to work for cyft and
assisting kids in a different
way
all of these events we have
staff there we have
opportunities we can do initial
screenings for them on site last
month we hired fifty three new
employees so that's not just
employees that moved maybe the
promoted within the department
or moved from one division to
another those are new employees
to the department from outside
of cyfd so those individuals
will be starting our training
program and going through the
training and hopefully within
the next four weeks can start
taking a graduated case and then
work up to the full case load
after the six weeks umm
right now we have two hundred
and fifty nine employees with a
degree and social work were
continuing to recruit social
workers and encouraging our
current staff who don't have a
social work degree to continue
their education we're looking at
how we can shift you know job
hours or times to really support
staff to go back to school and
get that degree I figure if
they've been with us for a while
in their engaged and it's
something that they're really
enjoying that we should supp.
Board them to go back and get
their social work degree and so
we're having those conversations
with universities i'm like
schedules or how can we
accommodate them to really go
back and do that
we have many positions posted
right now we're still working
with the union to make sure that
we can you know get those better
quickly and get people hired and
that's continuing and all of our
hrs process has been streamlined
now I knew I talked about it
last year that we were making
changes it now does reside
within the hr department we
briefly try to use work for
solutions to do the betting of
those positions and help us with
our hiring that really kind of
bottlenecked and slow down and
we for a period of time didn't
see a couple of we didn't see
hires and so we've taken that
back internally and we're doing
that ourselves
i'm not sure that will give up
on that idea but it's something
that right now where we're not
moving forward with
in addition to the job fears in
the hiring events we've
increased our recruitment
advertising to include the
recruitment of license social
workers were widening our
recruitment efforts to include
digital billboards radio digital
display television commercials
in youtube in addition were
investing in geoffensing to
target specific geographic
locations including colleges in
universities and so i'm the next
line will show you kind of what
that recruitment advertising
looks like a lot of that funding
that we got for one time funding
from the legislature to do
recruitment efforts for social
works is being used for some of
this advertising down on the
bottom the total advertising
spend that we budgeted is about
seven hundred and seventy four
thousand dollars this includes
in new mexico
hi recruiting there but also
some ads out of state and build
boards and some targeted efforts
at universities that have social
work programs.
Um
I wanted to share a quick video
with you the next slide that you
have is an actual video it's
something that we're using as
part of our digital display i'm
I understand it's not working
but we will get the code for you
guys so that you can look at
that online or it is
mad i'm sure it's a good I think
it's nat we can't get it to work
so what we will do as an
alternative is send it out to
you for your own viewing
and it's just if there is no
audio to it it's just a quick
clip that we're using you know
for a quick we rounded at the
fair so people could just kind
of see that it was on a loop and
they can understand in it really
talks about you know why CYFD um
why you should consider that as
a profession
we're also continuing efforts
and other universities like I
said we're targeting social work
steel students we're going to be
out this fall at different job
fairs at universities were
hoping to capitalise on some of
those individuals that are
graduating in december we've
created a number of internship
programs for individuals so that
they can come to the department
pre testing or licensing i'm
into an internship program and
work with state personnel offers
to be able to bring them in and
then due a recruitment waiver
once they test or get certified
to move them into fully licensed
position and so that I think
that that's
proved to be really helpful in
recruiting lawyers we did that
with several that hadn't taken
the bar cause that's another
area where we're struggling to
hire we were able to bring them
on as waclerk's and then once
they passed the bar we will move
them into a position without
having to go back through spot
when having them apply for that
we're gonna do the same with
social workers and i'm
individuals that are are sitting
for licensing
with this next slides shows many
of the universities that were
targeting and we've put together
a team that is.
Starting to travel I think the
first travel is early october
they're going to be out at
university of texas doing
lawyers and also looking at
other individuals and other
studies for social work but the
focus on those other slides is
really the social work program
in bringing individuals from
other states to new mexico or
interested in that field
once we get these individuals
recruited one of the things that
were working on in your cnnt
budget it's a new training
academy so we're really
revamping our training because a
well trained work force a well
supported work force can respond
effectively to complex cases
they can build meaningful
relationships with families and
implement best practices all of
which contribute to better
outcomes in more resilient
system overall so our new
trading academy is going to
focus on enhancing skills and
knowledge consistency and
service delivery to ensure all
team members follow consistent
procedures and protocols we need
to more reliable and equitable
service delivery it's really
something we're focusing on it
was what we based our pillars on
so that we could insure that
across the state individuals are
treated the same regardless of
what community you live in
we're working on enhanced
collaboration in that training
process we really want to foster
better communication and
collaboration among t members
among the agencies that we work
with an abunks are community
partners and faster resource
parents I think in order to
build a support of network all
around we have department with
other outside individuals as one
team
we're gonna really talk about
adaptability to change to have
continuous training to help
staff stay current with the
bobbing policies technologies
and evidence based practices
were really excited to partner
with highlands university and
you may have heard a little bit
about that this morning but they
received a federal ground of
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollars which is aimed at
preparing professional social
workers in new mexico.
So the first cohort will start
in january we've been working
with them on this for a better
and so will take one hundred c
way of deployees d wide and the
program will include non social
workers as well as social
workers to establish a
foundation for trauma and formed
culturally competent evidence
based best practices in social
work and child welfare so I
believe that even if we don't
have social workers in those
roles that training and working
with social workers will really
give them an opportunity to
expand their knowledge and put
it to practice immediately in
the jobs that they're doing um
so as I said we're starting with
highlands they're calling their
program inspire it's a pilot
program on that they're doing
with this one time funding that
they receive and were really
hoping that that is something
that we can continue to do for
them in addition to that we're
working with them on e thirty
credit hour module that will be
a certificate program for non
social work child welfare
workers so it'll be more of an
intensive program a longer
period of time to really build
their skills if they are not
social workers so individuals
that come maybe from other
backgrounds early childhood or
you know other backgrounds that
qualify them for their jobs but
don't have the social work
degree and they will go through
this program um it will help
with understanding social
drivers and key factors in
influencing child not treatment
what are the modules would be
establishing a shared paradigm
next is putting theory to work
making sense of the theoretical
underpinnings for child welfare
um report trust in relationships
skills of engagement and
interviewing complex contents
ensuring child care your burn
worker safety
assessment considerations case
planning effective inner
disciplinary collaboration in
advocacy.
Tribal sobering team child
welfare equipment per um
presented by caroline daily and
remaining resilient and the
workforce so some of those are
some of the modules that we've
turned out with highlands as of
this point in time and as I said
that'll be a certificate program
for non social workers
with the ability to transfer
those hours to credit if they do
decide to continue their degree
and go into social work so we're
working with them on what that
would look like right now but we
believe that these efforts in
the training that we're doing
will also help with retention we
want to make sure that we're
investing in professional
development four are staff that
they feel value and supported
which we believe can lead to a
higher job satisfaction and
lower turnover rates so in
addition to the recruitment that
we're doing those with some of
the retention efforts that we
have um one of the other efforts
that were doing for retention is
were working collaborate who
were collaborating with
presbyterian leadership right
now to research development
implementary worker wellness
program right now what we're
looking at for that is we want
to make sure that we're
cultivating a health your work
force we want a promote mental
health initiatives to reduce
stress increased mindfulness in
mental health awareness teach
healthy habits talk about work
life balance encouraged business
programs and increased exercise
and boost intellectual impacts
and personal development we want
to focus on these areas and help
create a support of environment
that enables them to perform
their ball effectively one of
the hardest jobs I believe in
state government is a child
welfare worker they go out on
these investigations and work
with these families in cases
every day and come back and
really right now all they have
is their coworkers or their
families to really talk that
through and so I believe the
establishing is strong um work
for support program for them
will really help in retention.
And just employee well being and
satisfaction in the job that
they are doing
so i'm grateful to prosperity
and for the conversation and
they're willingness to work with
us on that program which I think
is incredibly important
rachel talked a little bit about
key slowed standards and what
that looks like in the concern
that we have there
um meeting those standards is
one of the main goals of our
leadership
however with the turnover rate
that we have it makes an
impassable we guess you know
will make some progress in an
employee will leave and those
cases need to be redistributed
amongst the remaining employees
like I said even if we higher we
can't redistribute those cases
to a new employee so it just
continues to push the remaining
employees work load higher and
higher and higher so there at a
breaking point and then we see
them leaving and so our
retention rate I she said is you
know about thirty six percent
and I think that's gone down a
little bit from what has been in
the past I think it was thirty
eight the previous year so it's
a tiny but nowhere near where we
need it to be if we're going to
make significant change
so we've provided you with um
some heat are some of our heat
maps and those really tell the
story it shows where we are and
these are based on the
requirements under the
catherness litigation so based
on cabinets are investigators
should not carry more than
twelve cases our permanency
workers should not have a keys
load of more than fifteen and
our placement workers should not
have more than twenty that's not
even looking at the type of
cases that those are right we
have to really take into
consideration not just case load
but work love how many kids are
in those families and does that
count towards one keys does it
count towards several cases
because you're dealing with more
so in addition to that we need
to look at work load but as you
can see from this heat map in
investigations.
In order to meet the standards
under kevin we need seventy four
investigators statewide to meet
those keys loads
for permanent c we need forty
more employees to meet those
case loads in amplacement we
need fifteen more employees to
meet those keys loads so those
who just the front line workers
in addition to those individuals
were hiring support staff
individuals who can come in as
case each to help with the
paperwork to help with the
administrative duties to help
with transportation for some of
those individuals so in addition
to doing the case work in the
investigations often times our
staff has to transport kids to
appointments and um take them to
school that's one of the biggest
issues that we have right now is
transportation to and from score
so really looking to build out
that support staff for them so
they have the ability to focus
on the task out hand and really
engage with those families in
build those relationships with
families
which have a little bit about
the mel recurrence of
maltreatment and that has been
something as we've said if you
go back and look at this chart
from two thousand twenty we have
been
consistently above fourteen
percent for mour treatment and
as she said we'll end this year
at fifteen percent.
Addressing addressing mail
treatment requires a
comprehensive multi faster dude
approach of high importance is
prevention and education see way
of de is working to implement
programs that educate families
and communities about
recognizing and preventing mail
treatment removing children is
not a solution for recurrence of
maltreatment our family services
division is focused on providing
programs and services to
families to prevent recurrence
of maltreatment and although
we've always had the programs
that we have in our family
services as i've said boat four
they were embedded within
programs with some of the same
workers that were out doing
other work so when family
services workers laughed that
responsibility fell on remeaning
offices and were you see the
most significant impact of that
is in some of our world
communities where there's not a
whole lot of people to
distribute the work load and
everybody has to kind of pitch
in and pick that up um and so
when faced with going out and
working with a family for
prevention or going out and
doing a critical investigation
um family services usually fell
to the way side and so pulling
that out and really focusing on
that and giving them the
opportunity to really work with
those families and strengthen
that I think is going to show
over the next couple of years
that those that mail treatment
will start to decline the next
slide shows your mail treatment
by county in its you're over
year it very significantly at
any given time we we've seen you
know one month will have nothing
next month it can really spike
up in a in a county so having
dedicated family service
employees in each county will
really allow staff to understand
the unique needs of their
community they can work with
families and stay holders and
providers to understand what's
needed and provide an
individualised approach in a
familiar perspective for that
specific community.
The next slide really shows
where that mail treatment is and
as you can see a large
percentage of that falls within
the neglect category what we're
hoping to achieve through our
family services division and
really diverting some of those
cases so that they're not set
for investigations is really
being able to highlight or only
substantiate when it is will
fall neglect so often times it
will be neglect for
issues that may be the family
just doesn't know where to get
services it could be housing it
could be food and securities it
could be clothing issues it
could be medical appointments or
medical neglect we want to take
those and remove them from
protective services
investigation sign side and
really give them the opportunity
to work with family services to
a sign a case worker to them to
kind of do that warm hand off to
community program to get them
the resources that they need so
that they don't end up in
protective services with an
investigation they don't end up
with a neglect substantiation if
they're unwilling to engage in
services and it's well fall and
they are not at all interested
in working to remedy the
situation then that will be
turned back over for
investigations to see if there's
other things that we need to do
to step in in insurer the safety
of that child but being able to
remove a large percentage of
those cases of that are just um
issues that can be resolved
through community services umm I
think will be able to show that
that number for substantiation
of neglect charges well decrease
over the next year as it has
been talked about across the
country there is no reason to
open up an investigation and
substantial substantiate neglect
for poverty i'm and new mexico
sees a lot of poverty.
In the cases that we deal with
and we just want to ensure that
we're giving them a different
path to be able to maintain that
family unit and get the services
they need um and begin to thrive
and continue to work as a family
so family services will be able
to work with them
um over the next year up with
gotten a lot of those positions
funded that has been just by
moving positions around within
the department and pulling them
out from where they previously
sat um and unify them and one
division.
Next I want to talk a little bit
about our resource foster
parents recruitment and
retention
these faster parents that we
have served as a vital bridge
between the child's previous
environment and a stable
nurturing future the temporary
but stable and safe home is
crucial for the child's
emotional and psychological well
being our faster parents provide
support and help children heal
from trauma they build trusting
relationships in their car
consignificantly impact a child
sense of security and self worth
their involvement helps children
adapt and thrive in a new
setting faster parents also
become fierce advertised for the
child's needs including
education health care and social
services while building these
bonds in providing support to
the child they also support the
goal of reunification they play
a huge role in helping prepared
children for permanency plans
whether through a unification
adoption or other longterm
solutions I just want to see
that i'm incredibly grateful to
those who have been braced as
huge responsibility and i'm
hopeful that more will take on
the important title of faster
resource parents
we right now have ongoing
recruitment efforts our staff
participates in events
throughout the state on a
regular basis this calendar year
they've held two hundred and
forty two recruitment events
across the state in addition to
these they provide monthly
support group meetings provide
trainings conduct home studies
and build relationships with
their families the next slide
shows just some photos from a
few of those of bounce I thought
it was important to kind of show
staff out in the community you
know working with families we
have one they did a
faster parent appreciation night
and did a movie and popcorn they
did another appreciation I and
one of those photos were you see
a lot of the parents there and
just in a recruiting events
across the state we currently
have one thousand ninety five
resource foster homes with a
total of two thousand two
hundred and twenty eight
available beds.
Since january we recruited a
hundred and one new non relative
homes and two hundred and fifty
one new relative homes we
currently have two thousand
sixty four kids in care so when
you look at those numbers and
you think you have two thousand
two hundred and twenty eight
available beds in two thousand
sixty four kids and care it
doesn't make sense that we still
have kids steam in offices or in
multipurpose homes and one of
the reasons for that is really
just the type of resource homes
that we need that were not
really targeting so some of the
individuals who end up in office
days or in um rtcs or other
environments are those kids that
have really high needs and we've
been busy checking the box to
recruit more and more families
but we're not really spending
the time to look at the kids and
determine what are the needs
that they have so that we can
match the family to the child's
needs because having additional
bads and additional families
doesn't help us if they don't
meet the needs of the child so
we're taking a really focused
look on those individuals that
were having difficulty placing
we're building out a team for
foster care plus we're modeling
it after oklahoma's who has seen
some very great success in
recruiting um current faster
parents and providing the major
training for foster care plus
i'm in it has really lowered the
number of kids that they have in
office of stays as we call it
but hotel stays as they call it
so umm it has lowered that
number we have a team that's
going out to train with them on
that and we will be starting to
recruit in a more targeted way
to meet the needs of those kids
that were still i'm not able to
find appropriate placement for.
The cabinet
team recommended or put together
to pilot project teams one was
in jonathan county and one was
in sun one those recommendations
came back and asked for a
dedicated staff in each of those
counties to work on recruitment
efforts and so we are currently
recruiting for that dedicated
staff in addition to that were
recruiting for five more um
foster care plus recruitment
specialist one for every county
that or be region that we have
so that they can really work on
that targeted um recruitment
efforts and working with those
families.
Some of the needs that were
really looking for is
individuals who can handle you
know trauma behavioral
challenges or medical needs
those are kind of where we're
missing the mark on kids that
were having difficulty with as
rachel said some of the money
that we used from the behavioral
health money that was allocated
and I believe this money was
expenditure in this matter prior
to the reauthorization in the
change and some of that language
but it was to open am I kids and
albert
and the hope for that was that
it would give us an opportunity
for those individual kids to be
in a multi service home where
they could receive services
while they were there and not be
sleeping in offices and the idea
was to bring them from different
counties throughout the state
for individuals that we were
having a hard time placing or
that were um
you know being placed in
multiple areas and
not being successful in those
placements and so we opened am I
kids in me we've transitioned
six kids through there I believe
they still have four we have
three youth that are eligible to
go there but like anybody else
they're struggling with staffing
and so on several of their staff
have already left since me and
serve it's that same cycle that
we see at way of d with hard to
place kids and
they're seen the same and so as
we're working with them and
they're continuing to staff up
where transitioning those
individuals there
ydi is opening a similar
multipurpose home and albequirky
for females so
my kids is males aged fallen
above um ydi will be females
each twelve minute bone and the
hope is that we can then
transition offers stay females
to this multiple service home
they are required to provide
educational services this summer
several of our use um at emi
worked.
And we worked with the
department of work for a
solutions to do internship
programs for them and bp a
salary for them to be out in the
community they did construction
I think somebody wanted to be a
shaft and works in a restaurant
and so they're actively engaged
with them and trying to get them
some life skills and employment
opportunities so that you know
as the move further you know
towards been on their own that
they have skills available to
them to be able to work in the
community um
the remaining kids that we have
in office days are being
taken care of at the receiving
center in albuquerque for youth
under the age of twelve we've
had several tourism of that
facility recently I think people
really bought it into the media
when they said they were
sleeping on the floors there and
so we've had prospecturian we've
had the news we've had UNM
several different groups that
people are coming to tour that
we've had legislators we've had
judge bega and several of the
judges came to to look at the
facility um I can assure you
that it's an amazing facility
and i'd love to and by any of
you to come just not today cause
they're replacing the flooring
but at any point in time i'd
love you guys to come in toward
that facility um it really is
welcoming environment for kids
and we keep our littles there
when we're having trouble
placing um we recently acquired
a fifteen passenger band from
the department of homeland
security that was left over from
the fires and so they have that
and they go on outings we took
all the kids to the fair um both
the littles and the older kids
from amian those that were at
our office
still so we're trying to get
them out in community and engage
with them and you know they went
to the zoo this summer they did
a movie today while they were
redoing the flooring and so
that's been a huge asset were
really excited about having that
um
and so
that's really our hope to end
the office days is to have those
three facilities where they can
get intensive services.
While we're still looking for
permanent placement and
opportunities for them the hope
is that as we launch the um
faster care plus that we will be
able to target one at a time and
find appropriate placement for
those kids and make sure that
they can have success
the next slide is just a really
another quick video that will be
using in our digital campaign
and will make sure that you guys
get the link for those
I take a little bit about our
training academy and critical is
really the training that were
providing to faster parents and
so we've pulled the five
positions that we had in
protective services to train
faster parents and we've moved
that over to our foster I can
out to our training academy so
all of our training will be
under one roof or hope is that
we will do a better jar of
training foster families
community partners and cyfd
staff.
In an environment that is not
just exclusive to one or the
other for example we do trauma
training and were required to do
it for all of our faster parents
were retired that all of our
community providers take it and
then our staff take it currently
they all do that separately our
staff comes and take certain or
foster families take it we're
hoping to engage them to do that
together to really build those
relationships in that sense of
comrationary so they can
understand the challenges that
the others are facing how some
of the actions that we each take
a fact the relationships in
really trying to build that
community so that were in it
together as opposed to all these
separate entities that all
really have the same goal of
improving the child welfare
system so the training academy
will be for staff and outside
partners as well um
I think that that in it really
goes a long way to try to build
those relationships I know that
we have a long way to go to
rebuild relationships with our
resource families and our foster
families but there's nobody etc
waiting that's not willing to
put in the time in the effort
and do the work to rebuild those
relationships or talking with
other entities you know to
ensure that we can bring
resources to the state umm to
better serve foster families and
so i'm hopeful to have some more
information about those efforts
as we move forward so I think
those are the topics that are
rachel touched down i'm happy to
take questions specifically if
you have um any other questions
or what more information on any
of the work that we're doing so
i'll stand for questions
thank you thank you regional for
the presentation that overview
and secretary for the
covering all three of those as
well
we have representative arms
strong who would like to ask
questions
yeah alright.
We I think have got everyone
else were michael list
thank you madame chair and I
think you offer your
presentation I
wouldn't want your job first and
foremost but I would like you to
do your job I would like you to
know that hope and checking the
box is not enough for me.
I know we've had so many
conversations and some of us
were sitting around here
thinking
here we go again
we're gonna hear the same thing
that we've heard in the past and
so I appreciate you
being there I really do and all
the staff III can't even imagine
the heavy lift that it is
but I do want
i'm exhausted
from hearing this over and over
and over again
so my first question is madam
chair is how many
children do we have sleeping in
offices right now.
Madam chair representative
armstrong I believe as of last
night we had twenty kids in
office.
Okay thank you for that and I
wonder how many faster parents
do you have in your
in your in your files in new
mexico how many foster parents
are there.
For but when he grab that slide
that has those numbers giving a
second
to foot back to it.
Two thousand two hundred and
twenty eight types sorry i've
missed it on the fire so i'll
think you for that
and I wondered how many madam
chair and secretary on the
resource and faster parent
training how many training or
appreciation how many do you do
of those a year and is it a
training and appreciation or are
they separate they are separate
and manager representative i'm
sure they are separate of dense
that we have so appreciation
events are usually help held in
a may june time free but in its
parent and passed her
appreciation
that has typically been stopping
every offers putting that
together umm and then we do
quarterly meetings in every
county with posture families and
then we do training throughout
the year
okay and how are men on
secretarian and madam chair how
are they notified of the
appreciation events or is it for
individual off offices do their
own thing or is that organized
each individual office plans in
a bent and then communicate to
via email and text message with
their foster families.
Okay thank you for that I am
just getting a lot of emails and
text messages that they didn't
know about the events and had
never heard of it so I just want
I just wanna pass that on to you
okay.
I wanted to talk a little bit
about carer is there any
movement on making care
mandating that that the parents
get treatment
madam share representative
armstrong with respect to the
right now for a carer it is
still a voluntary program what
we are looking at right now for
this next legislative session
and we're in discussion about
changing the abuse language to
include ventina so that that
would be separate from carrier
and would be um.
An immediate investigation for
abuse
thank you madame charite I had
heard rumblings of that but you
know right now it's fit in all
next year it may be something
else but I I really think that
if your considering possibly
removing children from the mail
treatment list because
because you think that they're
not eating enough or you know
that something that could be
solved
I think that that adding at just
at separating fetting all out
not going to make that big a
difference and we've got other
drugs that the and other issues
that that parents have
being born addicted basically to
who who knows what it shouldn't
matter
that to me is is neglect an
abuse
and so it shouldn't just be
separated out to still my my
opinion on that
I was curious to know
are you aware of a program to
ifd
paid new day use and family
services to implement the
support faster families who are
willing to take the hard to
place teens are you aware of
that program a matter of show
representative armstrong i'm not
okay it informed the this
program implemented the trauma
and form principles of cabinets
and provided training to newly
licensed faster families as well
as
twenty four seventh support and
mentorship so the kids in the
officers could thrive and a
family setting
can you tell me why this program
was cut
because it was cut
and if it wouldn't have been cut
just think of the progress that
we possibly could have been
making this whole time instead
of reinventing the wheel again
so I if you could look into that
I would love to know why it was
cut.
Manager representative I will
definitely look into that i'm
not where do you know when that
was
I believe it was cut two years
ago.
Yeah.
Are I just want to reiterate
madame chair and and madame
secretary that you know removing
these kids off the list from
mail treatment is is
all that's going to do is
improve your numbers it's not
going to help the kids and so
i'd I really were discouraged
you from removing the kids from
that list
and I have three or four more
questions and I know everybody
else has lots of questions while
hustle up how does the
department plan on to use the
three million reauthorized
appropriations for work force
development
madam share representative
armstrong that is being used for
recruiting a retention efforts
were increasing or efforts to um
with social media with digital
media I think I lead that out
it's about seven little over
seven hundred thousand dollars
some of that will be used for
travel costs to go out of state
for a recruitment efforts and
then we're looking at
um
whether or not we can use that
for
enhancing or providing
incentives for employees who are
going back to school to get
their social work degree.
Okay thank you for that
what actually see why do you
take and to increase the number
of resources faster homes in the
state and what have been the
results you named a few of the
the actions but have you
had anyone knew sign up for a
foster family sir foster
resource management share
representative arms yes as they
mentioned we've had several new
since january I believe we have
fifty three right now that are
going through the home study
process
and those numbers are all all of
those numbers are on the way
that
might be able to find anymore
thank you so a hundred and one
new license non relative homes's
january two hundred and fifty
one new licensed relative
resource home since january and
fifty fiber right now in the
home study process
thank you that's impressive
thank you madame chair i'm i'm
happy to hear that but i'm sad
to her that we still have
children sleeping in offices
even with all those new faster
family so it the numbers are
making a sense to me
to have that many new families
and that many children still
sleeping in in offices I am
anxious to hear what you find
out about why that program was
canceled and i'm curious my last
question is do you have.
Twenty four seven resources for
faster families for hard to
place children
met himself representative
armstrong we do not at this
point.
We have staff that is on call in
the evenings if they are need
something but like actual
resources for them that is
available across the state we do
not
that thank you madame chair and
and madame secretary.
Like I said this is exhausting
and hope and checking the box is
just not enough for me and every
single agency that presents in
front of this committee
is going to be asked some hard
questions when we get a list
I don't know how many trees we
killed for this one but of all
the money that's out there in
all of these agencies and the
money is not being spent
and
the questions aren't being
answered and there's children
sleeping in offices there's
baby's dying every day
reports on the news of
workers which I know you have
not every control over every
worker but smoking pot with
kids
and
what does it were not okay this
is not okay
it's not okay
I think everyone in this room
knows it's not okay
and win
are we going to start making a
difference when.
I've been in here twelve ten
years
ten years i'm looking at others
that have been him much longer
than me
it's still an issue
fix it please
edit them I am trying let us
help you fix it please thank you
manager
think you representative thank
you secretary our next three in
the following order senator
pitya representative vincent and
then representative
okay thank you i'm out in chair
and thank you secretary and
thank you to our lfc entire team
for pulling all of us you know
stuff together for us I really
appreciate that
you I think you're headed in the
right direction I am concerned I
but concerned about a twenty
eight percent vacancy rate you
know
and then some of the areas that
were higher what are you what is
your understanding of what
you're able to to hire of that
twenty eight percent
because i'm very concerned that
this is one of those areas
everybody on this committee that
that that you know this
secretary should be allowed to
fully expand her budget or that
the budget for this department
can you give us any facts there
are whoever wants to address
that one venture i'm senator pda
yes so we have a twenty percent
forced vacancy rate we have um
as regional pointed out earlier
there were some issues with be
budgeting over the last several
years and so the federal revenue
kept increasing with the amount
of general funds for the match
um and we did not recognize that
revenue coming down from the
feds for the last several years
we did and this fiscal year in
our protective services with a
bout of fourteen million dollar
deficit arm so we definitely
spent our money um we did not
revert and we did not draw down
those federal buttons as they
should have we are bringing in
somebody that casey family
programs is providing for us
who's an expert in.
Forty he will be here doing an
audit of our four e draw downs
to make sure that we are
capitalizing on everything that
were eligible to draw down to
ensure that we're doing it
appropriately and if we're
missing something we'll make
sure and capture that and then
really to let us know you know
you have been back to the
funding is gonna stay where it
is right now in our budget
requests we are asking to fill
that gap with general fund
because otherwise in addition to
the twenty percent vacancy rate
we would have to figure out how
we account for the fourteen
million dollars that's not being
drawn down in federal ones okay
thank you madame chair and
secretary appreciate that that
analysis there so if I so it
might understand though that of
the twenty eight percent really
you have an eight percent
vacancy based on what you're
allowed to do so that makes zero
sense to me at all I mean you
wouldn't project the number
unless you knew you needed that
head count to do that work so
this is a department that I mean
III hope I get reassigned to
send it finance again when we go
through the election this year
because if I do i'm gonna be
beaten the drum until somebody
hears me because you're your
area you wouldn't project that
that total amount unless you
knew you needed it or creatively
we're all very creative people
sitting here then I want you to
project a thirty percent higher
so you get what you really need
I don't know how it's to put it
this is the one to just really
get to my right you know how
close that work with you guys
and carried your confirmation
i've been all over this
department trying to help as
much as humanly possible but
we've got to do something here
to get you the ability to staff
the place the way you need to
and if it's if it's federal
money that's not coming in here
we have more money than we know
what to do with you know we and
this is one area that we should
give you what you need what do
you really need
that insurer sell everybody I
appreciate that thank you we did
project in our budget this year
the number of positions that we
do need I don't need the
positions we have vacant
positions.
I just need the funding to fill
the positions and we did project
what we needed to meet the one
hundred percent requirement and
cave and **** those positions
are on our work which we
provided and we did those and
orange so they are positions
that are mandatory for cabinets
compliance um and we added those
you know to our current budget
request I just want to say that
we're not just relying on steak
funding I mean we are looking at
other opportunities we are
working with kellog foundation
in the recently funded
grant for us to put together a
symposium with child welfare
funders across the nation to
really look at innovative ideas
and things that we can do on and
so hopefully all of you would be
interested in participating in
that I believe we're looking at
a december on late december time
frame after hearings are done to
to pull that convenient together
so so amount of chair and and
that madame secretary you know
in my business I aim high and
shoot lows I make sure I can
exactly what i'm trying to get I
want you to do that to I want to
publicly say that right now that
you should ask for one hundred
percent of everything that you
believe not just for cabinets
that you get your budget at one
hundred percent of what it needs
to be
would you can you commit to that
venture center yes I believe
that we have I believe that I
request did shoot at one hundred
percent of what we need but not
not just but would be beyond the
not that you not allowing for a
forced vacancy whatever the heck
that means I know what it means
but when i'm get you what you
really need I will change I will
champ in this for you I promise
you if you if you insist that
you're with me on this thing
thank you yeah and then I just
require the title four e did
that the moneys that are coming
in from for a fostering
connections is that also
drinking at all from the title
for you money or is it still a
hundred percent funding um madam
chose anybody I do not believe
that the title of the funding
per bustering connections were
streaking but I will get
confirmation on that.
I believe that was um.
You can assist me
I was just gonna want it for
rachel before we moved on for
rachel to address the vacancy
and the funded and funded and
the request
so I just wanted to make sure
she had an opportunity to
management chair women when i'll
point to is that volumes that
informed last year's budget if
if that's kind of helpful
context I think the first thing
to know it in thinking about
cities operating budget over
time it's going to be has an a
large vacancy rate and therefore
what has historically been
spending significantly under
budgeted levels so in africa
twenty four
budget at two hundred and twenty
six million actuals for protect
uses protective service there's
actuals are a hundred and eighty
five million in the prior year
you are made some significant
investments on the personal side
particularly in fy twenty three
i'm sorry in a four fy twenty
four bit and you did three
million and a special for that
work force but you also did five
million did you appropriate
placements within salary and
then an additional three million
to fill active if you if you
look at that chart that assured
you it kind of shows how
appropriations have grown grown
over time and for the last few
years and the agency store rate
actually felt this changed in
the last miscall year but that
had been the trend when we look
at cyfdus afy twenty five budget
admittedly I even find it
difficult to talk about funded
versus unfunded rates so I like
to talk about fte the number you
often see in your ps calc you
look at the apply twenty five
but we project that cfd if they
drew down the federal revenue
and at the budgeted level.
They could fill about sixty more
positions however they are
drying down significantly below
that federal level and that's
just a secretary mentioned that
really constrained to their
ability to hire to put that a
little bit in kind text and when
we look at
and when we see that the
department's budget request and
we look at fy twenty four
actuals federal revenue will
come in at about sixty three
million in the prior year I mean
it was around seventy six we are
seeing a drop in that federal
revenue I dropped and it can
have what and I diversions and
what is budgeted and dry down
and to the secretary's point
that does constrain their
ability to hire and they have
start technical assistance and
to figure out what's going out
with head of the
totally
I would just like to add one
thing to that so I know that the
year before it was higher and
then it was lower but I just
want to also point out that we
were required by the federal
government to pay back fight
seven million dollars in january
four inappropriate draw down so
get so so thank you and i'm glad
I asked the question thank you
madame chair and thank you to
both you for those explanations
so I guess the me refrains event
so what i'd like to see you do
has come forward with a a
proposed zero variance vacancy
rate that way which you have
projected and asked for is what
you actually can get whereas
your your kind of like shooting
into the air with a twenty
percent vacancy rate on out of
every five minutes that to me
that's just that's particularly
setting you up for failure I
think in a lot of ways and then
on on the
the the title four e money and
the foster connections program I
did meet recently with your
vendor that is putting your ims
system implementation together
information management system
what's it that
see west serious yes he was yet
and and they volunteered all of
their own I didn't ask them you
know they volunteered to help
find other grant money that is
available because they have a
reach across the country as well
so when you have a meeting with
them again i'm happy to come to
it and.
Remind them that they made that
commitment to me but they would
do that so if you would like
that be great and the memory
trying to have others on the
list so it is just a some some
idea that I would throw out
there for you to consider I was
bouncing it off of our other
professional see why the
legislator representative
charges here we have to we we
talk a lot about this subject is
there been ever been a move to
talk to public school teachers
to have them go into some sort
of that salary augmentation in
the summer where maybe you
wouldn't get a full summer out
of them the first year because
they have I think a month or
forty five days to become
certified to work as a cypd you
know and are in a role like that
I know there are a lot of
certified social work trained
and license people appearedy in
the public schools in all of the
communities where we all live is
there been ever an effort to
maybe have them come in in the
summer have the intensive work
around the child done by the
that the year round staff that
have all of that training
through those summer months but
then have the public school
teachers or that public school
social workers I know the sounds
can't but just think about it
you know have them come in and
do the case work have them come
in and do the custom the the
child touch points that going to
see the child the interviewing
of this batter or whatever or
have them go out on the street
and help you recruit other
people have them in the role
cause they know the job have
them go out and help your
recruit additional folks through
the summer month and then you
interview people through the the
fall or whatever and then
suddenly you you begin to have a
larger group of people helping
you for there's a number of ways
you could use it and then these
folks are going to make more
money in the summer they might
be able talk meant to income
battle and chase the liberties
that was something that we did
try to do this summer we were
too late we should have done it
earlier while they were still in
school it occurred to us like
when school is ending where they
go we could probably use them so
we reached out to teachers that
we knew to see if anybody had
any interest but I think it's
really something that we should
explore with districts to send
something out wider to see um
you know rt slows tend to dip
during the summer because the.
Mandatory reporters are not
there with kids but it would
give a good opportunity for them
to come in and do some of that
keys work with them when cases
are lower to help clear them up
because then when the school
year starts again are cases but
typically spike on the speech if
you could certify them on your
requirements outside of there
there full time job then maybe
they can become a recruitment
arm for you because they live in
every one of our communities
they're all over the state why
wouldn't we utilize that
resource in the summer to help
you with your recruiting efforts
and stuff or or just the actual
day to day work of the okay just
read you can just hit these ones
yesterday knows if you want to
the last one's madam chair are
is your request this year going
to come with a pay increase of
of some significance for for
your staff I mean for for these
box account you know they come
in they work for you for how
long and then they go out and
get themselves a job at
presbyterian or something at a
much higher rate of metal chairs
than everybody that we have done
appropriate placement with the
funding that was given to us i'm
a special appropriation to do
that there's been significant
increases for them there still
some that are waiting for that
but it was hard for me to come
to you and talk about a fourteen
million dollars deficit but i'm
giving increases to staff and so
it's something that we're really
weighing but you know we did
recently with the new
appropriate placement that they
did for attorneys we started
losing several of our children's
court attorneys because we
didn't have funding and so we
did do those increases only
because we were seeing them
depart to department of justice
or healthcare authority and
other agencies so we did not
include an increase on first out
my understanding is that state
personnel office is doing a
study across the state of wages
and that's something that ls was
I believe doing a placement
around study on salaries for
state employees and our hoop is
that at that point they will
raise those for child welfare
workers along with funding to be
able to do that I appreciate
that and I know you have others
now insurers all stop now but
back to the conversation real
quickly.
Before I wrap up on the how
you're going to a propose your
vacancy range by doing this and
as you make that decision I
would really like to know that
so that I can try to help you
know on this site for you
alright thanks.
Think you senator pity next
representative vincent then
representative travels then
speaker motinas
thank you madame chair and that
secretary
I always get nervous
i'm i'm nervous for you
nervous too
you know III really
whatever I said here and look at
you and your staff.
Knowing that you have to come in
here and you have to set before
these panels and i'm thankful
that i've been on the panel with
most of the cycle people because
I have really got an educated
one and i've got a lot more to
go but i've been educated on
what's going on
and
knowing that you have to come in
here I love what you have to say
here
this is good stuff cause you
have plans that you're trying to
roll out
it's just the implementation of
the plans and rolling them out
and sometimes I feel like and
i'm not reprimand and i'm just
telling you how I feel I I feel
like
this is the good stuff that we
want to hear
but we hear it over and over and
over and it just doesn't get
rolled out and I will I actually
all you and
deputy secretary sound of all an
apology because I told you I was
going to come and spend a day
with you and I had every
intention to do that until you
know my county cut on fire and
almost flood it away
and we've been pretty busy with
that but I do plan on redeeming
that promise to come and help
you and last time we read for
tallis
deputy secretary phoenix was
presenting there and I made the
example then i'm gonna continue
to make this example is I see a
department literally drowning
you thread and water and you're
not getting aware and as
humanitarians we want to throw
you a safety device we don't
want you to drown
which are literally drowned in
and it's at the expense and i'm
not even saying you're not try
and I know you try and I I know
you try and hard but it's at the
expense of.
Kittles and.
I'm just i'm blown away by the
thirty four percent turnover
why
I know there's a you don't have
to give me a long list but why
are thirty four percent turn
over madame chair.
Oh madame chair representative
then said I think it's an
incredibly hard job and I don't
really feel like our staff fills
the support that it takes to do
this type of job rate
I mean even just my leadership
team you know were there every
day working really hard we're
not out in the trenches were not
visiting with those families
were not seeing that front line
work in the trauma that it takes
rate but even for me when I open
up that newspaper and I read
about a dumpster of fire I read
about our failings it really
makes you stop in question am I
doing the right thing and my
putting my energy into the right
things and I am sure our staff
feels that way every day and
when somebody leaves and they
get you know twenty more cases
because that key slow gets
distributed
I think at some point they just
make that decision that they've
given their all and don't have
more to get up.
Thank you madame chair and I
proceed that answer because
in my past career
it was a very high intense
benefit chief is a very high
intense job and when you're
going up there doing the best
you can you've always got the
one percentage that are armed
chair quarterback and everything
telling you you know you didn't
do that good and it does bring
them around down however i've
literally heard these committees
say whatever they can do to help
you guys
to get ahead that's what we want
to do and as far as money goes
and personnel and raisin raising
salaries
get new get you additional help
but then I I hear that these
appropriations are made and
there's money not getting spent
do you not have time to spend
the money do you not have the
vision to spend the money madam
chair
madam share representative I
don't think it's that we don't
have the vision um I think it
just is a matter of you know the
day the day and trying to get
that done and we've.
Doesn't get spent in then we re
authorize it and so
I think we have really solid
plans right now on spending that
money especially the behavioral
health twenty million dollars
you know that's going back and
forth when I first got here a
year ago I don't believe any of
that has been spent in you know
we worked and put a plan
together that's partly our money
part health care authority there
was transition there with carry
coming on board or secretary of
me home and so just lots of
conversation lots of different
perspectives on what that needs
to look like and I think we are
now all on the same page as a
brachel mentioned earlier week
i'm done in rfe we got huge
response I think there were
eighteen providers on that
responded on new services or
expansion of services which is
really exciting were right now
reviewing all of those and
hopefully we'll be making awards
to ten of them as we look at
that funding if there's money in
other categories that looks like
it's not going to be spent of
we're gonna continue with that
list of providers and use
additional money there to fund
more of those new initiatives.
Thank you matter chair and
I know you have a lot of staff
here
and i'm gonna put you on the
spot and ask your question
because I keep hearing this over
and over over limit let me build
you up i've asked a lot of
people about you and they're
cheering you along they want you
to succeed
now if they were telling me that
they don't want you to succeed
i'd want to know why and then
i'd probably be in favor of
finding a new secretary but
there's a lot of favorable
people that want you to succeed
and they want your staff to
succeed and.
I like your roll out here on
your foster parents
whenever you were whenever you
talk about your foster parents
when you're talking to one that
has never done it you're trying
to get him to do it what will
happen how do you receive them
how do they receive you.
Madame share representative I
think it's best i've been trying
to have more conversations with
boston parents just to
understand that I have to say I
had a great conversation with
somebody it was just completely
out of the blue I went to my
granddaughter's volume ball game
and there was a faster parent
there with a two month old baby
and somebody approached me and
said oh there's a poster pair
here she was to talk to you and
i'm gonna say I initially went
staff i'm like oh my god to she
heat us that was my first
question because that's what I
consistently hear like faster
parents heat you
she was the most pleasant person
and had the most wonderful thing
to see about staff and it
completely changed my
perspective in having those
conversations right and because
you do your afraid of what
that's going to be and i'm like
I manner game when my
granddaughter into I really want
to have you know this heated
conversation with somebody who
feels like we're completely
failing
but I think you know it depends
I watched my staff at the state
fairer I was there on saturday
i'm an engaging with people and
talking with them about it and
people were really excited and
they actually stopped you know a
lot of them said no they had no
interest but they actually start
to listen and enter consider
like what is it really mean and
I just think we need to figure
out you know how do we engage
with them and then how do we
support that might I honestly
feel like that's one of the
areas where we've gotten so busy
with just trying to stay afloat
that we stopped being that
support and that advocate for
those foster families as well
thank you and madame chair
this is another question that I
just want to jump out there and
ask do you in your staff feel
like an armbudsman is the right
her wrong approach.
A madam chair representative
instant I don't believe that
it's the right approach I
believe in oversight I do um I
think there is quite a bit of
oversight right now I think if
we could enhance with the
substitute care advisory council
does and hold them to their
responsibilities through statute
you know that could play that
role and then if it's determined
that it doesn't in their needs
to be more than you know I would
love to have that conversation
we got our office of ad because
he we have a director who she's
on there you'll see her and our
leadership team
she is now setting up that
office about it can see it
includes our constituent
services they get a high number
of coles you know on a regular
basis for advocacy work in for
you know solving problems and I
think they do a really good job
I think there's you know several
people who may be are afraid to
approach the department I hear a
lot that they're afraid of
retaliation or you know talking
with the department and you know
maybe that was the keys I don't
think that's the case of the
department today.
Thank you madame chair just for
the record you know a lot of the
people that I talk to they feel
like there needs to be an
ombudsman put in there but I
always like to talk to you know
the secretary and see do you
think that didn't just not want
to be have the oversight or does
it does you know would you would
you be willing to take
established having some
oversight just to wear maybe
they could guide direction
because you'll this picture is
so broad we got to help you you
know get back here because
you're out here and the other
the last question that I had
madame chair was
as far as fast your parents.
How many of you lost since let's
say january
madam chair representative have
been sent it was going to say
it's probably a good number I
think our numbers are setting
you look at how many we've
brought in but were really not
you know we are maybe a hundred
more than we had i'm earlier in
the year and so when you talk
about bringing in three hundred
and fifty and your net gain is
maybe a hundred were losing them
out a rapid rate and I think
it's really something that we
really need to pay attention to
some of those are foster are
relative placements and so
obviously you know when that
child points permanency with a
them then they're not gonna
continue to do that it might be
a grandparent tourist you know
and answer an uncle so those we
expect kind of to even flow but
we do lose some that are not in
relative placements and we need
to pay better attention to the
y.
Thank you madame chair and I
would love to see so when you
lose a foster family
or you lose an employee normally
you would do you know an
accident of you and maybe keep
that as a wrecker do where I
would love to be able to see it
i'm sure the whole committee
would like to see but i'd love
to see why do you not want to be
a foster parent and I know it's
a lot of responsibility and I
know that whenever you become a
foster parent maybe you signed
up for something you didn't know
you were signing up for
or as an employee was it the
supervisor they didn't like or
was it the working conditions
they didn't like her is at all
specifically you know just the
hardships of watson you know
maltreatment of of children so
if you would consider that I
would love to see exit
interviews on
faster families as well as
employees and i'm still gonna I
haven't given up on you yet and
i'm still i'm still route for
you i'm gonna come down to hang
out with because I know it's
gonna be bad I read on an
ambulance for twenty five years
and I I got to see a lot of
things that I really didn't want
to see
but I did make it the whole
twenty five years because
there's a lot of good and you
know my good always outweighed
my bad and i'm hoping that your
bad is not outweighing the good
but that's what i'm afraid of
thinking manager
thank you representative vincent
representative traves then we're
going to go to speaker martinez
and senator lopez thank you
so
i've you've presented before
helping human services as some
of the set these issues were
some of the same interest that
you presented some of its new
but one of the things that I
wanted to ask about is the
recurrence of maltreatment
and
my own sense is that.
That has a lot to do that could
have a lot to do with the
experience and skill level of
the workers and that's something
that I think we really need to
look at I think it would help in
terms of training I think it
would help the terms of you know
preventing some of that
recurring mel treatment so one
of the questions that I have is
when that happens
when a child suppers a
reoccurrence of mel treatment
what is the department do in
terms of helping that worker
understand what happened and how
it could have been prevented
manor and share representative
chavers so when that happens
those workers have staffings
with their supervisors or the
managers to talk about the cases
and what the outcomes of those
cases are um to really provide
that guidance and and give them
the opportunity to ask questions
or you know look at the case and
see if there's something that
could have been done differently
and they just want to clarify
like we're not taking any of
those kids and just taking them
off the list of negligent what
we're really trying to do is
provide different services to
them up front through family
services so that you know if it
is an issue of housing or even
if it's educational or medical
neglect rate is there a reason
for that medical class do you
not have transportation can we
help to provide transportation
so that you can get your child
where they need to go and then
it's not a substantiated case
it's actually us you know being
proactive and trying to provide
services to families so in terms
of so that's more neglect rate
that you're talking about so in
terms of the child abuse
repeated sexual abuse I I guess
that's what i'm really asking
about those those better much
more serious I think some things
are related to poverty rate and
and those situations need to be
addressed and they should be
addressed at the front end when
that that intake first comes in
and so when we have a case when
you have a case of a kid who has
been put back into the home and
there's repeated.
Physical abuse repeated central
abuse you know how do do you go
with that worker and then the
other question that I have two
is you know one of the concerns
that I have is their supervisors
may not have all that much
experience either in the
department so how are you sort
of guiding both of them together
the worker and the supervisor
melanchol representative shovers
I think that is something that
we're really hoping to address
through our new academy I mean I
think I agree with you a lot of
our supervisors are employees
that have been there a year or
two ray and so maybe they are
the best person to move into
that position at that moment but
still lack some of that
experience and skill to be able
to you know fully staff those
cases with their sport needs to
be able to really identify and
look for you know triggers that
maybe they have been missed in
replacing that child back in
that family or two soon or you
know I think what we're seeing
from some of our reviews is when
we refer out to a provider for
specific service says of are
those services actually being
provided or are they just you
know kind of touching the
surface and then they're saying
what they went through services
and your reunification is
appropriate so really looking at
how we're holding our providers
accountable to ensure that
they're providing the services
that were engaging with them for
as well
okay and then my other questions
have to do with foster current
as on page twenty one that i'm
looking at and you say that see
where he has dedicated seven
positions solid for recruitment
and that's around the state
correct these are new positions
so we have staff right now these
are positions that will be
dedicated for our new foster
care plus and this is really to
look at faster families
that will be working with
oklahoma on their model for
foster care plus so it was
faster care plus is that like
treatment foster care it is
similar to treatment **** care
it is you know release.
Forward those individuals with
higher needs I opened them to be
able to okay so right now see
why if he has some kids in in
treatment foster care right and
these are not these are ****
yesterday homes these are
separate form at homes bad other
agencies run other treatment
plastic agencies right so what's
the difference between the two
between the two levels of kids
these would be a step down so if
treatment foster care is not the
day this is for that individual
it's kind of a step down but
they still need intensive care
so tell can you kind of give me
some examples of what the simple
I look like with us and so with
this step down the step down so
it would be typically for some
of those kids that we have an
officers so high behavioral
needs um
high medical needs
that don't really require a
medical provider to give that
care.
The.
And why are those kids are are
the cheaper foster homes
rejecting those kids are they
too easy for them what's
madam and share of
representative chavis yes we've
seen a huge number of refusals
to take some of those kids and
you know we've had conversations
you you set went up with us to
talk with some of those I think
again there's issues with the
department and communication but
I think from the beginning of
the year out of a hundred we
probably had seventy that were
rejected
so then that that's it i'm glad
you reminded me about that
because then manager sorry then
that's economy next question so
so we had that that plemary
meeting and then there was
agreement to sort of deschedule
another meeting because I think
that we what we need to do
matter chair is really look at
improving the communication
between those foster
treatment agencies there peter
foster treatment families and
agencies because they are really
a very valuable resources to
take some of these kids so i'm
hoping that we can you know set
up a meeting like really soon to
be to continue that conversation
show representative shoppers I
believe my assistant was going
to should have breached out to
your it it's a schedule I know
okay I asked him to reschedule
that because I do want to get
back together you know one of
the things from that meeting
that we realized is really are
package of information that are
going not just to treatment
poster cares but to foster
parents in general um really
were working on improving the
packets of information that are
going to them so that they have
a full picture of what it is
that were from asking or what it
is that there i'm really been
asked to do that i'm sure about
him secretary it's ticket
so then my next question is is
around am I several of us have
have gone to visit ami and
it's through their staff as
quick because those kids are so
difficult manager
they should be in the repeat of
poster care or maybe residential
tri.
I don't know but congregate care
is not best practice on my
question is why do we keep doing
it
madam share representative
chavers it was really a decision
that I made whether we do a
multi service home or continue
with office days then with
office days that's affecting you
know if we have twenty kids it
could be fourteen different
officers and then we have staff
in those offices twenty four
seven so that was a huge burden
on the staff and we were really
starting to see the turnover in
the burn out of those staff and
so in order to have some relief
for staff and we did the moto
purpose home so that we could
have one location we could
provide education and treatment
for them but you're right during
credibly difficult journals and
those are the kids that were
asking our staff to take care of
twenty four seven after you know
working all day and you know we
did look at the opportunity of
should we hire dedicated stop in
the officers but that would be
twenty four seven care in thirty
three counties
you know because we don't know
what you don't have an office
day in those countries so madam
chairman of secretary than all
of the kids are being brought to
albert at this point that is the
plan yes.
The.
I mean I think that's mad i'm
chair madame circuit I mean
that's really very difficult if
you're looking at reuniting the
kid with their family
because it's just not possible
to do that at your if they're an
album you're bringing a kid up
from lost christmas it's just
not
madame share representative
which I was I one hundred
percent agree with you like I
said it was a decision whether
we keep them in offices with
staff maintaining that um and I
mean I think you all sign the
media we had police been called
to offices routinely in many
locations and it was not
situation that we could continue
with our staff
and then that and share amount
of secretary on the list of
university
I don't see any u and m doesn't
have a program yet but I don't
see any
and this is just a suggestion
universities and surrounding
states on the worst.
That would be my suggestion
another the only other comment
that I wanted to make is that
you know
cyfd
goes through
every time we have a new
governor of secretary and
we
would you call it remodeling
which are called we organization
and back in the eighties and
nineties the department was
under a federal coincident
the department at that point in
time was under you
human services
and then moved over to a new
department was created so
children you think families but
that at that point in time you
met sickle was really seen as a
model in terms of child welfare
we had a cho well for a unit
family preservation unit and
really the call was to keep kids
you know out of foster here we
had a very robust foster care
unit as well that recruited and
trained and provided support to
foster families so I think we
can get there again
i'm not so sure that we can do
that under the current model
and I think that we owe to our
kids to do something different
and to do something better thank
you manager
thank you representative
travelers we're gonna go to
speaker martiners than senator
lopez and representative harm
you know and i'm just so folks
no I you know we are a week
behind schedule
but take your time with
questions you know there's a lot
of these questions are really
important and so I don't want to
rush them and you know we'll
just edge into our own dinner
plans thanks
thank you man cheers to take a
seller's good cu
this is a difficult conversation
for all of us and I know that it
is for you as well
you you talked a lot of your
presentation about
vacancy.
Rate and turnover
and I think we start at the top
you're the third cy of these
secretary in five and a half
years
around the fifth pd secretary I
think
I can go on point is
there's something it's not
working some things missing
and I think that unfortunately
for good folks like you who have
jumped into this to make a
better
emerge staff.
I can only imagine how
frustrating it is
that almost six years into this
administration we're on the
third see web desecretary I can
only assume a third
different way of doing things
rate new leadership
that's an issue
in terms of residential
treatment for some of these more
troubled youth does the state
have enough.
Residential treatment beds for
those youth.
Um madam service your speaker no
we do not
and I think the same can be said
for a dots who need treatment
again
special session about the safety
where we were asked to create a
program through which we would
commit people to treatment
when there is no capacity for
treatment now why make sure we
understand that no capacity to
treat all of these people
including young people within
the caby system.
In terms of
first of all
in terms of you hiring I I
appreciate how much work has
gone in and for you guys to be
visible and he had a huge huge
first step
are there more intentional
strategies under way it sounds
like you all are going to career
fares you you guys are doing all
the right things
it is are there partnerships
with universities you you
mention something with you know
some of the universities is is
there anything specific you can
point to through which we are
recruiting
young professionals or soon to
be professionals straight out of
college into
into your department
of madam chairman speaker we
have this stipend program that
we work with local you know new
mexico universities with with
both eastern western highlands
the person who was running the
site in program for cyfd left
um and so we are rebamping that
program were working really
closely with
higher ed with secretary
rodriguez to help us to build
those relationships with those
universities and but we're
hoping to increase the statement
program we've also started the
program with dws that I spoke to
earlier and that's kind of a
internship for a younger
individuals who haven't quite
decided if they want to do
social work maybe they're during
early child heard maybe you know
not sure to bring them on and
have them work as case workers
or cases or transport to really
kind of introduce them to that
type of work in our hope is then
to be able to kind of support
them through um that journey in
hopefully steer them toward
social work thank you ma'am
chair and secretarian is this is
a sort of what the I think it
was the inspired program you
mentioned that highlands is out
is that part of that
in whose paying for that program
madame chairman is to speak at
this point highlands received a
federal grant one that is pain
for the first one hundred
individuals to come through
that.
And we're asking for additional
funding in the next budget cycle
poor training and development
and part of that training would
go for um supporting this
program thank you very much
victory so so see what they
would be asking for the
appropriation or would it be
highlands you ever did not
highlight okay thank you for
that
I think somebody else already
but how many children are arm
living in the facilities and in
the office and things at twenty
k and what what are the age
ranges
madam chair was just speaker
that the aim to age ranges of
kids in offices and so we
include the receiving center as
part of the office stay and it
could be anywhere from newborn
to seventeen wow
well they don't typically live
in the office but they come to
the receiving center of while
we're processing that and
getting them placed and so that
would count you know if they're
there for a period of time
typically they are there for
maybe two or three hours while
we're getting their foster
parent lined up.
Got it up and
you said you have
there's a lot of paper appears
apologies how many fast
repairers you have
are we currently have one
thousand ninety five faster
homes and how many children on
average or each of those homes
carrying for.
Our licensing allows up to seven
I think there have been
instances and i've mentioned it
before where there could be more
than seven licensing is up to
seven and we since the last
hearing had been doing an audit
of those to make sure that we're
not overplacing and homes
but we currently have
about twelve hundred beds
available
thank you madame chair and and
secretary
in terms of children's court
attorneys how many do you have
and how many do you need
a manager mister speaker I can
get you that exact number I
don't know how many we currently
have I know that we've had
several leave over the last
probably four or five months
we did increase salaries for
them I think I mentioned that
earlier because we were seen
such a mass exodus of that
we've been doing recruiting
efforts and as I said we created
the in the local position so we
did recruit recently three right
out of law school who worse
scheduled to sit for the bar who
we have come on board and I
think hopefully that can be a
really good transition for
trying to bring them in often
got
thank you madame chair and and
sector are there
is there an effort to work with
the union last school to bring
people in it immediately as a
graduate madam chair mister
speaker yes we are working
closely with you and i'm law
school and are attending some of
their events we've done virtual
events with their students and
are doing a lot of recruiting
efforts with them got it thank
you
madame chair and and secretary
in terms of
interest of oversight and this
goes to to my colleagues
question earlier in terms of
oversight
you made it clear that my number
position would not be something
that you would support what what
kind of outside.
Oversight would you support
items shows mr speaker
it's not that I wouldn't support
oversight I I feel like that's a
great way for you to get an
evaluation and understand what's
working what's not working as I
said earlier you know we were
bringing in somebody to do a
four year review where bringing
somebody ends look at our fact
system into a review you know we
have different chasing family
programs coming in to look at
our um
prevention plan and give us a
thoughts and ideas so I welcome
outside perspective to really
take a look at that
I just feel like there is you
know a lot of oversight right
now we have the mediator the
kevin s arbitration we have the
coneutals that cut men and
really due case reviews we have
the federal reviews there are
three different reviews that we
undergo from the federal side
you know there's the substitute
current bisory council that
comes in and does review of
pieces there is a water review
of the department on so i'm not
seen that i'm opposed to having
oversight I just think if we
could look at all of the
different elements of what that
looks like you kind of come up
with one system of oversight
that you know really gives us
the opportunity to
focus in on what that looks like
and like I said with our office
of constituent services and
office of advocacy a lot of the
concerns and complaints that we
get from outside come in through
there so
thank you for that but wouldn't
you agree that
it seems it seems to me
in my ten years as a member it
seems to be that none of the
oversight strategies whether
they were implemented by the
prior and restriction of this
one are working I mean things
seem to be getting worse
so wouldn't you agree that maybe
it's it's a good time to from
the outside look in an and it's
not to be punitive I mean I
think.
You know this is a no problem
this is what so
hard for me to understand that
this is not a problem created by
this administration it's been
going on for years it's an
inherited problem of anything
unfortunate nearly five and a
half years into it now we own it
right that's just how it works
and I have a hard time
understanding why we wouldn't
want
somebody to look under the hood
to tell us what's going on
otherwise we risk these you know
pulling you in front of a
committee lfc ccj health human
services whatever other
committees out there mean I have
been asked by the number
security to see why i've deal
with that committee which is you
know now the hunor there but
it's a process that is not quite
leading to results why wouldn't
you all want an outside agency
to
evaluate and then propose
solutions alongside all
a matter of is just speaker I
don't disagree with you on
oversight but when we say we
don't want it to be punitive I
think the recommendation had the
oversight the ombuds at the
attorney general's offers and I
think just in nature for that
just staff knowing that you know
they're being looked at a
reviewed from a lens of the
attorney general's office I
think is really just kind of
intimidating app for staff.
Hi
I I don't know that there's I
mean if their serve employee
selling week to a kid under his
care absolutely that person
should be held right honourable
and go to prison if convicted
I don't know that any other
proposals i've seen whether or
not their house that the age
offers would subject any of your
staff members to any type of
legal action it's really more
about protecting the rights of
the child and ensuring that that
child is receiving the supports
and the
appropriate interventions
through the state because after
all when a kid goes into the in
into sacracity when ultimately
you are the guardian rate as
secretary and we all have a
responsibility as legislators to
back you up and support you and
do our best for that child does
that make sense yes absolutely
so you know we that the house
I think he wasn't recession a
pass number of bills you can
expect those bills to come back
I promise you that they're going
to come back if there is a
crisis to address in the state
it is not
it is the well being of these
kids you know I I travel the
country talking about how great
new mexico is for children we've
invested we have a
constitutional right to early
childhood we have in early july
trust find we have an office of
early childhood we are making
those big bold investments up
streaming those investments so
that in twenty years new mexico
to transformed please
unfortunately we have too many
of our kids who are caught in
that in between and these are
kids who are going to school
right now probably about to get
out of school to get out for
here.
They're an elementary school
and they might be living on the
streets they may be kids in
faster care
or god for bed there in an abuse
of home and we have yet to do
anything about it
as I travel the country talk
about how in new mexico we are
rebuilding the village that it
takes to raise a child
but unfortunately a feel like
we're failing the most
vulnerable and these are the
kids that are under
the supervision the perview.
Of see why
i'm all in to does everybody
else point i'm on to help you
all find the funding streams I
mean quite frankly I think it's
a little bit ridiculous for
state agencies to have to go to
foundations for money to put
together summits we have a hard
money to do this stuff with i'm
here to help support you all
build those budgets to do better
by his children but these little
kids but these little babies.
But it's hard for me to
understand
why we are so resistant to
outside evaluation to us fresh
survives to protect the rights
of these kids again not about
punishing you incredible staff
I know some of a personally in
they truly do god's work
they do
we have to support
and as the political winds
change right
we're all gonna be gone at some
point from our elected positions
the ones who remain are your
civil service professionals and
I want to leave
a strong
system in place so that your
folks can continue to do their
good work long after we're gone
so you all should expect
legislation in the upcoming
session
to help support you
and that will include outside or
site that will include funding
that will include all these
different strategies to ensure
that kids have access to the
research is that they need and
that faster families have access
to the resources that they need
because it's going to take all
of us to to to fix this in again
public safety begins with the
safety of our kids at their home
if we can't take care of that
nothing else really matters
thank you very much thank you
for your time sector
thank you speaker next we're
gonna go to a senator located
thank you madame chair and I
apologize I was a bit late
coming in but I would venture to
see that some of this
information may have been shared
also with courts corrections in
justice last week in and asked
them with the senate memorial
five task force also so I
appreciate.
Madam chair.
The job that are employees have
it see why fd is hard and i've
mentioned this at one of our
previous tasks force meetings
for a set of memorial five
it's a hr factor
human resources
our employees are doing their
best
but when they hear.
The difficulties
that are happening
and the disparagement that we
have about our employees is kind
of hard to go to work
and I appreciate the plan that
you have your in front of us
madame secretary madame chair
because I think that shows that
there's a commitment from the
state from the department and
saying that we value our
employees
and mr chair you know when you
have
employees
having to take care of them and
working with them and making
sure that that value was there
and of course it is pay making
sure that they do receive the
pay appropriate but also um you
know is it's just an internal
thing and how we treat our
employees it's it's the value
and if a person is not valued
they're not going to stick
around
it is what it is whether it's
through the media for us because
in our roles as legislators and
others in the community are
advocates and it's a hard it's a
hard job for those persons to
keep working up
so I want to say thank you to
our employees
thank you for the work that they
do because it's not easy
years ago I had a chance to go
on a visit
and
what I saw is an observer broken
heart
and this was about I will say
twenty years ago mr chair better
chair
i've been around a while.
And it broke my heart back then
but what we're also dealing with
madame chair is society and all
the other ills that are coming
and it's the drugs it's it's
everything of who we are it's a
mental health issue that we're
dealing with
and it's not just within the
department i'm just saying as we
are as a community when we have
not invested over time madam
chair in our community we've
lost track.
And it could have been down in
the downturn back in the two
thousand when we had to cut a
lot of different programs than a
lot of things and if you haven't
those who were here that he keep
the books you can see where we
had to make cuts it was hard
for those who were here in the
twenty sixteen time we still had
to make cuts
and they are still hard and
those with support services that
the state makes but then you
look at the counties we look at
the department of health in the
public health offices I mean
there's the infrastructure madam
chair that the state has not
continued our support.
So fast forward and on also
include that within the school
systems too because schools
madame cherries in north part of
that first responder we've cut
back on them too go back and
look it's within this twenty
year period but things build
upon each other madam chair
and yes we've had many
secretaries come I know i've
sacks I was chair of the rules
committee I have seen them come
and go
we've had persons who have sat
on that chair madame secretary
who didn't know anything about
what was going and i'm not going
to go into particulars.
But when you don't have someone
there who's committed someone
who tries to learn the
department fails the distance
the people don't feel valued and
ultimately madam share is the
children and families
so I think that's in my
estimation madam chair that's
where we're out there at this
point we've been in a crisis for
a long time
we've had.
Dous should have happened it
should never have taken place
but it's also reflected with a
society we live in madam chair
and what I look out is we also
have to reflect back on what
society and what are communities
are doing rate what are we doing
as a community because it also
falls back on us in our
communities
to be the eyes in ears about how
we help families who are
increases too
it's serious I have some in my
own neighborhood that i've
worked with and i've helped over
the years
some of us know madame chair we
have the privilege to make a
phone call and help connect for
services
some of us don't do that and I
don't see my colleagues i'm
seeing in the community as
general
I believe madam chair and
there's some recommendations
that are here that um that i've
seen i've seen is in a couple of
committees already
of really with what are
oversight mechanisms are.
Accepts you too care advice
recounts all has done some good
work and I think needs more
support.
I was on their meeting zoom
meeting this past friday they're
adopting some new changes and
such but they need some new
members to participate
so how are we going to help
recruit members for that
at courts and corrections and
justice last week we heard about
the child fatality review
that information needs to be
shared with us madam chair
I love emails emails are great
but we get that glassed over
lurkers I get so many emails I
don't sit there and click and
clerk i'm still all fashion
where I like a paper so there's
maybe some changes where we need
to also see some of that
information madam chair madame
secretary I think that some of
these recommendations are
wonderful in those or where we
start.
Change is going to be slow
but I believe that maybe there
are some changes within cyfd
that need to happen
maybe we need to remove a few
responsibilities and sharon with
some other department so that
there's just a focus of child
protective services and juvenile
justice
maybe early childhood education
i'm sorry the speakers not here
that you department can help in
some other realms.
They're their capsuling the
early childhood hello early
childhood you know age range
family intervention maybe we can
work with secretary gregansky
and looking at some other ways
of movement but there's a lot of
your shoulders madame secretary
and for your own staff employees
you know the issue one on the
set under the at ccj course
corrections and justice last
week we heard that there were
approximately fourteen attorneys
to left
that's hard you know how hard it
is when you have to go represent
families and now you are less
fourteen
children advocates I mean their
attorneys what is that due to
who's left
that is hard
and as an attorney it makes it
very hard to figure out what
you're going to do because your
value you know your focused on
what you're supposed to be
doing.
What are we doing to recruit
new attorneys to come in I know
there is a chance at a change I
think within your own leadership
to have somebody who's the chief
children's court attorney
but in what's the revamping of
that how are you going to feel
that vacancy because our
children need representations
proper
and madam chair we've heard
about other representation when
a child even the juvenile
justice system
right legal later whenever it's
going to come and represent or
whoever that's willing to
represent they just meet the kid
that first day
talk about being represented and
really having an ideas to what's
really happening with our
children and families
I could go on madam chair
there's still much for us to
look at
I think it's the prevention that
we need to really look out and
support as to how the children
who are really being abused
sexually abuse and such as to
how we can do that prevention
their children's code
improvement task force has some
recommendations to change the
way we approach
neglect and some others is not a
changing but it's the definition
of how we look to focus how we
can put
money yes but we need people who
were going to do this work right
employees
who can do this work to go do
the intervention
we have a state that some
poverty madam chair
we'd care we don't have a white
pick of fence for everybody and
how we address the issue in
poverty in the state of new
mexico is another factor that we
have to really own up to
we have billions of dollars
sitting in a nice little bill
wherever it's out
but how do we do that investment
madam chair that really can
affect these families who need
some help
and it's financial
and some other areas that I am
you all have heard it but it
it's a bandwagon that I will be
repeating over and over.
As setting us closer
so I might hear I just hoped it
for me it's having that
representation for our our
children and I hope that there's
some serious efforts to be made
to recruit and replace those
attorneys who are gone
because of a chill doesn't have
the proper representation
that leads to other things
so just come in madame chair I
appreciate being able to sit
here with you today i'm just a
guest for today but it's a
concern and how we address this
crisis we do have one
but.
It's working together with
community advocates and having
that open mind as to how we make
that change and i'm hoping that
the executive a governor
resulted helping and willing to
make some changes to
thank you
thank you senator so just to
remind everyone we have a
wonderful presentation coming up
after this and the topics
include national best practices
and child welfare system
improvement and implementing
prevention and early
intervention as well as a
strengthening system oversight
and accountability so
with that we have one more
representative who was on the
list I know I have a whole long
list of questions but rather
than
take the time to ask them what
i'm gonna do and recommend that
any other legislators who may
have outstanding questions is
i'm going to get my questions to
rachel and then you know she can
get them to you and and we can
do follow up that way but with
that representative her meal.
Madam chair madame secretary
thank you so much for being here
it's certainly isn't an easy job
is it and
I look out and I see my
colleagues for twenty five years
that I have worked with and I I
thank you for your work for
children and
and I say that because I spent
the twenty five years working
for children as well and so
my background comes definitely
with those boots on the ground
those stories of burn out those
stories of a
infense who have sexually
transmitted diseases I have been
that worker
holding two year olds who have
died and I have been that worker
so
one of the concerns that I that
I do have is that
when we have children in offices
we have just admitted that we
are not following cabinets
and
how can we help you resolve that
you know that I come from a
family up adoption that was
adopted from cyfd at the age of
ten and a we are not okay
and the ramifications of that
are that even as adults we
struggle with asus and I know
with several of you I have
shared the stories of my family
and I know that in honouring my
brothers my sisters my parents
I chose this line of work it is
not easy but I do know that
there are solutions I do
and if cyfd
if we don't have the oversight
through the attorney general's
office
madam secretary is there an
office.
Where you would feel comfortable
with that oversight happening
manage I represent him how to
meal I think that they're you
know could be a solution to
oversight I have said you know
probably i'm not opposed to
oversight I think it's a good
thing and so I would be happy to
engage in conversation and
that's on what that could look
like in.
Thank you madame chair and
madame secretary because I think
we're well beyond
not not having that oversight
and and you know that our
journey started almost thirty
years ago with my family and
still my baby brother is fifty
now and still dealing with what
asus and trauma have caused and
those ramifications to our
extended family so another
question I have is
I was I was somewhat concerned
madam chairman secretary for the
trump informed care for foster
families and I see that we still
have a balance of one point five
million
so has that happened at new
york yeah that's new money this
year okay okay thank you
and then finally
I know that madam chair and
secretary I am a huge proponent
of ececd and
i'm probably a little biased I
think that they have all the
answers and they're amazing
so III don't want to infuse them
into this situation without of
course you speak into them but I
do know that we have boots on
the ground when it comes to
providing
in home home visiting services
for from pre natal through at
least five
I know that these agencies have
social workers in and care
coordinators and therapists
and I know that in twenty twenty
three I had requested that we
work in tandem so that we can
fill those gaps within CYFD can
you share have you done that
have you investigated that
component
madam share representative of
how to meal I think that is a
lot of work that we're doing and
family services and ca.
Yeah I don't know if you want to
speak to any collaboration with
eccd I know that I mean with the
secretary on a regular basis and
we talk about processing
collaboration but um do you want
to talk anything about it
services thank you
manager representative good to
see you again to
we are constantly talking with
the family services and early
intervention division which is
the home visiting and fit as you
know I have a bit of a
background there so we've been
in contact with them they've had
some leadership changes so we're
having the kind of regroup just
a tad with their one how can we
support families as you say in
tandem we don't want to be
duplicating services but walk
alongside each other and so
we're looking at home visiting
with two of their different
problems with healthy families
america and with child first but
we're also working with the
family that other program to
make sure that we get those
referrals done
thank you and madam chair and
madam secretary and
has a boots on the ground i'm
telling you it's not happening
it does not happen and I I look
at those areas in in sacrawin
sierra county and
we're still not getting our
carol referrals
which we're still not
having those those conversations
that can build these bonds to
help our families and we
understand that just because
we're working with a three year
old we may have a family that
has a ten and eleven twenty two
year old
help us help you let us help you
I think we are begging to be
able to do that and thirty years
later i'm.
But hegging let us help you and
what does that mean and I can
tell you when I was asked to
come here today
i'm so exhausted i'm so sad
but we can't give up because
it's so important and and where
do we need to go I don't know
anymore to be honest with you I
don't know anymore
let us help you
thank you thank you for being
here
thank you so much thank you
madame secretary for bearing
with us thank you regular for
the presentation and we'll get
you the rest of our questions
yeah thank you very much I
appreciate it thank you all
right
next we have four are discussion
on child work welfare system
improvement and oversight
joseph ribson director child
welfare in juvenile justice
policy with any case he
foundation
manager would like me to do a
little bit of table setting
regarding this presentation
all right so I I mean to start
with the table setting in a
recognized senator lopez has
left the room but and as we
embarked on the interim you know
lfc has the subcommittee and
child welfare in addition
senator lopez among other
sponsored i'm sent moral five
which developed a task force up
that includes a variety of
stakeholders including
legislators and I see secretary
in a right to have other
appointed roles to look at this
states child welfare system and
make recommendations for
improvement
that work is ongoing and we have
we have a we as lfc staff are
sort of that coordinator
convenient of that group and are
trying to ensure that that group
and you all are hearing similar
information.
And at the same time sending a
low balance connected us with
the any casey foundation i'm
going to introduce john just a
moment and to help us think
about how to other states
approach similar challenges when
it's research say what our
lessons learned from other
estates about how other states
have addressed some of the
challenges that we are new
mexico may face within our child
welfare system and so
joe and let me get i'll give a
little bit about buyer a rego
i'm gonna talk about what he
will cover and then what I will
kind of bring finish out the day
with so
joe ribsam thank you for joining
us again he is really better
partner with us and regarding
that this tenant memorial five
task force is the director of
the child welfare in juvenile
justice program at the anti etc
foundation joe has also lead
child welfare systems in both
new hampshire and new jersey and
where his leadership resulted in
the implementation particularly
of prevention efforts and
prevent system involvement and
here's also as they mentioned
been a supporter of the senate
memorial five task force work in
connecting us to national
experts we asked join particular
to come here today and talk to
you all about both national best
practices broadly when it comes
to transforming child welfare
systems and then specifically
you be implementation of
evidence based can prevention
early intervention programs to
divert system involvement so as
we've asked you to talk about
i'll then close and for you all
with a summary of some of the
past lfc program evaluation
recommendations and that
includes that this section and
strengthening over saying
accountability so that's a
little bit of our roadmap for
the rest of our afternoon and
and I will just begin again with
a think you to jell who came to
us and from the east coast today
great thank you so much rachel
and just make sure folks can
hear me well yes rate.
The.
Thank you so much and
does everybody have a copy of
the presentation you do
excellent great
so again i'm joe ripson and with
the anti casey foundation
we do a host of things within
the space regarding children and
families and to have a long
background working within the
child while fair and juvenile
justice space
will just jump right ahead
really quickly slide through
just a little bit of background
on me
I am a lawyer by training before
that I was a teacher
spent ten years in the state of
new jersey leading helping leave
their child walfar and there
children's behavioral health
care system
and that's an important part of
what I think might spend a
little bit of time talking about
today and the role that that
please in all of what I think I
heard for talking about today
after that I spent about five
years in the state of new
hampshire and the the different
three most dates is vast nothing
is quite like any other state
right I am not going to pretend
that I know much about new
mexico really going to talk
about that national kind of
perspective and a little bit
about what i've learned through
my journey with working with
those two jurisdictions but I
think there are some things that
folks can gleam from all of that
to help you think about the work
that's happening or could happen
here within new mexico
move forward for what we're
gonna talk about today and yes
i'm gonna talk a lot about
that i'm on page three just to
keep bugs up to date talking
about child while for endurable
just a system prevention I
really think about these two
things as very deeply
intertwined and I know that we
often think about these things
are separate but they really are
very closely intertwined and I
learned that very well when I
left new jersey and want to help
leave new hampshire system where
the two were connected and new
hampshire being such a smaller
state right new jersey over two
million kids new hampshire two
hundred thousand kids rates are
new jersey about four times as
many kids as new executive and
hampshire about half as many
kids as new mexico.
So I actually got to know
personally a lot of kids in new
hampshire unlike new mexico are
unlike new jersey and the
biggest difference between kids
that were presenting adolescence
in the new in the travel offer
system and at a lessons
representing in the juvenile
justice system was really who
was making the phone call to the
agency it wasn't the underlying
issues in the family all of the
kids had tons of trauma all of
the kids had tons of needs it
was whether they were being
called from the school to law
enforcement or whether it was
the doctor calling the child
while for agency saying this kid
needs help and we are talking
about
add a lessons that was often
times the biggest difference
it's who was calling it wasn't
with the kids behavior was and
it wasn't what the kids needs
were so really these issues are
really really similar when
you're getting down to nat the
presenting issue as to the
behavior of the kid that's
getting the system involved but
when you get beneath that to see
what's actually happening in the
family and was actually causing
the behaviours
the other things that I think
are really important that I want
to touch on here is that you
have to recognize that all of
these child and family serving
systems are interconnected
because our kids and families
touch all of these systems rate
so certainly the three big ones
that i'm talking about in terms
of child welfare juvenile
justice and children's
behavioral health but it's also
true across education.
Economic supports food support
all of that all of those things
are all of those things are
connected and then last year
when I touched a little bit on
approaches to improving
effective implementation and
then we can jump down to slide
six
so.
If we look at what it has
happened in child welfare
over a long period of time
in a lot of ways child welfare
has become
the emergency department for the
social service system.
Right so trouble fare is being
asked to do all of the things
that all of the other social
service systems could or should
be doing
we get called child welfare to
address housing food substance
use disorder.
Behavior a hot treatment for
can't behave rough treatment for
parents all of that
a lot of that shows up as
neglect reports but the
underlying issues of families
are dealing with are all of
those rod consolation of
challenges
and at the end of the day
those are not the things that
child welfare is actually really
designed to address rate it's a
system that's built in designed
to investigate abuse neglect and
to address safety concerns so if
we allow our system that is
designed to investigate abuse in
the collect.
And to address safety concerns
to also be the system that has
to remedy all of those other
challenges it is always going to
struggle
and it is also always going to
place families and a position
where they're afraid to seek
help
and always going to place
families in a place where
they're liberty their liberty to
parent
is unfairly put at risk.
And those are things anything we
have to think about and take
seriously when we think about
how our systems are designed and
i'm not talking specifically
about new mexico here but this
is true in almost every state
and it's a fundamental design in
my view designed flaw of the way
child walter has evolved in this
country over the past i'd say
fifty percent of years largely
based on the way that the
federal funding system was set
up in nineteen sixty.
And i'll move on
so.
We talk a lot about prevention
and we talk a lot about clinical
models of prevention and those
things are important and they're
very important but prevention
isn't just as clinical models.
We recognize that parenting is a
really hard job i'm apparent I
imagine many of your parents I
imagine if you're not apparently
you at least were a child
you know parents.
What prevention is is anything
that makes parenting easier rate
so prevention is anything that
helps all of the any of these
things on this page that helps
keep families together and help
me parenting easier economic
supports child care housing
stability access to health care
access to food parent and
children periodical health party
education substance used to sort
of treatment fairly resource
centers home visiting access to
college work training jobs etc
all of those things.
Help prevent child abusing
neglect.
Yeah.
If we expect that assistance
designed to investigate abusing
neglect is also going to be the
system that's going to be
responsible for all of those
things.
You're often gonna find families
having a hard time accessing all
of those things because families
are going to be afraid to access
those services through that
system.
And you're gonna overwhelmed the
system whose javiders to
investigate safety great so you
have to figure out how do we
change the way that this works
so that you can distinguish
early on what is the safety
concern and what is really
concerned for making sure that
kids and families have the
things that they need to be
thriving and healthy and how do
you make that distinction
i'll reflect on a little bit of
work that we did in new
hampshire and I think a couple
folks in this room were at a
prior conversation that I had so
have heard this before.
But we went through a process in
new hampshire to try to cannot
use this apart and we surveyed a
host of our mandatory reporters
folks whose who are required to
call the hot lane when they
suspect abuse of neglect and we
ask them a simple question we
said how many of you have called
the heartline to report abusing
neglect even though you did not
suspect that there was abusing
neglect in the household forty
three percent of them said that
they had.
And then when we asked them
why did you do that
the largest percentage of the
said because this family needed
help and we didn't know how else
to get help to the family.
So to me that says that there's
a real disconnect between how we
have structured the way that we
helped families and how we
actually.
Provide
help have folks who care about
kids and families access help
the families right so when I
heard conversations early about
the rules of teachers when I
heard conversations early about
the rules of community when I
heard conversations early about
the roles of home visiting
programs all of that stuff is
great and it's really figuring
out how do you make that
connection between what's
happening at your heart line
what's happening with your child
welfare investigators and what's
happening in your community to
make sure that those things are
actually giving to the people
that need it must so that you're
not putting families and
necessarily through an intrusive
invasive process of an
investigation when they don't
really need that but at the same
time making sure that.
If there really is a safety
concern that's being raised that
you do investigate that rates
you have to really piece those
things apart and think about
those things and those are not
easy things to do but they are
worthwhile things to do because
if you don't go through that
hard work what you'll end up
doing is overwhelming your child
will for agency with form will
work then I can handle chasing a
tail doing work that it that it
really shouldn't be doing and
you're probably scaring families
away from getting the help that
they really need.
So if we foot to the next page
talks about leveraging federal
resources to expand prevention
services.
So lots of ways to do this am I
focused on really too here
because there's two that folks
talk about a lot the family
first preventative services act
and no folks here have talk
about that a lot lately.
Things that I want to really hit
on here is that what family
first covers is sometimes a
little less than what folks
think it's going to cover
generally first preventative
services act is really covering
what I would refer to his trash
your prevention so that is kind
of you're more clinical
interventions and its stuff
that's being provided to
families once they're kind of
known to the child welfare
system generally some states
have gotten creative and figured
out how to move those things a
little bit further upstream but
that really requires a state to
be you know someone creative and
how it's using its federal
resources
but there are some really
worthwhile things there it real
reimburses states for evidence
these prevention programs and
services for substance used
mental health and parenting
programs
the other place to look for a
lot of this though is within
medicare you can actually find a
lot of the same programs within
medicaid that you can family
first so thinking within your
medicate program as well as
another way to structure a lot
of these same types of
prevention programs and from
what i've heard in my time you
know just through a couple of
the committee presentations here
I know and off a lot of your
child populations eligible for
medicaid that might actually be
a place that you could leverage
you know perhaps even better
draw down then you could through
the only first and some
instances
moving on quickly to the next
slide I wanted to move into the
role of children's behavioral
health care because I think this
is one that very few states have
really implemented well and hits
directly at the issue that I
heard a lot of conversation
about today which is the issue
of young folks who are not
finding appropriate
replacements.
This is an issue that
is happening at almost every
state so it's not you need to
new mexico this is an issue
that's happening in most states
in the postcode environment.
And
where it's not happening is in a
few states where they've really
done some really remarkable work
around children's behavioral
health and it's work that
they've done years ago not right
now
so by transforming behavioral
health care some states have
reduced the need for
institutionalizing kids and
improved outcomes by building
comprehensive statewide systems
of care for children's
behavioral health sustainably
funded by medicaid thoughtfully
integrated with their child
welfare and juvenile justice
systems and doing that have
managed to yield to yield
enviable results including the
lowest utilization of group care
per capita by any child welfare
system in the country.
Lowest utilization of june or
justice facilities by any per
capita by any juvenile justice
system in the country and the
lowest suicide rate by any state
in the country.
And i'm gonna talk through a
little bit
what that looks like and how
that's done
this is long term work this is
not work that you do.
Overnight this is complete
system redesign work but it's
work that's possible.
So if we flip to the next page
page ten
there is really kind of five
core service components but it's
not just about services it's
about how you reorient the way
that you interact with kids
community these families and
your systems the five three the
five core service components
that were kind of part of this
model and this model was what
was utilized in the state of new
jersey and their children behave
her healthcare system and then
has been incorporated in a
couple other jurisdictions.
Are the five course services of
mobile response and
stabilization services so what
mobile response and civilization
services is that when a child is
dees
disregulated so they're having
escalated behaviors rather than
having a law enforcement
intervention you have a mobile
crisis unit who was able to
respond anywhere in the state
within one hour I understand in
mexico has some parts of the
statute that might be difficult
so that might be something has
to be thought about but that is
the that's the that's the goal
in this model that you have
somebody who is a mental health
professional ideally turned up
with a pier support who was able
to respond to that within one
hour and a well established
system like we had a new jersey
ultimately ninety seven percent
of the time they were able to
describe that situation and keep
that kid in the home
without ever having to take
their kid out of their own home.
They said earlier about
children's behavioral health and
actually going into the homes
that's probably true for most of
the things that we should be
offering to our communities
if we're offering services in
offices and in locations that
folks can access then you're
probably not doing it right we
probably need to talk to the
folks who are receiving the
service isn't see what makes the
most sense to them and see where
they need those services to be
and most of the time you're
probably going to hear that they
need to be near where the people
are
and if you do that again you'll
find that those services will be
implemented a lot better.
And taken up a lot better
engage individuals and providers
who are trusted in your
communities to serve your
communities so
when we put things out for rfp
and all if that's language you
use your but will put things out
for a proceed
it's you know a lot easier to
put out a procurement and you'll
have your come in you know
providers who do most of the
work in the state respond to
those that are good at writing
grants.
Often terms of the struggle with
though is actually getting folks
to pick up the services
I had that experience lots of
times in my career
if you approached it a little
bit differently and actually
went out and talked to your
folks in your communities and
said you know hey where do you
go when you need help and figure
out what those places are
and figure out how do you get
those entities to be able to
actually be providers for you
you'll find that those
communities will actually go to
those places to get help so i'll
give one example without giving
names
but we set up a program is
designed to be a voluntary
intervention
in new hampshire had one
provider up in the north country
by the provider somewhere else
in the state with country and
new answers up in the mountains
and you know rural part of the
state
that provider you know typically
for voluntary program like that
they say if you're able to get
like twenty percent of your
contacts to enroll that's pretty
good.
They were getting like ninety
five percent of the people they
contacted the sign up for the
program which was like
unbelievable nobody gets that
you know but that's because it
was somebody that they actually
everybody up in that part of the
state trusted it was where they
went anyway to they know who
they wanted to be with
and when I talked to the person
whose job it was to actually in
roll families and they say
you're how are you doing this
year as well you know when I
find out that I have a family if
they're not returning my call
they say you know she give an
example of one to go if another
they were doing their laundry on
monday so i've picked up a cup
of coffee and I went down to the
laundry matter on the monday
with them to come into your
laundry and I engaged in there
right but that's what happens
when you work with folks who
actually are from the
communities that they worked in
instead of trying to bring in
folks to go into the communities
it's really important
and then you got a really create
formal structures to ensure they
have ongoing dialog and shared
accountability between your
state your locality your
providers and your community so
that all of these things have a
circle and continue going on I
could give a few different
examples of that one that I
would give was within the system
of care in new jersey we had
different levels of kind of
reporting boards and we provided
them all with data so we could
see what was happening at the
system a different levels and
they had responsibility for
reviewing that data and
providing feedback around one of
the gaps within the system so
that we had the state level new
how do we help you fill those
gaps at the community level and
held and we also then gave those
look those local into these
money so they could actually
help fill some of their own gaps
but those are ways that you kind
of structure these things so
kind of make them sustainable
and make them a life
and with that i'll pause and i'm
happy to take any questions.
Do we so rachel did you want to
give us just the cliff notes
cause I know i'm several members
have questions for our presenter
i'll look to you manager do you
want me to give you the cliff
down now
why don't why don't we go ahead
and do that because that'll just
be a few minutes sure I will I
won't give them very brief
version okay so
joe talked a little bit about
the national perspective on
prevention and early
intervention i'm gonna talk very
briefly just this recap of prior
lfc
policy recommendations related
to child welfare if you look at
side on over the last decade
program evaluations have really
focused on kind of four key
levers for system improvement
those are the implementation
implementation of evidence based
prevention or early intervention
programs here a lot about that
in the last child welfare
subcommittee at recruiting
retaining supporting and
developing a professional social
work work force you heard about
that this morning and expanding
access to behavioral health and
other community beach services
you've heard a lot about that in
things like our medicate
hearings over the interim and
then strengthening oversight
accountability it's item for i'm
gonna highlight a few places
where lfc program evaluations
and reports over time have made
some recommendations for a
system improvement i'll
acknowledge that send it more
more in five tasks for us is
likely going to go much deeper
into this topic with this
summarizes essentially what lfc
reports have suggested in the
past few years
and the first one is an
connected to avoid in space
prevention and early
intervention and carer
implementation so this is
probably the one category where
we in particular have made some
recommendations around statutory
changes that we haven't seen
your your recall and we did a
program evaluation lsy start
earn twenty twenty three on the
implementation of the state's
current statute if you look at
slide.
By this were that an old review
of the key findings things like
and the does not include
monitoring in particular a
follow through planes of care
which is a recommended practice
that hospitals were likely under
screening substance exposed and
invents and things like families
were aware that plans of care
were created for them and that
the vast majority of family is
referred to services warning
able to access them and so those
are some of the key program
evaluation findings if you turn
to slide six this is just a
summary of what that program
evaluation recommended
a point out a key of you key
things where there were
statutory recommendations for a
change that weren't yet I get
enacted i'm the first western to
move actually the lead agency
for it for care and
implementation to the health
care authority while that was
done to the budgeting process
last year and appropriation made
to the health care three
statutorially and a change was
not made there and there is a
recommendation to promote rules
requiring birthing center staff
to report families if referrals
remain specifically first
substance use treatment for a
list of drugs that were then
declined and those rules have
not been promotated and that
could also a kerbia statute I
will know that see what yes they
mention has done some hiring
related to care navigators and
you'll see in this kind of
overview and there also has been
activity some activity at the
health care authority to give
direction to care coordinators
to do an additional set of
activities
but one thing to kind of keep an
eye on is the integration of
those two key things and you'll
also see honest this wife i'm
some other recommendations
around requiring things like
universal screening through
espirate wishes to recommend it
best practice as well as
implementing definition response
in line with statute we talked a
lot more about that.
It enterprise or something
hearing
so in particular inside seven
this cause at the specific
specific recommendations and
that are legislative and for you
to take a look at
in particular
okay
this is the cliff okay never
like i'm an attorney to
a series of recommendations to
evaluations or reports have made
over time particularly related
to strengthening oversight and
accountability and the child
author system australia were
just a very brief overview of
what is federally required and
how we implement those things in
new mexico so there are probably
several two key federal
oversight mechanism to dry your
attention to one is the
requirement that states
implement citizen review panels
also known as faster care
substitute care review boards
and that is the federal
requirement as is the
requirement that states have in
place a child thetality review
panel and the federal
administration of children and
families also provides oversight
i'm to steach half offer
agencies and does a variety of
reviews but tend to be focused
on specific outcome measures and
or audits at that ecf is
interested in what you'll see on
the right column is how new
mexico is currently implementing
those things and in new mexico
that citizen review panel
oversight function is the
substance you care advisory
council which is currently in
new mexico house within the
regulation and licensing
department over time lfc
recommendation lfc reports of
highlight that that function
could likely be considerably
more robust and if you look back
to the early two thousand that
function was reviewing and
direct deputy director courtney
will correct me about three
thousand cases and in a giving
year.
And we have seen in recent years
that the council hasn't always
had a quarrel unlikely statue
could strengthen some of those
functions that are
recommendation number one lfc
reports have made and the second
is potentially looking at their
child fatality review which is
hours within the department of
health but hasn't historically
always consistently produced
reports they had within the last
two years published those online
but that might also be an
opportunity for strengthening
oversight functions and and
statute finally there are
variety of other oversight
mechanisms that exist in new
mexico that had internal
oversight functions things like
an reviews conducted by the
administrative office of a court
wife inspector general those
tend to be internally focused
and don't produce and publicly
basing reports and in the last
is there are kind of performance
in oversight data functions than
exist within our state though
some of those have declined or
retain so for example and see
where do you use the published a
variety of three sixty reports
that had a more data indicators
than our currently things like
demographic factors and things
like that so those types of
functions could potentially be
strengthened and
if you turn tether last page and
sorry the next speed we kind of
walk through whatever other
functions that other states are
implementing and summarize can
how we compare one key thing to
know about some of these
functions there isn't really
wrote while organizations like
ncsl will give you summaries of
sort of what other states do you
there's not a lot of research
around how these different
functions produce different
outcomes within a state one
thing we do and I don't really
hear as it's likely that both
the relationship at leadership
of those entities really matter.
To produce an improvements first
system
and and then the last thing I
will mention is a set of
oversight recommendations in
particular a twenty twenty three
risk management program
evaluation point two I know and
madame chairman then you're very
familiar with this
recommendation in twenty twenty
three lfc did a program
evaluation that looked at risk
management broadly across the
state this was nat and a
specific styfd evaluation but
recommended that new mexico
implement a federal best
practice is related to analysis
following an incident and
license at state agencies i'm so
in particular requiring three
statute agencies to appoint a
loss prevention team to review
and cases associated with
deserious injury or substantial
life this could potentially help
address some of the growth in
risk management costs you want
to has experienced in the last
few years and you'll note the
data point around since twenty
twenty one this day has paid
about twenty one point two
million for legal settlements on
behalf of coffee and she had the
issuing their liability
insurance increase and so this
recommendation around statutory
requiring each all agencies to
do that kind of loss review and
documentation credit help sort
of reflective process to make
improvements over time that's my
cliff knows version of I hope
what you ask is depend of cover
pretty briefly thank you so much
regional and and committee
members should take a look at
that you know more in detail and
then you can follow up with
regional for some questions so I
think I saw hands earlier from
representative heard in senator
lopez and representative vincent
okay and representative toppers
okay so we'll start there no he
didn't have a question.
Thank you madame chair the only
question I want to ask is you
you talked about this services
that would be available for you
particularly those who were
having mental health challenges
and that they could call someone
for assistance at my only
question would be how many of
those individuals who actually
call for assistance were
subsequently worse subsequently
because we say have seen that
happen far too many times here
in new mexico mentally ill
people have called for
assistance in the end of day at
the call
they call for assistance in they
end up meaning they they they
did by suicide or no because of
the interaction with the
individuals of the line for some
but I guess are you saying that
the people who were going to
don't have guns when they got
mobile with mobile response i've
never heard of that happening in
twenty years of mobile response
services in the senate of new
jersey well I I i'm sorry madame
tear and mister president I
guess i'm looking at that recent
case it just happened in georgia
for example the woman called for
assistance he was having a
mental acuity problem and the
next thing we know she is no
longer live if that doesn't
happen with children that's
really good to know yeah yeah
thanks for that yes the the
model with a mobile response to
stabilization services that
they are they're not armed
they're going out with mental
health clinician and typically
with a pier support now if they
arrive and they feel that it's
unsafe they do have the ability
to step out and call for law
enforcement but that was very
rare overwhelmingly they
approached they felt that it was
safe they were able to resolve
as I said the experience in new
jersey was ninety seven percent
of the time they were not only
able to resolve the issue with
they are able to resolve the
issue with maintaining the child
and they're on home i'm not at a
well established program that's
been doing this for a long time
to receive that national data
mobile response.
In the addle and child model is
closer to eighty percent
resolution but with a child
model in the state of new jersey
they were getting ninety five
percent ninety seven percent
sometimes resolution
thank you madame chair
thank you representative senator
lopez please I thank you madam
chair and thank you mister
desbum for you presentation
risbon
I just wanted to mention and
this is not necessarily a
question to you
but there's something called the
behavioral health collaborative
here in the state of new mexico
and I remember when we passed it
in two thousand four
the directive was supposed to
create the health mental health
care delivery system for the
state of new mexico
and
madame chair we've had
difficulties
from a prior
governor's directive where are
fragile behavior healthcare
system was
was destroyed
in many of the fragile support
services that were available for
families across the state were
not existent
after some actions taken by her
secretary at that point in time
but madam chair I don't know
what the all of c has taken this
under advisement to look at the
behavioral health collaborative
as to you know what it's charged
with its responsibilities and
when it's not doing
I firmly believe madam chair and
others from the lfc that we need
to revisit the behavioral health
collaborative and see what
we should update remove make
changes with
because there's there's a full
list as to what the
responsibilities are
and when we look madam chair at
the money is available we have
medicate of course.
They have private pay we have
some moneys from the attorney
general's office that are
sitting there
there from a last suit in such
that we are receiving some money
the county burner leo bernilio
county has a nice chunk of
change that we taxed ourselves
in order to provide money I
think there's some opportunities
madam chair and lfc that we need
to review the behavioral health
collaborative it's supposed to
be statewide
and it also does include our
children it includes families
there so many other realms that
I think
this needs to be
opened and some surgery done
thank you
thank you and I do believe that
lfc has done some looking and we
can actually
staff could send that around to
everyone just for a reference
thank you for being a matter
represented a vincent and then
representative travels and
that's all i've got
thank you madame chair and think
you president i've heard you
before and
I appreciate the hardware to
cheaper than everything and it
sounds like you have really
positive outcomes and one thing
that I was wanting to know is
in new jersey and or new
hampshire
was there any oversight in those
states and are you familiar with
yeah so in your time out and
ombudsman are a child advocate
type of structure yeah so it's
an in it works in two different
seats I had two different setups
and then i'm happy to talk about
it
interestingly in the state of
new jersey when I started there
was a child advocate in their
office was abolished while I was
there
in the senate of new hampshire I
started and october twenty
seventeen and a new officer
tried to advocate was passed in
statute a few months before that
but the new charter advocate was
appointed a few months after I
started.
And the structure new hampshire
was was interesting and I think
helpful
in that the
and the individual I think that
was the chart advocate for most
of my time there was was of the
rate person for the job and I my
opinion on it is that that
matters a lot i've seen
folks in those roles not in my
own experience in leadership but
through colleagues who
use that position to have
sensational eyes bad things that
are happening in the system in
ways that make it really really
hard for work to get done and
they don't actually make they
don't actually help progress you
know work forward and i've seen
folks used that to help things
move forward even if it means
sometimes elevating tough
conversations rate and I think
that was the relationship that I
had with the charter of getting
new hampshire right we both came
in at a time that the system was
in deep crisis and both of us
came in with a reform mindset so
that was helpful because we kind
of had a similar vision.
And even though we didn't know
he's agree on sequencing and
priorities we had a common
vision of where we wanted to see
if things go so that was that
was great and that was helpful
but
it's really really important
who's done that role and it's
really really important how you
think about structuring that
role in the priorities for that
role one of the things that I
thought was really important it
was that the person that was in
that role was heavily focusing
this wasn't built in the statute
but it was really important and
how she did her job was that she
was focused on something that
that we caused safety science
but this idea that child welfare
work is a very high risk
operation
and that
when you're working in a high
risk situation that you are
going to have to you you know
that it's hard to make decisions
without making errors
and you have to be able to work
with folks and make them
comfortable to make decisions
because I have to make decisions
on other agency prowlers is
within the system and to do that
you have to
be willing to kind of work with
your staff and protect your
staff to make it a safe place to
make decision if we very
intentional about that and you
can't bully staff you can and
that includes leadership right
you can shame and boly
leadership
and try to advocate often have
done that in some jurisdictions
so you have to be careful who
you put in that role in how they
think about that role because if
you have somebody that roll who
doesn't handle it in a way
that's helpful you could really
be destructive to the work
that's trying to that you're
trying to deal so it's
there's positives on his
negatives I my experience was
the chart out of it was actually
really helpful and getting
things done at the same time
I have seen actually in those
things being be difficult
and and make systems kind of
disabilities to tell so.
Thank you for that answer and
who would write this person's
job descripts and who would be
the right person to write that
that job description matter
I don't know that I have an
opinion on that
you know a I think you need to
engage the folks who are gonna
be most affected by by that by
that role rate selling that
would include the communities
that that the child advocates
going to be interacting with but
also the staff who they're going
to be interacting with rate and
the agency they're going to be
interacting with I think all
that's important if you the
other thing that was interesting
about how the structured in new
hampshire was at the child
advocate was responsible to both
a body that was house within
legislature but that was
consistent of legislative
members and key stakeholders
so the child advocate had
accountability to that kind of
legislative type body but also
had accountability to the
executive branch and the
governor so it wasn't it was a
roll where the children kind of
had
accountability could have been
in two different areas and you
have a set
they set a within the executive
branch for purpose of you know
you have there on papering these
branch they also could only be
smissed for calls they were not
somebody who was serving at the
pleasure so as a result of that
this they enjoyed a little bit
of protection
and were appointed for a term
for your term so there was there
were some thoughtful must put
into how that was structured in
order to give that personal
little autonomy but again.
There's depending on who's in
that seat there are risks
associated with that there was a
lot of things to think about the
new when you think about that
role
thank you in the last month just
to come in you know if we if we
if the body did choose to ahead
in that direction we were just
want to make sure that
I don't know if it'd be outside
advocates that were you know
having some man put on how that
job description was to go
because I would want that person
what are working hand in hand
with the way of the secretary
and
not like that because we
wouldn't get anything thank you
manager
think you representative
representative chavis and then
area closing question from
representative armstrong
thank you madame chair I don't
know if it's a a question but I
do have a comment that I wanted
to make and it's sort of
occurred to me when rachel was
making her her report on the on
the recap recommendations on
page nine the federal oversight
mechanism and the the citizen
review panels
and and they review foster care
substitute care and i'm assuming
they resume
reason we review madam chair the
length of time that a child has
been in care right and I think
that's one of the pieces of the
capital settlement
and an it occurs to me that we
haven't had any kind of report
in terms of the length of time
that kids have been in care
and one of the reasons i'm
raising that is that I got a
text earlier
it was too late for me to ask
the question but there's a child
who had a very young age was
placed in a home I think it was
like around each one parents of
god you know majors substance if
he was just used and they've
actually also I think believe
been charged with one or two.
Of counts of child abuse
kids been in the home for two
and a half almost three years
and so the plan is for the child
to return home um it's difficult
for me to understand why that
continues to be the plan when we
talk about
you know kids and foster care
amount of chair and the trauma
that kids experience so for that
child to have formed a
psychological bond with the
parents who are carrying for him
to return him home to a family
that he really doesn't know is
going to create even more trauma
and so i'm raising that because
I think that that's one of the
things that we need to begin to
focus on in terms of
cyfd and how long kids are being
held in care and why because
that's not any kind of a
permission plan
thank you madam chair
thank you representative
armstrong thank you madame chair
and and I was sitting listening
and I I so appreciate you coming
all this way to help us learn
how they do it at another states
and and that there and to prove
their solutions
we have solutions there all
around us and it's just how are
we going to make this happen so
i'm my
I apologize for stepping out my
thirty five year old son still
calls me mama is married and has
three children wanted to visit
and that's very rare in his busy
life so I had to answer his
second call so that's where I
was being a good mama instead of
a good legislator anyway
in the states that you have
implemented this in an and
helped implement in
is there a career law
and what is it
yet so that that's actually
national the the captaker lol so
that's their comes under the
federal capita
but the implementation varies
state by state.
Great so every state structure
that a little bit differently
um some states have really
implemented deeply through their
child welfare systems others
have looked at other systems to
be more deeply involved in new
hampshire where I was they
actually put a lot of
responsibility explicitly on
their birthing hospitals
so statutory required birthing
hospitals to take some of those
responsibilities
with the idea being that
for certain instances child
welfare didn't necessarily need
to be involved
you know if a child was was
testing parts of it for exposure
but there are testing positive
for exposure because the
exposure was that the parent was
that the parent was
using prescribed medications but
under a lot of state statues
those would still trigger a
child abuse report and
investigation so and under many
state caralas they would still
trigger the same type of
response and investigate a
response so it varies state by
state what that looks like
yeah it really it's it's wildly
different depending on where you
go while my main concern i'm
madam chair and answer is is it
are they mandated for a
treatment or is it optional.
I don't really know the answer
to the app
i'm not aware of mandated
treatment outside of a child
abuse context.
You know and that's kind of
through the child abuse court
you know being mandated for
treatment
I was just curious where we're
here it's it's supposed to be
option offered an optional but
no real follow ups are happening
and so I was just curious how
that was so thank you so much
again for for answering so many
questions and being here and and
once again we have solutions and
we have answers let's get busy
thank you representative
armstrong so thank you very much
mister ribson rachel and
secretary because others
sticking around and and hearing
this presentation and then thank
you to the members for a great
questions and have a good
evening.
