have Daniel.
fiscal analyst to go over.
Budget proposal. Please, Daniel,
when you're ready.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Daniel and
I cover public school finance
for the LESC.
Uh, you are now receiving or you
have received a document titled
Public School Support.
So that looks like this.
Uh, before we get started, I
want to acknowledge the LESC
staff, uh, for their
contributions to the FY 26
recommendation you all have
today, as well as our partners
at uh PED DFA and LMC or their
collaboration throughout the
interim.
Uh, that I think has led to a
pretty strong recommendation
that is not only responsive to
the needs of public schools, but
that it's also responsive, uh,
responsive in the context of the
broader budget needs of the
state. So thank you to everyone
who's been involved throughout
the interim and helping to build
a recommendation that we think
is largely reflective of what
you'll eventually see in house
Bill 2.
I also want to start by saying
that you all heard about 3
primary things, uh, themes, uh,
from LESU staff throughout the
2024 intru, starting with number
one, really prioritizing your
investments in public schools
through flexible funding in the
SCG.
Number 2, practicing restraint
with the creation of new below
the line programs, and number 3,
really increasing your use of
multi-year budgeting.
Uh, those three themes are
critical and building local
capacity so that we have a
strong foundation for improving
student growth and your staff at
LESC was very intentional about
aligning with those three themes
in your recommendation for FY
26.
The plan for today is to over
the to go over the
recommendation and get your
feedback on whether there are
revisions, you all want to see
in the final recommendation that
we bring to you in January.
So you all have the high level,
which is the common template
that we use across LESC, LFC,
PED, and the executive in
building each of our public
school support recommendations.
We're going to walk through the
structure of the high level
first, and then we'll go down
the spreadsheet line by line.
Overall, there are a few
different ways that funding
flows uh to public schools, and
we refer to them as above the
line, the middle of the line and
below the line.
Above the line is everything
that flows through the SCG,
which is everything between row
2 and 32.
Each of the numbers in this
section is either in addition to
or subtraction from the SCG and
the money here is flexible and
how it can be used at the local
level.
If you look down to row 33, uh,
you have categorical or middle
of the line appropriations,
which are funds that flow
outside of the formula, like
transportation, the Indian
education fund and assessments,
and the funding listed here must
be used for the purpose listed.
And starting on row 57, we have
our below the line
appropriations, and those can be
either recurring or
non-recurring, but they
generally flow to PED and PED
awards that funding to districts
and charter schools, and some
examples of of those
appropriations are literacy and
fellows and attendants.
On row 136, we have the public
education reform Fund, uh, which
you all have used in the past to
fund a lot of programs. And
you're gonna hear a lot about
this fund in the session, so
we'll spend some time there.
On row 150, we have our other
state funds and transfers and
that section includes your
capital outly appropriations,
and a few other transfers that
support specific needs.
And last on row 175, uh, we have
the appropriations that you all
made from grow, and those are
the multi-year appropriations
that you all made in this year's
session for FY 25, 26, and 27.
So if you turn back to the top
of page one.
We'll start with the SCG.
And you'll see in this section,
this is where we've really
prioritized uh the flexible
funding that this committee has
been very supportive of in the
past. Uh, so starting on row 2,
we have the FY 25 program cost,
which is $4.171 billion and
everything below that number is
either in addition to or
subtraction from uh the FY 25
program cost.
On row 3, you have a subsection
called unit changes. And this is
where we have the SCG revision
that you all heard about in
Silver City, and you'll hear the
bill and the analysis and the
scenario from director Senna
later today.
In that bill, you all will be
asked to provide flexible
funding to schools with the
intention of supporting CTE
programs, uh, secondary fine
arts programs and broader
academic supports for students
in grades 6 through 12.
Uh, you'll also be asked to
revise the at-risk index, so
that we have a stronger
framework and foundation for
identifying uh student poverty
and so that we encourage schools
to be more intentional, uh, in
supporting English learners.
So each of those considerations
are directly responsive to the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit,
especially for the needs of
low-income students, English
learners, and Native American
students. And these
recommendations, as you heard
about this morning, uh, come
from the SCG working group that
included superintendents, uh,
school board members, charter
schools, LFC staff, uh, PED
staff and PED leadership. So
these ideas are very much
collaborative from our partners
throughout the states.
So in that first section of the
high level, you'll see how that
bill would move money in the SCG
beginning with the repeal of the
three existing indicators of the
at-risk index, which are Title I
English learners and mobility.
You'll see the accounting for
that on Ros 45, and 6, where
you're essentially pulling $380
million from the at-risk index.
And in place of those 3
indicators, we are proposing
that you all use the methodology
of the family income index, as
the indicator for poverty in the
SCG and that is shown on row 7,
where it's pulling $300.5
million back into the at-risk
index.
And that does a few things. Uh,
it increases the threshold for
poverty in the SCG to 130% of
the federal poverty line. It
uses data that we collect within
our own state rather than using
federal data that we can't
audit.
And it ensures that each charter
school generates at-risk funding
for the low-income students that
they actually serve. The bill
would also create a separate
factor for English learners, and
that is on row 8 with $120.7
million that for the first time,
each district and each charter
school will be able to easily
determine the amount of funding
their English learners generate
in the SCG so they can be more
intentional at the local.
school level about serving those
English learners.
And you all have really focused
this interim on a theme of
flexible funding.
But also the importance of CTE
in increasing student engagement
and the role of middle school as
an inflection point in student
outcomes.
So to support our schools in
providing the programming they
need to meet student needs, uh,
for a grade 6 through 12. We
have a proposal for increasing
the factor for grades 6 through
12 to 1.30 on a row, rows 9 and
10, where we have $51.1 million
for grade 7 through 12 and $40.1
million for grade 6.
And that is a total of $91.2
million in flexible funding that
schools can use for CTE programs
for secondary fine arts
programs, behavioral health, uh,
attendance, or any other
innovative programming they
believe is relevant or
responsive to their communities,
and that is something we haven't
done before on this scale,
because the last time the wait
for grade 6 was adjusted was in
1993, and the
Last time, the wait for grades 7
through 12 was adjusted was in
1976.
And we all know we're not going
to build a foundation, a strong
foundation for student growth if
we're relying on a model of
funding that is not responsive
to the needs of today's
students.
So on row 11,
We have a total cost of the SCG
revision bill, which is $132.6
million for FY 26.
The final consideration we have
in this section is K12+ on row
12, uh, with $49.7 million and
that would simply pay for the
additional program units that
were generated in FY 25 for more
schools choosing to do K-12
plus.
And that is it for the unit
changes section, uh, moving on
to the unit value changes, and
this is where we're really
targeting SCG funding to support
recruitment and retention.
On row 18, we are recommending a
3% increase in public school
personnel compensation, with
$101.4 million. Uh, you all
heard about in the interim about
the challenges that schools are
experiencing in recruiting and
retaining teachers and other
personnel in schools. So this
recommendation is only one
component of a broader strategy
that we have at the LESC for
preserving our regional
competitiveness and
compensation, as well.
is honoring and recognizing the
critical work that those
personnel are doing across our
state.
On row 19, we have a proposal
that you all heard about from
the partners, almost every
partner this morning, uh, where
we are proposing an increase in
teacher minimum salaries to 55,
65, and $75,000 with a cost
estimate of $7.4 million in the
SCG.
When you all last increased
minimum salaries for teachers,
you follow that with multiple
annual increases in
compensation. And with the
enactment of House Bill 130, uh,
most LEAs have adjusted their
salary schedules to reflect the
increase in hours and days.
So much so that there aren't
that many teachers across our
state who are earning below
those proposed thresholds.
Um, so this proposal would bring
up the few teachers who are
still below that 55, 65, and
$75,000 threshold.
Um, and it would act as a
recruitment tool for new
teachers.
But if this bill were enacted,
it would also automatically
increase uh administrator
minimum salaries because their
salaries are based on the uh
minimum salary of a level 3
teacher.
And the cost of doing both the
teacher minimum increases as
well as the administrator
increases is included in that
$7.4 million recommendation.
A preaching.
Together rose 18 and 19 are an
example of how we're approaching
these complex challenges in a
very comprehensive way by
acknowledging that recruitment
and retention are similar but
distinct challenges that each
need unique and targeted
solutions. On row 21, this is
another thing that you heard
about from the partners this
morning. We have insurance on
row 21, we have $37.9 million
for insurance and that pays for
the employer's share.
of the premium increases we're
expecting from NIMSA and FY 26.
So if you look at that row and
you go to columns to the left,
you'll see that FY 25, House
Bill 2 only included $25.7
million for insurance, which we
acknowledge was pretty not
substantial for the increases in
premiums that we saw across the
state. So for FY 26, we're very
much trying to target uh 12
million.
dollars more in additional
funding to cover those increases
in the employer share of
insurance.
On row 22, we have $5 million
for fixed costs, and that pays
for increases in utilities,
rent, and those other opening
the door cost that you heard
about this morning.
So on row 30.
The LESC recommendation includes
$4.5 billion for the SCG in FY
26, a $334 million increase from
FY 25 or exactly 8%.
That does it for the SCG.
Moving on to categorical
appropriations on row 33,
beginning with transportation,
where we have $116.6 million for
maintenance and operations,
$13.2 million for fuel, 5.9
million for rental fees and $1.8
million for a 3% increase in
compensation for our
transportation personnel.
And $5.3 million in adequacy
funding on row 41.
And that last row is really
important because you all heard
about this morning and for the
past year, actually, about the
decreases in transportation
funding across our state.
And part of the reason that that
happened is because when the
density factor was removed from
House Bill 2 in FY 25.
House Bill 2 didn't include the
adequacy funding that LASU staff
had recommended, uh, be paired
with the elimination of the
density factor from the
transportation distribution
formula.
And we believe that not having
included that adequacy funding
is what contributed to those
large decreases, those large
fluctuations in transportation
funding across the state.
So for this year, we are
recommending the same adequacy
funding uh be added to the
transportation distribution so
that we avoid those decreases in
uh transportation funding from
continuing into FY 26.
In total, on row 42, we have
$143.3 million for
transportation, an increase of
$9.5 million from FY 25 or 7.1%.
On row 45, we have our other
categorical appropriations, uh,
starting with $55.7 million for
a universal school meals, uh, in
the past, school meals have been
below the line, but for FY 26,
we are recommending that you all
move it to a categorical
appropriation, and that doesn't
change any of the day to day
operations of the program. It
simply says it's simply states
that this money is intended for
school meals, and it allows us
your staff, uh, to ensure that
future recommendations for
school meals, uh, accurately
reflect the cost of the program.
On row actually on this one,
you'll, if you look one column
to the left, you'll see that the
executive is recommending $50.7
million. They have an additional
$5 million for school meals
below the line. We just went
ahead and added the whole thing
to the categorical
appropriation.
So the same recommendation just
split apart into two rows.
On row 47, we have $20 million.
Where the Indian education fund,
uh, PED staff will present to
you all tomorrow on their
proposal for additional funding
that will flow directly to
tribes, pueblos and nations, and
we're going to wait until that
presentation tomorrow, uh, to
get your feedback on whether
that's something that you want
to see in the LESC
recommendation for FY 26.
On row 48, we have $12.8 million
for assessments followed by rows
49 and 50, where we have $1
million for supplementals and
393,000 for out of state
tuition.
In total, we have $233.1 million
in categorical recommendations
on row 51, an increase of $64.1
million from FY 25 or 38.8%, and
that large increase is almost
exclusively because we're moving
school meals from below the line
into the categorical uh section
of your high level. So basically
just a change in where it's
appearing in the spreadsheet.
Moving to our recurring below
the line, uh, considerations on
the next page.
Starting with row 58.
We have $14 million for early
literacy, the same as FY 25, and
that will help uh help us
complete the phase in of
elementary teachers into
structured literacy, and it'll
support uh the onboarding
training for new teachers who
are transitioning into
elementary schools.
On row 59, we had $8 million for
Steam, primarily with an
emphasis on math.
And that would be a new addition
to House Bill 2 because there
wasn't any dedicated funding for
Steam and in FY 25, and we heard
from you all throughout the year
that you want that funding
restored and house bill to for
FY 26.
On row 60 and 61, we have school
leader and teacher professional
development with $5 million
each.
On row 62, we have $2.3 million
for New Mexico grown, which
matches the executive
recommendation to support
schools in buying local
ingredients for school meals.
On row 63, we have $1.25 million
for test fee waivers and
training.
The next row, we have $1.5
million for RECs, and that would
provide a base allocation to
RECs so they can continue to
provide technical and
programmatic support uh for
districts and for charter
schools throughout the state.
And last in this section on row
65, we have $750,000 for the
grad program.
So overall on row 72, we have
$37.8 million in recurring below
the line appropriations, a
decrease of $29.6 million from
FY 25 or a decrease of 44%.
Move to the PED agency budget on
row 75, and we included a $3
million increase for PED, uh,
and that would support PED in
creating the 15 FTE that they
requested for the Office of
Special Education that you all
heard about in November.
Overall for total public school
support on row 83.
Uh, which is the SCG categorical
recurring below the line and the
PED agency budget.
The LESC recommendation for FY
26 is $4.8 billion an increase
of 375.4 million or 8.5%.
And I want to pause here because
I want to emphasize that when we
developed this budget uh among
ourselves at LASC we did so
while taking into account the
broader budget needs of the
state, whether it's the
increasing cost of Medicaid or
early childhood or state
employee health insurance.
But I think people are gonna
look at that 8.5% and say that's
pretty excessive, and we think
it's important to point out that
the $375 million increase for
total public school support is
42% of the $892 million in
additional general funds that
were forecast for FY 26.
If you look back at FY 25, that
number on row 81 for total
public school support was 43.4%
of appropriations in the GAA. So
our recommendation doesn't
significantly deviate from the
historical trends, and that is
why we believe our
recommendation here at the LESC
is not only responsive to the
needs of public schools, but
it's also responsible in the
context of the broader budget
needs of the state. Monroe, 85.
We have our non-recurring
appropriations from the general
fund.
Starting with row 86, this one's
really important. We have a $150
million appropriation from the
general fund to the public
education reform Fund.
And we'll talk about that in a
bit.
On Route 87, we have a $40
million appropriation from the
general fund to the state
support reserve fund to prevent
a decrease in the final unit
value for FY 25.
You all may remember earlier in
the fiscal year, when we were
encouraging PED to increase the
preliminary unit value for FY
25, and they did end up doing
that.
Now, we're at a point where PDD
has pushed the money out.
Uh, but we've also had some
fluctuations in program units,
uh, like an increase in K-12+,
and increase in rural population
and increase in ancillary staff
program units, and we're at a
point right now where the final
unit value may have to decrease
because of those fluctuations in
program units, and because of
those fluctuations in calendars
from K-12+ and a few other
components of the formula.
So this $40 million is intended
to prevent a decrease in the
final unit value so that we end
the fiscal year, uh, with a flat
unit value.
On row 88, we have $30 million
for the summer literacy
Institute, not much to say there
other than it just continues the
programming that we saw last
summer into next summer.
On row 89, we have $30 million
for CTE and that's a pretty
broad bucket, which includes the
CT pilot project, uh, work-based
learning and summer internships,
and you all heard about
innovation zones, uh,
yesterday's presentation, we're
gonna have a separate
recommendation for innovation
zones later in the present.
On row 90, we have $20 million
for the Ed Fellows program, and
that just continues the
initiatives that you all heard
about from PED yesterday, and
that program, as you heard about
yesterday, has two goals. Number
1, building and diversifying the
educated workforce and improving
student to teacher ratios.
Uh, so this money will continue
the program into FY 26.
On row 91.
We have $20 million for out of
school learning time programs,
which you all heard about in
September, uh, when the out of
school time network spoke about
the positive impact of those
programs on attendance,
behavioral health, and broader
academic outcomes and also the
need for continued funding so
that those programs can expand
to more of the rural communities
and other underserved areas of
our state.
So our recommendation will
continue to support both LEAs
and community-based
organizations and continuing
that programming throughout the
state for FY 26.
On row 92, uh, we have $15
million for K-12+, which PED
could draw on a participation in
K-12 plus increases so that any
fluctuations in program units
from K12 Plus, uh, don't
decrease the unit value sometime
in FY 26.
On row 93, we have $12 million
for the student information
system, and this is something
that PED initially requested.
The executive recommendation
then came out and included $4
million for a statewide IEP
system, which is which are
similar but distinct concepts,
but the LAC recommendation
includes the original $12
million for student information
system that PED originally
requested.
On row 94, we have $10 million
for school improvement and
transformation, and this item is
intended to help identify and
address the root challenges that
schools are facing primarily
through site visits,
professional learning, uh, for
school leaders and ongoing
monitoring of school improvement
plans. This is the request that
was also included in the
executive recommendation, so you
may hear more about that from
PED later today.
On row 95, we have $8 million
for community schools, and that
money is sustains the various
grants that that support
community schools throughout the
state. Uh 96, we have a $7.4
million supplemental for
universal school meals, and this
money is needed because
participation in the program
this year is exceeding the
amount that was initially
appropriated for the program,
and so this money
simply cover the remaining
amount for the current fiscal
year.
On Route 97, we have $5 million
for behavioral health, which is
a new appropriation as there
wasn't an appropriation for
behavioral health in FY 25.
Our intention for that money is
for, among other things,
creating and implementing
wellness rooms like the one that
you saw in Silver City, that
provides support to students
while they're at school.
Um, supporting school-wide
social and emotional learning
initiatives, and helping LEAs
and identifying the barriers in
improving student well-being. On
98, we have $4 million for
special education initiatives,
and that money would be intended
for a few different things like
professional learning and parent
engagement, like you all heard
from about from PED uh when they
requested this money in
November.
I wrote 99, we have another
school meals consideration,
where we have a $3.1 million
dollar deficiency uh request for
school meals.
And FY 24, there were 4
reimbursement claims from APS
that couldn't be paid because
P&D depleted the appropriation
for school meals. And so this
$3.1 million is what's, it's
what's needed to pay out those
FY 24 reimbursement claims, Bron
APS for school meals.
On row 100.
Uh, we have $2.3 million for the
learning management system, uh,
right now, the plan from PED is
to provide a single streamline
platform to deliver their
professional learning
opportunities and to support the
educator ecosystem and so this
appropriation would support PED
in continuing to provide that
single platform that houses all
their professional learning
opportunities.
On 101, we have $2.3 million for
educator and administrator
preparation, induction, and
evaluation, and this is the new
recommendation for FY 26, uh,
which came from a working group
that included LESC, LFC, and
PED, and they came to a
consensus on what was needed to
strengthen school leadership.
And you'll hear more about that
during the bill summary that
director San I will provide this
afternoon. Um, but
disappropriation would support
the enactment of the bill by
supporting an additional FTE for
PD to oversee school leadership
work, uh, supporting a site
coordinator for each EP funding
for aspiring superintendent
programs.
And funding for principal and
superintendent induction
programs.
On row 102, we have $1.5 million
for the bilingual multicultural
Education Act, the Hispanic
Education Act and the Black
Education Act, and this matches
the executive recommendation,
and we intend for that money to
be used for grants, professional
learning, instructional
materials that are culturally
relevant, and other student
support services that align with
the intention of those specific
statutes.
103, we have $1.1 million for
microcredentials, the same as FY
25.
On 104, we have $1 million for
school panic buttons, again, the
same as FY 25.
On 105, we have $500,000 for
outdoor classroom initiatives,
and that money could be used in
a number of ways including
professional learning, uh,
startup grants for outdoor
classrooms and implementation
grants for schools that got the
uh the planning gra before.
On rows 106 and 107. We have a
combined $750,000 for a
sufficiency lawsuit fees and
legal settlements that PED
requested.
And last for this section, we
have $200,000 for the school
safety summit that we've heard
from this committee, uh, you all
want to see that continued into
FY 26.
If you go all the way down.
To row 135.
We have a total of $364.5
million in non-recurring
appropriation requests or FY 26,
which seems like a lot.
We want to point out that a big
chunk of that number are truly
one time appropriations like the
appropriation to the public
education reform fund that we
talk that we'll talk about more
in a bit. Uh, the $40 million
for the unit value, uh, the $15
million for K-12 plus and those
supplementals and deficiencies
in school meals that we
theoretically shouldn't be
seeing on a year over year
basis.
Without those items, the total
is about $164 million and that
money is targeted to a handful
of programs like the Summer
Literacy Institute, out of
school time and CTE, which are
all priorities of this
committee.
So I think this section really
demonstrates how your staff has
been, have been very intentional
this year and ensuring that
we're not growing the either the
number or the scale of below the
line programs.
And with that, we're gonna move
to row 136 with the public
education reform fund, where you
all will likely see some pretty
significant proposals to
significantly change the purpose
of that fund beginning in FY 26.
In the past, the Perth has
supported a large number of
programs with money that
reverted from ELTP and K5+, but
you've heard from us.
Throughout the entire interim
about the need to promote
greater consistency in funding
so that LEAs can plan on
sustaining high quality
programming, and we believe that
the key to doing that is
multi-year budgeting. Uh, you
all have already piloted that
approach with grow where you are
now supporting educator,
educator clinical practice and
special education differentials
with funding for FY 25, FY 26.
and FY 27.
At the end of which they'll
theoretically be evaluated and
the results of that will guide
whether or not they receive
recurring funding, uh, beginning
in FY 28.
One of the challenges with that,
however, is there's no formal
mechanism for LESE staff to
participate in establishing the
performance measures.
Uh, of those programs or
participate in the evaluation of
the programs.
So
In this upcoming session, there
may be a bill.
That converts the perf.
Into a multi-year research fund
exclusively for K-12 programs,
that would be jointly overseen
by LFC, LESC PED, and DFA. The
details are still a little bit
in flux, but essentially you all
will have the option to
appropriate funding from Perth.
That will support programs for
at least 3 fiscal years, the LAC
will will have a formal role in
approving the pre-analysis plans
for each program, uh, monitoring
the progress, reporting the
progress and issuing
recommendations at the end of
the funding period on whether
each of the programs that you
are funded through Perth should
receive additional funding
beginning in FY 29.
Uh, the bill is not coming from
LESC staff, but I think we're
generally supportive as an
agency of an approach that
broadens our use of multi-year
budgeting, and that gives the
LEC a formal role in evaluating
any programs that are funded
through that framework.
So if you flip all the way back
to row 86, you'll see that $150
million
recommendation that's marked
public education reform Fund.
That's the money that we are
recommending that you all
appropriate, uh, you all flow to
the Perth so that it can be used
to support the multi-year
appropriations that we're going
to talk about now.
If you flip back to row 137, the
public education reform Fund.
We have $45 million for
innovation zones, as the LESC's
first recommendation in Perth,
and that would be $15 million
each year in FY 2627 and 28.
Uh, we talked about CTE at our
joint hearing with LSC in
September, and we mentioned
there's a need to place
innovation zones on the path to
evaluation, so that we ensure
that they're effective in
improving student outcomes.
Uh, you will also heard from PED
yesterday on Innovation zones
and how they're intended to make
school more meaningful for
students and increased
engagement and attendance. Uh,
they also talked about the need
to have consistent funding for
innovation zones so that PED has
the capacity to build a strong
foundation for the program.
But again, your staff at LESC
believes there's a need to
evaluate the program or its
impact on student achievement,
and those two factors are why we
are recommending that you all
include innovation zones in the
initial round of multi-year
funding from the public
education reform Fund.
On row 138, we have $30.9
million for attendance.
You all heard from Jessica and
Tim during the interim about the
continued challenges that we're
seeing with attendance and how
even though we've improved in
the last few years. Uh, we're
still seeing some pretty high
numbers of students who just
aren't coming to school.
So in response to those
long-term challenges that we
have with attendance.
We're recommending $10.3 million
for attendance each year for FY
26, 27, and 28, and that annual
amount is double what was
included in House Bill 2 were
attendance in FY 25.
On the next row, we have $30
million for students who are
unhoused.
In September, we talked about
the pilot program from Appleseed
that is supporting unhoused
students that they come to
school, and we've included uh
$30 million from the Perth to
support similar initiatives with
$10 million each year for FY 26,
27 and 28.
On row 140, we have $15.6
million for elementary math
achievement.
Uh, in July, we talked about the
consistent disparities that
we're seeing with outcomes in
math and how they are most
pronounced for the students that
were identified in the Martinez
Yazi lawsuit and how there's a
need to support additional
professional learning and
interventions for students in
math.
So for the initial round of
funding, we've included $15.6
million for math achievement
with $5.2 million each year for
FY 26, 27 and 28 in the next
row.
We have $15 million for
secondary educator literacy.
FY 25, you all appropriated $5
million for secondary educator
literacy as a compliment to what
you're already doing uh to
support structured literacy in
elementary grades and the summer
literacy Institute.
Uh, we are recommending you all
continue that same level of
funding for secondary educator
literacy, or 3 fiscal years, and
that will support training our
secondary educators and
administrators and
evidence-based reading
instruction and providing high
quality literacy intervention to
secondary students who are
reading below grade level, and
that would have an emphasis on
students in middle school.
Monroe 142. Almost done.
We have $7.8 million for
innovative staffing models.
Uh, we've talked about
innovative staffing models over
the last few years, especially
about the opportunity culture
model in Carlsbad that you all
saw there a while back, uh,
we're seeing a lot of potential
with that unique form of
staffing, and we'd like to see
the model, uh, piloted elsewhere
and also placed the program on
the path to evaluation.
Uh, so we've included $2.6
million each year for FY 26, 27
and 28.
And last, in this section on row
143.
We have $6 million for the STEM
network.
Uh, over the interim, Connor has
been developing a proposal for a
centralized hub that would bring
together the various STEM
resources throughout the state
so that we can build on best
practices from communities
across New Mexico, and you all
will see a bill on this in
January.
But for now, we've included $2
million for the STEM network
each year or 3 fiscal years.
So in total on row 149, we are
recommending $150.3 million in
appropriations in the initial
round of multi-year budgeting or
funding from the public
education reform Fund.
We're gonna move down to row 151
in our fund transfer section,
where we have a $50 million
distribution from the public
school capital outlay fund for
school security and that money
will be pushed out using a meme
calculation, non SB 9
calculation, and that would
ensure that every school
district in the state would
receive uh some base level of
funding based on, on the number
of students that they serve.
And that is responsive to the
concerns that you all have
shared with us around school
safety, and they need to provide
more funding, uh, so that
schools can ensure that their
students feel safe while at
school.
On row 158, we have $1.5 million
for school bus fueling and
charging infrastructure to
support districts that are
converting their buses to
electric buses and buses fueled
by alternative fuel sources.
On 163, we have $500,000 for
grants to teachers who are
seeking their national board
certification.
And last on row 170, uh, we have
$4 million for the online uh
licensure portal.
Py requested this money, this
appropriation to support the
redesign of its existing
licensure uh process that PED
has reported it pretty time
intensive, uh, it's prone to
human error. It doesn't provide
real-time data for department
staff or for educators who are
applying for licensure. It does
not have the security features
that they need to actually
securely store the data that
they're collecting from
educators.
So for FY 26, uh, we are
recommending a $4 million
appropriation that will replace
the current system with a
customized platform that will
automate a lot of the repetitive
tasks, uh, reduced the margin of
human error, uh, offer real-time
data to applicants, and it'll
improve the security of
confidential data that PED
collects uh from educators.
And we'll have PAD here this
this afternoon who can provide
more context on that project.
In this last section, we have
the appropriations that you all
made from grow in this last
session, and all I'll say in
this section is that you heard
this morning from the partners
about this general need to have
recurring or consistent funding
for residency programs. I just
want to point out that in this
last session, you all funded
educator clinical practice for 3
fiscal years on row 182.
And that educator clinical
practice bucket includes teacher
residencies, and so those
residency programs are funded
for FY 25, 26 and 27, and
beginning in FY 28. That's when
you all can make a decision on
whether or not a residency
programs not only for teachers
but also for principals, um,
should receive recurring
funding. So that was a lot.
But before we finish up,
I want to acknowledge that this
budget is the product of
extensive research, um, analysis
and collaboration from our
partners throughout the state.
Um, and you all saw that
directly firsthand throughout
the interim.
Um, and we think this budget
does all the things that we
talked about in 2024, including
a focus on providing flexible
funding in the SCG so that
schools have the resources they
need to provide locally
responsive programs, whether
it's CTE whether it's secondary
fine arts programs, and we're
doing that with the SCG revision
that you'll hear about in the
next presentation from director
Senna.
We're also practicing restraint
with the creation of new or the
scaling of new below the line
programs which we talked about
throughout the interim as only
one step that you all can take
to reduce the burden of the
reimbursement process on both
schools and on PED.
And finally, we're really
pushing as a staff toward this
concept of multi-year budgeting
in this budget, uh, which we
talked about in almost every
single meeting throughout the
interim, uh, as a key component
in helping sustain locally
responsive programs and that
help build local capacity in
ways that school boards and
charter school governing bodies,
uh, see fit for their individual
communities.
And we did this in a way that we
believe is responsive to each of
the court challenges that our
public schools are facing,
whether it's recruitment and
retention, uh, student
engagement, or disparities in
outcomes.
And so the next steps for us as
your staff at the LESC is to get
your feedback on this budget so
that we can refine the
recommendation before, before we
bring it back to you for
committee approval in January.
Thank you. All right. Thank you
for that, Daniel, and thank you
for, for
Contextualizing the budget and
giving voice to, you know, the
fact that you all are looking at
The whole picture, so the
revenue forecasts, um, and
listening to the partners and
what they would like and
certainly the work that we've
been doing, um, together over
the past year, um, so thank you
for that. Um, I have Senator
Soles who promised not to
monopolize all of our time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I really
have only like one question or
comment, uh, and Daniel.
The, uh, you made a comment and
I missed the details of it about
the percent of new money that
this represents compared to new
money of the total budget.
Could you explain that.
Again, does that make sense what
I'm asking?
Or do you
What, what is, yes, it does, Mr.
Chairman, Senators, uh, for FY
25, when we look at row, the
total number on row 81.
The $4.427 billion. That
represents about 43% of the
appropriations that you all made
in the general appropriations
Act in the last session. So 43%.
When we heard from the revenue
estimating consensus revenue
estimating group that helped a
little bit.
In December, um, their
forecasting $892.3 million in
additional general funds for FY
26. So we're operating in that
$892 million universe. If you
look at row 82.
The increase that we're
recommending for total public
school support, including the
SCG categorical, the PED agency
budget recurring below the line,
that represents about 42% of the
quote unquote new money that
Craig has forecast for FY 26,
and that's why I said there are
recommendation doesn't deviate
from the historical trends that
we've seen with public school
supports.
Thank you, Daniel, and that's
sort of what, what I thought,
um, I remember back when Johnson
was governor, and you know, he
had a plan to get us back to 50%
of the budget spent on
education. Now his plan for
doing that was to cut everybody
else to get it back to 50%, but
we were lamenting that for the
first time in history, public
education support for public
education out of the finance and
the monies available is slipped
below 50%.
We now
Or well below and percentages
tend to be a more reliable
measure of what the true support
for education is as a percent of
budget rather than actual
dollars. And so,
It's disappointing that, you
know, as we get additional money
that we're not working towards
coming back to where the true
support for education ought to
be to do education well, as we
heard there's so many needs in
our state from the partners this
morning, you know, not a
criticism of you, but just in
general that we continue to with
our budget undervalue the
importance of the investments in
education compared historically
to where New Mexico was in the
past, yet we lament.
Our low performance. I think
they're tied. And thank you Mr.
Cha. That's all I got.
All right. Other questions,
folks?
Right, Represent Garrett.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Daniel. I just
want to make sure I understand
it cause each year we're here,
it's like you get a little more
understanding.
On line 93, the progress on the
statewide IEP.
Um
So you said we're going back to
the original amount of 12
million. I don't quite
understand that statement.
So the executive asked her for
um
4 million
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett just for historical
background, FY 25, you all
appropriated money to PD to
build a statewide IEP template,
just so we all are all on the
same page. In the past, every
district and every charter
school has had a different
template for IEPs for their
students. So you all said we
should have a a standardized
template across the state. You
all funded that in FY 25. That
is either almost completed,
completed somewhere around
there. The consideration now is
that when a student moves from
one district to the next, there
should theoretically be some
data warehouse that actually
houses students, IEPs so that
when they move from one district
to the next, the new district
can just access the portal or
the system and access that
student's standardized IEP
template.
So that was the initial
consideration, uh, earlier in
the fiscal year that ended up
evolving into a student
information system, which would
conceivably include the
warehouse for the uh statewide
IEP.
So that was the consideration
from PED that they
Submitted in their final PSSR
when the executive issued their
recommendation, uh, it went back
to $4 million only for the
statewide IEP system.
And so LESC staff very much
believes that we should just as
a state keep moving toward the
student information system that
if done correctly would house
the statewide IEP system, if
that makes sense. So Mr. turn
down, you're saying that the IEP
becomes a subset of the greater
house.
OK.
Thank you.
Um, my second question is on
line 95, Community school and
family engagement.
Um, last fiscal year, there was
a problem. It was 8 million, 12
million was expected. Uh, today
we heard from the educational
partners that they would like to
see, actually 12.5 million, I
would like to see that raised. I
just wanna voice that opinion.
If we can look into raising
that.
And um
Because our analysis of results
seems to be that community
schools are improving student
outcomes, you don't have to
comment about that right now. On
line 103 microcredentials. Do we
have any formal survey?
Now that we've finished a year
of micro.
Credentials. I'm just hearing.
feedback that not everybody's
happy with them.
Especially in the light of the
fact that people are supposed to
do letters training, microc
credentials training.
Is there any surveys or
evaluations done on
microcredentials at this point.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, that's a great
question. We actually had PED
present to us, uh, the committee
earlier in the interim on
microcredentials, and they had
conducted some surveying that
was.
I think generally quite positive
overall with some anecdotal kind
of disagreement I've heard in
the field as well. That's not
something that LASC has surveyed
ourselves yet.
Uh, thank you. I, I hope we can
take a deeper dive into that.
Um, let's see, and then, um,
Let's see, mine.
Um
So I want to make sure I
understand on page 3, the other
state and federal funds.
lines uh
137.
To 143.
Those are new appropriations
that will go for the next 3
years. Is that correct? So that
would be 26, 27 and 28. Mr.
Chairman Representative Garret
correct.
OK, thank you.
Uh, and then my final question
is,
In section 9, then um
We're proposing in section 9
lines 176.
To 181 would be now under the
public education reform Fund,
correct proposing for the next 3
years, Mr. Chairman
Representative Garrett, um,
those three recommendations
under grow our executive
recommendations at the executive
has recommended be sourced from
grow.
OK, and then lines 182 to 199
reflect year one of 3-year
funding, is that correct?
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, the numbers that you
see under FY 25 operating budget
under the grow is the total
amount of money that you all
have appropriated for those
considerations. So for example,
on row 182, you see that $60
million. That's $20 million for
each year for a total of $60
million.
Thank you. And, and the original
grow bill required evaluation.
Um, however, as I recall that
was taken out.
Can you just tell me the status
of evaluation of the use.
the, the return on these
programs, where does that state,
the evaluation. Mr. Chairman
Representative Garrett, if I'm
remembering correctly, the
version of the bill that passed
that created to grow requires, I
believe it's LFC, to collaborate
with DFA and revi in devising
proposals for how to revise the
accountability in government
act. That was, I think the.
The, uh, recommendation that was
in the bill. I don't know the
status of where that's going,
maybe director Senna has
contacts. He does not,
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, uh, I, I also don't
know the status of the
conversation. Sonny might be
able to speak to that. I just
wanted to say that um both for
teacher residencies and for
special education differentials,
which were included this fiscal
year. Uh, we've brought you
presentations, Annie started
preliminary work on that, on the
residency work, we had the PEDs.
Special ed department, uh,
Office of Special Education
present a little bit about this
differentials, regardless of the
process of this, we'll continue
to watch these education
initiatives for you all.
Mr. Chair, I just addresentative
Garrett, that you're correct,
the accountability provisions in
Uh house Bill 2, or vetoed.
to require evaluation of growth.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chen. Thank
you, everybody. It's just, you
know, there's all these floating
years and programs and money and
I just wanna make sure we really
know what's happening. Thank
thank you very much for this
best explained budget at this
point that I've ever heard.
Thank you.
Senator Brant.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh I'm
not sure if these questions are
best asked now or when John does
his, but I'll start now. This is
what I was anxiously waiting for
all evening.
OK,
but, but I, I do want to cover a
little bit on the CTE side on
this, um.
I, I thought that the
Direction from LESC has been
pretty clear over the last few
years that that should be a
focus.
But I don't see that as a focus
in this budget.
In fact, I see that you removed
40 million from CTE below the
line that you've removed another
40, 10 million um from line 172,
which is the executive
recommendation, that's at least
50 million that's been taken
away from CTE.
Um
Which is, I think the opposite
of what the LESC.
Unless I misunderstanding the
LASC's uh as members, which is
one of the problems I have with
having a group that has no uh
legislative uh voice in it.
I, um, it's, it's a bureaucrats
running.
A monk, in my opinion.
Um, because I, I don't think
That the direction from this
body.
When it came to CTE was
considered at all.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Brad.
Just to provide some context on
how CTE is funded in the high
level.
FY 25, you all supported CTE
with $45 million in below the
line appropriations, and that
was for the the uh pilot project
for work-based learning for
summer internships.
And
In your budget that you all have
today, it actually still totals
up to the same $45 million and
I'll show you how.
You go to row 89.
You'll see that we have $30
million in that row and it's
marked as money for the pilot
project, money for work-based
learning and money for
internships.
So there's that $30 million for
CTE. The executive is
recommending a total, uh, where
is it? They're recommending
$15.8 million there for CTE.
If you go all the way down to
row 137 in the public education
reform Fund.
You, you'll see that $45 million
there for innovation zones.
That's $15 million every year
for 3 years for innovation
zones. So when you total it up
to 30+ to 15, we're back to the
$45 million. It's just
structured differently because
we're using multi-year budgeting
for innovation zones, and that's
why it was broken out in that
way.
And Mr. Chair and Senator, if I
could ask um what Daniel said is
absolutely right. The other
pieces of it are the additional
piece, um, although it's not
specifically called out for CTA
it could be used for other
things. Is that in addition to
the 45 million, which is the
same that we funded this year.
We're actually proposing an
additional 90 million.
Through the SCG in that
secondary increase. Again, that
wouldn't necessarily be used
specifically for CTE but could
be. So double, uh, essentially
what we have in the budget for
this current fiscal year
and I appreciate that and, and,
um, so my
Thank you for pointing those
out, but the innovation zones
from what we heard yesterday
isn't necessarily CTE.
And, and that's been one of the
problems, right? We allocate
money for CTE and then PE
decides they're going to use it
for a new program that we didn't
authorize.
So that becomes one of the
issues that we deal with.
Right, we, we allocate money and
then an agency, it's not always
pet. I just like to pick on them
cause they're here.
Um, but, uh, uh, uh, an agency
decides, well, they gave us the
money, we don't like what they
gave it to us for, so we'll just
use it for something else.
Um, and that becomes an issue.
So,
I liked what I heard about the
innovation zones yesterday.
And I liked how the one that was
represented to us was working.
But
That's the first time I've heard
about it.
And I've been on this committee
for 12 years.
So, um, maybe I missed the, the
time 2 years ago when it was
told to us, but I don't think it
ever was.
And so I think that's, that's an
issue. We didn't fund.
In last year's budget innovation
zones. We funded CTE.
They took that money and decided
they wanted to start a new
program. They should have come
to us with the idea for the new
program, and say we'd like you
to fund this new program.
That we can try out for a couple
of years and see if it works.
Um, that's the way it should be
done.
But we keep giving away our
authority as a legislature, not
your problem, now I'm preaching
to the choir up here.
OK.
We keep giving away our
authority and letting the
executive do whatever they want
to do. And then we wonder why
education isn't moving forward.
I think that
Under Senator Stewart's guidance
and under Senator Soul's
guidance in the past and we've
had some really good suggestions
come out of this group.
That have never happened.
I've never gotten forward.
Because the executive, whether
it's the previous one or this
one.
their own ideas.
We're the funders. We're the
ones that give the money.
They prove it or not.
I'll talk about it when John's
up there about the fact that I
think that CTE money needs to be
very specific.
And needs to be allocated for
CTE, not for whatever other
program that had or anyone else
decides they want to use it for.
Like
Again, my concern is the 83%.
of students.
I don't think we're focusing at
all on them.
I think we, we throw up a token
amount of money for them.
83% of our students will never
graduate from college.
Only 35% will ever go.
At all.
College.
So we're ignoring 65% of our
students.
That's why they're not attending
school.
That's where the innovation zone
sounded really great, but they
don't necessarily include CTE.
And they don't necessarily
include CTE that makes sure that
they can go out and get a job
when they graduate from high
school.
Which is really the focus, ought
to be on a CTE not just every
program and everything that
everyone wants. It needs to be
looking at what we need as a
state.
That's the direction we should
be going with CTE in my opinion.
And I had thought, at least for
the last couple of years.
That EC and actually the
legislature, cause I had a bill
all the way through to the
house.
That would have provided a
separate funding.
I pulled the bill because of the
work this committee was going to
be doing, I was asked to pull
the bill.
And I'll tell you, I feel like
I've been stabbed in the back.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Daniel.
Um, and I apologize for missing
the first part of the
presentation.
My question is about, uh, let me
see, where am I?
Lines 1099 110, Black Education
Act, Hispanic Education Act, and
then the uh Indian Education
Fund, uh, that the governor
proposes for 90 million.
Because I missed the first part
of the presentation, I am
assuming that the added unit
changes will cover
The Black Education Act and
Hispanic Education Act, you
know, I just 70% of our kids are
Hispanic.
And the executives asking for 90
million for the um Indian
education benefit, could you
just give me an overall view of
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
If I can ask you to refer to row
102.
On page 2.
You'll see the row titled
Bilingual Multicultural
Education, Hispanic education,
and the Black Education Acts,
we've consolidated the three
separate recommendations or the
three separate appropriations
into one line item that PED
could then use in whatever way
they feel is most appropriate
and it matches the executive
recommendation for those three
acts. Mr. Chair and the Indian
education.
fun.
Of 90 million by the executive
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, if you refer to like
row 47.
On page one.
You'll see that we that we
recommended $20 million for the
Indian education fund, and
that's the same as FY 25 and
during the presentation, I
talked about, I referenced the
governor's proposal for that $90
million. It's a $90 million
divided into three separate
years, so 30 million in FY 26,
3027, 3028, you all are going to
hear it directly from PED
tomorrow on how that
recommendation would actually
play out.
And in
distributing more money directly
to charge Pueblos and nations,
and when you all hear that
presentation tomorrow from PED
we'll be asking you for your
feedback as a committee and
whether you want to see that
incorporated in your
recommendation for the LESC.
Well, I just want to say that.
I'm lost here, here. Um,
2.
2.
versus.
90 million, it's it's a big
stretch, but uh I guess we'll
hear from that tomorrow and I
can voice my opinion on that
tomorrow. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Representative, just
to clarify, um, so for the
Indian Education Fund, we're
recommending $20 million which
is the, which is what we've done
over the last couple of years.
And, and we, you know, I should
say the 90 million that the
exact um recommended or
requested just came out last
week and why we thought it was
important that we get your
feedback on that.
And what I would like to add is
I'm finally 20 million for the
uh Indian education fund if we
match that uh with the Hispanic
act, you know, if we had 20
million for the, I mean, if you
take, if you take the numbers,
it should be 7 times should be
140 million. I mean, for 70% of
our kids are Hispanic in this
state, and yet our budget
doesn't reflect that, and
that's, that's
That's my job here to say.
It's, it's not, it's not equity,
it, it, we aren't serving our
students equitably with these
formulas. That's all I have to
say. Thank you.
Other questions, folks?
All right. Um, thank you again,
Daniel, for, for putting this
together. I think, um,
It was very clear and concise
and appreciate the walkthrough.
I did have one question that
we've heard from the partners
and collectively today is um the
fear of what may be coming from
the incoming administration.
Um, federally, um, lost Title
One funding, um, we heard from
the special education folks, um,
uh, uh, a fear and and a request
for us to be proactive in IDEA
funding, um, is that anywhere in
the budget or is it something
we're gonna have to keep an eye
on during the legislative
session.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I think there's a lot
of questions as to the intention
of the incoming administration,
there's been a lot I think
concepts about what they want to
do, not much detail. And so we
really don't know, I think where
we're going in terms of the
federal level and that federal
funding that comes from the
Department of Education, but we
have been thinking internally,
uh, our staff about the various
funding sources that come from
the federal government and
whether there is capacity at the
state.
level to somewhat backfill some
of those appropriations if the
intention of Congress is to pull
back or scale back some
appropriations. So there's not
much that I can offer in this
moment, but I do want to assure
you and the committee that we
are thinking about it as staff.
Yeah, no, I, I, I certainly
appreciate that and, and I just
wanna
Again, thank you all for, for
really listening to us. I mean,
even those insinuated that it
was, it's very staff driven and
maybe elsewhere, but I think in
terms of the work that we are
doing here in LESC, even though
you may not see it big
highlighted in Christmas lights
where um certain initiatives
might be, um, that you very well
pointed out that we're still
working on those initiatives
like career technical education,
um, albeit in, in different
areas.
and not one consolidated area.
So thank you for that work and
thank you to the staff and thank
you director and thank you for
the committee for all the work
we've been doing over the past
year. Um, and in prior years.
Thank you then. Thank you.
Hooray, folks. Thank you so
much.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
You're gonna receive a stack of
papers. I'm gonna wait till you
get that.
All right, Mr. Chair, uh, you
know, we're running a little
behind. I want to make sure that
we have 80 plenty of time when
they get here to present their
budget, um.
So I'll be going through a
couple of things, all of it has
to do with uh legislation that
you, you all will consider
whether or not you want to
endorse some of these bills, uh,
for today, we brought you two
actual bills for endorsement,
uh, the, the others, I'll talk
you through as we're working
through drafting and analysis
we'll get you a final version or
at least a version that you
might endorse come January. So
we're we're gonna walk you
through a couple of bills to
begin with, some, a couple that
we think are
high priority that you probably
want to deal with sooner rather
than later. And like I said, and
then in January, well, you'll
have a a small another list of
of bills that you might
consider. So the first one, and
I won't harp too much on this,
is the bill that would
essentially enable the funding
formula changes that Daniel just
described.
Um, we focused a lot, uh,
obviously on the secondary, and
that is a big ticket item. It's
something that we heard both
from our um
Funding formula working group,
but also from our middle school
uh memorial working group as
well about the needs of middle
schoolers and um and we've
talked a lot about how.
If you look at proficiency rates
across the state, you actually
see this steady increase in
proficiency.
Until kids get to 5th and 6th
grade.
And it's then that you see this
precipitous sort of drop off
until they, until they leave
high school as far as
proficiency goes, and, you know,
not that I want to harp too much
on on efficiency rates. But if
you think about the fact that by
the time 11th graders are taking
SATs.
Those are the 11th graders that
are left.
We've lost a lot of students by
the time as juniors take SATs,
and we're still seeing lower
proficiency rates at that level.
So clearly something's happening
in a middle school, we heard
about the, the need for social
and emotional supports. We heard
about the need for um earlier
exposure to career learning and
college exploration, so all of
those things uh led us to this
proposal, um, the other piece,
and I should say that this is um
happening within a large
larger context of some of some
funding formula changes across
the country. Uh, other states
are just now coming around to
the way that New Mexico has
funded state schools for a long
time based on the number of
students and the characteristics
of those students. A student
weighted formula.
One thing that that a lot of
states are looking at that we
hadn't gotten to yet, but that
we think is important, uh, for
that reason, but also in
response to the lawsuit.
His English learners.
English learners are are
currently captured in the
at-risk uh formula as one of
three components. We felt it was
important to highlight English
learners based on the outcomes
that we're seeing there, um, but
also because it provides clarity
to school districts so that they
understand how much money their
English learners are generating
and how they can target those
funds to services for those
students. So, again, I won't
talk too much about it other
than to say it does this bill
does 3 main things, which
Daniel.
described already.
Sort of
Eliminates the way that we do
at-risk currently.
It replaces
Um, that mechanism with the
family income index as a poverty
indicator for all school
districts and charter schools.
It creates a standalone English
learner factor.
And it and it increases the
secondary factor to 1.30 for
students in 6 through 12th
grade. Mr. Chair, this, you have
this bill in your pocket, the
draft of this bill in your
packet, along with Daniel's.
Uh, analysis of this bill, I
won't walk you through the whole
analysis. And then I think one
thing that's very important for
you all to take a look at and
I'm happy to answer questions as
best as I can, is this very big
spreadsheet.
And this spreadsheet will give
you an indication of how the
changes in the bill would affect
school districts across the
state and charter schools.
In full transparency, I think
it's important as you look
through this, that for the most
part,
School districts.
With
More they, every school district
will receive more money through
the secondary increase.
Most districts will receive
increased money through the
at-risk factor depending on
their, on their current at risk.
And most will receive additional
funding through the English
learner factor.
The place where you are gonna
see some red.
And this is important for you to
understand.
is in the charter schools.
Currently
Charter schools receive, use the
at-risk index of the school
district in which they are
geographically located.
So whether you're a sort of
dropout recovery charter school
and APS.
Or you're a college prep.
Charter in APS.
Currently you're using the same
at risk factor regardless of the
demographics of your student.
This mechanism actually allows
us to get to that school level,
and they're at risk factor will
more accurately reflect the
students that they serve.
So in some cases, you're going
to see some charter schools get
a big bump because they were
actually serving a larger
population of at-risk students
then was reflected in APS is
overall at risk.
And in some cases you might see
some charter schools.
actually lose a little money
because they were not serving a
population that was as at risk,
if you will, as APS is at risk
population as a whole. So
there's gonna be some
fluctuations in those charter
schools, that's outlined for you
here. The last piece that I
think is important to note
though, because we don't want to
just bring this on folks is that
we have included in this bill, a
whole harmless provision.
So that if schools generate
fewer units because of the
changes that we're, that we're
proposing that we would hold
them harmless for a year, they
would receive the level units
for next year, so that they
don't see a decrease in funding
for fiscal year 26.
That would only be a one year
hold harmless according to the
to the proposal in this bill.
After that, things might change
depending on their student
population, but we did want to
give them at least a one year
runway to sort of brace for
those changes and and and make
any necessary adjustments.
I think those are the high level
changes here, uh, Mr. Chair, I
don't know if you want to stand,
if you want me to stand for
questions on each of the bills.
This is a pretty big one.
Yeah, because we have 2 bills,
so we'll take them bill by bill,
so we are on the SCG bill, so if
you're ready for questions,
director on it, ready for
Questions from community
representative Gary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Director.
Wait, what are we, yeah,
director.
Mr. John. Isn't it true that um
Part of the justification and
motivation for raising the unit
value for secondary students was
to cover additional CTE costs.
Mr. Chair Representative, that
was definitely one of the
intentions of the of the amount.
And you heard this morning, not
just about the importance of CTE
but the importance of local
control and making sure that
districts have some flexibility
in that funding to do the
programs that that they see fit.
I will, I will add, um, there is
a sort of overall engagement
theme here as well. We've heard
both in terms of chronic
absenteeism and again in that
middle school work that we did,
that engagement at the secondary
level is critically important.
And that doesn't
always necessarily mean a
formal.
Career pathway, for instance,
right? What other kinds of
initiatives, uh, can school
districts use to do career
exploration. I hope I was doing
a good enough job they're not
complaining about my, um,
So hopefully it, it does, it
gets to that engagement piece
overall.
Thank you.
Other question, Senator Stewart.
I don't know if you're ready for
this, Mr. Chairman, but, but I'd
like to move that we and you.
Approved this as an LEC endorsed
bill. Oh, thank you. I'll hold
on to that because we got
represent Miroba Moya and then
Senator Brent.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
and I won't take up too much,
but I, I do like this cause I
have been like it, it really
blew my mind when
Of this some, some of this has
not been changed since I was 2.
And I I'm, and I'm getting there
in age. So,
so, so that's, that's the crazy
thing because we, especially in
the secondary, when we are um uh
even more post COVID, um.
We technological classroom.
And that's expensive, and we
have not been properly funded,
so I love the fact that that is
going up so we can have those
those funds and however, and in
those different ways that we can
educate and capture their their
their attention and and their
and and kind of make education
their own, um, and have the
funds to be able to do it. So I,
I really appreciate this and I
love the moving 6th grade or or
or funding 6th grade because I
think that may be a good factor
for those.
school districts, including
those of Valencia County that
are still 7th and 8th grade for
middle school.
That 6th grade year is critical,
and it could be a good
transition year and maybe they
haven't because they didn't have
the funding, the extra funding
that secondary usually brings.
So bringing that up, maybe,
maybe that will help them make
those decisions. So thank you.
Senator Bran.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman and
and uh John so so walk me
through a little bit with
How exactly the group focused on
CTE when they figured out how
much to increase the uh
6th grade through 12, I guess
would be right, and it went from
what, 1.25 to 1.3. So where did,
where did you guys come up with
the numbers? Did you call Hobbs
and find out how much it was
costing cause they're the ones
that are really doing a focused
job on it.
So, so, Mr. Chair, and, and
Senator Brown, I think so I'll
start with
Um, we wanted to make sure,
because we've heard this from
school districts about CTE in
general, that part of the issue
about the way we're funding it
currently is that it is grants
through the department.
Based on reimbursement and funds
certain kinds of things through
that pilot project.
And so we did hear about the
need for sustainable recurring
funding, um, and we started to
be honest with, with a little
bit of a number of we're funding
CTE for $40 million right now.
What would it look like to put
$40 million in the funding
formula. That
That evolved, as we heard more
and more from the both the SCG
working group and the middle
school group, uh, about not just
the need for, for CTE but again
some of those other support
services.
I'll call out Jessica, uh,
because she's also currently in
the middle of working with what
what we're calling a very
innovative leader, our CTE
working group, uh, that involves
superintendents from across the
state. And one of the
conversations that we're having
with them right now is that we
don't really have a good idea of
what CTE costs. We know that
there are some initial startup
costs that have to do with
equipment, maybe some incentives
for staff, um, obviously,
facilities can be an issue in
capital outlay. And so some of
the work that
we were doing in the pilot
program.
Is getting at some of those
startup costs. And so we, we,
that's why we insisted on
leaving that $30 million in
below the line funding.
While also supplementing and
hopefully adding some
flexibility for districts, um,
with that SCG funds. And so I
would love to tell you that
there was a
Super scientific method about
how we got to 1.30, there isn't.
But we knew that there was a
call for additional funding.
This seemed like, uh, given the
budget situation and where we
were with, with revenues across
the state, that this seemed like
a a a reasonable, justifiable
amount that we think is
desperately needed and called
for by secondary schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
John, I
I guess my concern is, and on
one, on one side, I'm, you know,
I always talk about local
control.
On one side, I, I, I love giving
more local control.
However
There's no incentive.
To
Putting any focus on the 65% of
students.
That are not gonna go to
college.
And that's not a unique number
in New Mexico. That's a number
that's nationwide, so, you know,
it's, it's not like if we start
doing a better job, actually
educating our kids, which would
be a miracle in this state.
Um, that more are gonna go to
college. No, it's just, that's
just the way it is, only about
35% of.
Young people ever want to go to
college? Well, at least right
out of high school, right?
I was out of high school for 10
years before I went to college.
So, you know, we're not talking
about that. We're talking about
people who go right out of high
school.
Go to college
35%, only half of them graduate.
Yes.
Happening. So the best college
is only half of them graduate.
So again, you're 17%.
is what we focused 100% on, in
my opinion, for the last.
Well it's been a while since I
was in school, but since I was
in school, that's all they ever
talked about, go to college, go
to college, go to college.
That's all I've heard here for
12 years. Well, for 10 years.
About 2 years ago, we started
talking about, hey, maybe
there's something other than
college.
We shouldn't be pushing all of
our kids to go to college to get
in debt for 4050 $60,000 for a
job that pays 50,000 when they
cannot go in debt at all and go
work for TLC Plumbing, which I
tried to call this morning, and
they don't have any plumbers to
come out today.
Why? Because they don't have
enough workers.
Didn't get an appointment.
My water heater went out
yesterday.
See?
It's tied into personal.
Why can't I get someone out
today? Can't get someone till
next Tuesday.
Because they don't have enough
workers.
Because we focus all of our
education on going to college,
and even when we do CTE it's
done with such a shotgun
approach.
That we're not really getting
the fields that we need.
Because we want to be all
inclusive to everyone for
everything.
Doesn't work that way.
With certain skills that we need
in New Mexico.
That's what, you know, we keep
talking about, we don't want our
kids to go off somewhere else,
then let's quit training them to
go off somewhere else. Let's
train them to stay in New
Mexico, so for the jobs that we
have here.
I don't think this does that,
and not to the, not to the
extent that I thought we wanted
to focus on it doing that.
Because what we've done is a
school can make no changes at
all, do nothing at all.
And they're still gonna get the
increase.
That's where to me it was
important to have it as a
separate factor for for students
that take CTE.
Actually pay for the cost of
CTE.
Now maybe we do that still by
adding more below the line.
Those initial costs, absolutely,
we got to deal with those.
But
There's a huge cost.
In the staffing.
That Santa Santa Rosa's done a
good job being able to find a
couple that they've been able to
fit in.
Not everyone's going to be able
to do that. That actually may be
easier to do in the rural
communities than it is in the.
Larger communities like mine.
The normal class in high school
that you teach 30 students.
35.
You can't do that with a CTE
class. You have to have a much
smaller cohort, and you can't
pay them only 55,000.
Because they're coming from a
job, they're making 100,000 at
their level, if they're
teaching.
Huge expenses that we're not
even that we are not touching
on.
In my opinion, in this.
But I, I would
Love to continue the
conversation, um, I won't be
supporting this change because I
don't think it focuses on CTE,
and I think that we need to
focus on CTE.
Other questions
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
John, for this presentation a
massive amount of work. I can't
even imagine tackling this, um.
Am I right in assuming that
everybody gets a raise in their
annual outcome.
Is that the way I'm reading
this.
Mr. Chair Representative, first
I just to your first point, I, I
really can't say enough about
Daniel's work in this, not only
in the, in the spreadsheet
stuff, but in coordinating that
working group and working for 18
months, this is, this is really,
um,
Herculean, yeah,
um, not everybody.
And, and that's the whole
harmless provision there and a,
and I have to, I would have to
go back in. So, and I, I think
it's important that everybody
recognize that.
What we're talking about is not
everybody wins just because of
the changes. When you put in
money for a a teacher raises,
for instance, when you put in
money for insurance, um, those
kinds of things go into program
cost, and at the end of the day
when the school district gets
their allocation or a charter
school gets their allocation. If
you've increased the overall
amount of money to to the SCG.
Most districts and charter
schools will get more money than
they got in the current year. It
may or may not
be enough to cover all the
things that you are asking them
to do. So in this case, that's
what the, why the whole harmless
provision is important to make
sure that there's enough money
so that they can provide those
3% raises, while also holding
flat those other programs that
they may be paying for already.
So, Mr. Chair, if I could ask
another question. So does this
Do these numbers reflect all of
the
programs on both sides of this
paper.
So Mr. Jarret legislation,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
the only, um, there's only a few
bills on this sheet that have
budgetary impacts, not all of
them do. So the first one is the
SCG definitely does this when
we're talking about.
Um, if you go down a few bullets
to raising the minimum uh
teacher salaries. That's also in
the, in the, in, in the budget
scenario, if you will.
Um, there are a couple here
that, um,
Specifically, the last one that
you've asked about, the 30,000
and the and the one that we've
heard from a few partners,
that's not currently reflected
in our budget scenario.
And that would be my bill, so
that's why I was asking that
question. That's not that's not
in here. That's right. OK,
30,000 minimum wage for all
school personnel. OK.
Um, thank you.
Thank you. Other questions,
folks?
All right. I didn't want to say
Senator Brant, I know a plumbing
company that I called on Monday
because our water heater was
leaking. Precision plumbing. I
call it 10, they were out by 120
and gone from my house at 12:30.
Cool. Um.
Director, um.
The
I had a question about, because
I think Senator Bryant raises a
good question about CTE, but how
this functions or any of these
CTE proposals function with um
federal money for CTE.
So Mr. Chair, um,
I want to make sure I understand
the question. Is there a
specific connection that you're
concerned about? No, no, I guess
how districts would work with
any of this funding for CT along
with funding that comes in from
the federal government as far as
CTE. So the proposal because
it's not specifically tied to a
CTE factor or anything like
that, would not have any impact
on a school district's ability
to get federal funds or the
state's ability to to do
anything with federal.
funds. We do, the state does
receive federal Perkins funding
for career technical education,
uh, that's administered through
the department. Um, this would
be because it flows directly to
school districts, um, not
necessarily a piece of that at
all.
Cool. I appreciate that
clarification.
Cool. So we don't have anybody
else on the list. Um, Madam
Proin made the motion to um add
to LESC's endorsement. All
right, we have a second vice
chair souls, so is there any
objection to this, sorry,
Senator Brandt.
All right. That means everybody
else is in sports, so we have an
LESC endorsed bill for the SCG
changes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll take
you to the next bill that you've
got in your packet. Um,
A little less paper on this one.
this is a bill that I mentioned
yesterday in, in uh relation to
capital outlay. This bill has
already been endorsed by Pacuda
earlier this week. It does a
couple of um major things. The
first one is that it expands,
um, the local match reductions
that you all passed a couple of
years ago to so that to increase
access to the capital outlay
fund, so it actually decreases
local match, um,
Requirements by 1/3 for school
districts or by one half for
micro school districts, students
with districts under 200
students. So this bill would um
Extend those local match
reductions as a group of folks
from LESC, LFC.
All the other letters you can
think of continue to look at
that local match formula,
because we we we're still seeing
some issues with how districts
um can access the public school
capital outlay fund, which
districts are required to pay
their entire uh portion of that,
how they're match is part of all
of that. So this bill would
extend those reductions. It also
changes
The waiver requirements for
school districts. And so the
important piece here is that it
simplifies the local match
waiver criteria by removing the
70% free and reduced lunch
threshold and the 50% local
share requirements for small
high poverty districts. So there
were some criteria in place.
That essentially said you can't
get a waiver unless at least 70%
of your students are free and
reduced lunch, and you have to
cover 50% of your local match,
right? And so we've seen as we
as we, as you've heard over and
over again, increased costs, um,
the district's inability to
bond, even if they're bonding to
capacity and still be able to
afford these projects, and so
this bill really is getting at
accessibility to the fund,
knowing that we still have a lot
of needs in the state, uh, and
we want districts to be able to
upgrade their facilities for
students.
And with that I'll stand for
questions on this one.
Questions, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and out of
Piscoda, if I was sort of
assigned to carry this, uh, for
those of you who look through
there are a number of pages, but
the only real changes are on
pages 567, and 8.
Um, and so it's date changes in
the second one on.
The criteria to request a
waiver. It waivers are not
guaranteed, but as it was,
people weren't even allowed to
request a waiver if they didn't
meet those, they're lessen that
so more districts are allowed to
request a waiver. It does not
guarantee funding if they meet
those new criteria. Just want to
make sure that clarification.
Great. Thank you. The comments,
questions, concerns, Madam
Burin.
Mr. Chairman, I move that we
endorse this bill from the LEOC
and our endorsement to the
Pacuda in.
We have a motion to
Endorse this bill and add it,
along with the public school
capital outlay Task Force. I
heard a second from
Representative Herrera, is there
any opposition to endorsement.
Seeing none.
It's collecting endorsements.
All right, 22 for 2, Mr. Chair,
2 for 2, and I forgot to mention
because Senator Souls is going
to carry this piece of
legislation um for the SCG bill.
I'll be carrying that, um, and
then Senator Stewart will be
carrying it on the Senate side.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna run through
these ones relatively quickly,
hopefully not too quickly, cause
PEDs here and they're ready to
go. Um,
Uh, so we've talked about the
1st 2 bullets.
The 3rd bullet here is changes
to administrator preparation
programs and establishing
separate licenses for principals
and superintendents. Again, we
will have build drafts for you
all in in January on these
bills. We're still in the midst
of getting those ready, but um
I'll, I'll run you through the
high points.
This is the product of another 2
years of work. Um, we, we heard
two years ago the need to
upgrade or or improve our our uh
principal preparation programs,
um, we've worked LESC staff has
uh with PED with the deans and
directors of the educator
preparation programs with
superintendents, um, people who
prepare superintendents. This
has been a very inclusive
process to get to this point.
Last year you all had a bill
that
focused just on the principal
preparation piece of this.
And the, and the educator
preparation program piece of
this.
This is essentially that same
bill with some additions, and,
and the, the next iteration of
that that happened over the
summer, was talking about the
need to differentiate between
principal license and a
superintendent license.
Right? It's, it's a running
joke. It's my own running joke,
and it's probably not very funny
that if, if they wanted to,
anybody could hire me as a
superintendent today because I
have the same license as any
superintendent across the state.
Right? We know that being a
principal is not the same as
being a superintendent. And so
how do we ensure that those two
folks first are prepared to do
the principal job really well.
And then secondly, are there,
are there uh processes in place
to make sure they can take that
next step to being the
superintendent. And so, there's
a uh I won't run you through all
of these pieces, there would be
a delayed a year delayed
implementation to give people a
chance to to make those changes.
There's also some grandfathering
components in here.
We don't want anybody, any
principal or superintendent to
think that they would have to go
out and get this new thing, it
would be automatically
grandfathered in with some
requirements at renewal.
Um, and so that's the high level
for this particular bill, and
I'll stand for any questions on
that. We're not gonna, you don't
have a bill today, but I just
wanted to make sure everybody
knew what that was.
I don't think so yet because we
don't actually have the bill. So
I appreciate people's
willingness to carry the pills,
but I mean just
I would wait till we actually
have the bill, so you know what
you're getting into, just in
case you can never be too
careful.
I, I like our staff pretty good.
I think they do a good job, but
it's better that you check it
first. Uh, the, the, the 3rd
bill on this list is a change to
restraint and seclusion.
Right? This is an issue that
you've heard before. Um, it's an
issue that folks, um, it, it is
not.
Only a special education issue,
but we do hear a lot with
students with disabilities are
are disproportionately affected
by restraint and seclusion. You
heard a presentation from folks,
uh, and meritt's been working
with folks, uh, for a while now,
as part of a working group or
task force, you heard from them
in Los Alamos in July, I
believe, um, and what this bill
would do is clarify, add some,
some specificity and clarity.
To what is and what is not
restraint and seclusion. This
would ban seclusion.
In New Mexico, and seclusion
would have a very specific
definition of essentially you
cannot put a kid in a room for 4
hours by themselves and nobody
watching them, just because you
need to get them away from
something.
These are, we've heard some
pretty terrible stories about
seclusion. This would clearly
define what that is.
While still allowing school
districts the tools to keep kids
and and staff stay safe because
there are other things that are
not seclusion.
That that school district still
need to have access to in order
to to uh keep staff and students
safe. And again, we'll bring
this bill to you, um, with, so
that you can take a closer look
at it, um.
In January.
The next bill here is raising
minimum teacher salaries. This
is very straightforward, uh, as
Daniel said in his budget
presentation, this would
increase uh teacher salaries to
55, 65, and 75 for level 12, and
3 respectively, and because uh
principal salaries and assistant
principal salaries.
statutorily tied to level 3
salaries, any time you increase
Level 3 salaries, you also
increase uh principal salaries.
So that would, that's what this
bill would do.
At the bottom of the page there,
you heard again in our budget
recommendation, uh, to you all,
and, uh, you heard about, you've
heard about the STEM innovation
network also for a couple of
years, um,
Connor has been instrumental in
working with a group of folks to
establish the framework, the
statutory framework that would
create a center of excellence at
a at a higher education
institution.
To coordinate all the STEM
activities in the state. We have
a, we actually have a lot of
STEM activities, both in K-12
and in workforce, but they kind
of operate in silos. This would
help to coordinate all of those
efforts by, by having a sort of
a home base at a higher ed
institution and allowing the
establishment of regional hubs
so that each, each area of the
state would be able to access
those resources. This is tied to
that $6 million
appropriation that we mentioned
to you, so $2 million a year for
the next 3 years to see how that
would work out.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would defer
here a little bit to uh vice
chair Souls if he wants to talk
about his uh UPI bill a little
bit.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh, and John,
um,
I call it UBI. I think
technically the people that do
UBI, it's not UBI, it's a cash
transfer because it's not
universal. Uh, this bill came
from some work I've been doing
with the Hunt Institute on Early
Childhood Education. I'm glad
the secretary is here and
hopefully we'll, we'll help uh
push your endorse some of this.
Uh, it comes from some of the
work of, uh, Doctor James
Heckman, who is the Nobel
laureate in economics and the
work that he did on the ROI of
early childhood.
The education and the earlier
the better. Um, also some work
on um problems with
The trauma caused by people who
are in house who don't have
enough money, and often
families, young families in
particular when there's a
newborn on the way there
economic situations get
substantially worse, which makes
it bad for the child through
that first year. So that's kind
of the background behind this,
uh, this particular proposal
would create a
A, you know, start with 2 year,
uh, hopefully it would continue
but provide 15 $1500 a month for
2000 families that meet a
threshold of 200% of poverty or
less, so that they are lower
income, uh, the only criteria
there would be only 3 criteria
for getting the money, uh, the
criteria would be first they
must participate in prenatal
care. We know that helps and
makes a difference, um.
Avoiding one or two high-risk
pregnancies almost pays for the
cost of this in avoided.
Uh, costs through the medical
system. The second requirement
is once the baby is born, the
family, parents must participate
in home visiting, and again, a
program that is well researched
is very clearly makes a
difference, uh, and so it would
require participation in that
program. The third requirement
is you have to participate in
questionnaires and follow up so
we can do the research on the
effectiveness of a program of
this sort, uh, the
And future cost for investing in
children when they are at their
very youngest, which includes
prenatally and in those families
and lifting those families out
of poverty and the reduced
trauma, according to the
research of Heckman that he got
a Nobel laureate Prize for is
huge, but they are long term.
costs that are are saved while
doing this. This would be an
investment in the future of our
very youngest children to get
them started. Um, it's got
several other benefits in that
landlords when a young family
isn't able to pay the rent, they
now have money to pay their
rent. Food insecurity is off the
table. If the parent mother
chooses to go back to work, it
provides some stable income for
uh
Early childhood education
settings for the child to be in
an opportunities to do that. Uh,
there are numerous pilots that
have been done of this on a
small scale, all of them show
exactly the same results that
the money is used to lift the
family and more importantly,
that young child's family out of
poverty to give them a solid
start. Uh, we know that due to
poverty, many of our children
start in pre-K and kindergarten,
but up to 2 years.
behind their peers, we can stop
that with a relatively small
investment, about $80 million
covers this program for 2000
families for the 18 months from
The pregnancy and through the
until the child turns one year
old. Uh, so that's the basic
premise behind doing this 2000
represents about 10% of the
cohort of babies that are born
in the state each year.
I'm sorry Representative Verra.
Yes, I just wanted to um commend
Senator Sos for this
legislation. I just wanted to
also um let you know, and you
may know this already that the
city of Santa Fe has had a
similar program. They did it,
uh, I think it was over a 3 year
period, and they were looking
for.
Young people who hadn't
graduated from high school, but
wanted to go on to a community
college. I think it was a 3-year
program, and it was about 4 or
500 a month, and they saw
substantial change in the lives,
not only of that student and
that child, but also their
surrounding family.
Um, you know, if you strengthen
one pillar of a family, you can,
you can help a lot of other
people too. I found that
interesting. That's the most
recent research they've had, so
Alan, uh, Mayor Weber has has
taken a strong lead in that.
They had a special fund that
created an endowment in in the
city of Santa Fe for, for, uh,
infant programs, and he's he's
been doing this for about 3
years.
I'm, I'm aware of some of the
things it's got some things I'm
not sure I quite agree with as
much. Uh, this, the child in,
uh, was it child tax credit,
credit, uh, is clearly showed
how much investments in early
childhood reduced the poverty
level for children, uh, when,
during COVID when we had that,
we lifted across the country
people out of poverty and the
rates went right back when that
was removed when it didn't pass
through Congress, this focus
is
Money where it makes the biggest
difference, which is when the
children are the youngest rather
than us trying to spend money
through the next 12 years of
K-12 education making up for
something that could have been
prevented on the front end.
Who senator, you piqued my
interest with that. So what are
the parts you don't like about
the Santa Fe proposal.
Uh, there was a requirement that
they have to attend the
community college and be getting
other skills in many of those
families don't have that ability
to get out there and to do some
of those things is one of the
ones that I recall right now.
Cool. Thank you. Repentido Amoa.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
one quick question like in this,
uh you were saying that there
was um prenatal care home visits
and questionnaire was the only
requirements. Anything about
like possible drug testing.
No, and thank you for bringing
that up because I have thought
about that, and the concern with
that is if a parent comes in and
is getting the prenatal care,
that is going to come up and
that gets us the best
opportunity to get them access
to uh anti-drug things and again
focused on the need for the
child. If that's a requirement
to start the money, then we
don't ever get access to that
group of people because they
won't come in and ask for it.
That is true, Mr. Chair, that
is, that is true, but um I also,
cause I have like drug addicts
in my family and uh you give
them cash and it doesn't go
where you intended to.
Um, with it, so if it doesn't
have, if you're not paying that
bill for them. I mean, I would,
I would love to think that that
would, that would do it, but
unfortunately, I have an issue
with giving people money that
are, it's not gonna go where we
intended to, where we would like
them to do it.
And Mr. Chair and thank you and
I appreciate it, all of the
pilots that I've looked at,
there are always going to be a
few that drink the money, misuse
the money, all of the data
indicates the vast majority of
it is used for housing, for
food, for transportation, for
getting the car fixed so that
they can get to work. It is used
in appropriate ways there will
always be a few in any program,
but we shouldn't stop the
benefit of the majority.
Because of one or two who don't.
Mhm
No, no, all right. I was just
gonna say, Mr. Chair, that we'll
have the bill for everyone to
take a look at in January,
right, we can have.
Questions again?
Uh, the last one on this list is
the bill that Representative
Verera mentioned earlier, and
that's uh establishing a minimum
annual salary of $30,000 for all
public school personnel, you all
raised the, the minimum salaries
for educational assistance a
couple of years ago to 25,000.
Um, again, that's the statutory
minimum prior to that, it was
12. We all knew that no one was
making only $12,000 a year, but
we did raise that statutory
minimum. Um, we're working on
this bill, um, and some
additional estimates. This is
This is a tricky one to get at
how much it costs, um.
Partly because our lowest paid
employees are sort of all over
the place when it comes to
scheduling, right? Some are
working 9 months or 10 months or
11 month contracts. Some are
full time, some are part-time,
and the data problems that
you've discussed about pretty
much the entire system also
applies to this group of folks.
So we're still working on
numbers to make sure we get you
a good estimate for what this
will cost, and we'll have the
bill uh for you to take a look
at in January.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chair, if
I could just say one last thing,
is that um I hope it's clear
that these all of these
proposals are the product of
Years of work
Years of engagement with our
partners in the field, whether
those are folks working in
education and advocates who are
seeing things happening, like I
said earlier with the students
with disabilities, we're trying
our best to, uh, and our, and
our staff does a really great
job of making sure that they're
talking to folks, and I think if
you were to ask our partners in
the, in, in the field, they
would say that as well. And so
uh we feel really confident
where we landed with these
proposals and uh appreciate you
listening to them.
All right. Anything else, folks?
Cool. So we can have the
discussion when we get some of
these bills before us in
January.
Right, we move to our last item
for today?
So, Madam Secretary designate,
please.
All right, I think we're good. I
think we all have the materials
we need. So please,
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairs and
members of the committee.
Uh, thank you so much for
inviting me to come here this
afternoon to present the FY 26,
um, public school support
agency um support budget and the
PED um agency budget. Um, I have
been in front of the legislative
committees, including this one
several times over the last
couple of months to talk about
our priorities related to the
PSS budget to engage in.
conversations with all of you as
legislators, um, as well as with
legislative staff and so I'd
like to thank you all for that
collaboration. Uh, thank, uh,
Director John Senna and his
staff.
As well as Sunny from the LFC. I
think that um the work that
we've done together, I'm
thinking through the PSS budget
has really strengthened the
budget, and I think based on
what Daniel presented earlier
today. I hope that you see a lot
of commonalities, a lot of
shared thinking and a lot of
shared prior priorities from the
LESC budget and um the the
executive and agency budgets.
Um, last week I was in front of
the LFC presenting the
aggencies' public school support
request, um, and today I'm in
front of you presenting the
executive um budget request, so
you will see some changes.
Um, this request reflects our
commitment to equity and
excellence in education,
addressing the needs of all
students and seeks to continue
making targeted investments that
enhance instructional quality
and improve student outcomes.
Um, what you have in front of
you is this handout. It's a high
level overview of the major um
budget.
Initiatives and priorities and
then they're kind of bucketed
into specific groups. Um, so if
you'll just kind of take a look
at how it's structured. Um, we
have the total uh funding
request of the bucket to the
left, how it's broken down in
the middle and to the right, we
have some highlights, um, that
we want to um share with you
all.
Uh, the agencies FY 26 public
school support budget requests
an overall 5.5% increase in
funding from fiscal year 25 to
26.
There's a recurring general fund
increase of 5.3%, which is
largely due to increases in K-12
plus funding, um, compensation
and expansion of universal free
meals.
There's a non-recurring increase
of 1. I'm sorry, 121.3 million
from the general fund, which
includes a 40 million uh
supplemental appropriation to
sustain the unit value.
Um, 90 million over the next 3
years for Indian education and
27 million needed from the
general fund uh for CT.
Uh, that's used to be paid, uh,
that used to be paid through the
purse.
Um, items that we've recommended
in this budget for reoccurring
funding include our learning
management system, which
supports professional
development and micro micro
credentials, funding for the
Education Acts, um, also, uh,
we're requesting recurring
funding and school safety funds
are also a request for recurring
funding.
In addition, um, the executive
budget has uh requested growth
funding for math attendance and
school improvement.
These shifts to recurring
funding ensure ongoing support
for initiatives designed to
close the achievement gap and
improve student outcomes.
So first step, educator
ecosystem at 1151.4 million. Um
teachers remain the most
important factor in student
learning. However, the state
still has far too many teacher
vacancies. Compensation is an
important aspect for recruitment
and retention, and the agency is
proposing a 3% increase in
compensation for school
employees, which is $101.4
million investment.
We want to invest an additional
$50 million in our educator
ecosystem to recruit and retain
teachers, which includes 20
million for educator fellows.
This is a locally grown educator
program that advances
educational assistance and other
school staff through an educator
prep program while remaining in
the classroom with a licensed
educator.
These educators are more likely
to stay in their communities and
in their schools. Um, we
currently have 70 school
districts participating in the
educator Fellows program.
We're requesting 20 million for
educator clinical practice. This
supports our teacher residency
programs are paid student
teaching programs as well as our
principal, um, residency
program.
10 million for professional
development, um, is, um,
administered through our
priority schools bureau, which
oversees instructional coaches,
teachers, and principals and and
uh superintendent professional
development. These are 3-year um
cohort programs that really
provide um uh focused
professional development for our
school leaders.
These investments are designed
to strengthen teacher
preparation, enhance
professional growth
opportunities and ensure
educators have the tools needed
to deliver high quality
instruction.
Um, one of these, the programs
that I just mentioned that we've
seen a great interest and
successes with the teacher
residency program.
Between FY 23 and FY 24.
There was a 650% increase in the
number of teacher residents,
which translates to an
additional 260 more educators in
our pipeline, receiving the
highest quality preparation.
Um, the budget includes 54
million to support literacy and
math education with 34 30
million allocated for the summer
reading program, and 14 million
to expand structured literacy
training through letters.
We're also requesting 5 million
for middle school structured
literacy and 5 million for math
initiatives.
These funds will continue to
increase reading proficiency and
math proficiency, as we've seen
already with the 4% average
statewide increase in reading
proficiency across all grade
levels.
Um, the summer reading program,
our first summer reading
program, which um occurred this
last summer. Um, we feel was a
real success, um, in many ways.
We established 117 program sites
throughout the state, um, and in
these programs, we, we partnered
with our um, our schools with
community partners with tribal
partners to establish program
sites. These were, um, and
very focused intensive reading
programs, working with students
for 4 hours a day, 4 to 5 days a
week in groups of 4 students.
To one instructor. Overall,
students saw about a 5% growth
in literacy, um, this in
comparison to their peers who
did not have similar uh literacy
supports they experienced a 6%
uh loss in literacy proficiency
over the summers. We really
received incredible feedback
from our instructors from our
educators and from parents.
who are really asking for more.
They're asking for more summer
reading programs, more
opportunities during the
academic year, as well as um
after school programming.
We are under a way with our
planning for this upcoming
summer, we have already started
signing up program sites. So far
we have 43 that have indicated
that they're ready to go, um, of
those 43 program sites that
reflects an estimated 6900
students that would be
represented in those sites, um,
our goal is to serve as many
students in this free state
funded program as we can.
Um, and, uh, we would like to
see similar efforts obviously
for math. We have a long way to
go to improve our math
proficiency as well, and so we
very much need um educator
professional development and
coaching in math instruction.
Uh, for special education, we're
requesting 9 million to support
students with disabilities.
4 million will be allocated for
professional development and
training, including the state
behavior initiative, which will
support students with autism,
um, important programming for
students with disabilities such
as um the best buddies program,
the Office of Special Education
is planning a special educating
education leaders and fellows
academy, as well as a
continuation of our parent
university. Uh, we hosted a
couple of months.
ago, our first parent university
event, we had almost 500
attendees. These were families
coming, many of them with their
children to be able to learn
about ways that they can best
support their students and um
how to best advocate and engage
in the educational process. Um,
We also this spending will also
support the state and school
initiative, um, the Office of
Special Education has seen great
success in the state and stay in
school initiative, which is uh
was a pilot that was rolled out,
um, Farmington High School,
which participated, um, their
4-year graduate rates for
students with disabilities went
from 32.9% to 63.1% from 2017 to
2022.
Demons rates went from 42.6 to
74% during the the same time
frame with this funding, our
plan is to expand that program
to 17 additional school
districts that have already
indicated with us that they're
ready to go to implement the day
in school initiative.
We're requesting 5 million and
grow, uh, to continue the salary
differentials to attract and
retain specialized educators,
ensuring students with
disabilities have access to high
quality instruction and support.
Um, we see the highest vacancy
rates among our special
education teachers, and so this
is an effort to make sure that
we're pulling those educators
back into the classroom.
The budget includes $63 million
to improve graduation rates
through programs like career
connected learning which bridges
education and workforce
opportunities with $40 million
in funding for next gen CTE
innovation zones and summer
internships.
The number of summer internships
that our students are
participating in is increasing
with 2,741 students
participating in 2023 and 3,365
internships this year in 2024.
Um, we know that these programs
really work. Students that are
CT concentrators, as you all are
very well aware, have almost
100% graduation rate. Um, we
want to continue to invest in
this type of programming for our
students as a way to really um
engage our students and
strengthen our graduation rates.
We're requesting 15 million um
and out of school time learning
and high impact tutoring
programs which provide frequent
small group to.
during, um, to accelerate um
academic progress.
We're requesting 8 million for
community schools since 2019
when the Community Schools Act
was enacted, there's been a 12%
increase in 4-year graduation
rates when compared with
non-community schools.
These programs again are
designed to boost graduation
rates, provide wraparound
services and engage students in
meaningful career pathways.
Attendance, attendance is one of
the biggest hurdles, as you all
know, that we're facing an
education that is really
impacting learning.
The executive request is
requesting 6 million and grow
for the next 3 fiscal years to
provide support for attendance
initiatives. This would include
behavioral behavioral health
supports, um, staff such as
attendance interventionists that
can work with students and
families, investments in early
warning systems and other forms
of technology, um, Farmington
School District is using the
funding that they have
currently, um, to invest.
in an AI
technology that interacts with
students and their parents when
students are absent, so they
have an interactive
communication where they are
asking questions about why
they're absent, reminding them
the importance of being in
school, asking them that if
they're at as if they're at a
doctor's appointment. That's
what the family says, uh, where
the student is at, reminding
them to send in their doctor's
note for.
an excused absence, and then
that information goes to school
staff who can later follow up
and it allows the school to also
collect attendance data.
Um, these strategies that we
have been seeing implemented
around the state are working, as
we've seen almost a 10% point
decrease in our chronic
absenteeism statewide. This is
significant for the state and
something that we should be um
excited about in terms of the
progress. I also want to
highlight another school
district, Santa Fe Public
schools is really invested their
attendance funds on hiring staff
to work.
directly with students and
families, and they have just
celebrated a 22% reduction in
their chronic absenteeism rate.
Um, one of the top issues that
we at the department continue to
hear from Superintendents and
charter school leaders is the
issue around school safety.
We've had several meetings with
them over the last couple of
months to really hear about this
concern. Some of the things that
they are requesting funding for
includes communication systems
that address response times.
This is a particularly a
significant issue in rural
communities.
Whose law enforcement response
times are around 100, around an
hour, and that's um really
incredible to think that a
school would have to wait that
long or law enforcement to
respond to an emergency.
They're requesting funding for
technical assistance for threat
assessment plans and overall
training, um, on how to respond
to to school threats. They're
requesting school safety
equipment, um, such as equipment
utilized to screen students and
other folks that are coming onto
school campuses. They're
requesting funding for school
resource officers, and again,
they cannot reiterate enough in
the importance of mental health
support.
As this is playing a big factor
in school safety.
Um, and then I just want to
share that more and more schools
are choosing to use the mobile
panic buttons that the
legislature has funded over the
years with more than 700 schools
currently opting into this
system, the panic button has
been utilized over 16,000 times
since its inception in FY 22.
Student nutrition, we are
requesting 68.9 million.
To ensure that students have
access to nutritious meals,
which are critical to learning
and well-being.
In school year 23, 24/55 million
meals were served through the
healthy universal meals program
with a projected increase to 58
million meals in school year
2425. We are seeing more
students participate in
breakfast and lunch. Last school
year, we saw an increase in over
2 million additional meals
served totaling a 4% increase in
both breakfast and lunch. Lunch
is served from the prior year.
Based on the July and October
claims processed this year, we
have already served 834,000 more
meals than the 1st 3 months of
the previous school year.
Our projections for FY 26
reflects a 5% increase in male
participation over this current
year.
In addition, we're asking for
2.3 million to go towards the
New Mexico grown meals program
to bring in fresh local produce,
meat, and other products into
our schools. Um, this is an
important part of the universal
meals program, we really want to
improve the quality of our
school meals. I know many of
you, um, spend time in schools
and had had many school meals
yourselves. This is one of the.
top issues that we hear from
students at the department. They
love that they have free meals.
They would very much like for
the quality of those meals to
improve.
Um
We are requesting.
14.3 million for assessments to
maintain robust student
assessment programs.
Um,
Including a account of student
accountability and assessments,
which this year includes support
for the Panorama survey and
required gifted screener.
This is also a request for 1.3
million for student test
assistants for advanced
placement testing, um,
international baccalaureate
testing and PSAT testing, which
is a new addition this next
fiscal year.
17,951 AP exams.
Were taken by um just over
10,900 students.
In the 2023, 2024 school year,
um, and the PED supported
through this funding almost half
of the cost of those exams.
These funds will support the
state's ability to measure and
track student achievement,
ensure data-driven decision
making at all levels. The
federal target for participation
in state accountability testing
is 95% and New Mexico is hitting
that mark.
A total of 9.6 million is being
requested to enhance critical
data systems.
This includes 1.1 million for
school dashboards and reporting
portals to ensure that students,
that schools and teachers have
meaningful and secure access to
their nova data.
4 million for phase one of a
statewide student information
system that would include an
online statewide IEP is part of
that request.
4 million for an online
licensure portal that will
increase security and efficiency
as well as connect our state
licensure database to the
national uh licensure system,
which is really important for us
to catch any license revocations
that may occur in other states.
We would also like for our
licensure system to be connected
to our student database system
in the future as well as with
our educator prep programs.
500,000 would build an API to
bring student to bring the
student assessment data from the
vendors directly into our
neighbor our nova system, which
will um uh reduce the burden on
our schools to enter that data,
but it will also very much
improve um our data accuracy.
These investments ensure schools
and educators have secure access
to accurate and actionable data,
improving outcomes across the
board.
We're requesting 1 million for
programs that directly engage
families and provide additional
support for students,
experiencing homelessness,
students in foster care and
students being raised by their
grandparents.
This request will fund
coordinators that will work
directly with families, with
schools, with CYFD and other
community organizations and
entities that are supporting
these students.
This request also includes 9
million to support the family
income index program, which is,
which is meant to directly
support the students and
families in our most
economically disadvantaged
schools.
These types of anti-poverty
measures, um, improve students'
lives by providing essential
resources or basic needs that
lead to better outcomes because
of these types of measures, New
Mexico's child poverty rate.
Is um the lowest that it has
been um in a long time. It's
currently at um
8.9%, which is lower than the
national average at 10.4%,
making the state 17th in the
country. Um, this has moved us
since the beginning of the
administration from 50th and now
to 17th.
Um, the K-12, uh, to improve
academic achievement when
requesting 57.7 million to
provide extended learning
opportunities and expand teacher
prep time.
Um, the SCG shortfall.
Request is 40 million. Um, this
is due to the request that we
have we heard from our school
leaders, our superintendents and
charter school leaders, as well
as from the legislature to
increase the unit value in May
of this year. And so in doing
that, um, we put out more
funding and so based on uh where
we're at with K-12 plus. We have
a shortfall.
Um, we expect the units to
increase this next school year
for current participating
schools who may choose to to
increase to additional days.
There are also many schools that
are right at the cusp of 180
days that could also qualify for
K-12 plus funding, 60% of school
districts and charter schools
have a minimum of 180
instruction days currently,
there are 735 K12 plus schools
and school year 2425. This is up
from 542 schools.
6 million is being requested for
school improvement and
transformation, which will
support schools designated in
need of improvement, um, both
MRI and CSI designations, uh,
this funding will support some
very directed work with school
leaders, uh, to help them review
educational practices, review
and utilize student data, um, to
engage in goal setting and to
engage in coach.
with school staff.
The biggest recommendation, um.
And for our education acts
includes $50 million for um
Indian education fund. So,
The request is the executive
request is requesting 90 million
to be utilized over the next 3
years, um, which would increase
the current amount of funding
for the Indian Education Fund.
Um, these recurring funds would
not only support schools that
provide education programs and
services to Native American
students, but also would be
provided to the Pueblos tribes
and nations for educational
programs.
such as the out of school
timeportunities, ancillary
services that students with
disabilities may need to fund
language instructors and for
other investments to improve
educational outcomes of our
students.
1.5 million for um initiatives
for the bilingual multicultural
Education Act, Hispanic
Education Act and Black
Education Act is also in the
request.
The agency received no funding
for the current fiscal year to
implement the bilingual
multicultural Education Act.
These funds are critical to
increasing proficiency rates,
fostering cultural identity and
providing equitable
opportunities for all students.
The state seal of bilingualism
and illiteracy was earned by 66%
of eligible English learners in
school year 2324, highlighting
the success of our language
programs, and then I'd just like
to note that New Mexico is
really a national leader in this
space, and that this is
something that we're very proud
of.
Now on to the agency budget.
The public education department
is responsible for ensuring
students in New Mexico receive a
quality education. It is an
enormous responsibility
requiring more than 40% of the
state's budget.
The agency is responsible for
monitoring and oversight of
funds, professional development
and technical assistance to
schools on a host of topics and
for ensuring equitable student
learning. However, the agency
budget is quite small, with an
FY 26 budget request of 27.5
million, just half of 1% of the
total PSS request.
The funds that the agency is
responsible for has grown
incredibly over the last several
years, but agency staff has not
kept pace.
Over the last year, the agency
has done an exceptional job of
recruiting and retaining staff,
the agency has a total of 355
positions, however, only 281 are
funded.
We are requesting for an
additional 1.75 million, so that
we can fund positions that are
critical to the department's
function.
The agency is also requesting an
increase of 1 million to support
staffing, particularly for the
Office of Special Education. In
addition, were requesting
$250,000 for to pay for rent for
Albuquerque in Las Cruces
offices.
For special appropriations
request, the agency is
requesting a half a million
dollars, uh, to pay legal
expenses related to the
Martinezai Consolidated lawsuit,
which is an ongoing expense for
the department.
And 1.5 million for data quality
initiatives to support continued
implementation and improvement
of the Nova data system.
Um,
for our supplemental requests.
Uh, there are Ser funded
possessions currently at the
agency, um, that needs some
additional funding to continue
their salaries through the
remainder of this fiscal year
were requesting um $200,000 to
uh pay for those salary
expenses. The agency is also
requesting 300,000 to maintain
our offices. We have never
received funding from the
legislature to pay for the
department's offices.
Um, at this time, I can stop,
Mr. Chair and take questions
about the budget. I can also um
quickly share um about the um
agencies legislative, um,
priorities for this session. We
have a couple of bills that I
can share now or we can come
back in January and talk about
him then as well. Sure, why
don't you share now with us? OK,
great.
Um, the public education
department, uh, will be running
uh a bill to support um special
education. Um, we have
previously ran a a similar
special special education bill,
um, we were unsuccessful with
that effort. Um, the governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham
established the Office of
Special Education and some of
the activities that have been
occurring through executive
order. So we would like to um to
move forward with the.
bill that will allow us to
codify and statue the work of
the Office of Special Education.
This bill will focus on
transitions of our for our
students with disabilities from
pre-K, uh, through the K-12
system and on to post-secondary.
The bill enhances coordination
between state agencies, ensuring
um comprehensive continuous
services for students with
disabilities.
It creates partnerships with
colleges and vocational
programs, supporting students
transitions to higher education
or the workforce. This will fill
the gap in IDEA by helping
students with disabilities
transition into adulthood
successfully.
The bill will require a
department approved IEP template
and a statewide system,
promoting consistency and equity
and services across all schools.
This will eliminate the
variability that students
experience in the special
education system as they move
through our educational systems.
Um, the bill also seeks to
address specific challenges
related to, um, students with
disabilities, um, academic, um,
outcomes, specifically, um,
focused on um closing the
achievement gap.
Uh, this bill is uniquely
designed to help New Mexico's
specific needs, not just uh
utilizing IDEA federal
legislation, but really taking
that legislation and
implementing it in a way that
works for New Mexico and New
Mexico students.
Um, we are also, um,
Moving forward with the New
Mexico science of reading and
educator preparation Act. This
legislation calls for
scientifically based reading
instruction in our educator
preparation programs in New
Mexico that enables educators to
improve intervention supports
for all students using
evidence-based decisions and
holistic supports. Um, this
allows us to make sure that our
educator prep programs are
focused on structure.
literacy so that they come out
of school ready to be the best,
uh, literacy teachers that they
can possibly be.
The legislation would require
parental notification, um, when
students are um demonstrating
characteristics of dyslexia and
other reading challenges, so
that's students, um, so that
parents are notified early and
they know what is happening
oftentimes, um, parents will see
their child promoted and passed
from grade to grade. They're
passing their their their
classes. Um, however, they are
still.
kind in their reading
proficiency and so this would
require that parents are
notified.
Um, the bill would also change
language from professional
development plan to local
literacy plan to help
differentiate the literacy plan
from other professional
development plans, and the bill
would also require the use of
high quality instructional
materials for reading
instruction.
The department would also um
like to move forward with the
mathematics and science
Education Act, um, which would
require annual mathematic
professional learning plans,
introduce a mathematics
screener, so similar to our
dyslexia screener.
Require parental notification
again when students are um
showing characteristics of math
deficiencies, um, and would also
again like this literacy bill
required that the school develop
intervention plans to support
progress and to also monitor
progress.
Establish a leadership framework
for promoting effective teaching
strategies and programs of at
school and district leadership
levels.
Um, and then also establish
requirements for mathematics
coaches at at our school sites
and also define their duties.
And then the 4th bill is really
a bill that cleans up a lot of
outdated language within
existing statute, and so that is
very varied, but I'll give you a
couple of examples. For an
example, um, in the Indian
Education Act, it would change
the term historically defined in
an impacted schools to Native
Americans serving school
district.
Um, it would.
A men's school designation to
align with our current
consolidated state plan.
It would amend language to
replace the term hotline in our
black education Act. We do not
have a hotline for reporting,
um, incidences we have an online
reporting portal. So again,
those are just some examples
that these are really clean up
language within statute, uh,
that we feel is important in
carrying out um the intent of
various legislation coming from
this body.
Um, so with that, I can take any
questions that you may have, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Um, before I go to
committee members, um, Madam
Secretary designate will be able
to get a copy of these.
Bills, Mr. Chair, absolutely,
um, they're still in draft form.
So we can absolutely share what
we have. We have met with
director Senna on the special
education bill and we have
walked him through that as well
as merit. We've walked through
that with them, uh, to and
reviewed it and take their
feedback. Uh, we will be doing
the same with the other 3 bills.
Um, we're also meeting with our
educational partners on these
bills. We previewed them this
morning during our um regular uh
school
leader, um, call.
So we are working to make sure
that we're getting it out for
folks to be able to give us some
feedback.
Yeah, and I, I mean, I think
that includes or needs to
include us as legislators
because we're going to be the
ones, I'll be the one charged on
scheduling them, and then we'll
be in charge of considering them
here in the next month, so, um,
we definitely need to be a part
of that process, the sooner the
better and especially me as
chair of a standing committee
that will be considering these
bills because when we went
through the initial iteration of
the special education bill, we
had several different versions,
multiple.
men's 8 or 9 different times in
the course of of just hearing
the bill in committee, so, um,
we would want to get ahead of
it. Um, I think that stands for
a lot of us on on house
education especially. So the
sooner the better.
Chair, you let me know when
you're available and we'll be
happy to sit down and review all
four with you. Alright, well,
we're here right now, so that
would be awesome
Seriously. All right. Uh,
block.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Secretary designates.
I appreciate the time today, uh,
a couple of questions or maybe
more than a couple, maybe 3,
maybe 4, maybe 100. No, just
kidding. So Mr. Mr. Chairman, I
almost called you Mr. Speaker,
uh, secretary, a couple of
questions, one about the 17%.
I'm sorry, 17th ranking in child
poverty, was it? That's right.
Mr. Chairman, uh, can you tell
me what metric that was from,
uh, what study? I just am
curious. So Mr. Chair
Representative Locke, yes, so,
um, US Census Bureau puts out
they this basically a reflection
of what's called the
supplemental poverty measure.
And so the supplemental poverty
measure takes into um
consideration, all of the
anti-poverty measures similar to
what Senator Sos was speaking
about. So this measure takes
into consideration all of the
things that states do to support
the economic condition of
families, and so those things
can include um childcare
assistance.
They can include um tax reforms,
so changes that we've made in in
our tax system, which New Mexico
is a leader in that space,
supports in um food benefits,
cash assistance programs. These
are all areas that New Mexico
has made big investments for
families and so through those
efforts, we know that it is made
an impact on the economic, um,
conditions of our families.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Secretary designate,
and I appreciate that and I
think that's an important metric
to to study and I uh did, did
the census make any changes to
how they how they measure that
in 2020 census, which is why it
may have decreased or we have
increased, but
Her number decreased we're not
50th, right? So how do you know
if they recalibrated that in any
way, so it could have just been
lost in the math somewhere.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Block, it's just a method, it's
a different methodology for
taking into consideration all of
the various again anti-poverty,
um, supports that states invest
in, and the impact that has on
families.
Chairman. Thank you for that and
I appreciate that answer and I
know we talk a lot about poverty
and and then we also think about
child well-being and things like
that. And we've, I feel like
they're kind of tied in many
ways to to funding.
stuff so we could have that
conversation forever. So, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Madam Secretary
designate, my next question is
regarding the uh special
education office that was put
into law by executive order. Can
you tell me, uh, Mr. Chairman
and secretary designate how
How is that currently funded in
your budget?
Because it's not through
legislative action and then
where will the new pot of money,
if this new bill gets put
forward, how would that affect
that funding stream that's
currently putting that into
practice.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Block for that
question. So the Office of
Special Education is basically
taking the staff from the public
education department, so we are
utilizing the same staff that
exists.
In the agency and so this office
is um mission to serve our
students with disabilities
throughout the educational
system. So the Office of Special
Education collaborates with our
early childhood partners, so
making sure that very young we
are um providing early
identification and and
interventions for students and
so that we're working to make
sure that we transition with
that that child and family
throughout our education.
educational system. So the
Office of Special Education
partners not only with the early
childhood system but also with
the higher education system, but
again, this wasn't necessarily,
it's not a new budget, it
basically takes the public
education's budget and it is
under the Office of Education,
which is under the purview of
the public education department.
Um, the legislature has
appropriated increases for
special education, and I had
talked a bit about that and so
those were for some of the
initiatives that I spoke about.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
keep on calling you Mr. Speaker.
Please don't think he likes it.
But I appreciate your support
so
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I'm just gonna call
you that, Mr. Chairman, OK.
Uh, secretary, uh, so with the
office of special ed, are those
positions included in that 281
to 294 figure that you're
wanting to increase, and how
many of those positions would be
going to the
Office of Special Education OSE.
Um,
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative
Black. So yes, the Office of
Special Education FTE is
reflected in the agency's total
FTE and so the expansion that I
had mentioned of a million
dollars would um support an
expansion primarily in that
office, so again, um, within the
the public education department,
um, they would be able to expand
uh.
Staffing to to um expand the
efforts under that office.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
again.
Mr. Chairman.
So here I'm getting ready for a
sessions, so I'm like
practicing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
person or whatever, you know.
So be prepared, everyone. So Mr.
Chairman, can you tell me a
little bit uh about the online
hotline or the portal that you
have for the.
Black Education Act that you,
you said you were going to put a
new amendment to that. I know at
least from my experience when it
comes to.
Dealing with online portals
where they'll get back to me,
never essentially. Usually a
hotline is better. Are you maybe
factoring in how you could
potentially.
put an individual in an office
or one of the individuals that
you're trying to increase
staffing to answer that hotline
for any questions because I know
that things can get lost in the
emails. I know in my email, it's
like a dumpster fire where I get
like thousands of emails per day
during session. It's hard to
know what is important, what is
not important. So can you tell
me how that works currently and,
and how you may be able to to
champion that, and that's kind
of my last question. So, Mr.
Chair, Representative block, so
in, in the black.
Education Act. It's specifically
calls out um a hotline.
And so what the department has
currently is a portal so that
instead of making a phone call,
there's an ability to enter
through our portal, um, whatever
it is that you would like to
report to the department. So we
do have a process where PED
staff are constantly monitoring
and responding to um whatever we
received through that portal,
and so I agree it's an easier
way to keep track of what's
coming in and making sure.
that we are responding in a
timely manner.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, not
Speaker. Thank you. Thank you,
Representatives.
Uh, other questions, folks.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Representative.
You should be, you should say
Madam Speaker let's start some
more rumors, OK.
Uh, thank you, um, I'm just
gonna call you secretary. It's
too.
All these titles, uh, you
anticipated my first question,
which was what surprised Bill
should we expect the experience
with the special education bill
was very unpleasant. It plopped
on our laps.
Um, I know personally I probably
met 3 cabinet secretaries, and
each time a new version came. I
had 6 significant things to say
about it, so I just regret that
we haven't seen these during the
interim because uh
Is the funding for these already
in your proposed budget or would
they uh need more budgeting for
the 27 budget.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, at first, I'm gonna
start with your last question,
and so there wouldn't be
additional funding requests, um,
from what you have in front of
you today. Um, as far as the
last time we ran the bell, there
were changes that were made in
response to the feedback that we
received from legislators and
from other um key partners,
educational partners, so that's
why you saw some amendments to
the bill. I will.
Say that um Doctor Margaret
Cage, who leads the Office of
Special Education has been
working, um, for the last year
and a half, I would say. Um, and
really making sure that we are
listening, um, that we were
making tweaks to the bill during
that time. I think that we've
learned a lot just in the first,
um, um, time that we've had
implementing the Office of
Special Education, so, um,
You know, absolutely we'll get
the bill in front of you. Much
of what was there before is
still in the bill. Much of that
same intent. Um, and, uh, with
some additions and some tweaks,
I would say based on um the
implementation of the office to
this point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
already we have been funding the
IEP statewide template, what is
the progress on that.
The development of the statewide
template for the individual
education plans. I would have to
have, I think, office of special
education.
Can you speak to that, Miguel?
Um, and so I just something I
had heard earlier about um
funding request, this funding
request is for a statewide SIS,
and I know that in the executive
budget, it references the IEP
template. However, the IEP
template would be a component of
a statewide SIS and so the
request is to um roll out the
first phase of that statewide
SIS. Go ahead, Miguel.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, so unfortunately,
the person who would probably
speak better to this just
stepped out. So I, you, you're
stuck with me. Um, I, so we've
done a lot of work over the past
year, um, re-engaging
stakeholders on the IEP
template, um, we reviewed
drafts, we've done, um, parent
uh sessions where they're able
to review along with the the um
the special education on bud,
and we really have a, a fairly,
um, clean draft of that, um,
obviously subject to
A few more approvals, but we're
pretty far along in terms of, of
having a uniform IEP to prepare
for the system that we would
like to implement, whether it's
through an SIS or a, a
standalone IEP system.
So, and I'll just elaborate on
that a little bit and that we
know to shift gears to a new
universal template that we need
to spend a lot of time with
people, making sure that the
users understand it that we're
getting input and establishing
it, but also making sure that
there's a trainingunities, um,
um, office hours for folks to
get questions and so that's also
part of what the funding is
helping us support to make sure
that we have a really
successful.
transition.
Uh, thank you, and then, um, Mr.
Chair and, and Madam Secretary,
uh, looking at these spills,
these are things we've been
talking about for the last
couple of years, the science of
reading, um,
Making an act. I, I do hope I, I
joined the chair and in
requesting to see it before um.
I think it's January 20th.
January 20th or 2020 21st, so
21st, um, because also we're
very concerned about math and
science, but we're talking
about, you mentioned requiring
math coaches and and lots of
things that I know that um
The LASC members and the
respective House and Senate
education.
Uh, members with probably what,
500 years of teaching education
experience.
Probably plus 500 years. I know
that we would really like to see
it.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, absolutely we'll get
that to you quickly and again we
have been having many
conversations, um, and have been
receiving feedback and and
integrating that, so we'll
absolutely get it to this
legislative body, um, very, very
soon. Thank you.
You're welcome.
Other question, Madam Pertin.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
Madam Secretary designate, I
just want to thank you for the
handout.
You have no idea how many years
the handout from the PED is 40
pages, and I miss to somebody
else say this already. It's 40
pages and it's not side to side,
and you've got to flip through
10 pages before you get any
data. Am I right? I'm right.
So this is a very nice little
handout can go in my folder and
I, what did she say? And there
it is. So thank you again. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
President, I appreciate that.
This is what I like to make
sense to me, so I'm glad it
makes sense to you too.
Thank you.
Other questions, folks?
Um, so I did have one, Madam
Secretary, is, um,
In the LESC recommendation under
transportation, um,
put in money for um adequacy
funding for transportation.
Obviously it's, it's absent from
the PED budget. I was wondering
if you have a position on the
adequacy funding for
transportation or not. We did
have, uh, Mr. Chair, we did have
an increase to transportation. I
did not include it in your
handout, but is Antonio here
Antonio.
And I don't have our full budget
in front of me, otherwise I
could give you the numbers, but.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
So in, in our, uh, the PSSR
request for transportation,
there is an increase for the
overall transportation request.
And, and I appreciate that. I
mean, the
The comparison that we have, it
looks like we and LESC have
matched it.
But then have included the
adequacy funding.
Um
And I guess that was the
question cause we're matching
that increase, but then we have
for adequacy funded just in
case. And that's where I was
wondering whether you all took a
position on to have that
adequacy funding available.
Mr. Chair, um, according to
Antonio, we'll take all the
funding we can get for
transportation, um.
As the individual who helps
oversee that, you know, what I
can say with transportation is
it is, um, a great interest of
the department to improve how we
fund transportation, um, how we
administer our systems. We hear
regularly from our school
districts issues associated with
shortages of funding, um, we're
really interested and partnered
with the LESC and LFC on their
assessments of uh
our transportation systems.
We're interested in doing a deep
dive and looking at um.
Uh what we're seeing around
around the state because we know
our rural and our urban school
districts and transportation
systems are very different. And
so we're really interested in
doing some more work there and
looking at what are our
solutions to help address the
problems there.
Cool. Well, thank you so much
and we look forward to uh
reviewing the PED bills for the
upcoming session. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Cool. Thank you. Thank
you.
All right, folks, so that's it.
We will reconvene at 9 tomorrow.
Unfortunately, I won't be able
to be here with you all because
I got to go grade all my
students' finals and enter them
and all that stuff. So,
Yeah, happy holidays.
Yeah, yeah, watch out, Senator
Souls gets to talk all day
tomorrow
just sorry.
