Uh, yesterday, today and
tomorrow and Friday and so.
Uh, I have to go back, but I did
want to come up and thank you
all for coming and uh.
helping
So they've been issuing checks,
uh, nonprofit foundation has
been issuing checks to people
like could be 1000 a week, could
be 1500 a week, could be $2000 a
week, depending on, I guess,
maybe how many kids, I don't
know how they do that, but they
started with $2,000,000 in that
fund. The racetrack gave him
another 500,000 Thursday night.
And so now they're down to about
1.9 million that they spent out
of that fund, right? But these
are people that displace their
homes, don't have work, uh, have
kids, they're going to school,
need money just to put gas in
the car. And so this foundation
is working in that direction.
And, and, and I hope the press
is listening before the Craig, I
mean, we need people to come to
Riodoso.
We need people to donate money
to that foundation.
In order to keep that. And, and
so let me here's an interesting
fact too. So if someone just
showed up today and they never
got money, right?
They don't start him at the
$1500 rate. They start where
they started the other people
and catch them up.
So they may have to write a 5000
or $6000 check. So that person
is treated as equal as the other
people were. And that's pretty
unique saying, you know, we know
you missed those, it wasn't your
fault, but we're here to help.
Um,
I mean to the lobbyists they're
listening to people are
listening. I mean, there's some
real people helping and it was a
big discussion. The other thing
is, and I'll make some calls,
you know, food banks still need
a little bit of food, um,
whatever, they gave a list that
don't want to send you, don't
send us a pallet of strawberries
and a pellet of squash and a
pellet of bread because we can't
get it out quick enough, but the
food need is still there and so
I'll make some calls to Road
Runner Food Bank and see how,
how they can help. But the other
thing they were talking about in
here here's another donation
thing is, is how to help these
businesses get restarted and and
creating another nonprofit
foundation to say, all right,
let's go in and look at these
businesses and let's help them
get through what they're going
through right now as a loan, not
as a loan, but as a grant, and
they want to build that
foundation up, so, I mean,
there's some things that got
help and it happen in Riodoso.
The economies is devastated.
We're here, but we need
everybody else in New Mexico
saying.
Come stay at the end of the
mountain gods, right? Come stay
at Riodoso Inn. The hotels are
open.
There's plenty of shopping
downtown. There's, there's parts
of town where you won't be able
to go to. There's the racetrack
is closed, but I seen Clay
Walker having a concert here and
so there's things to do in
Riodoso and and so.
You're an average New Mexican
and you need to, you're going
somewhere for the weekend. I
think about coming here and
spending some money.
Instead of driving across the
line to go to Arizona for me or
think about.
Driving across that line and,
and seeing, spending some money
in redos because they really do
need the help. They need the
money. They need the money in
their economy and as we push
into this Craig with the amount
of money we're gonna have, we're
we're gonna.
The world's deep deep into how
we do this because, you know,
Las Vegas was our first one.
This is our 2nd 1.
Seeing the while, the fire maps
from yesterday under the
insurance. They're, they're
everywhere. They're in
Albuquerque, they're in the
Sandia they're in Mount Taylor,
those wildfire zones are
everywhere and it can happen,
it's going to happen to another
community, hopefully it won't,
but, but it's gonna happen to
another community that we need
to figure this out so that as we
move forward, we have a really
good disaster plan when this
happens and we're able to serve
people. Um, yeah, you know,
On that fire thing, Roswell, we
put in, we're putting in a
$60 600 ft turn.
So we can fill
Every one of those DC-10s, the
tanker 1s that come in, we can
fill those on those planes at
our fire retardant base that we
have there, we can fill those
sans and have a man in going
round the clock and, uh, it's
one turn Roll, we got her some
money to, to do that and it's
not federal money, it was money
that came, um, you know, we got
in Roswell and to make that turn
so we don't have that problem.
I've fought a lot of fires here
in
in Scott Abelfi and stuff as a
volunteer fire chief. I've been
on these things, but that base,
that the range of those big
jets, the DC-10s and any of the
the is 700 miles.
So that that fire, they can come
in and land and be there and
fill up just, just like that in
Rossville and it's, uh, we did
that because of the shape of the
forest.
And the forest is extremely
dangerous because we don't have
sawmills and things. We need
those kind of things to help
keep the thing clean.
And, uh, you know, it's, it's,
it's really been good. One other
thing that
One person who really shined in,
in, uh, in all this, it's kind
of, but with the municipal
league.
We had all these people that
were leaving Riodosa at the same
time because they did, we didn't
know they were coming until
about 4 o'clock and and Riodosa
Dam was the next day at 4
o'clock, but they didn't, they
ran out of gas and the municipal
league, uh, figured out and sent
trucks of gas to fill fire
trucks and everything else so
people could get on down we had
a whole group of people in Hondo
that were that's where, where
they ran
Out of gas and uh and we were
able to do that. The municipal
leagues lost pretention
prevention plan sent and sent
gasoline and stuff up here that
really helped lots and lots of
people.
So when you see, uh, Mr. 40 for
all the cities that that belong
in participate in, in the loss
prevention program. That's how
they funded it, uh, they did,
they did a really a good job on
getting fuel.
Before anybody else could figure
out how to get it here, they,
they had done that and they
should be given a little credit
for that too, but, you know,
thank you all for coming and
really Ria Dosa, this is a
It's a lot of people are gonna
lose because of this, because
when you lose that much income,
uh, they have, you know, the ski
run, the road to the ski run is
washed out too, so they've got
to have that road fixed before
fall.
So you know,
We, they've had kind of a
perfect storm here for them, so
please, uh, help them all you
can and, and, uh, they're good
neighbors and just
Just like Las Vegas, the same
thing happened in Las Vegas and
that flooding is the flooding is
not, is not over yet.
And uh in Las Vegas, it's not
over here either, so there's
gonna be a lot to go on, but
thank you all for giving me the
time to be here. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
We look forward to seeing you in
pants next time.
When it gets to be under 100
degrees, I'll go back to pants.
I have an executive order if
it's over 100 degrees, you can
wear shorts and give the
executive order, it's 106 today
in Rossville, so good luck.
But
Thank you. Thank you.
All right, Izzy.
Lean
Stephanie.
Johnny Montoya.
He really is wearing shorts. I
can see.
What tab are we behind, Izzy?
Tap, Mr. Chair, but you also
have a handout from the
executive and and I believe they
will actually go first.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee, I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark. I'm the secretary
of the Taxation and Revenue
Department. And I will get us
started on the executive slide
that looks like this, the
consensitive consensus general
fund revenue outlook.
OK, um, moving to slide 2, I'll
start with an outline of, um,
what we will cover and this will
be very familiar ground for many
of you who have been on the
committee a long time and heard
these presentations. I'll first
go through an overview of what's
changed recently in the
macroeconomic forecast. I'll go
through some of, uh, the changes
to the state's major revenue
sources. I'll turn it over to my
colleague, Secretary Pros, to
give the general fund overview.
Before we get into the meat of
it on slide 3, I'd just like to
recognize the staff that put
this estimate and all estimates
together, they're called the
consensus revenue estimating
Group. And if, if the members of
the group could stand up, um,
over here we have 3 of the
economists from the tax and rev
team. Um, we have Leo and Noel
here from DFA and I think, and
then we also have the LFC
economist Jennifer is also here.
So I want to thank them for
their professional work that
they do every single time we
have to.
Do the estimate update.
See
OK, moving to slide 4,
I'll cover some recent changes
to the baseline forecasts. Of
course, the consensus revenue
estimating Group subscribes to
forecast data from Moody's, S&P,
and UNM's Bieber. And I'll just
start by saying there haven't
been major changes, although
there have been changes to the
two baseline forecasts. Um, one
of the changes, uh, we note in
the Moody's forecast from the,
from the July baseline that this
is based on is that, um, the Fed
is expected to
Reduce interest rates 2 times in
this in this fall, and that will
be a theme throughout the
forecast as people are watching
the Fed closely to see when and
how much they decrease the
federal funds rate, but a 25
basis point decreases expected
in September as well as
December.
The US labor market has
continued to hold up better than
expected, adding more jobs than
previously expected. And I
believe we said that at the last
estimate and the one before that
as well. Um, disinflation is, is
on the home stretch, um, there's
been another month of inflation
data that came in since this
forecast was made and it also
came down a little more than
expected and inflation by
Moody's is expected to stabilize
in early 2025. Um,
National GDP growth is being
supported by consumer spending,
which is also something we've
said for for many years in a
row, um, and that spending will
still be positive, but
moderating over the forecast
term. So the big picture of the
macroeconomy forecast is that we
expect moderate but still
positive economic growth.
Um, to the S&P forecast on which
the estimate is based, um,
again, they, they expect the
Federal Reserve to cut their
rate for the first time in
December, so S&P is, is um
anticipating a slightly more
aggressive rate cut from the
Fed.
Um, I, I think the rest of it
I'll, I'll go over the details
on the S&P forecast, um, and
highlight only that they expect
the national unemployment rate
to peak at 4.8% in 2027, so
coming up a bit, um, gradually
over the next couple of years.
Onto the next slide, um, we
reviewed changes to the forecast
for US gross domestic product or
GDP, and you can just see that
there isn't a whole lot of
change between the gray line,
which is the new forecast and
the blue dotted line, which is
the forecast that was presented
to you in December.
So the forecasted GDP rate has
come up just a little bit since
the last forecast.
And the increases are supported
by consumer spending, private
inventory investment and
non-residential fixed income
investments, primarily.
And the for the forecast period
that the budget is concerned
with GDP at the US level is
expected to grow by 1.7 to 1.9%.
Next slide, uh, slide 6, we turn
to the same statistic for the
New Mexico economy gross state
GDP and there we do have a more
marked revision since the last
forecast that you received in
December. Um, you can see the
pretty dynamic upward shift from
the blue line to the gray line,
just based on a couple more
months of actuals coming in much
stronger than estimated. And the
leading contributors to New
Mexico state product growth are
construction, mining, retail
trade, and manufacturing.
And so, um, again, though, we,
we've seen a shift upward, but
we still expect a moderate pace
to growth in the out years.
We're looking at 1.5 to 1.6%
growth in the out years.
Um, onto employment on slide 7
at the national level. Um,
there's been a slight positive
revision to employment at the US
level. You can see again the
slight upward shift from the
blue line to the gray line. And
as I mentioned in the first
slide, the US labor market
continues to hold up a little
stronger than expected and, and
that explains the shift in the
lineup. Um, employment gains at
the US level are led by
healthcare construction,
transportation and warehousing.
And then to the the same data
for the state economy on slide
8, you can see just like with
state gross domestic product,
we've had a larger upward shift
in what's expected for
employment in New Mexico since
the last forecast. Again, those
are based on stronger than
expected actuals. The New Mexico
unemployment grew by 2.7% in
calendar year 23 and is
projected to level off a growth
of about 1.6% in calendar year
24 and then down.
To 0.6% in calendar year 25. So
we are expecting a leveling off
of an employment growth in New
Mexico.
Um, next on slide 9, we drill
down to employment growth by
sector. So this slide looks at
year over year change in the
number of jobs in New Mexico in
this case we're looking at June
2024 versus June 2023. And
overall, New Mexico added 12,300
jobs, which is growth of 1.4%,
and you can see how much was
added in each individual sector.
Um,
And yeah, I'll go through. I, I
won't go through all the details
on that.
Um, next, we turn to
unemployment estimates for the
US and New Mexico economy, um,
you can see, of course, that
we're, we've just continued to
come down from the um COVID
spikes that we're experienced
across the whole nation across
the world, and, and all states,
um, and that New Mexico and the
US are at at about an even pace
and have been for several months
and the unemployment rate is
expected to remain fairly flat.
Um, we also break down.
Unemployment rates by ethnicity,
um, and, um, yeah, we're just
basically on par and expected to
remain on par with the national
economy at about 3.9% right now.
Um, next slide, slide 11, uh, we
show the forecasts and the
history for inflation and
interest rates. So inflation, as
I mentioned in the first slide,
has, has come down, has leveled
off, um,
Uh, their shelter continues to
be a, a strong spot in inflation
though that's proving stubborn,
whereas energy prices have
really come down or inflation in
energy has come down since the
peak.
Um, and then you'll see on slide
11, the revision to the Federal
funds rate forecast is basically
showing the gray line we expect
now the Fed to hold rates higher
than we did, um, in the past in
the, the December forecast.
OK, I'll start talking now about
individual revenue sources to
the general fund and the market
factors influencing those on
slide 13, uh, we look at the
updated forecast for oil prices
and, um, of course, as, as the
committee is aware, uh, oil
prices are impacted by many
global events outside of New
Mexico's control, anything from
global, um, economic growth,
increasing demand, decisions
made by OPEC, um, inventory
levels, storms, geop
issues, things like that. Um,
but despite all that, the
forecast for oil has not changed
too dramatically over the last
several months since the
December forecast, um, for the
budget year FY 26, the forecast
for oil price has come up from
$69.50 per barrel to $71.50 per
barrel. Um, no change in FY 27
and about a dollar change in the
out years. So nothing major
having changed uh in the oil.
Price forecast.
Onto oil volumes on slide 14,
uh, you know, we just sort of
always remind the committee
visually about this, um,
connection between rig count and
prices and volumes produced in
New Mexico. Um, there is, um, a
slightly more dramatic increase
in the forecast for volume
production of New Mexico oil for
the budget year FY 26, the
forecast has gone up from 725
million barrels to 79.
1 million barrels. And again,
those are estimated to be
produced at about $2 per barrel,
higher price than previously.
Um, let's see, oil production,
uh, did reach another record
high in FY 24. We think that
705,000 barrels were produced.
The rig count has held very
steady above 100 rigs active in
New Mexico ever since June 2022.
Um, as of the forecast, it was
at 107 rigs active. And, um,
some of the contributors to
production expectations
producers continue to be focused
on capital discipline, um,
industry continues a trend.
of consolidation of companies
and there's evidence that the
sector is maturing and there's
less interest now in fast growth
but long-term production plans,
which is good for New Mexico.
Um, onto natural gas, which of
course is a lesser, um, source
of New Mexico revenue, but still
an important source. Um we cover
price changes and volume changes
on the same slide here, um, uh,
the price forecast for natural
gas in New Mexico in the budget
year has gone up 10 cents per
MCF from 410 to 420 and there's
slight upward revisions to the
out years as well. And in price,
uh, I'm sorry, and in volume, we
also have an increase in the
volume.
Projected Natural gas
production, um, is expected to
basically follow the higher
volumes of oil because so much
of our natural gas production is
coming up out of the oil
drilling activity.
Next, uh, we move on to the
gross receipts tax, slide 17,
um, is a new slide that
basically shows how each
individual component of the
gross receipts tax base has
grown over the last 3 fiscal
years, and it really puts in
scale, um,
what kind of shifts are
happening in the grocery seats,
taxable base, and the mode or
the, the relative importance of
different sectors. So you can
see retail trade is by far the
largest sector, and it's also
growing pretty heavily from
22 to 23, especially, um,
construction and mining are also
very large, and mining has
probably the most dramatic
increase over that time.
Um, but you can drill down into
all the sectors.
Next on slide 18, we reiterate
the really close connection
between the taxable base of the
GRT and Eddie and Lee Counties
and what's happening in oil
markets. So again, you can see,
um, the close tie between oil
price being a leading indicator
of rig activity and rig activity
being what's subject to the GRT
base. So those, those things,
uh, followed closely and they're
very important and increasingly
important to the whole statewide
GRT base.
Um, next on slide 19 onto the
grocery seats tax outlook, um,
we experienced very strong 15%
growth in FY 23 and are
expecting the FY 24 growth to
have come in fairly strong as
well. Um, and in the out years,
um, it's moderate growth of 2%
here in FY 25 and 4% in the out
years. Um, so just like the the
whole theme of the macroeconomic
data I've presented, we're
expecting, um,
Things to be a little stronger
than than previously expected in
New Mexico. So you see that
coming in, um, in, in an upward
revision to the gross receipts
tax forecast. The forecast
increased by 104 million over
the previous estimate, um, and
that's despite, um, some recent
legislative changes that have
also been factored in since
December.
Um, FY 26 and 27 are up versus
the previous estimate by 135
million and $179 million
respectively.
Next, I'll talk about the
personal income tax starting on
slide 21, um, we've presented
for you on graph one on the left
hand side, you can see a
comparison of with wage
withholding from all employers,
um, over each quarter of the
year, the personal income tax
base has grown very strongly
over the last 4 years and
continues to do so. So as more
people have gone back to work
and wages have increased due to
inflation and other factors
withholding also increases. Um,
for the out years, we expect
Wage and salary growth to
moderate, um, in FY 2526, 27,
they're hovering around the 4%
growth estimate.
Next, um, on slide 22, we
basically show how we expect
that to work its way into the
personal income tax revenue
stream.
And a lot of what you're seeing
here, there, there's two things
here. If, if you're alarmed by
negative growth in Pitt in 24
and 25. Um, there are two things
that play that don't reflect the
underlying economic strength.
The legislative changes being
implemented and there's been an
accounting shift to account for
pass through entity tax in the
corporate income tax instead of
the personal income tax. So, uh,
bear with me and it'll all make
sense by the time we get to the
corporate income tax slides, I
hope. Um, so in FY 24, you'll
See that we had negative growth
of 11% in Pitt, but part of
that, about 190 million of that
is caused by just shifting the
path through entity revenue from
pit to sit. So where a pit is
down 190 million sit is up by
$190 million and the offset
completely. Um, but then there's
also, uh, 2022 legislation being
phased in, um, that, that also,
um, is impacting that and it's
impacting it in the out years,
as you know, in the last
legislative session,
Bill 252 uh had broad-based
personal income tax rate reform,
and that's, um, going into
effect in the out year as well,
contributing to that negative
10% growth.
Um, slide 23 goes into a lot
more detail on the legislative
adjustments that have been
modeled into the personal income
tax estimate. Um, you can see
there's a positive in the dark
purple line that's by reducing
the capital gains deduction.
Um, but then everything else
that's been enacted is, is
negative to personal income tax,
so these include, um, things
like the child tax credit,
that's 37% of the total, um,
adjustments to Pit. You can see
the bracket changes I just
mentioned from the last session,
the Social Security exemption,
um, and then, of course, yeah,
like I mentioned, the capital
gains deduction being a
positive.
Um, onto the corporate income
tax. Here's a little bit more
information on slide 25 about
that accounting change to the
pass through entity tax. Um, so
corporate income tax is, is
going to the, the estimate is
pretty dramatically higher for
these 22 different reasons. One
I've already mentioned, the
pastorenity tax is now being
accounted for there. And some of
the background on that, it's,
it's a little, it could be, you
know, 61, half a dozen of the
other, but a lot of the pass
through entity taxation comes
into the department on the
corporate income.
Tax form. So if we want to
reflect all the revenue in the
same place, it had to be in the
corporate income tax. And
that's, that's one of the
reasons for that shift. Um, but
a second thing and
The next slide, the corporate
income tax outlook on slide 26
is that the group has revised
downward the estimate for the
film tax credit by about $50
million per year. And typically
the film tax credit, um, comes
off of CIT and so the estimate
of it goes into the corporate
income tax, um, revenue
estimate. So between adding
pastorenity tax and reducing the
estimate for the film tax
credit. That explains the large
upward revision to the corporate
income tax forecast.
On slide 28, I'll cover just a
little bit on, um, what's going
on with some of the oil and gas
related taxes, severance taxes,
and rents and royalties. And
again, um, the, I think the big
takeaway from this slide is to,
to show that the legislative
adjustments to what happens with
this windfall revenue that it
doesn't all just pour into the
general fund anymore. It comes
off the top and goes to the
early childhood Trust and the
severance tax permanent fund,
you can basically see the blue
line, um, we've frozen these
Revenues into the general fund
at FY24 levels, and now you can
see the forecasted, um,
distributions that will be made
into the other, um, reserves and
corpuses and, and whatnot.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to Secretary Probst.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee.
My name is Wayne Traps, I'm with
the Department of Finance and
Administration.
Uh thank you for having us here
today, and they don't let me out
of Santa Fe very often, so it
was nice to have a, a long drive
to think about something other
than what's happening in Santa
Fe for a change.
And as chairman, also want to
thank the Mescalero Apache
Nation for the honor of being on
their land this morning.
It's hard to believe, but I
think I've first visited uh.
This reservation probably 40
years ago.
And it was magical then and it
was magical today driving in and
it does bring a sense of peace
to you if you allow it to, so
it's an honor, honor to be here,
uh, on the nation's land. Mr.
Chairman, I know you had a full
day yesterday of briefings and
updates on on fire and flood
relief efforts in this area. Um,
just want to briefly note, Mr.
Chairman,
That the $70 million that your
appropriation appropriated to
DFA. We have the money and we're
ready to get it out the door.
Uh, I know you heard from Ali
yesterday that we think we found
a way to speed up at least some
of the money getting out that
door.
Um, and I'm hopeful that we're
meeting with the community
members this afternoon to go
through how we think that
process will work and what they
can expect from DFA and the
other state agencies involved
and that $70 million in
particular, Representative
Vinson, thank you for inviting
us to come a couple of weeks
ago. I'm sorry we couldn't make
it at that, but I told you we'd
be here soon and we are, and I
want you to know that we're here
for your community, uh, and
that's $70 million is, is ready
to go.
Um, as, as Stephanie said, I
always want to thank the staff
who do all the hard work on this
presentation so that we can sit
up here and and take the credit.
Um, it really is, you'll
probably hear me say this every
time I give this presentation,
but it really is a remarkable
and special thing that we do in
New Mexico that we have a
consensus revenue forecast that
the executive sits down with the
legislature and comes together
on a baseline that we can all
start from, uh, that's very
unique, I think, from what I
know uh throughout the country,
but
does give us a head start. We
know there will be differences
when we see each other in in
January, um, but I think this
consensus revenue forecast
really allows us to, to minimize
those differences and come to
consensus, uh, much easier than
if it didn't exist. So I want to
thank the staff who again put
this together. Overall, Mr.
Chairman, there are no surprises
in, uh, in the consensus revenue
forecast, um,
We are expecting a significant
amount of new money to be
available to be appropriated in
January.
Um, as Stephanie, uh, mentioned,
um, taxes are down. We've saved
some money, as you know, for
future generations of future
uses.
Uh, where, uh, expected about 3%
growth and we're going to see
about 3% growth in FY 26.
Uh, so there's really no bad
news today, Mr. Chairman, and
frankly just a lot of continued
good news. We're very blessed in
New Mexico if you look at our
system some of our neighboring
states like Arizona with a $1
billion budget deficit,
California, other states that
are struggling that may have
been in a more positive budget
situation but are now
struggling, um, you know, New
Mexico is not, uh, we are still
in a very blessed place.
On slide, I'm gonna go through
the slides fairly quickly, Mr.
Chairman, on slide 30, um,
Stephanie covers a lot of this
in the first half of the
presentation, but noting in FY
25, the income taxes are
expected to climb by 6.5%.
Um, oil and gas revenue is
estimated to decline slightly by
2.3% and investment income is
expected to increase by 5.6%.
Ms. Chairman and committee
members, as you know, we are
rapidly approaching the time
when the largest source of
revenue growth for the state of
New Mexico will no longer be oil
and gas, but earnings on
investments, and that is a
remarkable story that um needs
to be, needs to be told.
FY 26, um,
Again, not a lot that hasn't
been, uh, covered there. I
realized, Mr. Chairman, that
this slide is very busy and at
my advanced age, it's getting
harder and harder to read some
of these numbers. Uh, but I
would, um, kind of,
Briefly touch on the the the
graph at the bottom left-hand
corner.
Uh, I think I've heard this
referred to as a roller coaster
of revenues for the state of New
Mexico. Um, when I look at this,
I see mountains. I see the
Oregon mountains, I see the
Hemez Mountains, I see all of
the beautiful mountains of New
Mexico. There are peaks and
there are valleys.
Uh, we managed to navigate both
those peaks and valleys, but
overall, I don't need to tell
you that our, our revenue growth
since FY 2021 really has been
remarkable. It's moderating.
Again, there's no surprise. your
economists have been telling you
that was going to happen and
guess what, it's gonna happen.
Uh, but we are still expected to
see 2.8% growth in FY 26, and I
think that's uh, uh, again, a
pretty remarkable, uh, story.
On slide 31, um, Ms. Chairman,
I'm going to talk a little bit
differently than the consensus
revenue group has perhaps in the
recent past about what we
consider
New money or what the slide um
calls total new money and giving
credit where credit due, the
term total new money came from
Mr. Torres to my right.
Um, but essentially, Mr.
Chairman, what total new money
is is the growth that we expect,
uh, plus, uh, revenue, uh, that
was not expended in FY 2025.
And so you'll see the total um
new money for FY 26 is projected
to be 659.
I'll round up $660 million of
total new money.
And one of the reasons, Mr.
Chairman, um, that we have kind
of taken a look at how we define
a new money and tried to be a
little bit perhaps more precise
and accurate is that oftentimes
after I make this presentation,
if we say there are billions of
dollars in new money, um.
The public and I think others
don't necessarily draw the
distinction between what is
truly new money to be spent in
FY 26.
Uh, and what we've been
including for the past few
years, which is non-recurring
money that we will have to spend
in FY 26.
People think we have $3 billion
more to spend and we don't
really have $3 billion more to
spend in FY 26. We have almost
$700 million more to spend in FY
26 or to not spend as the case
may be.
And that's an extraordinarily,
that's extraordinarily good news
for the state. Uh, but you'll
see that this, this slide, uh,
kind of tries to show how we
come to the total new money
figure of that $660 million.
Uh, you'll see that on the the
FY 26 estimate column. We're
estimating that there will be
200 or 1000, 219,000 available,
uh, for
19 million available for
recurring, but we're also
expecting that there will be
about $2.5 million in, um,
non-recurring appropriations
available uh to you uh when you
convene in January. So that 2.
2.5 million billion was there in
FY 25. We expect to be there
again in 20 FY 26. I don't
really consider that new money,
hence the, the slight change in
how we are reporting to you this
morning. I sort of likened it to
the fact that in July of this
year, myself and Allstate
employees received a 3%
compensation increase. Thank you
for that. That's new money, uh,
for me, and that's how I look at
the total new money figure that
is a figure.
And of new money that we have
over FY 25. And again, it's a
significant $700 million is
nothing to sneeze at. I try not
to make too many projections or
predictions in this job, but it
wouldn't surprise me as chairman
and members of the committee, by
the time you convene in January,
that 659.
$1 million is slightly higher
depending on what you and the
executive decide to do with
things such as setting a reserve
targets on slide 32, uh, Mr.
Chairman, going to highlight
here the FY 25 box at the
bottom, uh, reserves are
estimated for FY 25 general fund
reserves are estimated at 3.5,
almost 3.6 billion or 34.8% of
recurring appropriations, very
strong reserves above the
executives 30%.
Target above your target as
well, uh, so another sign of the
health of the state of New
Mexico and the physical
discipline that you and the
executive have
Exhibited even in times where
we've had uh
Exhibited even in times where
we've had uh resources and that
we could make critical
investments in health care and
environment and other areas that
you care about and that we care
about as well.
Um, again, slide 33 is somewhat
repetitive, um, 34.8% reserve.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, on slide 34, I
usually don't spend a lot of
time on on this slide, uh, your
crystal ball is as clear as
mine. Uh, we outlined some risks
here, um, but the risks that we
really have to worry about
probably isn't on this paper.
We're on this page, um, that's
the nature of risks. There are
geopolitical risks out there
that we haven't included on
here. Um, but always, Mr.
Chairman, there's a there's a
potential for a black swan
event, so you watch out for
black swans even though you
can't predict them.
But these are some of the risks
that our consultants and staff
look at and take into
consideration as we build the
consensus revenue forecast.
Slide 36, Mr. Chairman, is a
little bit of a kind of a
More detail about, um,
You know, the, the risk modeling
that we do and I'm actually
going to skip quickly to slide,
oops, did I go to slide, I'm
sorry. I'm slide 35. I have my
slides turned around.
I'll skip slide 36 for the most
part.
I think this is the most
important takeaway from this
presentation today. Um, you'll
see that the modeling we've done
is an upside. We always do an
upside scenario because we do
like to be positive.
About the future, we have a
moderate recession scenario,
which is the middle uh box and
is illustrated by the
The dotted, I guess it's sort of
an orange or beige line, and
then we have a low oil price
scenario or what I refer to as
the, you know what, it's the fan
scenario, uh, and that is the
very bottom dotted line and what
I find really quite remarkable
about this slide is that.
Even in the, you know what hits
the fan scenario, we're not in a
position where we're going to
have to go and search for
nickels and dimes in the
cushions of state office
buildings to continue recurring
expenses at the levels that you
set them, uh, and I think
that's, that's pretty, that's
pretty remarkable, um, yeah, we
would probably have to shave
some expectations on
non-recurring appropriations,
which is the gray gray bar, but
even there we would
Probably have north of $1
billion.
Uh, in revenue for non-recurring
appropriations even in that low
oil price scenario, and I think
that is a testament to the
The buffers that you and the
executive have worked very hard
on over the next, the last.
56 years to spend wisely.
To put money aside when we can.
Uh, to take, um.
Care of the risk that we
potentially face. And so again,
even in the worst case scenario
that our economists and our
consultants prepare for you and
for the executive we're still in
a pretty, pretty good place and
that's why I say that slide 35
from my perspective is probably
the most.
Uh, important slide of my
presentation.
As I said,
slide 36 we took this out to FY
25, uh, I believe Izzy and his
presentation takes it out to FY
26 and 27, I think that's a very
good exercise for you.
To have uh your staff uh provide
you, um, we stopped at FY 25,
uh, but we look at things
somewhat differently from the
executive perspective, but I
certainly respect and appreciate
and find valuable the work that
Izzy will be presenting to you
on FY 26 and how FY 27, uh, look
under our stress test scenarios.
And finally, uh, Mr. Chairman,
uh, slide 37. The most
important, um,
Take away from this slide is the
very end, uh, budgeting, people
who study budgeting say that the
most important thing is that the
trend lines are close and you'll
see in the forecast for FY 26 FY
25, FY 26, and 27, the actuals
in the forecast are pretty,
pretty much spot on, uh, and
that's a, that's a good sign
for, for us as we move forward,
it means that we're making good
forecasts, um, that the revenues
are coming in generally as we
expect.
them to that the decisions
you're making, uh, to
appropriate money are keeping us
close on that trend line. So
again, just another overall, um,
Indicator of the good job, I
think that all of us have done
in managing the resources that
we're, we're blessed with here
in New Mexico. In conclusion,
Mr. Chairman, as you may know,
as by virtue of being the
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration. I
also serve on the State
investment council.
A couple of months ago, uh, we
had a presentation by the
council's long-term, long time
investment consultant firm RV
Coons, RVK.
And I can't really describe it
well, but I, it really had a
tremendous impact on me because
the the lead consultant.
Almost couldn't really describe
what an incredibly solid
position.
The state's finances are in, but
also the state investment
council's financials are in.
They're hitting an all-time high
almost every day, over $55
billion on the way to $100
billion and probably north of
that, um, they have a, they're
sitting on a lot of cash, but
they've also been sitting on a
lot of cash when cash is king
and you're earning 4 and 4.5%
and 5% just on cash.
Uh, it's just another piece of
this, this puzzle of budgeting
that that you all are going
through and we'll be going
through together over the next
few months that indicates that
there's a lot of reasons to be
very positive about the future
state of Mexico. We have
resources that we can continue
to invest in your priorities and
our priorities, and we have
money set aside for future
generations, uh, and so, as
Chairman, uh, it's, it's really
easy to be here uh today because
there's just not a whole lot of.
A lot to complain about and a
lot to be thankful for. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Ismael Torres. I'm the chief
economist for you all at the
Legislative Finance Committee,
and I'll be speaking to the
brief titled Money Matters
behind Tab E and your binders.
Give you a second to get there.
And I think as the secretary has
mentioned, this revenue estimate
is a similar story to what we
were telling you all in
December. That is, the record
revenue growth that we've been
experiencing for the last couple
of years is continuing to slow
down. We expected it to slow
down in December. We're seeing
the actual revenues come in at
at at close to what we expected
at very close to what we
expected, and we expect that
growth to continue to slow down,
continue to moderate, heading
back towards the trends of
Secretary props just mentioned.
And heading back towards those
pre-pandemic growth rates. And
I'll start with the chart at the
bottom of page one here. These
are those growth rates plotted
for you. You can see the dotted
uh gray dashed gray line here,
the December estimates for
recurring revenue growth, the
blue, the updated August
estimates and that orange bar
there representing what are
pre-pandemic average growth rate
was. And in 22 and 23, we hit
record levels of revenue growth
close to 2.
20% in each year, 24 came in at
about half that rate, 12% we
were expecting about a little
over 10, um, and then 25 as
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned, we expect a lot of
these tax changes to take effect
and actually that the general
fund will experience its first
year of revenue decline since
the pandemic, but only a small
revenue declined before resuming
its growth, heading back towards
that pre-pandemic growth
trajectory.
And what that translates to is
FY 25 revenues of $13 billion up
$175 million from the last
estimate in December, but again
in FY 25, that's a reduction in
year over year general fund of
0.2%. So a slight decline in
revenues in FY 25. You can see
the growth in the table here at
the top of the page, the
adjustments that we made in
August and then the annual
amount change, you can see how
that revenue growth, that
slowing revenue growth translate
To in a year over year dollars
terms. So if you look at the
annual amount change in 24 at
half of the growth rate we had
experienced in previous years
still $1.4 billion. That's
tremendous, tremendous year over
year revenue growth. The decline
in 25 and then a more normal
growth rate of about $365
million in FY 26.
So that FY 26 revenue amount is
expected to be $313.4 billion
and as Secretary Props mentioned
and, and, you know, at the risk
of belaboring the point, I'd
like to take a little bit more
time explaining this new money
figure. So if you look at the
chart uh titled Revenues less
Appropriations in the middle of
the page here. This is a
hopefully a good graphical
representation of what we're
talking about. So before,
previously when we would talk
about new money, we would take
that revenue line, that blue
line, and subtract the
Red recurring appropriations.
That's the $3.1 billion in what
we used to call new money. And
that figure used to be helpful
because our non-recurring
appropriations might have been
100 $200 million in any given
year. So that was a helpful
metric to inform you all and the
public on how much additional
money there was to spend on top
of previous year's budgets. But
in recent years, that
non-recurring appropriation,
that no non-recurring budget
amount has grown tremendously.
It it now reflects maybe 27% of
total spending in any session.
Maybe a third of total spending
in any given fiscal year. So
it's a significant part of the
story, and it, it, it has made
that old metric of new money,
less useful. And so in hopes of
of having a more clear
understanding of how much
additional new money there is on
top of previous budget where
coming up to you all with this
total new money figure, that's
the total revenue minus the
total budget, and that's that 60
and about $60 million that you
can see there. So maybe another
helpful way of explaining it is
the pie is
Growing by 660 million. The
slices of the pie can still move
quite a bit, you know, if you
have, if you grow the recurring
slice by $3.1 billion. That
would mean no budget for
non-recurring. So there's a lot
of movement within the pie, but
the, the pie as a whole is
growing by $660 million. So
hopefully that's a helpful
explanation on the total new
money available to you all.
So if you turn to the next page
on page 2 here, you'll see a
table in the middle with the
state's balance sheet or a high
level balance sheet, estimated
ending reserve balances for FY
24 at 3 billion or 31.7% and uh
ending reserve balances in 25%
at about $3.5 billion or 34.8%.
Um, that's before I should
mention before any legislative
action in the coming session. In
the session, uh, very common
and, and most
Years, there will also be
additional spending in the
current budget year, so we
expect that 34.8% will drop once
a non-recurring appropriations
are made during the session. And
it's important to note too that
the uh
The government results in
opportunity funder the grow fund
is included in reserves in FY
25, but will not be included in
reserves in 26 and beyond. So
that represents about 5% there.
So when you're starting to
picture the FY 26 uh reserve
number, it's already closer to,
it's gonna be below 30% before
any new spending, and I'll, I'll
get into that a little bit more
here, uh, in a second. If you
take a look at the chart at the
top of the page, this is that
change in total
Revenues in FY 25 trying to
illustrate why revenues decline
in 25 and it's not because of
economic reasons. You can see
the gross receipts tax we
actually expect to grow in 25
above 24 by $84 million interest
or investment earnings $105
million. Other revenues $47. So
that really that decline is
attributable to the decline in
income taxes, which as Secretary
Shaon Clarke mentioned is the
result of legislative changes
primarily personal income tax
bracket movement.
I'll, I'll quickly breeze
through the economic forecast,
the chart at the bottom of the
page here reflects inflation,
the path of inflation and
actuals in gray, the dotted
being previous expectations in
the blue, our current
expectations a general downward
trajectory, but we still expect
lots of bumps on the roads while
we head there. So, uh, and, and
of course that translates to our
expectations for Federal Reserve
dropping interest rates as those
inflation indicators continue to
decline and move towards that
pre-pandemic average of about
2%.
Um, I, I think, as I mentioned
at the beginning, really the
story here is slowing growth,
slowing growth, slowing growth.
That, that translates or, or
maybe is illustrated really well
on page 3.
So if you'll turn to page 3
here, the employment forecast at
the top is improved
significantly as Secretary Sheon
Clark mentioned from where we
thought we would be in December.
There's a shift upwards because
of those recent actuals, but the
growth rate is, is largely the
same, but maybe more to the
point is that year over year
employment growth in the middle.
So employment, of course, if we
have more employees, there's
more people paying the personal
income tax more wages subject to
the personal income tax, but
there's also more spending power
in the economy, more
salaries means the gross
receipts tax can also increase
with retail sales, and you can
see that at the beginning of
this chart here, year over year
employment growth, we had really
remarkable growth above 6%
closing in on 7% at uh right
after the pandemic there. So it
makes sense that our personal
income tax growth was also
similarly 8% and, and around
that amount because we had
really high year over year
employment growth. But you can
see that the employment growth
is slowing, and so that
translates into slowing personal
income tax growth and slowing
growth.
seats tax growth and uh total
wages and salaries here another
important indicator for us, um,
although we don't have growth
rates plotted for you, the wages
and salaries growth rate was
about 10% in 22, 8% and 23%, but
that slowed down about half as
much and 6% and 24, we expect
it'll keep slowing down to about
4% in the out years. So again,
just that story of slowing,
slowing, slowing growth.
If you turn to page 4,
Uh,
some of our favorite charts here
on oil and gas production, the
top chart here reflecting New
Mexico, cementing its its place
as the 2nd largest oil producer
in the country, surging past
North Dakota and uh maybe about
half as much, a little under
half as much as Texas, but we
see that same story of explosive
growth transitioning into
moderating growth in oil and
gas. Um, the growth rates are in
the chart at the bottom of the
page. New Mexico has nearly
quintupled almost 5 times as
much production.
Today, as in 2017, that's really
tremendous and it's a little
hard to tell, but in the last
several months we're seeing that
growth really slow down and and
plateau um a little bit here,
and that's because we expect
that growth rate, which was 30%
in FY 22, 30 30% oil production
growth in 22, slowing down to
23% in 23 in 24 FY 24, we saw it
slow down even further, um, to
about 7% and we expect that to
continue to slow 4%.
The years beyond, and then 2% in
the out years as we expect oil
production to start to plateau
before it hits its peak here in
New Mexico.
Um, part of that story here in
the slowdown is the Secretary
Chardon Clark mentioned a new
prioritization by a lot of oil
and gas companies to uh
distribute profits back to
shareholders and that sort of
being prioritized above quicker
expansion growth or larger oil
production growth and as we see
broader consolidation within the
industry in Southeast New
Mexico, more and more of our oil
and gas production is subject to
that financial discipline that
prioritization of shareholder
value above.
um production growth. I'll also
mention 11 new tidbit of
information we've seen in
analysis recently, the cost to
drill in New Mexico is rising,
um, along with inflation, along
with other industries, but we
had previously seen maybe a
break-even price to drill a new
well in the mid-thirties. We're
now seeing that climb to the low
40s. So that just presents a
little more risk uh in terms of
the forecast, prices don't have
to fall as far before we start
seeing production impacts. So I
just wanted to note that.
For you all there.
If you turn to page 5, we have
the oil and natural gas
forecasts plotted out for you
here in orange with actuals in
blue. You can see that slow down
through the forecast as we sort
of hit the Mesa of of New
Mexico's production.
Natural gas, of course, as an
associated product with oil, is
similarly expected to slow. We
saw a 9.4% growth in 24, which
is quite a bit of slowdown from
the 25% we saw in the previous
fiscal year. So again, just the
story of everything is
continuing to slow down from
those historic growth rates. Uh,
the, the, the table here in the
middle of the page shows our
expectations, the Craig's
forecast for prices and
production volumes over 770
100 million barrels of oil
estimated to be produced in this
past fiscal year, uh, a
tremendous milestone for New
Mexico.
Moving on to the gross receipts
tax, again we see that slowing
down playing out here, uh, 6.4%
growth in FY 24. That's less
than half the gross rate we saw
in 23 at 14.6%. And again, 21%
in 22, so really slowing down
from those previous levels. We
see a lot of that growth coming
from construction. It used to be
mining. If you turn the page to
page 6, the chart at the top of
the page shows our previous
year's growth rate in 23.
To our last year's growth rate
in 24, mining was the the large
driver in 23 that's transitioned
to really construction in terms
of dollars and the table
presented in the middle of the
page here.
Um, I, I do want to highlight
that despite that slowdown in
growth from mining, a
significant portion of the
state's gross receipts tax is
still related to mining, about
we're estimating about 1/3 of
the gross receipts tax related
to mining. So in a, in the event
of a industry decline that could
represent a volatility of about
$1 billion in the gross receipts
tax. So significant gross
receipts tax volatility related
to the oil and gas industry
still.
Um, I, I also want to highlight
that the gross receipts tax
would be higher in addition to
the, similar to the personal
income tax that we've seen
decline because of legislative
changes. We're having similar
effects in the gross receipts
tax in FY 24, the final
one-eight reduction was phased
in. We estimate that total cost
for the total quarter rate
reduction at about $250 million.
So without legislative changes,
gross receipts tax, about $250
million higher. Um, if you turn
to slide 7, Secretary She and
Clerk
covered this well, um, our oil
and gas.
Related revenues are climbing at
a much slower rate if you look
at 21 to 22, an incredible jump,
surge in revenues, and 22 to 23,
the same story. We saw a decline
in 24, not because of
production, but because of price
declines, and we expect those
revenues to continue to climb,
total revenues reflected here by
the sum of the blue, the green,
and the orange. The orange
reflecting the amounts to their
early childhood Trust Fund,
which we expect will total 1.
$0.8 billion from royalties from
25 to 29 and 1.2.
$1 billion from severance taxes
from 25 to 29 going to the early
childhood trust fund.
Um, moving on to page 8.
A little more on investment
earnings.
This is one of the only revenues
that we're not seeing that
slowdown story take place. We're
actually seeing the growth
growing, so accelerating through
the forecast period. And you can
see that in the chart at the top
of the page, um, labeled
interest that actually reflects
our total investment earnings to
the general fund. It's now the
largest source of growth in the
general fund. And actually for
the first time we're estimating
in the budget year that total
investment earnings will be the
2nd largest source of revenue in
the general fund, beating
personal income taxes for
The first time. So in other
words, for the same level of
spending our personal income
taxes would have to be double
what they are currently if we
didn't have those investments.
So those investments are playing
a significant portion to
reducing New Mexicans' tax
burden, um, thanks to the large
contributions that the
legislature has made in recent
years, but also the large
returns that the state
investment council is earning on
those funds.
Um,
I will highlight something that
I mentioned in June, um, in a
volatility analysis that we did,
the state treasurer's office
distributions to the general
fund reflected in the chart in
the middle of the page here. The
state treasurer invests, the
state general fund investment
pool for the benefit of the
general fund. That is growing
increasingly volatile as the
size of that pool has grown to
above $10 billion in recent
years. And of course the
interest rate environment has
also shifted dramatically and
that's resulted in a large
amount of volatility.
Uh, in addition to that, these
distributions to the general
fund are based on market
expectations or market
valuations of the holdings of
the treasurer. So, of course,
market volatility is a
tremendous source of volatility,
and that is in the general fund.
I want to continue to highlight
that for you all, um, as, as was
discussed in June, maybe there
are potential solutions for
extracting some of that
volatility maybe above trend um
distributions could be
distributed to other funds as
non-recurring uh as
non-recurring or identifying
them as non-recur.
revenues. So I just wanted to
highlight that for you all
there.
If you turn to page 9.
Moving on to income taxes, the
chart at the top here, the green
bars reflects what personal
income taxes would have been had
no legislative changes took
effect, and you can see almost
$1 billion higher or in other
words, almost $1 billion in tax
cuts for New Mexicans and the
personal income tax to get to
those red bars down below. Um,
and again, you can see that the
decline would have been a growth
if not for those legislative
changes.
Uh, in the corporate income tax
in the middle of the page, um,
we do expect total corporate
income tax or gross corporate
income tax collections
represented by the sums of the
blue and the orange bars to
decline in the coming years, in
part because our corporate
income tax is heavily reliant on
the oil and gas industry and
moderating oil prices is
expected to flow through to the
corporate income tax. But we do
expect total collections to
start growing again, starting in
FY 27. Although the general
funds portion of the corporate
income tax.
is going to continue to decline
because of expectations for
growing um film tax credits.
Moving on to page 10.
Uh, we did have an upward
revision in in.
The nominal reversion
expectations in this forecast,
but I do want to point out that
our reversions are on track or
with expectations of what normal
reversions would be. Our
analysis suggests maybe about
1.2% of recurring budgets in any
given year is reverted. That
makes sense. uh, it's difficult
for a budget to spend 100%, so
90, you know, about 99% of
budgets being spent, although we
are seeing significant
reversions from non
non-recurring sources, so
perhaps not all of the
Non-recurring funds being
deployed there. So we did revise
our expectations for revisions
up in accordance with
Budget growth, about 1.2% of, of
um the recurring budget there.
Um, moving on to forecast risks,
oil and gas remains the number
one risk to the forecast, as you
all know. This time around, we
expect a $1 change in the price
of oil could have about a $500
million impact to New Mexico's
revenue, so very slight
variations in price can have
large impacts on revenues, but,
you know, a close second, of
course, is a recession or maybe
changes in federal policy,
whether that's related to
inflation and interest rate
Or to federal tax changes. If
you turn the page to 11, you can
see our expectations for the
federal funds rate. Of course,
if those rates stay higher for
too long, that could contribute
to a recession, which um we'll
get into here shortly with uh uh
the stress testing. Although we
do see that expectations for a
recession or maybe um or
concerns about a recession have
declined in recent months, the
chart at the bottom reflects a
survey of economists by the Wall
Street Journal.
And their or their risk, their
their chance, their likelihood
of a of a recession declining
pretty dramatically.
If you turn the page to page 12,
revenue volatility is also a
significant risk to the
forecast. The chart at the top
of the page here reflects our
standard expectations for
volatility by revenue source,
the corporate income tax is
highly volatile again, likely
because of its relation to the
oil and gas industry, but also
those distributions from the
state treasurer's office are
highly volatile. And so just to
put that in perspective, if 3%
of revenues come from the
corporate income tax and about
3% of revenues come from the.
treasurer's office, that's say
7% of revenues. We know that
those revenues can fluctuate,
can go truly negative quite
quickly and with little warning.
So if we're estimating 3%
revenue growth, you can see how
7% could disappear quite quickly
in this revenue forecast could
go negative, um, with short
notice. So just highlighting
that revenue volatility in and
of itself is a high risk to the
forecast here.
OK. Moving on to the stress
test, um, I'm gonna flip back
and forth a little bit here. If
you turn to page 13, this is a
similar chart to what Secretary
props had shown you all, and
The red line represents our our
lowest, most pessimistic.
scenario for a stress test.
And the bars in blue and gray
here reflect flat budget growth.
So so zero budget growth, the
same non-recurring and the same
recurring expenses in future
years. And I think it can help
to walk through.
What this scenario could look
like.
And what we're talking about
here, what we're thinking about
is, say, uh, a scenario that
begins with a price crash to the
low 40s and sustains at that
rate for
I guess 2.5 years here. So the
expectation would be that you
all as the legislature would
come into the coming session,
make appropriations, and then a
crash would, would occur. And so
how, what kind of reserves or
other funds might be needed to
cover the appropriations that
you all already made in that
session. And you can see if
Spending is flat. How far into
the bars, how far into the
appropriations, the revenues
could fall.
And as Secretary Props
mentioned, the good news here is
that the declining revenues
never cuts into recurring
appropriations. And, and so
there shouldn't be too much of a
concern that agencies would have
to have uh uh budgets pulled
back, but
There is some amount of
non-recurring spending that
might have to be pulled back or
reserves that might be needed in
order to cover those
non-recurring appropriations in
the event of this revenue
decline. So of course, if
there's capital appropriations
or maybe temporary employees
that have been hired on some of
these special appropriations,
you might want to cover those
appropriations that have already
started to be drawn rather than
strand some of these projects.
And so if you turn back to page
12.
The chart at the bottom here
reflects that difference. How
much of that gray bar was cut
into in that stress test
scenario. And you can see it's
about, it's not quite 33%, maybe
about $3.3 billion. And so
hopefully what this communicates
to you all is you would need a
combination of reserves, other
funds, and maybe appropriation
reductions.
To get to a balanced budget. So
that could be reserves at 25%,
grow fund at 5% and 3% pulling
back of special appropriations
or about $300 million in pulling
back special appropriations. So
hopefully that's a little, a
little more helpful. I know this
was a request from you all, um,
in the June hearing to help, um,
maybe clarify why we do the
stress test and how that relates
to the budget, and I'd be happy
to answer more questions on
that.
All right, turning to page 14,
I'll close, I'll wrap up here,
um.
Just the trend analysis really
reflecting that slowdown in
revenue growth, really
illustrating that narrative that
we're seeing in the revenues
that growth is slowing down and
returning to its pre-pandemic
trends. You can see that with
the graph in the middle here. In
25, we expect our revenue is
about $600 million above trend,
but quickly going back to trend
in the out years, in fact,
slightly below trend, largely
because of the legislative
changes that took effect.
And with that, Mr. Chair, oh,
actually I'll close with one
last thing, page 31.
Uh
For you all who may be
interested and for the public
who may be listening, we have a
new public dashboard with
downloadable data of revenues
going back to I think 1968 or
something like that, this the
LFC throughout the LFC's
history, and you can find that
on our website at
nmledge.gov/econ.
And with that, Mr. Chair.
Happy to take questions.
Thank you.
I don't see anybody's hand up,
so.
Senator Sher, you want to talk
about
Tax increases.
And talk about tax increases.
To offset the out years, go
ahead.
So
Mr. Chair, I do have a couple of
Questions or comments. The first
one, if I can find it.
is on this one. And I want to
start, excuse me, with page 8.
I'm just interested in what the,
the, uh, labor participation
rate is at this point.
Uh, so it talks about
Where it's page 8
Uh, how employment has gone up.
But what's the participation
rate in New Mexico compared to
the rest of the country.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I'll, I'll
take that question. Uh, we're
sitting at 7.3%.
Labor force participation rate,
the national rate, I believe, is
around 6263.3, 62.6%, sorry,
62.6% is the National Labor
force participation in 57.3 is
New Mexico's.
So, Mr. Chair, the point is that
our economy would be better if
the people that could work did
work.
More of them anyway.
So, um,
What are we doing in our budget?
What are we doing in our laws to
Disincentifies people to go to.
To go to work. But that brings
me to page 9 where state
government growth.
Seems to be
The growth
Um
And, and, and again that seems
kind of counterproductive to
To, uh, I don't know, economic
development. So, uh, if, if, if
I'm simply paying.
Uh, a state employee and then
taxing the state employee and
then paying the state employee
that
That doesn't get us to economic
growth. Uh, yes, obviously we
need some people. We need, uh,
we need Izzy. I'm not sure we
need the cabinet secretaries,
but we certainly need Izzy and
uh.
So
So how do we encourage
More private sector growth in
that, in that case because I
think that really helps grow the
economy, uh, helps things work.
Work better.
So I don't know.
Uh, if, if there's even an
answer, but I wanna make that.
Uh, point we also talked about
natural gas and where right now
natural gas is coming out of the
ground in Permian even though
nobody wants it down there, um.
But there is a market for
natural gas.
Uh, to the west, to the Asian
countries, Japan would probably
buy all of the natural gas San
Juan Basin could produce.
If we could turn it into
liquefied natural gas and put it
on a boat and send it to him.
But we have a problem with
California that won't,
they won't do it. We have the
facilities there. They've,
they've now banned us from, from
doing that.
So is there anything, Mr.
Chairman, that we can do? Can we
call in the governor of
California and have him testify
before us, you know, maybe.
Um
I know that's a, a stretch, but
I do believe that something that
that we ought to be working on.
How do we sell our natural gas,
uh, San Juan natural gas.
To the Asian.
Uh, nations
Uh, and this is real.
Because the pipelines
Did San Juan have? Go west.
The pipelines from the Permian
go east and so if we're trying
to sell, uh, uh, increase our
economy.
That makes sense to do.
Now we can go back to this one
real quickly.
So we talked about.
Taxes.
Maybe
OK, income taxes.
One of the things that
In the, in the
Budget guidelines we talked
about taxes being expenditures
and they're all negatives.
And certainly some of the things
that we've done were certainly
negatives to the revenue.
But do we have any way of of
looking at a return on
investment. So if we invest a
tax.
Deduction or credit, is there a
return on that? Do we have any
way of looking at that and
guesstimating what a return on
any tax policy would be.
Mr. Chair and Senator Sher,
there's definitely a lot of
research out there that we could
pull up for you. It depends on
the deduction credit or
expenditure, uh, for example,
um,
Depending on the income.
Quintile, say that the extra
revenue goes to, there's a
different multiplier. Um, so we,
we could.
Uh, pull something together for
you that hopefully gets at that
point.
So, um, Mr. Chair, I just, I
want to use the military
retirement.
As an example,
I certainly viewed that as
As a uh a positive return on
investment in here I don't think
it's counted that way at all,
and I don't know how to.
I don't know if we can properly
measure whether there was really
a return on investment and, and
the reason I say that is because
Most people think the military
as trigger pullers, but most
people in the service are not
trigger pullers. There are 10
support.
Troops for each trigger puller
in the army. Uh, the Marines,
it's, it's only 5, and in the
Navy, uh, I mean, the Air Force
is about 40.
So
What that means is, is these
service members have some other
skill.
Um, they're diesel mechanics or
we don't have mess halls. We
have't mess halls in a long
time. We have dining facilities
and so these are people that
know how to run restaurants. So
if you want a good restaurant,
well, what you do is, is you
hire somebody that's been
running a restaurant for 20
years.
And uh
So that's why I'm looking at
that as a positive because we
want those, those folks here,
uh.
But maybe it's not a positive. I
don't know.
Um, on page 8.
Page 8. What do I have on page
8? Oh, the, the permanent funds
being the, the growth, so, uh,
Mr. Chair, I think this is a
great, great, great thing
because we've been talking about
the permanent funds replacing
oil and gas.
Since 1910, before we were a
state, uh, at least placing, uh,
the natural resources we have.
So every time.
We come up with, oh, we should
tap into the permanent fund a
little more.
The power of compound interest
is, is reduced and truly if we
want to be self-sustaining on on
on a long term basis, we want
that. We want the permanent fund
to pay our bills.
And, and we're moving in that
direction. I think that's
I think that's
a great thing there.
Um,
On page 12, you mentioned
something here.
Let's see.
Uh, other forecast risks.
And down the bottom of of that
paragraph, um, state and federal
regulatory changes for oil and
gas environment.
I think that's something that we
ought to consider too.
Right now, New Mexico uh
produces the cleanest barrel of
oil in the world. And what I
mean that is not only is the oil
clean, but how we produce it is
clean.
The cleanest barrel of oil comes
from Permian Basement right now.
Let's not make it more
difficult, OK, because in that
case, then we really are cutting
off our, our nose to spite our
face. And that doesn't make
sense, OK? So,
You say that it's uh it's, it's
a.
00, a risk.
And I believe that and I think
we ought to look at because
Most people in the world, most
people in this room.
Don't understand the cleanest
barrel of oil in the world comes
from the Permian Basin.
And a lot of that is because
We're doing it right in New
Mexico.
And we don't need to push.
Beyond right. There's a balance.
No regulation, overregulation,
we're on the verge of over
overregulation.
Um,
And then finally, just as the uh
as we talk about things leveling
out.
I don't think that that means
that there's a disaster out
there. It just means that our
budget has to be flat.
OK, and it hadn't been flat in a
long time. If, if you go to
Izzy's last chart there, the.
Uh, what page was it? 31?
Whatever one goes back to 1965
when we had $150 million budget.
$150 million budget.
To a $10 billion budget. OK,
some of that's inflation.
But certainly if you just look
at the last few years.
Um, $5 billion budgets to to
You know, to $10 billion
budgets.
We've been growing pretty quick.
And so when we're talking about
how much growth we think we can
have or should have a 0 sounds
like a good number.
Um
And then finally, the, the
reserves,
um,
I guess the question is, are we
counting the grow money as
reserves.
Mr. Chair, Senator, only in FY
25.
On FY 25.
So one of the things that we
that that that was mentioned
here is that our
Just to make sure that these
other risk factors don't make it
negative as opposed to flat out
there in the future.
Maybe we ought to have a bigger
reserve.
Of course, I would hate to
rehash what we talked about
yesterday.
But a larger reserve seems to be
prudent.
Planning on a 0
Growth budget seems to be
prudent, and I don't think that
those are negatives to any of
us.
As long as we don't push
ourselves over the edge with
overregulation. Thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for this, um, wonderful
presentation. I appreciate the,
um,
The stress test information and
the total new money. Um, I think
those are very helpful, um.
Bits of information for us and
ways to think about things.
I actually just have one
question, uh, regarding, uh,
page 6 in the Money Matters, um,
And the matched, um, taxable
gross receipts by industry. What
I am wondering, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, um,
You all can answer this. It
doesn't just need to be Izzy is
how do we track and correlate,
um, the buy industry with our
efforts for economic development
with our 9 strategic sectors. So
what I'd like to know is how do
we see growth in those sectors
in this type of data, can we?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Dixon, um,
We, we can probably drill down
closer to the specific.
Target industries and maybe
chart them out over, over the
last several years to look for
growth, maybe above national
trend to see if maybe New Mexico
interventions are, are
accelerating growth in those
industries, um.
So I'm happy to help you look at
that if you'd like.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative Small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the panelists and
thank you to everybody who's in
the audience who supports, uh,
the three panels that you all
said, um, pretty remarkable
forecasting and, uh, was
discussing with Director Sale,
uh, even prior to the time that
I've had the privilege to serve
on the committee, the beginnings
of LFC and Craig forecasting,
uh, this 381% production growth
that we've seen, um, and now.
Where we're, uh,
right in on the production side,
it's been helpful for me to
think about it as a Mesa, albeit
a very steep mesa to get up on
top, you know, climbing up, uh,
a very steep grade. Are we, how
close are we to the top of that
mesa for production? It sounds
like there's still production
growth that is forecast and has
the, uh, production horizon,
which we saw extend.
Sort of almost through the mid
to later 2030s, has there been
any change in both the growth
and the horizon.
Uh
Mr. Chair, um, I, I, I would
like to maybe put a plug in for
the long term forecast that will
be coming before you all in
September that will give a
better picture of what that mesa
looks like. Um, I, I.
For you all today, I will say
that the
The Mesa's elevation, the peak,
the height of the mesa.
A little higher than what it was
before, but perhaps the
beginning of the Mesa is around
FY 29. It's, it's a little
sooner, um, around the FY 30
mark is when we expect that to
begin to flatten out. If not,
uh, peak and then come down
maybe in the early 2030s after
that, but there will be a much
more detailed presentation in
September for you all.
Got it. And uh thank you very
much, Mr. Torres. Um, the, uh,
And, and I can't help but think
about as we get closer to
hunting season, I know Secretary
pros, you know, there's still a
little ways to get up on top,
but we'll be up there pretty
soon, um.
The in terms of the um.
I guess then my uh another
production related question that
may be more of a September focus
in conversation, there's.
It seems like some.
Uh, producers are drilling, you
know, the consolidation that you
know is real. There's some
longer laterals and potentially
maybe sort of the our rig count,
um.
connection that you know that
maybe it's going to take on
average, fewer rigs to sort of
maintain or marginally grow
production over time, is that
something that will maybe is
better.
In detail as we go through the
rest of this year and obviously
into.
6 and, you know, the next
meetings.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we can definitely
include something to that effect
in September for you. Thank,
thank you for the heads up. I,
I, off the top of my head
thinking about um the data I've
seen the, the, the key metric
for sort of the um maintenance
reg count for maintenance
production, I think is actually
a
production per well.
Um, so the longer laterals would
increase the production per
well, but there are other
factors that play um as you know
that our, our smaller producers,
maybe with slightly less
sophistication of in drilling
techniques have a lower
production per well, and so, um,
the key metric we look at for
maintenance rig count is, is
total production per well, and
we haven't seen a lot of shifts
in that yet. I, I would, I
would, um, uh,
Remember, I'm remembering that a
maintenance recount is pushing
closer to 100.
OK, uh, got it. Thank you, um,
thank you very much and uh yeah,
thank you, and I, I just want to
know we have really.
Remarkably grown our capacity
for analysis and utilizing
national and international
resources, but it shows just how
strong our capacity and you all
and your teams are, uh, to be
able to dive in, um, switching
now to a couple of other things,
um.
Secretary Prop, Secretary Sharon
Clark, and maybe uh Mr. Torres,
the um the overall employment
increases, tracking strongly the
uh utilities and transportation
caught my eye as a as the sort
of and information is the
steepest decrease. Is it any
sort of additional color or
context to explain that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
of small
Um.
Uh, yeah, on slide 9 is where we
and the executive slide deck,
um, show the unemployment or the
employment changes in each
individual sector, and you'll
see that transportation and
utilities were down year over
year by about 3.6% or 1100 jobs.
I, I did ask the staff about
that as, as well as the
information sector in the lead
up to this. And, um, I'm told
that in the transportation and
utilities sector. There was an
above trend growth in that
sector post-CV.
And now we're just kind of
coming back down to what would
be trend in in the information
sector, um, that is a generally
a declining sector for many
years nationally and more so in
New Mexico. Understood.
Thank you, sir, and Mr.
Cook, Mr. Chair,
I think page 28 of the LFC brief
could add some helpful
information here, especially to
Senator Scherer's point, um, of
the growth since the pandemic,
and
State and local government had
actually been behind for many
years and I think this year is
maybe the first year that, um,
those, those, uh, sectors have
caught up, but you can see in
the grand scheme of the
recovery, they're actually not
towards the top of the
employment recovery list, as you
mentioned, transportation,
warehousing, and utilities is
towards the top of the
employment list. We've done
some, we did some analysis. Our
economist Brendan earlier this
year and presented before you
all that shows New Mexico may
have something of a competitive
advantage in the transportation
and warehousing sector. New
Mexico.
Having access to a lot of um
interstates and railroads, uh,
the location or the locating of
several large warehouses here in
New Mexico recently are
contributing to the employment
gains in this sector, and yet I
think this continues to be a a a
source of opportunity for New
Mexico, um, going forward.
Awesome. Thank you for that.
Thank you both, and that's super
helpful, um, makes me very much
think of what the committee has
done really a lot of credit to
the Vice Chair Dixon for, um,
the question that she asked in
sort of our focus and investment
on, um, all sectors of economic
development and um that's, so
that's exciting, um,
The another a request maybe for
additional um visual one is
around, um, uh, and again,
thanks to the vice chair, uh,
visuals for some of the trust
funds, so the non-recurring that
we show in the two different
stress tests, does that include
um the, that doesn't include our
permanent trust funds, the most
recent of which was almost $1
billion for higher ed.
And the
Robust funding for the land of
enchantment trust fund.
Mr. Chair, the sort of reserves
or or total cash or cuts needed
to get to a balanced budget does
not reflect those, um.
You, and of course those are
available to you all in the
event of a revenue decline. Um,
but if the question is, does it
factor into account um transfers
to say the early childhood Trust
fund, it would be after declines
in those transfers, so it
doesn't, it does take
specifically the oil and gas
transfers into account. Got it.
Thank you, Chair. I think the,
uh, person out, the request is
for um an updated snapshot of
all of the trust funds that
we've created to visualize
because again I think the
Committee and the entire
legislature, the executive can
should and and is appropriately,
um, pleased with the fact that
we've created these trust funds
to fund key priorities from
education to land, water, and
our health, and a bunch in
between, and of course, early
childhood is the biggest one,
but also a visual that does show
sort of that waterfall that
shows how so much more.
Money is now available. It shows
why the stress test shows that
even in our worst case low oil
price scenario we're not cutting
into recurring appropriations.
That and and there are multiple.
Buckets that contribute to to
that um.
Really strong place where even
in in the sort of a bit of a
black swan.
We don't have to cut teachers,
uh, healthcare workers, law
enforcement, that that there's
been growth in those areas and
so that, um.
Mr. Chair, I just, I would, um,
Conclude by asking, there is
room for very measured.
And very constrained, but
continued recurring revenue
growth. That's what the, and
it's a great description. There
is a.
Uh slight increase to the
overall pie and a lot of choice
for how those slices are
apportioned. So there is
continued recurring revenue
growth opportunity in a
constrained way. There is
non-recurring revenue
apportionment.
In, in a
Remains in a significant way,
um.
And this doesn't yet really
factor in or does the, can you
actually last question, Mr.
Chair, um,
On the grow.
Non sort of non-member.
Amount. There's currently
roughly 500 million there. Is
there this, does this include a
recommendation? It doesn't
include a recommendation for how
much to to sort of recapitalize
that fund, but that's another
area of.
Uh, prioritization that we
should be thinking about and
final, final question, uh,
secretary props, Mr. Chair.
Is the executive sort of working
on potential. I, I understand
there's been a lot of progress.
I want to thank you, Director
Cly and others, progress in how
to approach grow, uh, and other
expansion requests.
Can we think about or or is the
executive thinking about, um,
Putting some priorities in sort
of that grow 3 year space as we
look, as we move forward.
Mr. Chairman, member of the
committee and Chairman Small,
the answer is yes, we are. I
think we're even willing to go a
step further and see if we can
come to some consensus before
the session starts on grow
priorities. I agree with you,
you know,
um,
the I
I think the executive and the
executive agencies that I've
talked to are are looking
forward to that growth fund.
They understand it a little bit
better. I agree with you. I
think we're working very well
together with your staff to.
Kind of flesh out some of the
parameters that we couldn't
flesh out in a 30 day session. I
think that's coming along well
and that's not going to be a
hindrance again and uh perhaps
recapitalizing a little bit, uh,
would be a good idea as well,
so, um, yes, uh, we are, we are
looking to prioritize. We're
looking to using that fund and
to the extent that we can
collaborate on priorities, all
the better.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for the
indulgence, Mr. Chair.
One thing on on uh
representative Small's point is,
if we had a downturn, could you
and just say it's a, I'm just
gonna give this a scenario for a
$2 billion downturn, right?
Could you give us this, this
fund would be hit first and if
it had 1 billion and just 1
billion in it, we would draw
down this next fund we draw down
this, create that scenario,
right? So not everything's at
zero in the first fund when that
first hits.
scenarios that tells us, OK,
we're going to draw this amount
in a $2 billion downturn
scenario $40 oil gas, right in
the first year or two years, so,
so we can look at it across the
board how much that drawdown was
cause I mean, keeping reserves
and it.
30% with the amount of money we
have stuffed under the
mattresses and have invested
just I wanna see that scenario
in in when you do that form, so
Representative Seona.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just
really quick, um, thank you for
your presentation. Always very
informative. And this is for
Secretary Shadon Clarke, um, on
your employment on page 9 of the
executive summary, um.
What falls under information is
information technology or what's
the.
Driving force in such a low.
No
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative for.
Thank you for the question. Um,
my understanding is that the
information sector has a lot to
do with internet, but uh, is he
or our team?
Sorry?
Oh publishing and broadcasting.
Thank you.
communications. So, um, that
makes more sense with publishing
and broadcasting coming down
over the longer term in the
economy?
Thank you. That's all I needed,
pancakes.
It
And Miss Arian, you done?
OK, I'm sorry. Um, there's
nobody else on the list. Let me
kind of go over some stuff.
Um
In this scenario, I, I think one
of the most interesting things
about oil and gasses that the
Federal Reserve out of Dallas,
it says the US economy is
dependent on the Permian Basin.
In New Mexico and Texas, and
when they're dependent on our
oil, that oil production is
still going to rise. The
market's going to be the
markets, and it could happen in
the world market and and make
that fluctuate and change, but
that driver in in the US
economy.
is gonna keep New Mexico.
On top of the Mesa, even though
there's no creatures, they're
all down in the woods and
drinking water, um.
But I think we gotta think about
that then then another thing,
you know, this is the year that
the federal spending.
That the federal debt.
We're paying more interest than
we are paying on the debt.
And so as you watch that federal
number make that change this
year. That's gonna be a change
in, in how the feds are spending
money and.
Depends who becomes president,
but how we get control and
reduce the federal deficit,
right? Because that affects us.
Quite a bit in New Mexico
because they'll start cutting.
Sandia, they'll start cutting
the labs as those cuts come
across, um.
So I think the world economy or
the US economy is starting to
slow and change, and that's even
evident by the page 9 in in
employment year uh year over
year for in the employment
sector, right? You looked at
information technology. I mean,
they have the largest drop.
And then you, you look at a
construction.
Even construction is down within
New Mexico and some of that may
be an employment issue.
Uh, and there's too much money
out in the market, um, there's
contractors that have $120
million worth of jobs just
sitting there waiting to be done
and just can't get to them.
And so
Those sectors are slowing, and
when those sectors slower,
they're the, they're the
highest.
group of hiring, um, and so I
don't know how we adjust that.
The 7 sectors of economic
development. I'd really like to
dig into that a little bit more
and see, you know.
I personally believe what real
economic growth that we had in
New Mexico that that someone
could walk in a building and say
to you, I mean, I'm sure we got
Amazon warehouses we got.
Data centers we got.
People say they're coming, but
at the end of the day we don't
have those large employers
coming and how do we get those
large employment sectors here.
Um,
And I, I, I think that's
something that we should target
as we move forward.
Uh, is how do we get those large
companies with a lot of jobs in
areas and change leaded
completely.
Because it's not working.
We need the they need the
infrastructure, we need the jobs
and they need the building
assets and New Mexico's got to
learn to invest in that way, you
know, uh, I will give you a
perfect example. I think it's
out there in the news, you know,
uh, a film festival is coming to
New Mexico looking at New Mexico
pretty hard, right? Um, those
are big wins for New Mexico.
And there's other things that
could happen in New Mexico that
could really change the scene
now that we've slowing down on
reoccurring growth and agencies
aren't spending everything they
got or they're not applying for
federal money.
And, and this is in the
newsletter and CYFDU has been in
the paper where the feds are not
going to pay for that center,
and they took.
Mental health money that was
intended for children's mental
health and put it in that
building.
That wasn't the legislative
purview of what they wanted to
do, but agencies are spending
money wherever they want,
however they want, and then
they're gonna come back in here
and say, oh, I want a 10% or 5%
budget growth, well.
Katie bar the door because we're
gonna hold some people's feet to
the fire on have you spent your
non-reoccurring money? Have you
spent your reoccurring money?
Are you trying to make your
non-reoccurring money into
reoccurring money, uh.
That ain't gonna work, not with
this amount of reoccurring
revenue growth. If I look at the
reoccurring revenue growth and I
look at the five big things that
we're gonna have to do in this
next year.
I think we spent it all already.
We spent, we're gonna have to
spend $150 million on Medicaid.
About 100 million on educational
changes, about 150 million on on
on the pay changes because
there's some lawsuits coming.
Another 50 million uh uh on the
funds that where we get sued
from in GSD.
So I mean there's 450 million
that spent reoccurring money
right now that that.
Now you're just
At 2%
If you're gonna go to a 6%
growth and spend all 106659 that
tanks, and correct me if I'm
wrong right now, Izzy, the 659
reoccurring growth that could
happen in the next two years
flattens out pretty quickly.
That'll flatten it out even
quicker, correct?
Mr. Chair, I think I, if I
understand your question
correctly, the next year's new
money would be
Much less is if that's the point
you're making, that's correct.
Yeah, and, and so we gotta start
this balancing act of.
Who has too much money in their
agency and not spending it, who,
who's not doing federal
reimbursements because that's
costing us a lot of money. I can
probably count to 45 million on
my one finger.
Of, of who's not doing that and
how we, how we slow that down in
in government because.
I know, Wayne and I, Wayne and I
used to sit in the corner and
worry about pensions, and now
we're sitting here worrying
about
state budgets and uh it'll be
Izzy's problem in a couple of
years, um, and so, I mean, we
got to slow the growth and, and
fix what we need to fix.
Because I think we're, we're way
above the story used to be.
Oh, we're not back to our 2009
levels. Well, now we're way
above the 2009 levels. And so
now is the time we're gonna see
performance.
You spending your money, is it
spent correctly? Is it targeted?
What's your?
What you read
What your unspent, how are you
trying to swat non-reoccurring
money for reoccurring in an
agency, and I mean, the next
agency up has tried to do that.
They had federal money.
And now they wanted to swap it
for state money.
I mean
You're gonna have to figure out
how not to.
To keep
Taking the bites out of the
apple or you're gonna have a
small peach like we got on our
table today.
Uh,
And, and as we head forward, but
I mean.
This is a time sale.
This is telling us that that
we'd better be cautious as we
move forward, right? We better
have very targeted spending, fix
the things we need to fix and
fix them correctly and get a
hold of our flattening that's
coming over the next 3 years.
Um, 5 years.
And start leveling that off so
we can, we can hold it without
having to hit any other single
fund and so I mean that's just
good budgeting.
Um,
You know, there's still a lot of
things the SIC returns are are
really low.
And then if we're gonna pump
money into the SIC and we're
only getting a 4% return. I
mean, those are things that.
We get a better return on
overnight money.
And we do at SIC and, and we
have how much money.
Wayne, do we have parked at SIC
and and we're only getting the
4% return.
Mr. Chairman, I, I
would want to have those exact
numbers and not just come.
Give you something off the top
of my head. I mean I do think
the returns for Sever tax
permanent fund have been below
the targeted target set by the
SIC, but I think they're
generally within their
benchmark, um, but I, I do know
again as a member of the SIC
that John Clark who's the new.
Chief investment officer for the
state of New Mexico up just a
little bit. John Clark, who is a
new, uh, chief investment
officer officer for the state of
New Mexico is working with the
internal committees and the
investment staff at the SIT SIC
to look at our return
expectations and whether or not
we can.
Look at ways to improve those
returns, of course when you
improve returns you're often
taking more risks. So it is
again a balance there as well,
but I, I have confidence in the
new leadership at the SIC that
they're looking at those returns
and wanting to make sure that
they are maximized, but I
understand your point.
OK.
I, I just think.
You know,
If this is the year that we have
to really pay attention to the
difference between
non-reoccurring and reoccurring
money.
And not try to make that
transition and have agencies
make non-reoccurring money into
reoccurring, if they do that.
We're gonna change that scenario
to next year, 27 to 28.
And so as we move forward, I
think the the cautious tale is
reoccurring money is pretty much
dried up because we got some big
fixes we have to do.
Uh, and non reoccurring money,
well, there's plenty, but we're
not gonna use it in in a way
that it creates it is
reoccurring uh dollars.
And uh
Really watch where we moved into
the next year. Anything else you
guys wanna add or you wrap up?
And buy us a lottery ticket.
All right, thank you guys.
Appreciate it. Thank you guys
for all your hard work. I know
this is, this is a very long
tenuous process to dig through
numbers and to figure out what's
happening around us and, and in
the world and then come back and
try to.
Help us understand that.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, we are on
tab Fab F for families, which
was not intentional, but pretty
good.
I'm Kelly Klet with the
Legislative Finance Committee,
and with me today is Secretary
Gerginski from the Early
Childhood Care and Education
Department. There's also several
members of her staff in the
audience and I believe we have
representation from the
healthcare authority and the
audience as well.
Before we start this
presentation, I just wanted to
thank some of the LFC staff
members who really worked on
this as well. Doctor Sarah Dents
and Dr. Olega Hernandez also,
this was in collaboration with
the department, with the
healthcare authorities, so a lot
of people have really
contributed to this Legistat and
I wanted to thank everyone for
the cooperation. So this is our
3rd Legistat on Medicaid home
visiting. But before we start on
it, I just want to back us up so
we can think about what home
visiting is
So home visiting, as many of you
may know, is a parenting support
program where a provider will
come into a home and help new
families, hopefully prenatally,
but it can be postnatally on
some of their, you know, biggest
needs, it can provide screening,
it can provide support services,
lactation support, and so it
really is that helping hand in
that really stressful period
when families are starting off
with their new families.
And
Why is this important? Home
visiting is basically one of our
state's key prevention models.
It's what we've kind of built in
the early childhood system so
that we have long term gains for
families to be economically
supported, to be screened, to be
able to receive all those
auxiliary services. So if we
don't do home visiting, right?
We're not doing prevention right
so that we'd never reach that
point of crisis. So it's really
important that we build this
system in a way that's a
Hos family's success in the long
run.
And so I bet many of you are
thinking, well, if this is so
great, why are our outcomes not
what they are, and I can see
nodding. Yeah.
I just wanna make sure that we
think about home visiting. We're
not serving at a population
level yet, right? We're serving
anywhere between 70 to 5000
depending on how you use the
data if you're looking at
children or families. When we
have a cohort of about 21,000
babies born every single year.
And that 7 to 5000 is over a
three year period, so we're only
serving a small percentage of
our total population of
children. You can't see
population change
Until you're serving at a
population level. There's also
another thing that I want us to
think about home visiting models
and how we deliver them matter,
OK? Not every model is created
with the same outcomes. So if
you're looking to change health
outcomes, you would choose a
certain model and delivery that
focuses on changing health
outcomes. If you're looking to
reduce child maltreatment, you
might invest in another model
curriculum that focuses on that.
So not only do we need to
Serve more families. We need to
be selective in the models that
we deliver. We need to deliver
them with fidelity, and we need
families to complete the entire
program. So I don't know if many
of you remember but we did a
home visiting, um, evaluation
last summer and we saw that only
11 to 7% of families who
enrolled were completing the
entire model, OK? So those three
things are really why we're not
seeing population change, but
that doesn't mean that we can't
fix those.
Things and do things for the
system so that we can receive
this population outcomes and
improve the
The outcomes of children and
families so that you all see
what your investment is doing.
So if I could take back 3 things
for you all to remember when
we're thinking about this
legislature, this legislative
that in the future is we have to
serve at a population level. We
have to serve high quality
directed models that are
evidence-based, and we have to
have families complete them so
that they receive the full array
of services.
So with that, I will start with
the Legistat brief. I just
wanted to give us an overall
view of how to think about this.
So when we're talking about home
visiting, this brief is a subset
of home visiting is Medicaid
home visiting, which is a
funding source. We have several
funding sources in New Mexico
that deliver home visiting
statewide. We have general fund.
We have early childhood trust
fund dollars. We have McVee
dollars and hopefully if
If we can do better, we can
bring in a lot of Medicaid
dollars without having to really
increase state investments and
get those federal matches that
we can serve at a population
level with the investments we've
made today.
So on that very first page
you're going to see a chart that
shows early childhood
investments across the entire
system for the last few years,
you can see an FOI 12, we are
investing a little under $200
million in this system. This is
across all early childhood, and
as of the current fiscal year,
we're close to $800 million. So
that is really significant
investment that you all have
made in this system so that we
can make sure families are safe.
Safe, healthy, and stabilized.
Now, the chart below that,
you're gonna see several colored
lines. You're gonna see the red
line at the very bottom, which
is the number of families that
were serving with Medicaid home
visiting today. You're gonna see
the yellow line, which is the
number of children and families
we're serving with other state
revenues. So it's really the
yellow line plus the red line
for our population that we're
serving now.
The purple line is one cohort of
families that are Medicaid born
eligible. So that could be the
possibility of the families we
could reach using those federal
funds. And then the top blue
line is estimates of a total
birth cohort. So really what we
want to get is the difference of
yellow plus red to reach that
purple line in the future, using
federal dollars. Right now for a
home visiting for every one
state fund dollar that we put
in, we
Match about $3.15 in federal
revenues that we would bring in
on top of that dollar to deliver
these services.
If I could turn you to the next
page.
We're gonna talk a little bit
about those models that we
talked about earlier. So not
only do we want to reach more
families using federal monies,
but we also want to target
models that make the differences
that you all are investing in.
So we have a couple of things on
this chart.
We have the models that are
Medicaid eligible. So I wanna
kind of focus on, focus it on
this little bit. Not every home
visiting model is eligible to
receive federal funds. The feds
have to tell us that these are
evidence-based models they have
to approve it and then we can
reimburse for that. So certain
models like you may wonder,
first born, that's a local grown
model that's very popular in the
state. The feds won't recognize
that model at this time, so it's
not eligible.
For Medicaid revenues. But all
of the um models that you see on
the bottom of that page 2 are
written into our state waiver.
They're eligible for federal
revenues and there's a check
mark next to them on what they
deliver in the outcomes. So for
instance, on that very first
one, child first shows outcome
changes in maternal health,
school readiness, and linkages
to referrals. So when you're
thinking about your local
communities and the outcomes.
Do you want to change? Think
about these models and focus on
the models that you're looking
at changing in your community
and suggests, you know, help
your providers think about these
models to delivery for those
outcomes.
On the chart to the right on the
top side of the page, you're
gonna see um what some of these
models do to reduce maltreatment
and I want you to think about
this when we're thinking about
child protective services, and
we know that we have double the
repeat maltreatment rates in the
country. If we could deliver
some of these models with high
quality and fidelity, we could
do a big dent into reducing that
repeat maltreatment to closer to
the national average. So this is
a very strategic.
opportunity that we have to
really help reduce risk in the
state.
If I can turn you to the next
page, page 3.
You're gonna see another chart
that shows what we're doing with
Medicaid referrals.
An eligible population. So
you'll see in fiscal year 23
this blue chart, about 10,600
families were eligible for
Medicaid home visiting services
in FY 23.
And the MCOs referred about 6500
of those families to providers,
and we were able to engage 440
of them into actual services. So
that's a big gap difference.
The next few pages give you some
um data on things that we like
to monitor for high quality
fidelity, so the number of
visits we want to make sure that
if families are receiving home
visiting, that they're receiving
them frequently and in person.
We want to make sure that
they're receiving their family
goals so that these programs are
making a difference.
So what are the challenges? Why
can't we reach this goal? We
have the state investment to do
it. We've had the models written
into the waiver, so why can't we
get that 400 up to 10,000.
What's our barriers? Our
barriers are mostly system
barriers to help providers get
to that point. So I want to note
that Medicaid home visiting is
not a necessarily easy funding
financial model for these, a lot
of them are nonprofits, so
previously, these were contracts
that were receiving from the
state and you get your money up
front, you deliver the services,
and that's your business model.
For Medicaid reimbursement, you
have to be certified by the
MCOs. You have to deliver.
For one of these specific
models, you have to deliver the
service and then you have to
bill Medicaid and wait for that
reimbursement to come in. That's
a different business model. And
if we're going to do this, we
need to provide the support and
wraparound services for
providers so that they can make
their business models work with
that adjustment of cash flow.
We also need to make it easier
for them to become Medicaid
providers. It's really hard to
become a Medicaid provider. You
have to first get approved
through HCA, then you have to
negotiate with each of the MCOs.
The paperwork can be burdensome.
So there's some work we can do
to kind of streamline that
process so that these smaller
and mid-size providers can do
those processes.
The main Medicaid providers we
have now in the state are big
providers and they're people
like UNM Health Sciences, of
course, UNM Health Sciences can
navigate the MCOs and Medicaid
billing, right? But maybe what
some of your real providers,
that's not the same level of
infrastructure, so they need
support in that matter.
Also, if we're asking them to
move to a different curriculum,
then they're delivering now that
has a cost to it, and we should
be supporting them in providing
the transition to that new cost.
We shouldn't be asking the
providers to bear that cost in
that model if we want them to
move into these evidence-based
or promising practices,
businesses.
Um, other recommendations in
this report, um, is the billing.
Billing can be burdensome,
right? these providers may have
never billed Medicaid, may have
never been a health care biller.
That's not necessarily an easy
system to navigate.
So if we could do some type of
centralized building to take off
that burden. Those are the
things that providers need if we
want them to deliver these
services with Fidelity evidence
and to the state. So a lot of
them are infrastructure needs,
but we're heading in the right
direction.
So you'll notice on the very two
back pages, there's a chart of
the previous legisstat hearings
that we've had, the
recommendations that the
legislature has made to the
executive and what we have done
to complete some of those
recommendations. Some of them
are in the works, some of them
have been completed. Some of
them we need a little bit more
work forward on. So, for
instance, previously we only had
two models of eligible for
Medicaid services, and we
recommended we need more.
need a bigger choice and so
former models were added to the
waiver and that that was a
recommendation that came out of
this committee and has been
completed. And then the last
chart shows you the
recommendations that I just
talked about now so that
hopefully when we have our next
leggistat here in US can
continue to follow this process
on this recommendation and see
our progress going forward. With
that, I will turn it over to the
secretary.
Oh.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Yes, good. Good morning. It's
wonderful to be here with all of
you and to be able to talk about
home visiting. Um, I want to
thank Kelly, um, for her
leadership and support and
really being a partner and
helping us navigate what she has
described here as a very complex
and complicated system, but a
very important system to New
Mexico families. I do have a
PowerPoint, um, that I have for
you and uh before I do that, I
also want to
Oh, do this one.
OK.
I'm over here now, uh,
to thank all of you, the
legislative Finance Committee
for and probably HAFC and Senate
Finance for pushing us, for not
only pushing us but supporting
us and with the 2 million you
gave us to create an intake and
referral system for home
visiting. I'm happy to report
that system is live, uh, as of
Monday, and I'm also really
pleased for the $1000 that you
allocated to us to do specific
um outreach with media.
And advertising to make sure
that families know what Kelly
shared, the benefits of home
visiting. Home visiting is for
everybody. If we want it at a
population level, then people
have to see home visiting as
Like kindergarten, like
everybody wants it, everybody
needs it, and home visiting is
something that supports parents,
um, families, uh, from the time
they learn that they're
pregnant, um, all the way till
their child enters kindergarten.
So it is a fabulous program and
we are deeply, deeply committed
at the, um, the governor, uh,
is, um, very clear. We want
universal home visiting in this
state before we end our term.
And so we have a big job to do,
but we know we can do it because
we have your support.
So the first thing I just want
to share, I'm going to highlight
three things that I believe
cover what Kelly has laid out as
concerns, and I'm hoping that
we've addressed them. We have
addressed some, but we have a
long way to go, um, and I'm here
to hear your questions and get
your thoughts of how we move
this system forward. First, I'm
going to talk about how we are
improving outreach recruitment
and enrollment. How we're
leveraging Medicaid for all
eligible families have to thank
Secretary Armijo and her
incredible team at the
Healthcare Authority who are
Parts side by side, shoulder to
shoulder with us in this effort
to expand Medicaid funded home
visiting and enhancing the
quality of the statewide home
visiting system, which Kelly
talked about, and we'll talk a
little more in depth.
The exciting news that we can
all celebrate is every county in
New Mexico now has a home
visiting program supporting
families. On the next page,
which is very hard to read, um,
so I was looking at them this
morning, uh, but hopefully you
can see.
Some are very small. The number
of funded slots. Some counties
have more providers than others,
but this is something for us to
celebrate. This was not how the
map looked a few years ago, and
today we have 39 home visiting
providers in the state of New
Mexico.
The data that Kelly shared, and
she gets data from our data
system and so it's, it's a
little, it's a little different
and more promising, I hope that
you'll see year over year, the
department is making progress in
reaching more families. We
completely agree with the LFC
and Kelly and the entire
community. We need to be
reaching more families. But we
are in fact reaching, um,
almost 7800 children as of 24,
uh, and you can see a little
Under 6, 7000 families.
I'm also excited to share that
the family connects model, which
Kelly referenced on that page of
evidence-based models. Berna Leo
County, it was certified this
year. That has been a long time
in the process, longer than any
of us would have wanted, but
it's exciting and 336 families
have received that universal
light touch. But because they're
now certified as a family
connects International, a New
Mexico family connects, um,
international county, we can
expand.
All of Berna Leo, where we know
half of the births in the state
happen, those family connects
nurses who meet with that family
maybe 2 or 3 times, then connect
them, uh, hopefully to one of
our other long term
evidence-based models.
Department of Health is our
strong partner in implementing
the Family connects model and I
want to thank them and, and, and
grateful for their leadership.
So how are we improving
outreach, recruitment and
enrollment.
The new home visiting referral
portal. Any one of you sitting
here today, if you know somebody
who, gosh, they really want home
visiting. I've sat in front of
this body a few times that
you've asked me, how does
someone get into home visiting?
How did they get it? And I've
given you, well, we have
providers and answers and this,
this thing is slick. You get in
there, you do a quick
self-referral and you get all
the choices in your county of
who is a home visiting provider
in that county.
You could select a provider of
your choice. You'll see on the
next, uh, model, but, um,
Yeah, the next page kind of
walks you through it. But you
could also say, I'm not sure.
And on that, when you see all
the providers, you'll be able to
click on their website, learn a
little bit more about them,
where their office locations
are, but when you say, I don't
really know, I see all these
providers. I don't know much
about them. You say I don't have
a preference. Your referral goes
into an open queue.
Every home visiting provider in
that county gets access to that
queue and can pull down that
referral. They can start, um,
working on, um, enrolling you,
calling, getting you enrolled.
So families can self-refer,
third parties can sell for fur,
and of course, our home visiting
providers. But this is, this is
the way now to get into home
visiting. It's also connected to
our overall am I eligible site,
which is where families can
enroll and apply for childcare.
They can learn about pre-K and
they.
about early intervention.
So this is exciting. We, we, uh,
we released it on Monday. We've
had 53 referrals come into the
system. 15 of those are now in
the, um, have been acknowledged,
accepted, and the provider is
enrolling them. So immediately
from that referral they go into
the data, the database, the home
visiting database, and now
they're in the system.
There's no other way for the
home visiting providers to get
families into the UNM database,
uh, the data system. They're our
partner in, um, collecting and
analyzing our data. And so
everything is going through the
referral. This is exciting. This
is a celebration moment for all
of us. And I really want to
thank you all because you pushed
us, but you also funded us to do
this. And I also want to thank
the team at ECECD and UNM who
worked very diligently for the
last year, uh, to make this a
reality. So I hope you all get
on there to
Am I eligible on UNM or am I
eligible on ECECD. If you know
somebody who's interested in
home visiting, you might be
interested yourself in someone
you know, check it out and
you're gonna, it's, it's an
amazing opportunity for us here
in the state to be able to be
more transparent and more
streamlined in our processes.
You were right when you were
asking me, this is complicated.
I think Representative
Armstrong, you're like, why is,
why are we, why are more
families not able to get access
and it was more opaque. You
know, I have to go here.
here and people don't have time
for that. So this now gives them
direct access.
We also realized, and you helped
us with this $1,000,000 you gave
us to better support home
visiting. We need healthcare
champions. They're the best
referral source. An OBGYN, a DA,
a social worker, a nurse
practitioner. So we put out a to
the whole community, we said
nominate your favorite
healthcare champion, somebody
who has been amazing in home
visiting and referring to home
visiting and also our family
infant toddler program.
And we we had a lot of
applications. So we decided we
couldn't just pick one. So we
picked one from each part of the
field. So we have a doula, a
social worker, a nurse
practitioner, and a physician.
We celebrated them. We, they are
now going to be our
testimonials, our voice, our
mouthpiece for why home visiting
is the most important thing a
family can engage in, uh, and to
have those better outcomes that
Kelly referenced earlier. We're
going to support major medical.
references so that the
information in these
testimonials will be shared that
everybody will become part of
the home visiting and our family
infant toddler work as well. But
that is another outreach effort.
The baby showers we've talked
about in the past, you can see
there, we had great
participation, wonderful
opportunities for families to
enroll. We had 371 families
actually referred and 150 were
referred to other services. It
was a great way for the
communities to come together.
You can see all the different
locations.
Leveraging Medicaid is our
number one priority this year. I
wanted to let you to know that
You've told me, you've said it,
and you're absolutely correct.
We have looked at the data,
we've shared with Kelly and
Charles. We know, as they,
they've known and we've all
known, we're leaving 18 to $20
million on the table, federal
dollars, because we don't have a
strong Medicaid claiming system.
So we had to put the, the rubber
to the road this year and the
home visiting programs who
already are, uh, first we're
meeting monthly with HCA with
the Healthcare Authority, and
that has been phenomenal. We do
have, we're still waiting for
rates on some of the new models,
safe care, Healthy Families
America, Family Connects, and I
think that's it, yeah,
uh, on those three models, um,
and we're just looking to see
where the rates will be set on
the others, but that should be
coming shortly based on our
conversations within the next
few months. We've also improved
the technical assistance
manuals. I think those can be
improved further. I think the
billing manual is a help, but it
probably needs to be brought to
what Kelly's point was. The
people who are doing home
visiting really need
To have a stronger TA and
directly on how to do the
billing and how to do the
claiming and for us to think
about Medicaid as a layered
approach. We have the Federal
McVe dollars maternal infant
early childhood home visiting.
We have our state general fund.
We have the trust fund, and we
have Medicaid. I think we've
been too siloed thinking over
here Medicaid funds, and that's
how we're funding families, but
it's really all in because 82%
of our families right now in the
home visiting system are
Medicaid eligible. So,
You know, if it, if they're in a
nurse family partnership, they
had to have enrolled at 28
weeks. So they may not be able
to get the Medicaid funding. But
the healthcare authority asked
for postpartum for like parents
as teachers. We've seen an
uptake, um, in that area because
now we can claim. I'm getting
too technical, but anyway, we
did build a Medicaid claiming
unit, a module within our home
visiting system. We have 7
providers using it. Only one is
truly using it in a true
electronic form.
More work needs to be done
there, both with ourselves and
our partners at UNM and the next
3 pages or I think 3 pages,
you'll see, we put this
requirement in their contracts
this year.
Where we hear you and we put it
in their contract because if we,
we don't hold them accountable,
I can't get the medic, we can't
get the Medicaid dollars to come
in to the home visiting
programs. So if they're a
category one provider, which
means they're credentialed with
the MCOs, they've gone through
their HCA certification. They
have to claim Medicaid first for
every eligible family. Now, one
wrinkle that we could
potentially have is that when
their credential, their
credential to serve a geographic
area. So they may be a, a
Medicaid.
Visiting provider that serves
multiple geographic areas, but
they're only credential through
that MCO for Bernalio County. So
we're going to work with HCA and
our home visiting providers, but
we want them to be the payer of
first resort, as it, as it
should be. Category 2 are our
home visiting programs that are
offering evidence-based
programs, but haven't gotten on
the journey. They're not on the
path. They, they're thinking
about it and they want to do it,
but they're a little scared and
they don't know what that path
is. So we've told them
that by
December, they need to become
enrolled as a Medicaid home
visiting provider and we're
going to support them in that.
By next June, they have to be
contracted with each of the MCO
organizations. So first they
have to go through HCA then to
the MCO and then begin to build,
um,
For reimbursable services by
next July. Now, that timeline
may not sit well with all of
you, but we felt that it was, it
was, it's been a jolt for sure
to the system and we know that
we have to push in hard on
technical assistance and support
both with HCA and ECECD.
Then we have our providers who
are not using an evidence-based
model, and we have told them to
move to either an evidence-based
model or to a promising practice
which is first born. So that is
the journey that those providers
are on for this year with our
support, with our technical
assistance providers and with
HCA and apply for model
certification by next June. So
we need to see them or going
towards first born.
The final category R is
firstborn. Our wonderful New
Mexico uh developed New Mexico
grown first born model, and we
know that that, um, that model
is under evaluation. They're
working to get it to become, as
Kelly said, an evidence-based
model. So we're just putting it
out there, letting them know
we're acknowledging that. We're
here to support that. Once they
do become an evidence-based
model that they will have to
follow the path to
credentialing.
My final points I want to
address are enhancing quality.
Kelly already talked about this
expanding the number of
evidence-based models.
And transitioning to paying by
child. I heard this from day one
when I got here that families
were serving. I, I remember on
my spring tour, I went to Las
Vegas and I met with a family at
the first born program there and
it was a mom who just had a baby
and she had two little ones,
under 5. So here is a home
visitor serving this family with
children along this age range
and getting one rate for that
family. Well, clearly they've,
they're doing a lot more than
just one family. So now we would
be paying them for all three
children.
This is national best practice,
and we're excited about this
move. And I think the provider
community is, but there's been a
lot of changes we rolled out and
so there is, um, there's
opportunities here for us to
continue to clarify and support
in moving forward. Establishing
direct relationships with the
national model offices. I have
meetings with all of them next
month. We're going to enter into
deep partnership agreements. One
reason that states use
evidence-based models is because
you know you get the support of
the national office. We can
focus our energy
On those category 3 programs, 2
and 3, getting them on the
Medicaid journey, and improving
our communication. This is
something that I think we have
not done a good job with our
home visiting community. We've
missed opportunities to be clear
and explicit in the direction
we're heading. We've made
assumptions that have left the
field feeling a little, again,
jolted by the changes, but we
are meeting monthly. We're
having an in-person meeting in
September and it's gonna be,
we're gonna be talking about the
problems that that they're
encountering.
solution-oriented, working
towards solving the challenges.
The other thing that um Sarah
Dents noted in her, in the LFC
evaluation of home visiting was
that we've been talking about a
cost model for home visiting for
years. We finally completed it.
What you'll see here on this
page is the 100% of cost for
each of these different models.
We do not have the revenues in
our budget to fund at 100%. The
LFC also told us don't fund at
100% because there'll be no
incentive to go to Medicaid.
Again, that layered funding
approach. So this year, the good
news is our funding formulas
were equitable. We used the cost
model to set our rates for
different models at different
percentages.
When we, so that is a good path
forward.
Every program, I think there
were 2, but every other program
received an increase on their
per child, um, rates. There were
a couple and there were
different reasons for that that
didn't.
But we took a hard look at
enrollment.
We were they were they at 80%?
Uh, where were they in their
home visiting? Uh, we looked at
the quality of the programs that
they were offering and decisions
were made, but we used the cost
model as our benchmark for
determining what different
programs got based on the home
visiting modeling curriculum
they were offering.
So with that, I will close and
stand for questions. Thank you.
All right, got any questions
committee members,
Representative Army Hill I knew
you were first on the list, so.
You raised your hand before they
even sat down.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, chair.
Uh, Secretary Gruginski, I know
that we had spoken, um, before,
and I, I do have a lot to say
and, and many questions.
So I'd like to start off by
saying um last week, Secretary
Casades.
Secretary Casades indicated that
the problem with the legislature
is that we do not understand
Maslow's hierarchy of learning.
So I look at uh around this room
to educators, um, uh, social
service workers, and I would say
we fundamentally understand
Maslow's hierarchy of learning.
And with that, I'm going to wear
that hat today as an early
childhood education.
educator and a special ed
educator. And when we talk about
the fit program and being able
to provide fit services now for
25 years of my career, I would
say that my biggest concern is
funding for these programs. I
believe I shared with you that
the majority of the fit programs
are working in the red.
And um we are doing that
primarily because there is a
model that has been rolled out
without the support of that
model. I don't know that you are
aware, um, but we were made
aware at the um last summit last
month of service assignment
decision pyramid for child
needs. Are you aware of that
pyramid?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Harmil, I know that
that's not resonating, but if
maybe if you describe it, I may.
Understand it. I know what it
references was described to all
service providers is that um
when you meet with a family, you
will have certain levels of
services that you are to
provide, and I want to remind
everybody these services are
under IDEA. Is that correct?
Yes, that is right, Mr. Chair.
So we follow the federal
guidelines for provision of
services with children with
special needs.
And on this pyramid, it was
explained to us that we as
providers will decide the number
of services we will be given to
families.
For me as a practitioner, speech
language pathologist. I cannot
ethically do that because I know
that the service provision of
children and how we provide
those services is not presented
by the provider but rather in
accordance with the family. Am I
correct with that, Mr. Chair,
Representative Parmio, yes, you
are correct.
So, in essence, what has
happened to our service
providers when given this
direction is that if you have a
high level of need, then we are
to instruct, instruct the
families that they can have all
of these services, occupational,
physical, and speech therapy as
well as developmental services,
which may be once a once a week.
If they have a medium level of
need, then we are to offer them
2 services a month.
And if they are to have a
moderate level of need, then we
can drop down to one service a
month.
I want to remind everybody that
when we are providing these
services, they have been
identified as children with
special needs, and now they fall
under the federal guidelines of
IDEA.
So when we pass out a pyramid of
service development and our
programs have followed that with
Fidelity. What you now have is
limited number of services for
children within who will be
entering our special education
system in in the school
districts.
Um, who definitely don't follow
this pyramid of service delivery
model because that would be
illegal.
And um they're receiving less
services. So what providers have
then done is they've had to let
their therapists go.
Because they're not providing
those services and therapists
can quickly move to the schools
who pay a whole lot more because
we have not kept up with
reimbursement services in the
FIT program. So we are now
working at a detriment for our
home visiting program for the
most vulnerable children,
children with special needs. And
so this of course has left a
deficit.
My question to you.
After that very long winded
explanation is we're moving
service delivery models, not
just for the fit program and not
just for home visiting programs,
um, but globally for all
programs including firstborn.
How are we going to support them
in doing that? I'm also a
business owner for 25 years, and
I know that easily does not
happen. Becoming a Medicaid
provider is not easy to do. It
takes 6 months, 4 to 6 months to
do that. And I have been told,
will you agree to that when you
sign signed this contract and I,
I will say we've had a contract
for 25 years and have been the
only service provider in our
area. Of course, we agreed to
that because we service
Child
But that doesn't make it so
simply because we we've signed a
contract. How do we change our
whole um business model.
Um, because we simply signed a
contract and what support
services, are we going to
receive to be able to change
that business model. Not only
that, if we have not been
billing Medicaid before.
It is a whole paradigm switch
within these agencies. A whole
different documentation system
that must happen. So, can you
detail the the services that
these providers are going to
have to switch in this paradigm.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Harramillo, um, thank you for,
um,
Your comments. I do need to go
back and of course talk with the
team about this pyramid of
service provider, providing, um,
I am more familiar with how
we're working on the, um,
routines-based interventions and
making sure that we're not
sending a lot of folks into
families' homes, but really
being able to be more
intentional and, um, that's a
model that I helped DC move
towards what I was the assistant
superintendent of early learning
there and, um, you know, fit
like home visiting. These are
All kind of the systems within
our overall prenatal de5 system,
but I can assure you that, um,
the governor and myself, Mariana
Padilla, who's with us here
today, Sandeep Patel is our
acting division director for
family support Early
Intervention, Deputy Secretary
Michaelson, Sarah Michaelson,
uh, we are absolutely committed
to understanding and supporting
each provider where they are
because you're pointing out
exactly we have small operators
who are serving possibly 50.
Children and we have ones who
are serving 300 children. And so
what we've realized over the
last 6 months is RTA has to be
more individualized like you all
individualize for children and
families. And so that's the
commitment that I can make to
you, that that is the road we're
on. Those services that a
provider needs or technical
assistance or professional
development are going to look
different for each provider and
I think our errors that we've
had is kind of created, talking
about fit
Providers talking about home
visiting providers as a monolith
and each of you and each of them
are unique and the communities
they serve are unique. So that's
the commitment that I will make
to you and bring back to you
exactly how we're going to do
that and the way that we're
going to roll out, um, the TA.
The other thing that we are
doing is we have modeled the
whole system, cost modeled the
whole system and the legislature
will receive a report soon on
our five-year finance plan.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, uh,
for that.
Requirement, but in there is
exactly what you're talking
about. If we're asking providers
to do these things, what is the
cost? What are the things that
we have to make sure are built
in to our rate so that you can
deliver that model. So those are
the things that I can give you
today and know that we'd come
back for a further conversation.
I want to, uh, Mr. Chair, I'd
also want you to look at the
fact that um service provision
in each area is not equal. So
when I provide services.
In Sooto County. I, um, leave my
office in Socoto and I traveled
68 miles to Alamo to provide a
service, and then I travel
another 102 miles to my next
service provision to provide
those services. Our county is
vast, and I know we are not
reimbursed for travel. And, um,
so we, yeah,
you didn't know that. I didn't
know that. We are not reimbursed
for travel.
We are reimbursed by the visit.
So if I go to Alamo and nobody
is home.
Then I eat all of my travel
time.
And um when we are providing
services in large, vast areas
that does have an effect.
My company, thankfully, still
pays me for my travel time.
I know they aren't reimbursed
for that. So those are the
instances that I told you, fit
programs are running in the red.
I know this B program is running
in the red. And how often can we
say to these providers, yes, but
it's about the children.
It is about the children, and
they're running in the red, but
there's not many employees that
say, I will run in the red and
don't pay me for that service.
And yet, the state is asking
providers to do that. And many
of these agencies are open
because of love, because they
are committed to children, and
we need to be able to provide
love right back to them so that
we can continue to provide
services to the children of New
Mexico who are 50th in this
nation.
And who need to be able to grow.
And if we're going to see
changes in our public school
system, we need to start here
and we need to invest here and
we need to understand the
logistics of rural education and
rural home visiting. Thank you
very much, Secretary Groginski,
thank you, Mr. Chair, for that,
for my time.
Next time let him sit down
before you uh.
Get on the Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, uh, secretary, and of
course our staff are competent
staff. So appreciate you. Um,
Secretary, thanks for all your
work. We were just talking a
little bit here about the
complexity of rolling out this
huge program and, and doing it
sometimes while you're flying as
we were talking, thinking this
is crazy busy, but for good
purpose. All that being said,
Mr. Chairman, let me just ask,
curious, how did the conference
go, Secretary?
And um or at Bishop's Lodge
recently. Did you come out with
any new ideas, any new outcomes
on that? Can you briefly tell me
about that and then I just have
a couple of small points, Mr.
Chairman, or maybe questions and
I'll move on.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Rodriguez, yes, the
governor's, uh, Governor Lujan
Grisham's early childhood
summit, uh, was fantastic. We
had 200 people, um, Adrian spent
most of the day representative
Chatfield, Charles and Kelly
were with us among so many
others in the early what we call
Senator Padilla in the early
childhood ecosystem that is so
important to lifting up all
families across the state. What,
what we have is all the amazing
notes from the 25.
that did action planning for 2
hours around things like what
we've talked about here today.
How do we get a well compensated
and credentialed workforce. How
do we raise the quality? How do
we make sure we have the supply.
So those notes are being
compiled and a report will be
released on the summit. Uh, also
looking at the issue of what is
universal access mean? What does
it mean? So each table took up
that question, and it was very
powerful, I think, to, to start
looking at those notes so you
can look for a report on that
here in the coming months.
OK. Thank you, but in a
nutshell, nothing specific that
you can give us like in a small
brief uh on a, any final new
ideas that we may be looking
forward to looking at.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, such a great
question. Um, there were a lot
of great ideas that came from
the panelists. We had a panel of
families representing all
different parts of New Mexico,
and I think they gave us a lot
to think about in terms of how
are we designing a family
centered early childhood system,
they, they spend a lot of their
day navigating between all of
our different programs, whether
it's a school, get child to
school now they need after
school, they need another
smaller baby at a different
childcare center, so they
We talked a lot about the
challenges they have and they'd
like to see us, you know, as a
state, um, create a more family
centered early childhood system.
Our business leaders gave us
some fantastic ideas about
public-private partnership and
how we can work with our
business community to expand
access um to to childcare and
that it is a it is a key issue
to pay our early childhood
professionals more so that we
can draw down more of the
workforce Investment Act
dollars, the Apprenticeship
dollars, uh, because they are
higher paying jobs.
You know, they're high demand
jobs, we all know that, but the
pay that they're getting doesn't
necessarily put them in the
sweet spot of what the workforce
boards are looking at, though
they all know that without the
childcare, without those
individuals there, they won't be
able to expand their businesses
and get the workforce they need.
So those were some of the, the
high level ideas and then we
also had two national experts,
Dr.
Jack She and Dr. Cynthia
Osborne, um, who spoke very much
about
asking them to deliver quality
care to families, many of them
in high stress and high need if
they're not well taken care of,
will be hard for them to take
care of, um, and to do the high
level thinking and variability
that they need as they approach
and and connect with families
who have very different needs,
even though they're offering the
same model. So those are some of
the ideas that I'm remembering
right off the top of my head,
but I'll, I'll look forward to
talking more with you. OK, thank
you, secretary, and we'll be
looking forward to seeing that
report with the information.
Thanks again. Uh, just Mr.
Chairman, a couple of points,
um, um, only because we get
these questions directly from
providers and, and of course we
look to you for for answers. So
let me ask you this, um,
apparently there's some concerns
about providers not getting
their answers on what is
required now that you went to
this new system, um, in uh per
family funding to per child
funding, for example, and so.
So, um, because of that,
apparently there, there needs to
be some clarity on the
communication to providers on
the requirements for funding,
for example, to make it more
clear, a family of 3 kids. Now
you're, you went to funding for
each child instead of 2 per
family.
And so the providers don't know
what that means, how, because, I
mean, it's so many hours are
gonna require more hours are
going to be required per child.
How is that supposed to be
billed so that they can have
that information uh properly.
Can you tell me a little bit,
secretary, Mr. Chen.
Mr. Chair, Senator Rodriguez,
thank you for that question.
It's, it's an excellent question
and we know we, we did roll this
out in June and you know, to
implement the staff have worked
on new invoicing templates. I
believe we're holding office
hours on the invoicing process.
If not, we will be, uh, because
these questions have come up. We
did do office hours in July and
again in August, but in August
we were focused more on the
referral portal, um, but.
The the the those questions are
good and we do need to update
our standards to reflect this
change in policy to pay by child
around what you're describing of
the number of minutes and hours.
If they're using an
evidence-based model, that's the
other thing we need to clarify
in our standards. That's what
you follow. You follow there and
to successful implementation of
that model. I think for our
standards based um and our first
born, they have questions and
we're gonna work to get those
answered here very shortly, so
thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. And,
and I would think that you would
also be doing that around the
language apparently there's some
confusion on the language
requirements around billing
Medicaid. Now that you're moving
towards building Medicaid, um,
there's the language
requirements, there's some
confusion there, um, some
providers don't know, maybe all
I don't know, but they don't
have the clarity on this
language. So can you work on
that, um, Madam Secretary, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Rodriguez.
Absolutely, and I do want to
recognize, um, and may maybe you
all are not aware, but Christy
Romero, who has been our lead of
our family's first Bureau, uh,
for many years, when we had, and
I will just tell all of you, we
have had entire turnover in the
home visiting um the um the
division director for the
division, the bureau chief for
home visiting and the home
visiting supervisor are all new.
Sandeep's sitting in an acting
role, but we created the family
foundations Bureau. So we merged
families first.
And home visiting under Christy
Romero's leadership and they are
doing a fantastic job. John
Acuna, who's been in the program
a long time, was promoted to
supervisor and so between them
they are working closely with
the providers, but you raised an
excellent points and we will
follow up.
OK. Thank you very much for that
and truly it's a, it's a way to
um to see and follow how the
system can be stabilized as it
evolves. It's been a huge
endeavor from the very beginning
and we understand there's bumps
here and bumps there, but more
than anything, we need to see as
we continue to work together, we
need to see a continued
improvement in delivering more
services for our children and
families, and thank you so much
for all your work, Mr. Chairman.
That's all I have.
Thank you. We do have a big
list, so there's probably about
another 8 people on the list,
Madam Secretary, you have to
keep your
Answer is short and to the point
that represented Armstrong,
represents small woods, sheer
Dixon Garcia, Padilla, Garrett
and Schendo.
That's our list. Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only
have 8 questions.
8 so
I'll consolidate, but thank you
for your presentation. So I just
want to read just to to put
everybody on the same page that
we have around uh a little over
20,000 births, 15, a little over
15,000 of those are on our
Medicaid births and home
visiting is serving.
Um, around
5700.
And 400 those are Medicaid. So
I'm curious to know if we are
having births of 15 over 15,000
we're only serving 400. How are
we?
Advertising, I'll ask the
question again.
How do we recruiting these
parents if I'm a new parent,
come into town, have a baby.
How do I know about home
visiting?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, thank you for that
excellent question. Um, our data
shows we're serving 7,773
children, so that's, that's
literally in our data system and
so not to take away from the
other numbers, so all the other
numbers on the chart are about
um children and so I just want
to make that point. Um, how are
families learning about it?
Well, now they're going to learn
about it because of the funding
you gave us. We've just released
a huge marketing campaign. The
healthcare champions I talked
about, but also you should be
seeing Bill.
boards, hearing radio spots,
really making sure people know
home visiting is for everyone,
and with the referral portal,
anybody sees that and they learn
we we have to keep getting the
messaging out through our
trusted messengers, but they can
get right on and answer 5
questions and be put into a
queue to get um.
A a referral to a home visiting
program.
OK, thank you for that. The
other, my next question is, um,
First born
Um, is how long have we been
waiting for firstborn to be
recognized as Medicaid
reimbursable.
As Medicaid reimbursable.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, I, I don't, I don't
know, Kelly might know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so the
first RAND study that came out,
I believe is about 12 to 15
years old around this point and
we had submitted that to the
feds hoping that that would meet
the barrier for it to become um
evidence-based. It sat at the
federal level for at least 3 to
4 years on evaluated and then by
the time the firstborn came up
for evaluation, the feds give us
feedback that that study was now
stale.
So the legislature has funded a
new round of firstborn
evaluation that is going on
right now as we speak and we
hope that that will meet the
federal barrier to be able to
have evidence based in the
coming years, so a while.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and, and
Kelly for that explanation. Um,
I'm, I'm looking at the costs.
For uh the on the the sheet that
uh secretary gave us, and it
looks like first born cost per
child is the most expensive, and
there are.
Are there other Medicaid
reimbursable.
Um,
Entities that that we could get
that people could use that could
be reimbursed and why do we keep
pushing first born just uh
question.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Armstrong, I
think because it is a model that
has been very well received with
very positive outcomes. There's
a strong, um, uh.
Support for it. There's a
statewide office um that
supports local programs. Um, it
is, it is not one of the most
expensive models, um, it is, uh.
Put them in alphabetical order.
Um, so it is just a little more
than um.
Partners for a healthy baby and
then the other, so and the other
thing I wanted to point out
about this modeling is that you
can see what drives the cost is
our caseloads and the number of
annual visits, so, um, I think
firstborn is a model that the
state has always felt strongly
about continuing to support and
put our um
efforts behind working in hopes
that they get um to become an
evidence-based model, but it is
a promising practice in our
maternal infant early childhood
home visiting, and it's
recognized through our.
Agency in that manner.
Thank you for that. You're,
you're correct. I misread that
first born and child first
they're complicated to read, so
child first is the most
expensive model.
Um,
The next thing is how do you
plan on, um, I'm getting calls
that, that, that the, the
Uh, ECDCE does not communicate
very well with providers, and
are you working on that and how
do you plan to, uh,
To improve that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong, um,
that, um, we are, we do
communicate well with our
community. We have a every other
week newsletter that the
community knows what is
happening. We hold office hours.
We've held many office hours
with all of our home visiting
programs with office hours this
Friday with our fit providers,
um, our pre-K administrators, we
meet with monthly, um, in
person, and and virtually, so it
is something that I think we do
well, but in any area we always
can improve our communication.
I think these are complicated
and complex matters, so we do
need to take a step back. Our
director of communications,
Micah McCoy is here with me
today. I'm glad he's hearing
these questions because we do
need to think about the ways we
communicate and how to improve
that and make it clear and
precise and be brief in my
remarks. Thank you so much for
that. I appreciate that. Um, Mr.
Chairman and, and Madam
Secretary, can you explain how
and why the funding changed for
existing home visiting programs
this year while the previous
years had seen an increase.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, as I described
earlier, we did use the cost
model um uh as our base for how
we set our rates across models
to make it equitable, uh, and to
make sure because that was not
what was happening before, but
in the in the case of only maybe
two programs, everybody saw an
increase in their per child
rate.
Thank you for that answer and uh
Mr. Chairman, and so are you
basing that on curriculum, not
need?
We we're basing it on, on the,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, on the cost model
that we've been working on for a
couple of years here in the
state.
Thank you for that, um.
How do you plan other than some
of the things that you've stated
on, uh, to expand home visiting
services to accommodate the
growing number of referrals that
programs are receiving, and how
long does it actually take to
implement.
Uh, and, and get this program up
and running, um, in your, is
there a timeline?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, when you say to get
something up and running, do you
mean a new home visiting program
or uh can you, can you
elaborate? Uh yes, I would mean
a new home visiting program
along with how hard it is to get
credentialed and and those
barriers and how are you
planning on um working with all
the entities that be to make
this a smoother transition.
Well, our commitment is to, uh,
again, meet regularly with each
of them and as I said to
Representative Harmeo,
individualize our technical
assistance within these
categories of providers because
I, I think that has been a
mistake that we have made is
just treating all home visiting
providers as one entity and one
thing and they actually have
different needs, so that is one
way and then I think working
with our, with our monthly
meetings with the healthcare
authority looking at where we
can remove barriers to getting
them registered with HCA and
then.
I know HCA is working on a one
credential for the 4 MCOs, um,
we hope and we know that's a lot
of work and we hope that's
coming soon. So it is gonna be a
lot of individualized and
possibly some hand holding to
get people to be able to meet
their contractual obligation,
but we know that's our
responsibility and we plan to
meet it.
Thank you for those answers.
Also, um, you know, New Mexico
is, is.
Twice the national average of
child maltreatment.
And so how are we?
Looking at these models.
And making sure that they're
actually working. How are we
evaluating them to see if
they're working?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong, the,
um, the way that we evaluate
well first the, the national,
the evidence-based models are
evaluated through the national
model offices and we work with
them, but we also are partnering
with and it's a research and
prevention center at UNM to do
some deeper evaluation of our
home visiting system and we're
gonna look forward to hopefully
having some private sector
funding support them to go
further, uh, because you're
right, we need to evaluate. I
know statewide first born, they
may all
evaluate their programs, but it
is important and I think we also
see the outcomes and that's the
other way that we evaluate. We
do the annual outcomes report
and we share that with the
legislature, uh, and those
outcomes are very positive for
the families enrolled.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and what is your vacancy rate in
the um
In this area.
And Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong and
In the agency?
No specifically in, in the
Home visiting.
In uh in the family's
foundations bureau, I will have
to get back to you on that. I
don't have that. I have 13%
agency-wide, but I don't have
the.
The specific bureau. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Small.
Yeah, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you Secretary.
Thank you, Kelly. Uh, you,
Kelly, you're, uh, sort of the
intro and the framework, really,
really helpful for us and very
much appreciate it, uh, and very
much part of Legit, which is
great. Uh, Madam Secretary,
thank you, and it's clear that
there's a sense of urgency and
that, that your entire
department is working um in the
questions and sort of the
interactions just reflect that
we all know this is one of
are, you know,
Top handful, top 1, top 2
strategies for how we improve
our state, um.
That said, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, first question, the
uh
In the, the infant and newborn
care, the slots, it's very hard
to find those slots right now,
right? This is looking on the
childcare. Childcare, yeah.
Um, would the department
consider a sort of a model
connected with home visiting
that sort of had a stipend for
families that looked at that 1st
12 weeks, um, for, uh, so that
that uh parent or that, that
family could uh you know, yeah,
as part of our home visiting a
stipend that goes to the
newborns during that toughest
part to find.
childcare, say that 1st 12
weeks, uh, let's say like a
$4500 stipend.
Would that be something that you
all could consider?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair,
I, I guess I would have to, I,
I, I'm not so a family enrolled
in home visiting would
additionally be given.
$4500 understanding just how
hard it is for families to find
infant and newborn care right
now.
I, I mean, I would have to.
Understand more. I, I, I can't
really I don't think I can
comment on that without talking
with.
Mariana and others and you know
it's, but thank you for, thank
you for sharing that idea and I
think we can.
Definitely get back to you and
you know what that, what that
would look like. I know the
governor, um, as we discussed at
the summit really and our goal
is to have more quality infant
toddler care available so that
families can go to work. We have
huge workforce challenges in our
state and we know that many
people want to both have a child
and work, uh, and so that is,
that has been a focus, but we do
know that home visiting
programs, it would be great if
they had access to more
resources to help a family with.
Diapers and wipes and formula
and other things that they need
in those um in the course of
their home visiting experience,
but I definitely would love to
talk to you more about this idea
and and see what we could.
come up with. OK, thank you.
thank you, um.
Madam Secretary, uh, second, uh,
as we start to think about the
um.
The cost model, can you, and
again, I think I, I want to
acknowledge there's, you know,
we see and hear a great deal of
urgency. You hear from us a lot
of urgency, sort of right back,
right? Um, can you all release
all of the the components to the
cost model uh that you all are
using so that our providers, us
as, as, as legislators that we
can all sort of see, uh, see the
model.
And, and be able to sort of
look, tinker, suggest.
All of that
Mr. Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, yes,
we can, we, we have to release a
report to the federal government
on the childcare cost model. We
did provide some background on
the um home visiting model, but
we can do that and, and as I
said, the, the full system model
will be released here shortly on
the 5 year with the 5 year
finance plan.
Oh, OK, and I apologize for not
turning up. When is that? It,
when do you anticipate releasing
that.
We anticipate that being Mr.
Chair, Mr Vice Chair, I released
in October.
Is there, thank you, is there
any way for that to move up? I
just asked because, you know,
the that cost, I, I can see how
that cost model core to so many
of what the questions are.
As you know,
You know, it's not that long
from August to October on the
other hand to and maybe I would
defer frankly, to Kelly on this,
as we construct budgets.
And with our providers.
Is October appropriate? Is it
too late from a LFC perspective
and knowing I'm putting you on
the spot here a little bit. So
just not holding to anything,
just sort of uh context.
Uh, Mrs May, so October, we, we
will have the ECC budget in
front of you in December, so,
you know, it depends on, you
know, the agency ask if we can
see the cost model and if
they're asking for a rate
increase, I think that's kind of
enough time to decide where
we're we're fitting in the
financial situation, but that is
in the greater context of all of
the things that we're going to
be talking about. Got it that
that's helpful. I think, Madam
Secretary, what I would ask you
is maybe we can get additional
provider.
Input. Great to know sort of
your timeline, maybe there's a
compelling reason to try and
move that up, um.
I just learned about the
feedback. Thank you, Kelly. um,
Mr. Chair, Mr Vice Chair, I
absolutely can look to see if we
can move that up to September,
later in September, and I just
want to say the entire model is
developed.
All with provider input. Lots of
meetings with home visiting
providers, one on one interviews
with childcare providers as well
as surveys, the fit providers,
home is, everybody, that's the
only way you can develop a good
model is to actually talk to
providers. So I just wanna
assure you that what you will
see is something that has been
developed with the community,
not, you know.
In absence of that.
Thank you, Secretary, and I, um,
although this is not sort of my
that I'm in daily, I appreciate
and knowledge that there is you
have kept up in the department,
folks have kept up a regular,
like you said, biweekly
communication that there's a lot
of avenues to communicate, so,
and thank you for that. Thanks
to your team. Um, really quickly
on the um
The the prenatal care visits.
This was a great question that
Representative Armstrong raised
sort of right, you know, right
when that family learns that
they're expecting they begin
going through this process, two
questions related to that. One,
You know, any other things to
add on how we're going to
strengthen that referral program
to, there are other areas in
which sort of prenatal uh that
families interact with,
particularly on the ACA side. So
we have Wick, Snap, others,
maybe that, that folks maybe
through some of the food
programs,
is there, how do we integrate
home visiting into all of those
so that again, the
representative Armstrong's
As soon as that family knows
that they're expecting.
That there is.
Every
Uh, opportunity and push and
support financial or otherwise
for them to get the right model
with home visiting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Vice Chair, such an excellent
questions and excellent points.
I will say that in the new MCO
contracts, they are required
within 2 months of learning a
member is pregnant, of making a
referral to home visiting. So
that's now in their contract.
You should have had a two pager
on the home visiting Medicaid
that HCA and ECECD put together
so much much more clarity for
the MCOs. I'm also gonna be
meeting with the MCO leadership
with HC.
I think here in the next few
weeks, uh, we have to build a
stronger relationship there and
make sure that that system is,
is tight. A recent family
survey, we do a family survey
every year. Wick is the number
one program families know about,
so you're absolutely spot on. We
have to build a deeper
relationship there around the
home visiting um referral. So I
see, we see a great opportunity
there and our family's first
nurses are actually housed with
Wick at many of our Department
of Health offices around the
state. So
Thank you for raising that and
we have to do more in connecting
with um with this referral, this
new referral portal.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Chair. I know there are many
others, uh, Kelly, if we can
look at maybe then specifically
on the wick side, if there's a
sort of a connection and a
follow up there. Thank you,
Secretary, very much.
And you go to Senator Sharon and
that center. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
First, Madam Secretary, when we
started out we talked about and
I can't read my own writing. Is
it Medicaid uh certified or
Medicaid, whatever, people, the,
the providers have to get.
I, I, um, Mr. Chair, I think
Kelly might have referred to,
um, they have to get, I think
certified by HCA and then they
have to get credentialed with
each of the MCOs, so Mr. Chair
and Madam Secretary, what does
that take? How?
How hard is that? Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, uh, uh, Senator
Sher, sorry, the, um,
I know you're not gonna like the
answer. It depends how well the.
Entity that wants to become
certified, completes their
application, gets it in the
process, follows through with
HCA, but I believe it's, it can
be as I mean, I think about 45
days, so 45 days to 2 months to
get through the HCA and then
each of the MCOs has their own
process, so, um, I, I can't
answer on that front, um, maybe
somebody from the healthcare
authority, but we can get back
to you because I, I agree with
you that timeline should be
clear and understood by our
providers, yes.
So,
Do we have an answer?
Uh chair by his chair, um,
center.
Um, thank you. My name is Alex
Castillo Smith. I'm one of the
deputy secretaries for the
Mexico Healthcare Authority. Um,
it takes an average of 21 days
for a provider to enroll in the
Medicaid turquoise Care system.
With the new Medicaid program,
Turquoise Care that launched on
the first of July. There are
contract requirements that
require the MCO's once that
provider is enrolled, they have
up to 45 days. The MCOs to
credential that provider.
As Secretary Gruginski was
saying,
Why it depends.
is because when a provider is
trying to enroll in the Medicaid
system.
it could take longer than 21
days related to the
documentation that we need to
provide or the communications.
This is where the technical
assistance that the secretary is
talking about becomes really
important because we want, we
want them to be enrolled within
those 21 days. We don't, we
wanted to take even quicker if
we can, but as Kelly and the
secretary was describing it is a
it is a new system. It's
A new method and it can be
complicated and so that's why
for some providers it might take
longer than 21 days. Um, but
once they are enrolled, the MCOs
have a contractual requirement
to credential that provider um
within 45 days.
It
So, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary.
But the, but the provider still
has to meet whatever the MCO's
requirements are, right? So
you've got 45 days to
contentulum, or do you have 45
days to make a decision and say
sorry, you didn't get there yet.
So with, with that, what, one of
my concerns is, is the smaller
businesses and, and I think,
Madam Secretary, you said
already that uh was it UNM, OK,
they got credentials, they've
got a whole herd of attorneys
and whatever. OK. But
But a small business in
Shiprock, New Mexico that wants
to do this doesn't have a herd
of attorneys.
Uh, to figure this out.
And, and so my concern there is
if we want this, we have to
reduce the PETA factor. PA a
pain in the uh rear factor.
And uh
In in what I'm afraid of is that
we simply push small businesses
out of the, out of the picture.
They're gone. Uh, so
Presbyterian has it, UNM has it,
nobody else can do it. So we've,
we've taken the local.
People out concern.
Do we have any uh home visiting
programs that have been cut.
Did we have some that existed
and now don't?
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Sheer,
um, yes 2 programs.
Right,
Yeah my son, I think too, um,
when we did, uh, 2, we had, we
did have to terminate their
contracts, yes.
Just because of performance or
results.
Hm, OK. So,
Earlier, I think it was
Representative Armstrong was
talking about
results.
Uh, what, what are we measuring
because you said that it was um.
Uh, key prevention model.
Uh, so what, how do we know we
have a result? Mr. Chair,
Senator Char, um, the things we
look at are the 6 outcomes, um,
and we report on them annually
in our annual outcomes report,
and I'm, I'm gonna, Mr. Chair,
just so if, if you're coming to
my house, do you know that?
How do you, how do I know, uh,
as the parent, how do you know
as the provider that we're
getting anywhere?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Sheer,
um, I, it, it's, I mean, there
is a lot of they do screenings,
they do conversations, they're
they're measuring children using
the ages and stages,
developmental progress they're
looking a thing called the
Piccolo, I don't know what it
stands for, but it looks at that
parent-child interaction and the
strengthening of that
interaction. They're also doing
screenings around maternal
depression. So we're seeing is
there progress making referrals
to help address the areas
identified through those
screenings.
So
Early on, uh,
We talked about 7, and this
might have been Kelly, 7 to 11%
of the people that are in the
program completed the program.
What that tells me is that they
didn't see the worth in the
program, otherwise they'd have
finished. So if you only have
10% of the people that are, that
are actually in it and only
about 4% are actually enrolling.
Did I get that math right
somewhere along the way. So,
not, not many are enrolling and
only 10% are completing.
That tells me that
The parents
Don't see the benefit.
Otherwise they'd stay with it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, I would like
to say that that may be one way
to think about it, um, not all
families need though high
intensity and that's basically
what we had previously was
mostly high intensity programs.
In the new waiver, we added a
new program called Family
Connects, which is a light touch
model which would only have a
few visits and, and would
naturally drop off to where, you
know, high risk families would
probably naturally drop off at
that and then we could direct
those higher need families
hopefully into more
Appropriate model. So I think
that's a system adjustment that
will hopefully help those
completion rates.
And Mr. Chair, if I, if I could
just echo or follow on what
Kelly said. Part of the family
set goals when they enter into a
home visiting relationship and
they have their own goals, um,
as they want to achieve. And so
sometimes families have achieved
those goals, and they may not
have stayed in the program to
where the evidence-based model
says 2 years, but they've
achieved what they wanted to
achieve. So my commitment to all
of you is for us to improve our
data system to get more granular
and like why a family leave.
cause I don't think that we're
giving you the data that you
know, we, we not only you, but
all of us need to understand
about why a family might leave
after 12 months when the model
that they're in to say stay for
2 or 3 years, but.
They achieved what they wanted,
perhaps, or maybe they moved out
of state, but you, you ask a
good question and we will
definitely be looking at this
further.
Well, I
again, Representative Armstrong
asked why we're twice as.
likely to have
Again, I lost the word twice as
bad as everybody else.
So
From that
Starting point, why, why are we
twice as bad and then
How do we
Get un twice as bad.
Mr. Chair, Senator Sheer, I
think it's from what Kelly said
to get to that universal and
what the governors wants a
universal approach. We're not
reaching all the families that
we could reach with these
incredible programs that have
been shown to prevent, prevent,
uh, you know, child abuse, but
also promote healthy family
relationships, so I think that
we, that's the goal that we all
want to achieve. And so we have
to be in more places. You have
to draw down that Medicaid
funding and we have to create
the universal access through our
light touch, family connects.
Build that out and then to these
more intensive models, Child
first is for families
experiencing substance use and
mental health issues that we
have one provider willing to
implement that, but that's our
work and um I think I'm, we're
committed. I'm on the executive
and, and we know that you all
are as well because you've
supported us so well. So I think
that's how we get to reducing
the child abuse. It's truly
investing as we have begun, but
in a universal system.
So, Mr. Chair, that brings me to
my next question 100%, uh.
100% of the families.
That doesn't, it doesn't seem
reasonable to me, but also why?
I mean, we've got some families
in New Mexico that hire nannies,
OK, why do you need to show up?
I mean, you've got a
professional in their house all
the time. Um, but there's also I
believe, and, and I could be
wrong on this.
One of the reasons that we have
this uh child abuse problem is
drug addiction.
Or alcohol or something else.
Um, so those are the folks that
need help, but
But it's the home visit the
right help at that point.
Um,
And, and so I think that the the
goal of 100% misses the mark.
The mark is there's a handful of
people that really need help.
Let's help them.
Um, and then there's another
group of people somewhere in the
middle that need a little bit of
help, the soft touch. OK. Um,
So I'm concerned about the 100%,
100% thing there.
Uh
But when, when we, is, am I
anywhere near logical? So, Mr.
Chair members Committee, we're
not making a recommendation of
100%, um, universal is 100%.
Universal is usually around 80%
of the targeted population and
so our goal would hopefully be
to do 80% of the Medicaid
eligible population, which would
probably be closer to somewhere
around uh 12,000 of the 15,000,
a quick math. So that's, you
know,
Not
We do have to reach enough of a
population level to change the
outcomes for those populations,
and more importantly, we have to
target the models to the
families that those outcomes
produce. So if a family is
struggling with substance use
disorder, putting them in a
model that doesn't like parents
as teachers, doesn't address
substance use disorder. That's
not going to change things. So
the um
Really specific targeting of the
families and the model
curriculum and the fidelity of
that is the only way we're gonna
see this strategy work.
OK, well, I, I agree. I'm just
not sure that.
I'm not sure that we're
Go in that direction.
When, when we started this whole
department, when the whole thing
wasn't this just early
childhood, so it was.
I don't know, after birth,
certainly, uh, child care so
that people could go back to
work, and now we're talking
about pre-born interventions.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Sher, I
think it was established by the
legislature as a prenatal to 5
department, so definitely
prenatally cause most of our
home visiting models start
prenatally, um, and our families
first, um, program also starts
prenatally.
OK.
And then finally, the, the
clarifying information on the
contracts.
Wow, seems to me that that
clarification should have
happened.
Well, before the contract.
But and and so those are just uh
concerns of mine that I'm not
sure we're
I'm not sure we're focused on.
On the issue.
When we're focused on the issue.
So
Thank you.
Senator Woods and then we'll go
to represent Dixon, Garcia
Martinez, Senator Piacendo uh
she already got dela Cruz and
Serana.
Senator Wood.
I wasted some meat
representing Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I have a lot of questions, but I
will try to be very brief, um,
and have secret and Kelly, um,
if your answers can be brief as
well cause I know there are a
lot of folks. Um, I did try to
organize my questions, Mr.
Chair, in um to 3 buckets.
Um, they're not necessarily
going to be linear, um, and I
apologize. But I think my
takeaway from this conversation.
is that our goal.
is to move if we look at page 3
of the ledger stack.
The number of
Medicaid eligible families.
That are served.
Um, the families
that are being served with
Medicaid is 440. Is that
correct?
Give or take. OK. And the target
that we want to get to is 1500
families being served.
With Medicaid dollars. Is that
correct? Per cohort.
Per cohort.
So
21,000 are born every year, and
we want 80% of that 15,000 every
year because home visiting lasts
can last a few weeks, but it can
also last 3 years. performance
measure 15 OK.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon,
you're referring to our
performance measure of 1500 that
were only hitting 440. Um, yes,
so our goal is this year to hit
1500.
Funded by Medicaid, exactly what
you said.
Thank you. And um,
Kelly
We say if all Medicaid insured
families were served by Medicaid
funded home visiting, the state
could draw down up to 24.5
million, um, which would then
free up more funds to serve
other families. Is that correct?
Um, and so if we hit that target
of 1500.
How much of a federal drawdown
would that be?
Yeah.
This is a depends question. It
depends on the model that they
enroll in because that's the
cost of the, and then you would
basically take a third of that
would be federal funds. OK.
Suffice to say it would be a
significant amount of money. OK.
Thank you. Um, and so, Madam
Secretary, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary.
Is ECECD's goal. I just want to
confirm to get to that 1500 this
year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, absolutely.
Thank you. Um, on the map of
funded slots, um, I believe in
the ECECD presentation. Um, I
don't have the page numbers. Uh,
but with the county by county
map.
Could you tell me um what the
difference, do we know the
difference in these counties of
slots that are funded by general
funds or by Medicaid.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, I do have a whole
breakdown that I can provide to
you of where, I mean, what's
fun, which model they use, what
we fund, who's funded by
maternal infant early childhood
home visiting and um which ones
are, I mean.
The Medicaid one is interesting
because really we want them to
use Medicaid as their first
payer, uh, and that's new to the
field as of this year, so that
data might, we, we can talk
about what we have going. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair or Madam
Chair, Secretary. So one of the
things that I was noticing is
Dona Anna, for instance, has um
1100 funded slots. And just to
confirm, a funded slot, does
that mean that there's actually
a child being served?
In a funded slot.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, the um it
means that we've funded them to
serve up to that many children
and we know to the completion
issue that sometimes a child is
in that and they've maybe been,
but then they age out or they
something, but yes, that is how
much we fund them to serve up to
those that many children, yes.
Thank you. And so the other
thing that I was noticing about
Donny Anna, and just as a
reference point for folks that
don't have the map, Bernalio
County is only at 6625 funded
slots. But what was
really interesting to me is that
Dona Anick um had the number of
home visiting providers.
is 5.
And Bernalio County, for
instance, is 7. So I'm
wondering, you know, are you
guys tracking the success of
whatever Donana County providers
are doing and helping the other
counties improve or replicate.
And what do you know what it is
that Donana County is doing that
makes them so much more
successful.
Uh, uh, Madam Vice Chair and
Representative Dixon. Um, so
this just shows there's um
providers there, so this
wouldn't show their success.
This would be more of an input.
This, these are the providers
and this is what they're saying
we can serve. The other thing
I'd point out is some providers
who are in Dona Berna Leo are
also serving other counties
around them, but um, I wanna, I
wanna understand more, I think
what you're driving this is just
an input of saying, hey, we're
Mecca and we.
And serve 3 and 3 350 children,
you know, so, uh, it could be
that they have bigger providers
who are able to take on more
children than in Berna Leo, we
have, uh, we have YDI, we have
other providers, but I think
when we give you that breakdown
by county and models, maybe we
can then have a follow-up
conversation to, to understand.
OK, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Madam Secretary. um.
How many providers are there
statewide?
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Dixon, 39.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
Secretary, how much did CY um
sorry did ECECD revert this
year, uh, in home visiting
funds.
Was there a reversion?
Uh, Madam Chair, um, none, 0.
That's what my team is telling
me, and I'm believing them. OK,
thank you, thank you.
Um, moving on to the, the, um,
questions, uh, Madam Chair,
about, uh, shifting providers to
focusing more on Medicaid funded
slots as opposed to general
fund.
Um,
how many of these 39 providers
have staff, and I think this
kind of goes to what Senator
Sherr was asking, have staff
that are dedicated to billing
and administrative services,
because, you know, when we think
about hospitals and physicians
and, you know, they all have
staff that are trained in how to
do complicated billing and so
I'm just wondering of the 39 do
many or any have staff that just
do billing.
Uh, uh, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Dixon, I will
have to get back to you on that
exact, um, some do, some have
more dedicated staff, but I
think that also speaks to our
need for a layered funding
approach because the state does
need to support those providers
at some level because Medicaid
we all know, doesn't cover the
whole cost, so, um, thank you,
Mr. Chair, um, and secretary.
And so for the layered approach,
two questions, then I guess, um,
what are the incentives that,
that the department's looking
at, uh,
To incentivize the providers to
shift to the Medicaid, uh,
funded. Um, so that's one, and
then, um, is the department also
looking at the recommendation on
page 5 of the Legistat to do a
pilot project, uh, to help
providers with centralized
billing. So to take that off
their plate and make it easier
for them to do that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, we're definitely open
and, you know, want to explore
that and what that might look
like, um, your first question
was, what are we doing to
incentivize so people who are
pulling down the Medicaid
dollars, we are supplementing
that a little bit, not at, not
at the full cost of the model,
but a little bit to incentivize
them to draw down more, um, so
we are already looking at how to
use the state dollars to
incentivize people to claim for
Medicaid.
Does that
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. So does that mean,
and I'm not in this field, so I
don't.
Fully understand all of the
details, but so are they getting
paid extra then?
To draw down Medicaid.
OK. Um,
And um, I think this is headed
toward my last question. Um,
Mr. uh, Chair.
And secretary, um,
Do we know what other states do
for uh what the best practices
are to assist our providers with
drawing down the Medicaid funds.
Is, is that what his
is informing us? Are there other
things that we have not tried?
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, LLC
staff is extensively researched
like how other states are doing
this a little bit more
successfully and some of that
has been going to a lighter
touch model, um, and making the
enrollment period through the
enrollment point through the
MCOs so we get those families
earlier and we know that
administrative support is also a
big hurdle that the state needs
to kind of foot to get providers
there.
Thank you. And, um, and actually
this last question is for Kelly.
Um, on page 6,
under the comments, um.
In the, in the box, in the
chart, it says CYFD was
providing funding to implement
was provided funding to
implement safe care augment or
other evidence-based models to
reduce child maltreatment since
fiscal year 24 and has not
implemented. I was just
wondering if you could expand on
that a little bit, uh, because
I've been asked about Ka and
navigators and, you know, if
we're increasing those positions
and so I'm just wondering how it
ties together.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um, I
cannot speak on the care
providers because that's, I
don't work on that area. I can
tell you what they are. Um, I
don't I have recently spoken to
one of our analysts, and I don't
think the care providers
necessarily expanding as quickly
as we like. Um, as to safe care,
we provided opioid funding to
CYFD in FY 24 to stand up a safe
care augmented, which is a CPS
directed model internally.
And we added that to the waiver
so that CYFD could also get
federal funds to support that,
and that was never implemented
and that money went back.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, nice to see you
again. I have a few questions on
the IFC newsletter it says home
visiting program missing out on
federal dollars and if you turn
to page 5 on your presentation.
It states right here, uh, status
report on action steps 2022 to
2024 and if you go on the bottom
of the dealer says
increased number of families
receiving Medicaid, uh,
Funded home visiting. There is
no action on it.
And then if you go to page 6.
It says
The same thing in Antonio.
Let's start May 2024, 23 it says
increased number of families
receiving Medicaid funded home
visiting services again, and
this is no action and if you
look to the right of that, it
says the number of families who
receive services declined.
In 2024.
Uh
You know, that what, what's
going on? What, what, why are we
dropping instead of improving.
You know, you're, you're, you
got a goal of 1500.
Now we're at 400 and it was at
440.
Can you kind of briefly explain
to me why we're dropping instead
of improving.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, nice to see you as well.
Um, it's.
You're right, it's, it's not
good and it's the work that we
have to do with our home
visiting providers to make sure
that that's some of what I've
discussed today is that they are
going to Medicaid first as their
funder if they are already
credentialed with a Medicaid,
um.
with a Medicaid managed care
organization. Uh, we have to do
better in supporting them and
being able to do that, and as I
said to Representative Dixon, we
are committed to meeting the
1500 goal this year.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman and
Madam Secretary.
Is is your vacancy rate
affecting
The outcome of what we're trying
to do here to get more people on
the program because you know.
I've been hearing everybody ask
the same question. What are we
doing? Where is it going? And to
me personally, just a comment,
me personally, it seems like
we're going backwards on what
we're trying to do here because
we're dropping uh.
People off the list, not
improving people, and at this
rate we're never going to get
1500. That's not gonna happen.
So I would just, I apologize,
there are no slide numbers, um.
Madam Chair, on, on our slides,
but if you look at the slide
with the home visiting, we
actually are increasing year
over year the number of children
we're reaching with home
visiting. So I just want to be
clear there we're not dropping
off in the number of children.
We're just dropping off in the
number of children that are
getting claimed through
Medicaid, which is that's the
number we need to see go up, so
we're not, we're not dropping
the number of children. I just
want to make that clarification.
It's, it's the funding mechanism
that we have to enhance and we
have to do a better job as a
department with our partners at.
HCA and the MCOs and our home
visiting providers, all of us
together, have to do better to
make that number.
Uh, thank you, Madam Secretary,
Mr. Chairman, uh, how many uh
how many care navigators have
been hired by ECECD.
Lately
Madam Chair, Representative
Garcia, we have one car
navigator and she actually just
moved over to our family infant
toddler program to be a regional
supervisor, so we'll be
recruiting for our one FTE that
we have for car and navigator.
Thank you for that, you know,
just to clarify in my mind, how
many should you have and how
many do we have?
So, Mr. Jer, our analyst from
COFD was listening and she just
texted me right now they're a 4
hired care navigators, and there
are 17 posted care navigator
positions on Spo.
Uh, could you run that by me one
more time, please.
R CYFD analyst just text me and
at CYFD, which is where most of
the career positions are housed4
are currently hired and there
are 17 jobs posted currently.
We thank you for one more
question, uh, a year or so ago
we had a meeting in Albuquerque
and there was questions about
people providing services and
not getting paid, has that been
taken care of?
Mr. Chair,
Representative Garcia to my
knowledge, yes, I have not
heard, but if there are any
issues, please make sure
they're, they come to my
attention.
Uh, Madam Secretary, Mr. Chair,
you know, cause you know, people
ask questions on on on the phone
to ask question. This question
is not coming from that. This
question is coming from me
because I know we had that
meeting in Albuquerque. There
was some providers there that
were very unhappy because they
were not receiving their.
Your funds and you cannot keep
on operating if you're not
getting paid, so if you please
look into that to see how many
people aren't getting paid or or
fully paid. I would appreciate
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be
brief.
Um,
You stated
Earlier, uh, when you were
responding to Senator Sherr that
you're going after new families.
My question is why.
Why aren't you holding on to the
families that you initially
have?
Because I think you said that
you're losing up to 50% of those
families.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, um, I
can you I I'm not I.
The, the families on the, on the
warm touch.
You're losing up to half of
those families.
Mr. uh Mr. Chair.
No, um, we are, um, um.
I want to answer your question,
but I, I'm not, we're, we're not
losing family. I think what he
was saying is why are only 7 to
11% completing that the the
statistic that we were.
Oh, I have 50%, so it's even
lower, it's 7 to 11%.
Mr. Jack, could you clarify, are
you looking at a chart that or
what's the data point that
Senator Sher was following was.
The amount of people.
Uh, 7 to 11% are complete.
Um.
I'm not sure what this means.
Um
Your help. But your, your
numbers are the 1500. Let's go
just to the 1500 goal.
How many, how many births?
You, you said earlier I I know
it's in here.
Um, 20,000 births.
And you're out of those 20,000
births you're serving 400.
On the chart on number one, on
page number one.
Your Medicaid births, 15,360.
Medicaid home visiting, 400.
Is that correct? Am I reading
that correct?
Yes, so to clarify the 7-Eleven%
so of the families that we
engage in home visiting enroll
in a program the percentage of
them that meet the completion of
the full curriculum, only 7 to
11% of them meet that point
before dropping out of the
program. So that was that first
number we want them to receive
the full doses so we get the
full outcome on the second
question on that first chart, on
average in a cohort of 20,000
kids born in New Mexico.
Every year about 15,000 of them
are born using Medicaid revenues
to pay for their births. We know
those families are eligible for
Medicaid, so we would like to
leverage Medicaid to also pay
for home visiting services for
them and we're only use about
400 of those families right now
are leveraging that opportunity
to bring in federal funds.
Do we know why we're losing 90%
of them? Why 90% are not.
Completing the process.
So that's the goal of this
hearing is that we want to
expand the eligibility of
providers to be able to take
those families and deliver
services. Right now, most of our
providers in the state are not
using a model that is Medicaid
eligible for billing and they're
not credentialed in Medicaid. So
we have to move the system
forward so these providers can
take the opportunity to enroll
those families and leverage
those federal re.
News to pay for it. It's not
that we're losing them. It's
that we need to increase the
capacity to serve them. It's not
that they're opting out. We
don't have a place for them to
opt in. Does that make sense?
You know,
but Chair Representative Martiz,
I just want to make the point we
are serving over 5000 Medicaid
eligible children in our home
visiting system, which is
reaching over almost 7800
children. We're not drawing down
the funding source to pay for
them so that our state dollars
go further and we can reach more
families, so we're not only
serving 440 of the 15,000 were
serving.
Almost 6000 of that 15,000 we're
just not drawing down the right
fundings, the right, the funding
source which is Medicaid because
of the issues and challenges
we've talked about today, which
the department is fully
committed to addressing this
year.
OK,
what I'm, here's what I'm
confused about.
So this, the 7 to 11%.
That we're holding on to who's
serving them initially?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, that between the we we
added 5 new programs this year,
so, but before we had 34, 35
programs, they were being served
by all those different programs.
Our nurse family partnership,
which requires families or not
requires. I think the other
point we want to make here, and,
and this is where we probably
have a little disagreement with
the LFC staff on the evaluation
is how do we define completion.
If you set up a relationship
with a home visitor and you set
some goals and those goals were
met and you decide to exit home
visiting.
Did you not complete or was it
that you met your goals and you
didn't need it, but if they're,
they're using a, a bar of 2
years or 3 years depending on
the model.
And a family may not make that
bar, but it doesn't mean they
didn't get the services and they
didn't get the results, which is
better relationships with their
child, healthier outcomes for
themselves and their babies, so
I think we need to have more
discussion, um, both with the
LFC and the, and the department
about what we talk, what we mean
when we say completion, um, so I
would just say that that number
is stark and startling, and we
don't want to see that, and we
want to get deeper and more
granular to understand. You
know, we've heard that like some
of our providers have really
great.
Family stay. We do want to learn
what's happening there, what are
those exemplars, guidance center
in Lee County, Ben Archer, we've
heard from our programs, they
have really great results. We
want to go in and see what's
happening there, what can we
learn and spread across the
whole system, so I, I appreciate
your question and I do want to
just a new elaborate a little
there. Sorry about that, Mr.
Chair.
Could
leads to my next question.
There's increased funding.
There's increased, you're going
after new.
Providers.
You say that.
You disagree with LFC that you
are completing all the all
these.
Things we're still 50.
What are we getting for our
investment?
Whether it be state dollars or
federal dollars.
We're still ranked last in the
country.
And we're investing a lot more
money than other states are.
I'm, uh, what I'm trying to
understand is.
Why?
Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez, we are getting great
results from our home visiting
system. I think the reason that
we, as Kelly has pointed out,
we're not reaching all the
families who can benefit from
the program. That's why we need
to be better at pulling down
Medicaid, and I don't not
disagreeing with the finding in
the LFC evaluation, I think that
we need to look at that
completion in, you know, in a
more granular way, so we are
getting if you look at the
annual outcomes report for home
visiting, there are fantastic
outcomes.
Children and families, we want
to reach more. I think that's so
that we can move out of 50. So
it's not that we're not getting
good results, it's just we
aren't reaching enough families
early enough.
And then drawing down the
Medicaid funding.
So my, my question is with.
With the
Increased
funding every year.
Um, and, and that seems to be
the trend, the increased
funding.
We're not seeing the needle move
at all.
We're still 50.
And my question is, what are we
getting for our investment?
We're investing almost $1
billion in state funding.
We're still last.
What's going to move the needle?
Is it, it can't be more funding
because we've been investing
more and more.
So it's not more money.
Is it more targeted investment?
Is it help me to understand what
do we need to do as a
legislature to help you move
that needle.
Because it's important to all of
us.
It's not that I want to sit here
and
Pick on you because
For 17 years, I was at that
table having to answer.
Questions on why
Veterans in the state were not.
Be
Treated well. So it's not that I
want.
Beat you up publicly.
I actually called your office 3
times. I didn't.
I still haven't gotten it.
A phone call
So this is the only venue that I
get to ask these questions.
What can we as a legislature do
to help you.
Move the needle forward.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, thank you. Thank you
for that question, and I am
sorry that you've called 3
times, so I'll make sure that
you have my, my direct cell
phone so you can call my, my
cell phone and we, we can chat.
I apologize for that. Um, we
will need increased investments
and we need to do those
investments, I think, as we
pointed out today with.
Good fidelity, good supports,
good technical assistance, but
we are moving the needle. Um, we
are doing it every day for
families, uh, I could give you
testimonial after testimonial
about how your investments are
changing the lives of families
all over the state, whether it's
through home visiting, early
intervention for a family of a
toddler child care home visiting
their lives have been forever
changed in a positive way, so we
will need more investments
because we're building a system,
a prenatal de5 system.
We don't have one in a, there
isn't really a model for what
we're doing here in New Mexico,
but we're doing it really well
because of the leadership and
the vision of this legislative
body and Governor Lujan Grisham
to set the stage for a better
future for New Mexico's
children. We don't move the
needle in 2 years and 3 years
talking about reaching
prenatally critical period of
development.
80% of a child's brain. Families
are well supported. When we do
that well and we do it for all
the children, we're gonna see
that move way past 50, way up on
on the rankings, um, but we have
to do it well and we have to do
it for all the children who need
it, so you're right, targeted
investments and more investments
so that we can meet the goal
that you all set when you made
that monumental decision to
create a department and to
support the work of building a
prenatal defi early childhood
system.
So the answer is more
investment. So the $1 billion
we're investing now is not
enough.
Not quite 1 billion, um, but
well, it's it we're, we're,
we're doing well and we're on a
good trajectory to build the
system I think that you all
envisioned all those years ago,
uh, and for many years before
that people envisioned and so
it's an exciting time, a lot to
celebrate, um, but yes, but
we'll, we'll do it with
transparency, with good
accountability, and, and with
good stewardship of the, the
financial, the public dollars
that are given to our
department.
So, uh, admittedly, I'm, I have
problems reading these graphs.
But on page one.
I'm showing an investment in FY
25 of
$750 million pretty close to 2
to $1 billion.
How much more investment are you
looking for?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez, that will be included
in the report that
Representative Small referenced
earlier that five-year finance
plan, so we'll be looking out
all the way to 29, kind of where
we are in 25 to 29, and that
will be released next month, so
you'll, you'll be able to see by
core program, direct service, as
well as the quality and
infrastructure, uh,
revenues needed to support, I
mean, revenues needed to support
strong quality and
infrastructure. We don't want to
just spread a bunch of programs
that can't be well supported,
and then we don't get the
results that we all want.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary, and again,
It's not that I wanted to beat
you up publicly.
Uh
But I'm having a hard time
understanding.
we're investing this much money.
And we
We're still last.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sia.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, and
thank you to all the presenters
there. Um, I'll be real quick,
chair, uh, narrow my comments,
um, we've heard a lot, a lot
from various members here, and I
know you hear it every month,
Secretary, and everyone involved
and all the deputy secretaries
and directors that might be here
from early education and other
departments that support this
work. Um, I want to sit here and
say thank you. I think you're
doing a great job. I've been at
this for a very long time in the
background trying to support you
and help you get all your work
done and, and you're doing what
you're supposed.
To be doing.
When things are invented and
things are created, they do take
time, energy, money, and all the
things that go into building a
successful, um, you know, uh,
vital organization for any
outfit, whether it's for-profit,
not for profit, banks, airlines,
uh, government agencies, you
name it. So thank you. Keep up
the good work. Thank you for
having me at the Early Learning
summit. I learned a lot there as
well. Thank you for bringing all
of those great minds together to
continue the work that
everyone's doing. Um, I want to
hone in just specifically on
the.
Home visiting component. Um, you
talked about an uptick recently
and you had 50, 58 folks go
online and register and 15
throughput already or 19. I
can't remember what that. Do you
expect that trend and just be
real quick with your answers,
Secretary, because you've been
at it and you need some water.
I'm sure maybe go to the
bathroom. I don't blame you. Um,
so do you anticipate that uptick
to continue and what direction
are we headed do you really
think?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
thank you and thank you for your
support in attending the summit,
that trend is going to go
straight up, uh, because it's
the only way into the data
system, so we're excited to see
that much stuff taken in 3 days.
And so, chair, um, on, on the
also on, this is all on home
visiting, um, our other states
seeing the challenges on the
adoption of of home visiting,
are you aware of any other
states that, that we might be
able to learn from on best
practices?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, that
is a great question. I might
defer to Kelly and work with the
LFC staff to find out from what
I understand, we have one of the
more robust systems, but I do
think there are states we can
learn from in terms of the
Medicaid expansion.
Yes, there are states I would
say Oregon is probably leading
us on, um, adopting early and
getting people enrolled quickly
and partially because they went
with a light touch model early
on to kind of feed the system.
Uh, thank you, chair, and thank
you Kelly and secret and, you
know, I'm a business owner
myself here and I never want to
have to reinvent the wheel if I
don't have to, so please take
advantage of all of that.
There's also in-state providers,
youth development. I served on
their board for about 22 years.
I started on the board when I
was about 5 years old, so that,
you know, that old, but I was
there for 22 years. I know CHI,
I think, had a, had or has a are
we learning from them as well on
what, what can be done here?
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, Senator Pia,
thank you for that, and Alan
Sanchez has connected me with
their person. The CHI is they
serve a 750 families statewide
all private sector funding. So
those are other families that
are also being served in the
state through home visiting. So
we can learn from them and YDI
is a great provider of us for
the new Child first as well as
NFP. Lots to learn from our
provider community.
Well, thank you, and I know
Chair wants to keep moving and
I'm going to just cut off my
comments here in a little bit,
but on, on the home visiting
and, and getting the word out
and, you know, things of that
nature. We got, we have to do
better. We do have to do better,
and you named a couple of the
things that you're doing, um, to
drive up, you know, the numbers.
I mean, 4400 to 10,000. I guess
my first question or my next
question is, how did you arrive
at the 10,000 again? Is that
more of a Kelly question or?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members
committee, at 10,000, are you
saying that's our goal overall
or were you getting a slide Mr.
Chair, in your presentation
related to or I think it was in
your part of the presentation on
10,000 slots or 10,000.
That's uh page 3.
I just had eye surgery, very
significant, so maybe I'm not
seeing it correctly. OK,
Ms. Sherman, that was, uh, and
Senator, that was 10,023 uh
according to data from HCA
10,677 families were eligible in
FY 23 to receive Medicaid funded
home visiting and of those
10,000, 6500 were referred for
the service and 440 actually
received it. So, so thank you
very much, Kelly.
And thank you, Chair, and, and
secretary. So do we have
somebody, uh, this is gonna be,
did you have a comment on that?
I just did because they were,
they were funded by Medicaid,
the 440. That doesn't mean that
of that 6000, some of those
children are not being served.
We're just not drawing down
Medicaid. So I just, I, I can't
make that point enough that we
are serving almost 6000 children
who are Medicaid eligible.
That's, that's why we have to be
a sense of urgency and get that
Medicaid money into and not
being in your day to day while
you're flying.
That airplane as you're building
it, that's a comment I gave to
Senator Rodriguez. I'm glad she
mentioned it. You are, you're
flying this massive airplane
with a, that's a lot of money. I
agree with my colleagues. It's a
lot of money, but this is a very
big deal, very big thing we're
doing, using to.
shift the state vote or ship
here. And so I think you're,
you're moving in the right
direction here, but um, so these
are going to be very elementary
comments because I'm not in your
day to day. I do we have, uh,
folks beaten down the doors at
the at at healthcare clinics, at
doctor's offices at, you know,
hospitals when the children are
being born and all that kind of
stuff. Just, do you know all of
this is available to you? Do we
have folks out there doing that
at all?
Or is that even allowed? I don't
even need Mr. Chairman Senator
Padilla, um, we do in the new
family resource centers that
have come online are a great
place for families to learn
about it, but I think it's those
healthcare champions that I
talked about earlier, being
those mouthpieces, those
testimonials, why home visiting
is so important and the the
marketing, I'm hoping you're all
going to start seeing it in the
billboards and the radio and
hearing about home visiting. We,
we've talked about this in this
committee before. There's still
a stigma, um, and I just want to
say that 750 million is reaching
88,000 children.
with services, so I think we
always want to keep in mind that
the the children were reaching
with the amount of money that
we're paying, but we need to do
better. We need to have people
beating down the door, um, but
we do have a lot of of fit home
visiting, they're working
together more closely. We're
seeing those cross referrals
happening, but a lot more we
need to do as a department and
again, I'm here to tell you
we're committed and we're gonna
make it happen this year. Well,
I'll wrap up my comments I guess
with this that I've seen the
billboards, by the way, or a
billboard.
to on my travels around the
state, so that whatever you're
doing, it's out there and I'm
noticing it, I'm seeing it. Um,
it's, it's also not, you know,
lost on me that um you have a
cultural challenge also because
um and I'll just speak for my,
you know, ethnicity, Hispanic
families have a really hard time
understanding having someone
come into their house and or
even virtually or whatever and
you're gonna tell me how to
raise my baby, you know, I, or,
or, and, and I'm not, I know
that's not how you're presenting
it, but I just want to let
You know, that that's also part
of this equation that we can't
forget. So there there's that so
you have to get through that.
Challenge, if you will. I'm sure
that's part of the challenge.
The other thing is, um, you have
to tell people that people have
to see things 3 times and really
actually see them 3 times. I'm
sure I've seen those billboards
probably.
150, 200 times, but to me, I
think I've seen them twice.
So they keep doing the marketing
effort that you're doing because
it will have a breakthrough, um,
same thing as politicians here
when we're running for election
or re-election, we have to tell
you 15 times why we're so great
for you to hear it one time. And
I know that's the challenge that
you're facing as well. So please
keep up all of the very
aggressive marketing that you're
doing because I think it's gonna
help you. All right. Thanks,
chair.
We're getting there. Senator
Scino.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Kelly and, uh,
Secretary Ginski, just quickly,
and I'm looking at the chart,
uh, on the home visiting funded
slots provided by county. My
question is, uh, uh, how's your
interaction with uh tribal
communities or or how is that
working out or or is outreach
being done to I know there's a
lot of uh native families in
urban areas but also at the
tribal level. Can you speak a
little bit about that effort and
how that's going?
Mr. Chair, and Senator Schendo,
uh, we actually have a very
strong partnership right now
with the Lanel Foundation
supporting 5 of our Pueblo
communities in applying for the
federal maternal infant Early
Childhood home visiting,
uh, uh, home visiting funding,
uh, and we're helping build the
capacity there because that's
been something we've heard
directly from tribal
communities. Tiwa babies and
Taos is a fantastic program, um,
that we collaborate and
coordinate with and generally
whenever we
Go out to talk about
consultation. It's always
something that we want to share
with tribal communities. I is
this something you'd like to do,
something you'd like to be part
of some of the home visiting
programs that we funded this
year are specifically working up
in our tribal communities and
want to do more outreach and are
actually, you know, indigenous
people wanting to work in
indigenous communities, so we're
we're doing a lot. The assistant
secretary SNEI is always talking
about home visiting as a former
home visitor. Um, so if there's
something specific though I'd
love to have more follow up, but
Thank you for that question.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for the response. I
know that what you mentioned,
that's up in the northern part
of the state and I'm looking at
McKinley County, which, you
know, I represent part of that
district, you know, you have a
number of homes and providers at
2 and then 188 in terms of home
visiting slots and I'm just
wondering what does the outreach
look like because we have a
large number of Navajo and Zuni
and others in that area, so I'm
curious as to.
What's going on up there?
Mr. Chair, Senator Scindo, I
will have the I'll get back to
you exactly how we're serving
and what the what the uptake is
there and how we can do a better
job in outreaching in those in
those communities that's.
Yeah, no, it'll be good. I, I
think, you know, we have, you
know, uh 22 sovereigns in this
state, of course we're sitting
in, you know, one of the
communities here, it'll be good,
you know, maybe, uh, if, if you
could provide something in terms
of outreach to the various
tribes and what's going on and
all the, all the tribal
communities and so forth.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. When you break that
down, can you break that down
for cost and, and I know you met
with Navajo when they're
starting their own, one of them
has a pretty good program out
there. Did you break that down
for cost and, and make sure
those kids are within the New
Mexico bounds, especially Zuni
and uh Laguna Aamma in that area
for us so we can see that entire
four corner region in in what's
happening. I mean 2 providers
and 16, I I I mean represent
Dixon was trying to get to this
number.
is how many providers you have
in Dondiana to how many you
serve, right? And it is.
I don't, the providers may only
have 5, but they may have 35
employees. I don't know that,
right?
And so we want to see what that
breakdown and then it cost per
kid on each one across the board
represent De la Cruz and then
we're on our last one after
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the presentation, Madam
Secretary Kelly, uh, easy
question for you. I know you
receive funding from uh private
foundations. Can you tell us
that number what that amount
looks like?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative De
la Cruz, uh, we received about
$100 from uh uh called the Early
Childhood Governance and
financing. We received that in
21. It was a 3 year grant. We
received $1000 from the Kellogg
Foundation for over 5 years to
do a multilingual, um, uh
pathway for early childhood
professionals. We received 6.2
million from the Conrad Hilton
Foundation for a 3-year grant to
expand home visiting models that
we discussed.
To improve our for um.
1.5 million for indigenous
um, communities that the
assistant secretary works with,
with the tribal communities and
a variety and our social
emotional early development um
initiative, um, that we've been
able to get off the ground with
those funds.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Chairman. Um, as a follow up.
To that
Information. I don't recall
seeing that reflected in the
information that we get when we
are considering the budget.
Is, is it possible that we can
have this reflected or if it's
reflected, I haven't seen it, so
I apologize, Mr. Chairman, if I
haven't seen that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, it's in other,
um, it's it called other other
state funds. And so if you want
that breakdown, more than happy.
I do remember the Pritzker
Children's initiative also has
funded us, and we passed that
through to both growing up in
New Mexico for our family
leadership council as well as
two new, no, not that we're um
uh prenatal de3 um steering
committee, policy committee, so
we do get that those funds as
well, but we can break that down
for you.
Thank you. Last name is Jim.
It's commendable. It's
commendable. It's important that
you receive those funds, but at
the same time, I think it's
important that we are able to
look at that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative Sean,
you're the last one between us
and lunch. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, so I have a quick
question and, and a yes or no
or, or whatever, a short answer
would be great. How would you,
um, how would a major policy
change like paid family medical
leave.
Interact with our childcare and
pre-K, um, provider network, Mr.
Chair, Representative Sona, I,
I.
I don't have a response. I
don't, I'm not sure I can
respond to that.
Well, I, I wanna see that
calculation as we move forward,
right, cause you're gonna, if,
if that passes this year, looks
like it is. Then we need to
calculate that in, in all the
formulas across and pay. That's
why early on in the budget
hearing you said, you know, we
planned for the pay to pay from
the pay study to be about 12 to
30 million.
And then we started looking and
it runs it right up to 150
million, so we need to, we need
that number calculated for every
agency, Charles.
Uh
So we know what that's gonna
look like when paid family leave
hits, um, so we know.
What that cost is to the state
and we're gonna know that cost
from you.
Mr. Chairman, the only thing I
would say is that a child cannot
be enrolled in childcare until
they're at least 6 weeks old,
and again, so that may be the
only intersection that I can
provide in terms of uh the
providers can provide you the
number of employees and the cost
per employee, uh, if that passes
and you should have that
calculation because you're gonna
have to increase their contracts
to pay for that, and so that's a
cost to us and we're gonna have
to see what that looks like as
we as we go through otherwise
providers are gonna be
screaming, why? I
get that money for.
Paid leave and these guys are on
paid leave and these are
employees and I'm required to do
it. So those are the costs we're
gonna have to add in throughout
your entire budget with any
staff, even contract providers.
So we better start gathering
you're the first person that's
gonna be asked to do that, so
we'll uh.
Start with you. Thank you for
your time. You know it's a
little bit long today, but
there's a lot of questions and,
and there are a lot of good
questions and, and so people are
watching.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Legislative Finance Committee.
Lunch and back here.
One, it's 12:36, so I'll just
say 1:30.
