All right. Um,
So let's dive in. We'll begin
with crime trends.
Um, while New Mexico continues
to face persistent violent crime
rates above the national
average. We've seen declines in
property crime post-pandemic.
However, pockets of rising
violent crime remain,
particularly in Albuquerque and
Berlin.
Next, we'll talk about what we
call the accountability gap.
Now over the past decade,
clearance rates for violent
crime are we under
yeah, golf, George, yeah.
Um, so, on slide forward
discussing that, you know, over
the past decade, clearance rates
for violent crimes have fallen
from 1 in 4 cases solved to just
1 in 7.
Conviction rates are also low,
often due to challenges with
evidence collection and witness
cooperation, recidivism also
remains a significant issue.
Particularly among probation and
parole populations with
substance use and lack of
re-entry services, both at state
and county level, the driver of
this recidivism.
From FY 23 to FY 25/829 million
dollars was appropriated to
public safety investments, with
an emphasis on treatment,
accountability, and community
and victim needs.
Notably funding for courts and
district attorneys has outpaced
overall spending growth, as you
can see on this graph.
Um, while law enforcement
recruitment efforts have led to
a 27% increase in certified
officers since 2020.
Non-recurring investments have
also played a role. Over the
past 5 years, $427 million has
been dedicated to improving the
swiftness of justice and
supporting victims and
communities.
This includes over 7 million and
non-recurring grow preparations
for crime victims and over $213
million for law enforcement
recruitment and retention.
Despite these investments,
underutilization of diversion
programs like drug and mental
health courts highlight areas
where we need to improve.
You can look at this graph and
see on the right, the statewide
treatment court capacity and
participation, something worth
flagging.
Um, next you'll see this is a
pie chart that shows kind of how
this non-recurring
appropriations have been
allocated to which departments
and which percentage of it has
gone to recruitment and
retention. I don't see a
significant portion of it has
been for that. Um, again, you
know, we've increased the number
of law enforcement officers in
the state significantly since
2020, so this seems to be
working well.
This like, uh, just very
briefly, kind of, uh, outlines
the numerous evaluations for
public safety and behavioral
health programs that the LFC has
conducted over the last decade.
These include assessments of
domestic violence programs,
juvenile justice facilities, law
enforcement recruitment efforts
and most recently the upcoming
evaluation of the corrections
department's reentry and
supervision programs, which will
uh hear more about it our
December hearing.
So moving on to strategic
recommendations kind of, kind of
go through this and talk about
it at an agency level and, you
know, based on the policy area.
So to improve public safety, the
LSC recommended expanding
evidence-based policing,
enhancing officer retention
programs and modernizing
criminal justice information
systems.
Community policing strategy
should also be prioritized,
particularly in high crime
areas.
Other committees and several
outside entities studying the
criminal justice system in New
Mexico have made similar
recommendations.
The Legislature has already
funded many of these initiatives
through programs like
intelligence-led policing and
the criminal justice Information
System or CS at DPS.
The corrections department.
A revised facility's master plan
is crucial, something the agency
recently started working on
thanks to a special
appropriation in the last
session.
Overclassification of people in
prison must be addressed to
reduce costs, and the agency
must expand access to reentry
programs.
Behavioral health services,
particularly for individuals
with substance use disorders
should be a key area of focus.
Note once again that a new
program evaluation will be on
the agenda for the December LFC
meeting for your program
evaluators dove deep into the
reentry programming at NMCD.
Next, we'll talk a little bit
about courts and district
attorneys.
Ports can enhance their impact
by expanding specialty courts
and reducing barriers for for
participation.
The Legislature has largely
provided funding for these
programs, um, so the focus needs
to be on increasing enrollment,
leveraging technology to
streamline case management and
adopting universal pre-trial
screening are also critical
steps.
Over recent years, the New
Mexico legislature has invested
significantly in pretrial
services, including funding for
risk assessment programs,
specialty courts, and
infrastructure improvements to
streamline judicial processes.
These investments aim to reduce
pretrial detention, ensure court
appearances and enhance public
safety.
FG uh past appropriations have
included funding increases for
pre-trial services as part of
broader justice system reforms.
District attorneys should also
collaborate with law enforcement
agencies to adopt
intelligence-driven prosecution
models.
Expanding training for
prosecutors and better
co-ordination and evidence
collection are critical.
We requested budget
recommendations should include
funding for additional
investigators and and victim
witness coordinators whose
participation can help reduce
the number of case dismissal.
Next we'll talk a little bit
about community and local law
enforcement.
Uh, community and local law
enforcement can benefit from
adopting community policing
practices and investing in
analytics tools for crime
mapping and resource allocation.
And hence officer retention
efforts, particularly in rural
areas, are also recommended, and
you funded them.
Next, talking about juvenile
justice, recent trends show
setbacks in juvenile justice
outcomes, including changes in
the children, youth and family
department's use of risk
assessment tools and lower
treatment court enrollment and
participation.
Moving to behavioral health,
behavioral health integration in
the criminal justice system is
essential. Funding for crisis
intervention teams and expanded
access to treatment courts can
address the root causes of
crime.
Comprehensive discharge planning
for inmates with behavioral
health needs will also improve
reentry success and reduce
recidivism.
Finally, at a statewide level,
centralized data systems can
improve tracking and
accountability interagency
collaboration should be a
priority, and funding should be
steered towards agencies that
show a willingness to
operationalize these
recommendations, and whose long
term plans align with
evidence-based strategies to
improve public safety.
The committee should consider
potential grow appropriations or
special appropriations that help
improve measurable outcomes like
reduced recidivism and improved
case clearance rates.
Well, progress has been made,
critical gaps remain in our
criminal justice system with
targeted investments and
evidence-based reforms, we can
address these challenges and
improve outcomes for New Mexico
communities. And with that, I'm
happy to take your questions.
Questions from committee members
share, we'll start with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Scott, I wanna start really with
page 6 here where it talks about
how much money we spent.
I can get to page 6. We'll send
there.
So
$472 million and then another
$150 million.
And uh,
Sorry about that.
We shut that guy up.
I don't like him anyway.
So, um,
So we look at this and, and
It doesn't appear that we've
Moved the needle any.
With
That much money.
a billion dollars.
Has anything changed after we
spent all that money?
Mr. Chair, Senator Sheer, I
think that, uh, you know, it
could be argued that obviously
the needle hasn't moved as much
as we would like it to. But when
we look at the number of law
enforcement officers being so
much higher now in 2024 than it
was in 2020. You know, that's
obviously one outcome. We're
starting to see now that more
law enforcement agencies are
reporting to this uh neighbors
National Incident-based
reporting system, the crime is
actually not as rampant as we
would be led to believe from,
you know, some sources. It's,
it's.
flat or down in a lot of cases,
um, obviously, like we talked
about, there's hotspots where,
you know, obviously violent
crime is still, you know,
increasing in certain parts of
the state, but for the most
part, I think if the goal is to
improve public safety
investments that the legislature
has made have at least helped
kind of stabilize what was
otherwise a pretty volatile
situation.
Mr. Chair.
A few months ago, uh, I was in
Eagle Pass, Texas, and Del Rio.
Uh, with the, uh,
With the Texas Border Patrol,
their own, their own border
security.
And they just straight up told
me that they moved all of their
cartel problems to Albuquerque.
When they stopped them from
coming into Texas. They moved
him to Albuquerque.
We have
We have a cartel problem in
Albuquerque.
Has anybody even looked to see
if we have a cartel problem.
Mr. Chair, I think that's the
problem. We're not even trying
to figure out why we have a
problem.
We're trying to solve something,
we don't know what we're trying
to solve.
And
So it makes sense to me why do
we have violence in Albuquerque.
It's not Albuquerque people kill
in Albuquerque people, it's
other people killing other
people don't even killing
Albuquerque people killing each
other.
Of course
That's where the crime stats
from the FBI saying Albuquerque
is the most dangerous place in
the country.
I don't think any of that
addresses that.
So, Mr. Chair.
Do we have any way, do we have
any idea, any plan, even try to
get down to the root of why.
We're trying to, we're trying to
solve a problem, but we don't
know what the problem is. I, I
also think there's another set
in here and you can maybe try to
answer this.
Much of the crime in New Mexico.
Outside of drug crime, outside a
cartel crime.
Isn't strangers killing
strangers?
People who know each other
killing each other.
Some of that's domestic
violence.
But some of that again.
Uh, uh, could be drug deals, but
drug deals between people that
know each other.
It's just not, you know, I, if
you can stay out of the cartel's
way.
Then you just have to worry
about your friends and family.
Um
But again, is are we studying
that? I, I've, I've, I've heard
this several times.
I can't prove it.
Or are we even trying to study
that or anything else for that
matter.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think that
uh state police, you know, in
conjunction with the
District attorneys, the FBI, you
know, they're all
Working to improve public safety
by, you know, policing, um,
Violence in New Mexico, right,
and not just along the I-25
corridor, but statewide.
Um
I think that
Uh, again, you know, without
Evidence in front of me to tell
you otherwise that, you know,
yes, there are instances where,
you know, drug violence is a
problem. Um, and it's obviously
something that, you know, law
enforcement agencies deal with
every day.
I don't know that that's a
bigger problem than, you know,
intimate partner violence or,
you know, violence, um.
Among the members of the
community that have nothing to
do with cartels.
And I don't know that the stats
would.
Agree with that either.
Well, Mr. Chair, I think that
that's
I think we spend an awful lot of
time as a legislature, not just
here, trying to solve a problem
when we, when we have not yet
properly identified the problem,
and I think this is the biggest
one, actually, of all the things
that we do.
This is the this is the problem
that we don't even know what
we're trying to solve.
We're throwing money at it,
we're throwing police officers
at it.
But I think there's a variety of
things out there, Mr. Chair,
that that we're not.
We, we need to hone in on why.
And so one of the questions that
I ask often is what changed?
Albuquerque was not a violent
city 10 years ago.
Certainly wasn't a violent city
when any of us grew up there.
Yeah, there was violence. Yeah,
people got killed.
But not anywhere like it is
today. Something changed.
And did that something changed
because the Texans closed their
border and sent it, their, their
criminals to Albuquerque.
I think so.
Especially cause I said, they
said that's what they did.
Just by closing their border,
they sent their criminals to to
Albuquerque.
But I also think it's not just
drug traffic, that's huge.
But I think the drug issues
where people are getting killed,
that's really more
Local people killing each other.
I do think we have a huge human
trafficking issue.
Because again, the cartel said
they did.
They're bringing humans through.
That are essentially slaves.
And again
I don't have the evidence.
But I have been told repeatedly
that there are far more slaves
in, in America today than there
were in 1860.
In 1860 there were 3.5 million.
Today there's about 30 million
slaves in New Mex uh in the
United States.
And a whole bunch of them came
through New Mexico.
I think that's a huge problem.
But I do think, Mr. Chair, that
that's where our studies need to
be, you know, do we need to
study?
Um, you know, the, uh,
behavioral health issues.
Yeah, but I don't think that's
what's killing people.
Obviously, that's a problem.
The integrated data system, only
if it's integrated with the FBI
and I'm not sure that we are
integrating with the FBI. FBI
tells us that we're
That were the worst, most
dangerous state, most dangerous
city in the nation.
And we're saying, no, not
really, crime's going down. It's
not bad.
The property crime.
We've heard from Representative
Armstrong.
Who has business in big business
in Albuquerque. They just quit
calling the police.
Their trucks get broken into
their, their buildings get
broken into, the things are
vandalized, I can call the
police anymore. That's why,
potentially,
Property crime is the reporting
of property crimes going down.
There's people, the heck, cops
aren't even show up for 3 days.
And what they do, they're not
gonna do anything.
So why waste my time?
But again, I don't think we're
really studying that. What we
get is anecdotal evidence.
And if we're not going to study
that, if we're not going to try
to figure out why.
We're never gonna solve the
problem.
Mr.
Yeah.
I'm done now.
Straight from Eagle Pass
represented Lujan. Got
questions.
We're questioning committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
This is a, this is information
that is, is uh really trending
and has been really
I lighted in other committees
with CCJ and the work that we
did and and so my question is,
with all these increases that we
see, um,
Would you say as a
generalization of like 30%
increase over all these agencies
that you're identifying here.
and with that increase, where is
the correlation I'm trying to
find the correlation with the
increase uh from the previous
report we had with the
individuals from 18 to 24 to 48
um male crime uh rates that have
gone up and that's that age
group, is that identified any
anywhere here? Are we talking
about that and.
How is that correlated to
Um
The the behavioral health, the
substance use disorder issues we
were having and the
The
Recidivism, I guess.
Is there, is there, do you have
a graph or something that
correlates all of that
information, Mr. Chair.
Because that's what we're really
talking about is how we're
spending all this money, where
are we getting?
You know, where are we seeing
the crime is going down because
of it, and we are getting
reports that crime is going
down, but it's costing 100 law
enforcement, $150 million more
just for the recruitment and
retention, and we know from
other
Um, discussions we're having
that are our workforce.
Our law enforcement work is is
shuffled all over the place.
It's like, who's gonna pay the
most, who's gonna give the most
benefits? Do you have any of
that information, how, how our
workforces being moved around
and if we are keeping or able to
keep a high recruitment in those
high crime level areas like
invert Leo County and even Santa
Fe.
Do we, do we have any of that
information, Mr. Mr. Chair,
because that's a
You know, you're gonna hear
this, we're gonna say this,
we're we're putting a lot of
money down, but we also knew we
needed, there was a gap, uh,
that we needed to pay law
enforcement even more, and we
are, we ourselves as legislators
have created jobs or created
laws that um
There are law enforcement um
workforce.
May have inhibition to to be
recruited new new recruitment.
So do you, are you identifying
that anywhere, Mr. Chair,
yeah, I mean, I think, you know,
one to answer your first
question about recidivism. I
don't want to step on our own
toes at all, but next month when
we talk about the uh
Program evaluation that, you
know, the LLC did on the reentry
and supervision programs and
corrections. You're gonna hear a
lot about, you know, what is
effective at reducing recidivism
and how some of the investments
that the legislatures made into
these evidence-based programs,
um, have been rolled out, how
effective they've been at, you
know, uh, getting people
treatment that otherwise was not
available to them and where we
still need to improve, um,
that's part of it.
As far as the effectiveness of
some of these investments, I
think that, you know, when we
look holistically at the number
of law enforcement officers in
New Mexico being up as much as
it is from 5 years ago, you
know, that's definitely turning
in the right direction. But as
we've talked about, you know, on
this slide 4, there's that gap,
right? We still see the, the
number of crimes that are being
reported and charged doesn't
track well with the number of
people that are actually
prosecuted and sentenced for
those crimes.
And that can be due to a number
of factors, right? It's not just
about, you know, DAs or courts
not being willing to, you know,
enforce the law. It's that there
are oftentimes issues that lead
to case dismissals like victim
or witness cooperation or
evidence collection and the
investments that we make in
things farther upstream, like
training.
are going to really take a while
to bear the fruit. But if we can
improve not just the speed at
which people are charged, but
the frequency with which the
commission of a crime is
followed by actually being
charged for it. It's that
certainty. That's the biggest
thing that's gonna deter crime,
not necessarily increasing the
number of officers, you know,
consistently every year, that's
always a goal. We know that at
some point it's gonna plateau,
and we see that whenever we look
at like the
Law enforcement retention fund,
right? It's a program that DPS
is running where now they're
offering stipends to officers
that have reached their 5th,
their 10th, their 15th, or 20th
year of service with the same
agency. We see that a lot of
that like cannibalism where, you
know, people are jumping from
agency to agency has kind of
decreased. We see the number of
lateral officers that start
working for the state police is
kind of plateaued at around 5 or
6 years. So the evidence that,
you know, giving the state
police raises is causing APD to
lose officers or BCSOs we
haven't seen that.
Um, but, you know, when we talk
to our more rural law
enforcement agencies, we do know
that they have problems with
recruitment and retention. They
have problems keeping their
officer numbers up, that, you
know, ultimately does have
public safety effects in terms
of
How quickly are people being
charged? How quickly are, you
know, officers showing up
whenever something happens and
uh
How likely is it that you're
going to get caught when you
commit a crime.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that. Uh.
It's, it's, it's just really
good to have that correlation in
this, the, the mapping of the of
how that is all coming together
for us as we're making these
decisions as spending decisions.
The other piece earlier on that
that we talked about were the,
uh, and you have here mentioned
the diversion programs and the
other uh type of uh courts and
drug courts and all those being
underutilized.
What was the feedback from um
From our courts on, on why they
were underus or or or is there a
discussion on how they're going
to maybe readdress and revamp
the specialty courts, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
I I don't want to get ahead of
the budget recommendation
conversation, but I think that
um the legislature, the LFC
specifically is aware of some of
the challenges that people have,
you know, that these courts and
district attorneys have faced in
getting participation to
improve. Um, I think how they
measure participation is also,
you know, different based on
what district you're in and some
of the programs that are
available, say, in Albuquerque
are not available in, no, to can
carry or in Carlsbad.
Um, but
As the administrative officer of
the courts has said, you know,
improving the access to these
programs is a priority and we
look at what happened during the
special session, that the
legislature did invest in things
like assisted outpatient
treatment, um, which is another
type of diversion program and
whenever we look at uh
enrollment in those programs, it
has gone up some, but it hasn't
returned to the levels it was at
pre-pandemic.
we know that the AOT programs
are is the big programs only
available in Donana County,
really, and to grow these
programs, I think those are the
investments we need to look at
and understanding as we're
addressing, and I keep hearing,
which I'm really grateful is the
behavioral health perspective of
what's going on, something that
I've been drawing on for quite a
while and uh it looks like
we're, we are going to have some
funding for that, but um,
With that, uh, what is?
Any feedback on how to grow
those diversion programs.
chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
I, I mean, speaking anecdotally,
whenever I traveled around the
state with our quartz analysts
this summer to visit some of
these courts and district
attorneys' offices. I think the
consistent thing that we've
heard is that it's hard to get
people interested in a program,
um, if they know that there's a
higher likelihood that maybe the
case isn't going to go all the
way through and they're gonna,
you know, end up getting
sentenced. So oftentimes people
will hedge their bets and say no
I'm, I'm good. I don't, I wanna
do your drug treatment program.
I'd rather.
You know, bet on this case not
making it all the way through.
But as we see, um, evidence
collection improve as we see
that again, that gap closing
between, you know, the
commission of the crime and
being charged with it. We do see
that, you know, participation
was likely to tick up as it
becomes more of a reality that,
you know, if you get busted for
something, you're gonna end up
getting sentenced for it.
That'll make those programs a
lot more um popular. I think
also as we traveled around and
talked to these different
agencies, um, it takes time,
right? And it takes a lot of
time for.
judges to make space on their
dockets to handle treatment
court when done well and up to
some of these national
standards, it's intensive and it
requires a lot of involvement by
the judge and by the court staff
to make sure that people are in
compliance with these programs,
oftentimes there's testing
regimes or, you know, a number
of check-ins. It's, it's almost
like being on probation and
parole, but re-sentencing,
right? Um, and so, you know,
making sure that the courts and
their staff have the resources
that they need in order to be
able to dedicate the time.
Make these programs effective, I
think is also critical.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
we're gonna hear more of that
tomorrow, and I appreciate your
feedback. These are, these are
some of the concerns that, that
I have been uh working on,
working on the competency issue
in legislation in the past and
um I'm really I.
Wait to see what we have, what
more is to be put or added in
the asks that we're gonna get
from these agencies. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This
Last year, I stayed at a hotel
where I not a hotel, but a
apartment complex where I've
stayed for 14 years.
And last year there were people
walking back and forth up and
down the street, homeless
people.
They broke into my car. They
stole the computer. They stole
my notebooks.
Uh, and this is an area that's a
couple of blocks from the
Capitol, always being safe.
Oh, this is a questioning
committee.
Why do we have?
So much more.
Crime like that and homeless.
Mr. Representative Chatfield, I
mean, I, I wouldn't want to
venture to guess why crime is
increasing in, you know, Santa
Fe, right? But when we look
again at a statewide level, um.
We see that some of these trends
have improved, but I don't think
that there's a lot to be gained
by arguing the point that, you
know, crime is down, this is
just an anecdotal story. We
would it.
It's something that I think
quality of life is what law
enforcement agencies also
consider, right? It doesn't
matter if property crime is down
overall if it feels like it's
worse. So again, I think it's
about, when we look back at the
Evidence-based solutions that
you know the LFC has offered in
past evaluations. It's about
making sure that when people
commit crimes, they're charged
for them and that they're gonna
see justice and the more
resources we put towards again
improving the swiftness of, you
know, those charges being
brought and the certainty that
they will, I think we'll do more
to reduce crime than, you know,
simply beefing up the number of
officers and whatnot, but also,
you know, there is behavioral
health component and I'm not an
expert in that, but I think
everybody has heard or, you
know, a couple of years now that
Uh, addressing some of these
upstream behavioral health
issues will likely help improve
crime as well, you know, getting
people the treatment and the
resources that they need in
order to be successful. Um,
We do a lot to help improve
quality of life, not just for
Those that are currently, you
know, in the criminal justice
system, but also for the
society's own.
So, Mr. Chairman, we just heard
yesterday that the behavioral
health collaborative received
$900 million last year and
hasn't met in a year. They have
no executive director, so I
I think it, for me it's a false
hope to pin my hopes on them
solving the crime problem, uh,
if they're not meeting, if they
haven't met in a year and if
they, uh, in a year's time have
not appointed a new executive
director.
Um, the stats I see.
So there are 2500.
Homeless people in Albuquerque,
and that's not talking about the
ones we see here in Santa Fe.
And if you're homeless, you have
no job. You have no way to feed
yourself. Many of them turned to
crime, property crime, to, to be
able to have the
The basic, right? It is.
And I know you're dealing with
the numbers that you're given,
and that are reported to you.
But that that crime is down,
it's hard for me to believe.
You know, I, I, um,
I took a new Uber.
Yesterday, to go out to eat.
And when I got in, I told that
guy, I said, now, when I get
through,
With dinner
OK.
These and I call Uber so
somebody gonna come pick me up.
He said if it's after dark, I
will not be there, he said. I, I
don't work after dark.
He said after 9 o'clock, nobody
will pick you up. This is a high
crime area.
So the Uber driver knows that
it's a high crime area, so, uh,
If, if
If it is, if time is decreasing,
why is the evidence
To the contrary out there in, in
practical life, you know, Uber
doesn't run after 9 o'clock
because this is a very high
crime area.
I don't like uh sitcoms, so I
oftentimes watch YouTube on TV.
I saw a YouTube that.
Talked about crime in New
Mexico.
It said that one of the most
dangerous, dangerous cities.
Not in the United States, but in
the world was Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
There was more dangerous than
Then Juarez, there was more
dangerous than Afghanistan.
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
They said in New Mexico, the one
place.
That, uh
Was, was more dangerous.
Then Albuquerque was galloped.
With the highest crime rate, you
guys probably know whether
that's true or not, that the
highest crime rate might be
gallop.
Um
So
I, I, you know, the, the numbers
that you're giving us are
numbers of who got arrested or
who got convicted. That's how we
developed the numbers. If
somebody
commits a crime and they don't
get caught.
That doesn't really go into the
report. I, I also experienced
when I called the, the police
when my car was broken into the,
the
City police came, they, OK, Mr.
Chatfield, got your car broken
into 2, no, no, that's the end
of it, you know, there was a,
there was a camera right up
there on the roof and filming
the whole deal. Well, we don't
really know if the people there,
they didn't know how to back up
the camera or where you got it
set up there for, you know, it's
just kind of have become an
accepted way of life.
I think that the addition of the
officers is awesome. I think it
makes a difference.
What we know is that most crime
is committed by the same people,
a small group of people
committing crime over and over
again. So,
My
Opinion is that it's not the
officers, it's happens between
when they, when the police do
their job and what happens next.
We're closing down prisons
because there's not a, not
anybody that needs to be in
prison, and yet our crime rate
is skyrocketing.
And uh
I don't guess that all of that
was questions, Mr. Chairman. I
thank you for the time.
Uh
Center Woods. Just quickly, we
heard in testimony yesterday.
That
We were spending
Um, I can find that, something
like uh $100,000.
For apologize to you. Well,
isn't that terrible when you're
not prepared when, when the turn
comes to say something, uh,
There's a point in time.
When they start talking about
property crime.
When something like
Representative Chatfield's
talking about that you report.
And you get no action
whatsoever.
Nothing.
You're probably not going to
just keep reporting if it
happens to you again.
And all of a sudden it shows the
statistics that property crime
is now.
Uh, is there any way, well,
there's no way you can check
that if they don't report it,
this is not there.
But uh we spend a whole lot of
time, uh,
Talking
And
We
Uh, here's the statistics I was
looking for.
Our juvenile justice cost.
The $740,000 per inmate.
Our protective service cost.
is over $100,000 per child.
We're throwing money at stuff.
But I don't seem to be getting
the whole lot of results.
No, no.
I know that
There's outliers on every side.
But I'm not too sure the general
public knows the kind of money
that we're pushing out there.
We've got, we've got CYFD, we've
got
All these different agencies
that's supposed to be taking
care of kids. For $100,000 a
year, we can put them in UNM.
We can roll them in you and we
could give them housing and
And food.
It's, it's crazy the way we're
spending this money.
No.
Behave health is exact thing
that we keep coming back to as a
solution, but it doesn't seem
that the behavior health is
I guess
Where are we going wrong? Where,
and I know you don't have the
answer to that, but that's
That's your rhetorical question
as, as to
What part of this have we not
figured out?
That our crime rate in our state
keeps going up.
You know, we, we go down to the
border, we listen to the Texans
down on the border and they just
tell us, oh we're hurting all
our criminals through in New
Mexico by building more walls.
You know, that may be true, may
not be true. I know Espinola
was, was known as one of the
pathways for the drugs going
through on up north.
And it was always a rough place
over there.
But it, it's
It's getting
We soon we're gonna have
The notation of the most
dangerous state in the world.
Or in the United States.
And we don't seem to be able to
do much for it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm just
I'm unhappy with the way we're
spending our money and the
results we're getting, and I
guess I'll put it that. Thank
you.
Represents small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
uh, Mr. Sanchez, thank you very
much. I know you and your family
have a deep, uh, and very
personal connection to public
safety across the state, and I
want to thank you for your work
here, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sanchez
first, um, I'm gonna make a few
requests for data, if we could
sort of capture those.
And Mr. Chair, as I do that, I
think it's a great reminder for
all of us on this committee.
Either we want data and we're
gonna follow up and ask more
questions and learn more about
it.
Or we don't.
And we, we acknowledge, I think
I acknowledge that our daily
experiences have to be part of
the conversation.
But we darn sure cannot reject
data and I can't, frankly, that
if I don't like it, there may be
more questions to ask.
As we do, there may be more
things to uncover.
And so, in that vein, um,
My personal experience.
Is that the Donana Sheriff's
office has actually been quite
successful recently in
recruiting new deputies. That's
based upon a recent class that
graduated, I believe, over 20
deputies with a few, uh, that
were part of the Demming Police
Department.
My understanding, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sanchez, is that there's um
Another 15 plus deputy class.
And also my in those are
impressive numbers.
When you consider that some,
perhaps even at the state, you
other law enforcement agencies
have had trouble recruiting that
many new officers.
So Mr. Chair, my question, Mr.
Sanchez.
Can we get a breakdown of the
recent recruitment class,
classes across the state.
My understanding, Mister Chair,
Mr. Sanchez is that there were
some of the law enforcement
recruitment and retention funds
used both at LCPD Las Cruces
Police Department and DaSA,
which is great.
Um, if we can crosswalk.
The, uh, laws, the funds that
we've set aside as a legislature
and just how that recruitment is
going, maybe a snapshot of the
state, uh, is that possible, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Sanchez. Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative, yes, I mean,
uh, the law enforcement academy
closely tracks for compliance
purposes, you know, the
That the law enforcement
standards and Training Council,
the number of officers, you
know, this is done to make sure
that they, you know, everybody's
up to date on their training,
they have all the required, um,
and meet all the requirements
for their law enforcement
certification. So yes, I think
that's information we can get
for you, and specifically about
the, uh,
Law enforcement recruitment and
retention funding DPS is also
kind of the
Um for most of that, so we can
work with DFA and DPS to get you
more information.
successful those programs have
been. That's outstanding. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Sanchez. Uh, second, I wanna go,
um, around AOT.
Can we get the programs that are
operating AOT now.
The different judicial
districts.
And then I think also noting
that there's an expectation
based upon what the legis, what
we did in a bipartisan fashion
in working to expand those
services just to see where it's
um yeah, can we get that sort of
an up to-date snapshot there.
Yes, sir.
Awesome. Uh, OK, um, moving into
the um
You've noted, and this is
something that we've heard a few
times, and Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sanchez, we've had serious
struggles with um
The
district attorney's office in
Donana County.
In my anecdotal sort of
experience a couple years ago, I
talked to uh a person who had
witnessed a crime, who had come
forward, who was committed to
seeing that crime uh sort of
prosecuted in this case, as I
recall, it was sort of theft of
building materials from an
adjacent home.
Um, that was my anecdotal
experience, also born out, and I
see some of that in what you
just presented to us, Mr. Chair,
which is concerned about whether
it's evidence collection.
Whether it's all of the
different components that go
into
A bit of the swiftness and
certainty.
How do we explore that more? Is
that something that we need to,
uh, yeah, first, how do we
explore that more.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sanchez.
Mr. Chair represented a small,
I, I think that discussing this
with district attorney's offices
and uh, you know, the public
defender's office kind of
working through the courts to
figure out what is leading to
these case dismissals, um,
what's leading the charge is not
being brought, you know, it's
definitely something that we're
looking into, uh.
And as a part of our budget
making process, right, we wanna
learn from district attorneys,
uh, what do they need? I think
when we looked at the budget
request for the courts, there
was maybe two judicial districts
that asked for additional
investigators or victim witness
coordinators.
We see the gap in the number of
cases that clear.
We know what works.
And we know what investments are
effective at kind of reducing
that accountability gap, and we
don't see those requests come in
from the other 11 judicial
districts or the other 11
district attorneys' offices, uh,
that, that is indicative of at
least room for uh more
discussion, right?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sanchez, that
sounds exactly right to me. So
Mister Chair, Mr. Sanchez, what
I had asked for there then, can
you help put together a list of
questions for us that help us
dive into some of those.
As we go into that.
For key in a place where, where
we, I think we proudly invested
and maybe need to invest a lot
more with our district
attorneys.
But I would love for all of us
sort of a buffet, if you will.
Of questions and ways to explore
that.
And also as a part of that
request, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sanchez.
As there are examples and in
this case, sadly, I don't think
that example is coming from
Donana County at this point.
Of the, the district attorney's
offices and court systems that
are making those data requests
in the state or, or excuse me,
that are making the funding
request. They're saying we need
more investigators and there
maybe having a higher clearance
rate.
Can you put together a list of
sort of that, that sort of uh
some of the folks that are doing
it right, or at least moving in
that direction and evidence
based direction for us, please.
Mr. Chair Representative small,
certainly, and I think uh
You know, kind of to look at it
a little bit, you're gonna have
an opportunity to have some of
those conversations, I believe
today and tomorrow. That's
right, the courts and DAs are
going to come and present their
budget request. That's right,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sanchez, as that
is a 100% right.
And, and I know as we go into,
you know, this is only the
beginning part of the process,
right? I think
It is always helpful for me and
hopefully it's helpful for
others to have that guide for
those going into or or uh.
Some of the, that additional
I would say guide for engaging
in those conversations. They're
folks are across the state are
doing.
Uh, incredible work in law
enforcement in our district
attorney's offices in the courts
and the public defenders.
I want us to be able to have
sort of a clear course that
we're charting, even as we
welcome and listen to whatever
they have to bring to us, right?
We're not gonna send, we want to
hear everything that they're
seeing. We also want to have a
clear sense of what we're
driving towards.
So, that's why it's helpful.
Um,
Mr. Chair, um,
I think it's also noting.
And it sounds like this is more
on the DPS side, but the
executive implementation,
particularly of some of the
newer financing tools.
has pretty outsized importance
in this conversation.
Is that right?
Mr. to represent a small, yes, I
think that um.
We've seen what works and we've
seen kind of the most effective
place to put money for
everything from recruitment and
retention to
Um
You know, beefing up the funding
for the labs, right? I mean all
of this stuff has downstream
effects if we improve the
attractiveness of working for
this new state lab that you all
built here in Santa Fe and make
those jobs more competitive, um.
It's it's helpful in that, you
know, evidence gets processed
faster, right? And we see the
vacancy rates at the state labs
decreasing significantly just
because of some investments that
the legislature made in the last
session that kicked in July 1, I
mean, we've seen the vacancy
rates go from, I think, almost
60% down to almost uh
If they,
if they are down to about 10%
vacancy among lab techs, um, and
you know, it's continuing to
improve, but that's
Again, because of investments
that the legislature made in a
very focused way during the last
session. That's right, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Sanchez, that's
great. And I know there are
other questions, so I'll just
write um that and that is
something that this committee
and I think the legislatures
talked a lot about as it relates
to um whether that's DNA
databases, whether that's sort
of evidence collection and the
evidence processing part of it.
That is in
Essential component of both
swiftness and certainty and
without that.
Where the, yeah, we're, so
that's great. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
allowing me to go through some
of that. It's very helpful for
me. Thanks, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Sanchez for the, for
the report.
I just took it upon myself to
look that up.
And not, not only does it say
Albuquerque's the number one. It
says that we would be safer to
go visit Baghdad.
And live in Baghdad.
than it is to live in
Albuquerque, and I think the
folks in Albuquerque, they
expect us.
To get this right.
And one question that I have is,
what, what does the community
policing aspect look like? Is,
is it putting more police
officers on the street on foot.
In in high crime areas, what is
that, what does that look like?
Representative Vincent, I think
that community policing has
changed a lot, obviously in the
last 20 years, um, what we were
talking about back in the 90s
with, you know, some of the just
visible presence of officers,
you know, uh, being like the
number one community policing
tactic, right, just having boots
on the ground. I think what
we've seen in the last decade or
so is that
With advancements in technology
and our ability to kind of map
crime.
Putting resources in hotspots is
proven to be effective, um,
obviously, you know, we need to
do that.
holistically in a way that uh
Recognizes that there are
certain problems with putting a
bunch of police officers and um
demographically diverse
neighborhoods where, you know,
crime is high, but also if you
put a lot of cops in place, of
course, they're gonna catch, you
know, more crime happening. I
think, to get to the point, um,
We've worked with DPS a lot to
try and understand what their
community policing standards
are. I think that uh revamping
some of the training that
officers go through is
definitely something they're
looking at.
And again, just making sure that
people who are out there
enforcing law are prepared and
have the tools they need to.
Stop crying and prevent it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Sanchez. So, um,
Does this have a lot to do with
the vacancy rates in a lot of
the police departments and it
kind of spurred me along when
um.
Representative Small was talking
about them graduating 20.
What, what's the vacancy rate
look like in Albuquerque.
And are they, do they have the
same problem as our social
workers? I mean, are they, are
they looking for officers? Are
they fully staffed? Are they
half staffed? Is that why the
crime rate is up?
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, I, I think it'd be
difficult to draw direct
correlation between, you know,
officer vacancy rates and crime.
I think that APD would, you
know, I don't have the specific
numbers in front of me. I can
work to get them, but I think
that they're always hiring. I
don't think that, you know,
they're ever gonna get back to
the 1000 plus officers they had
20 years ago, uh, you know,
unless something changes, but,
you know, obviously, I mean 500
officers to do the police the
same amount of area with a
higher population is a
challenge, right? Um, and I
think that we see in a
A lot of cases, you know, I, I
look at the DPS staffing report
every quarter whenever we get
that from they have a manpower
projection that shows that even
by their best estimates, they
thought they were gonna have
somewhere around 670, 680
officers by this point after all
the investments that got made.
Problem is a lot of people were
tired after 20 something years
of service, they deserve it,
right? But you have, uh,
Kind of a bottlenecked training
where, you know, you can only
Staff of the class to run it 2
times a year. And uh if you're
graduating in 1516 officers at a
time, you're kind of treading
water. And if we see the, you
know, investments in recruitment
and retention have obviously
worked. You have people that
have, you know, stayed on at the
force for a lot longer than
maybe they had planned to
because of some of these
incentives. Um, they love what
they do, they want to make
Mexico safer, but, you know, my
dad 25 years in law enforcement
after 25 years, you get tired,
you know, wanna go do something
else.
Like golf, um, but if you have
people retiring at a
that's the same as your, you
know, training folks. It's hard
to
see a decrease in vacancy rates
when you're just barely keeping
your head above water.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
played that game for 25 years
and I, I feel that I don't, I
don't want to really want to go
back either. Um, I just always
make sure that I always like to
make sure that people have the
personnel and the equipment that
they need and we're talking
about the crime rate, and, you
know, for them to put that on.
Online, that it's better to go
to Baghdad than it is to go to
Albuquerque, that's just, that's
frustrating.
And, you know, maybe we do need
1000 officers there. Maybe we do
need to get a lot harder on
crime.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate
it.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation
of
Oh, I guess what um.
Looking at from uh the respond
of many of the statements that
have been made.
I, um, if there's something in
place.
For individuals that need the
behavior health.
But they resist the service.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
I mean, again, that's not my
area of expertise, but I believe
that, you know, part of what,
um,
This is an outpatient treatment
model is meant to do is offer,
you know, alternatives to
The criminal justice process,
right, to get people um help
they need, I think that, you
know, when we saw the number of
bills and conversations around
competency, you know, that was
obviously, um, a big deal during
the special session in the lead
up to it.
I don't think that the state
mandate that people get
treatment, but they can
basically give them an option.
It's either treatment or
incarceration.
Um
You know, moving through the
criminal justice process as a
defendant, right? It's not fun
for anybody, but I, I think that
Uh
Come a long way.
Um, you know, locking people up.
Because of behavioral health
issues, I think that's still
something that, you know.
The LC at least looks at
whenever we look at the
behavioral capacity that we
recognize that there's not
enough providers before you can
offer treatment to people, you
gotta make sure it's available.
That's a, that's a challenge,
and especially outside of the
I-25 quarter, right? I mean, you
can offer people treatment, but
if there's nobody around to
deliver those services.
difficult to
Mandate. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, um.
I, um, I just feel that, uh,
it'll make progress if we can't
get out of that base if um.
Individuals that need the help,
but refuse it.
But then they still continue
hurting.
Members of the society in one
way or another.
You know, that's so, that's a
hard one, I know, but what I
mentioned. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Scott, for the presentation. Um,
I, uh, appreciate your summary
of, of what we've done and uh
Progress to date. Um,
We're talking a lot about um
Uh, study that ranks
Albuquerque.
In a particular um
You know, tier of
Violent cities or, you know.
Um,
Prime.
Safe places to live. And I'm
wondering if it's possible. I
think it would be very helpful
to know what metrics were used,
if you could see if you could
track down that, um, that study.
Um, to see what quantitative.
Um, data points, uh, were used
in that study, and then if we
have um similar data points that
we could reference, I, you know,
it would certainly be helpful to
have a better understanding of
the numbers versus anecdote.
Um, you know, just as we
continue to discuss that. And
then, um,
Do you happen to know um if
treatment courts.
And those
Can we expand access to
treatment courts.
Um, do we need more judges or
can um
judicial staff.
court staff help.
Bring more people into those
programs.
You know,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
Representative Dixon, I think
that um.
AOCs definitely looked at some
of that, you know, there are
national standards that say it's
best practice to have judges,
not staff overseeing individuals
that are in some of these
diversion programs.
Um
I think that's also because, you
know, by law they're the people
that are
Charged with, you know, managing
sentencing and it is a form of
sentencing, right? Um.
I think that there are other
places where it's administrative
hearing officers that do this,
but again, it's about, you know,
trying to make sure that the
model we set up in New Mexico
adheres to best practices. I
think that AOC would probably be
best.
To answer some of those
questions, but we can definitely
ask them for specifics. I know
that their risk needs
responsivity pilot program that
they've been working on for a
couple of years has um
shown a lot of improvement and
they've
They're doing a couple of
judicial districts with plans to
roll that out anymore.
Um, but again, how that scales
is yet to be determined.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Scott. Um, last sort
of question. One of the things
that I've noted um and in
conversations that I've had with
um
The area substation, um, that
works in my district in
Albuquerque, um, and in
conversations with the district
attorney. Um,
The availability.
To charge people with certain
crimes.
And, you know,
Technology, everything is
changing a lot faster now than
it did, let's say 20 years ago.
And so,
Do we have any information that
would support whether or not we
have
Uh, whether
The charges.
You know, the crimes that we can
charge people with are actually
matching.
sort of the
Crimes being committed, um, in
terms of
You know, organized retail
crime, I think might be an
example, but um,
As we look at juveniles with
guns, um, and where they're
purchasing them and sort of
social media.
Do we have any information on
Types of crimes that are being
committed and then correlating,
um,
If we're able to
Sort of appropriately charged
them.
Representative Dixon, I mean, it
kind of does, I think.
We know that
Stiffening penalties doesn't
have the deterrent effect that.
Some would like to think that it
does. I think again, it's the,
if you do something that's
against the law.
Knowing that you're gonna get
caught, knowing that you're
gonna get charged, and knowing
that it's going to happen
quickly.
It's gonna be the biggest
deterrent to the commissioner.
Most people don't think.
Where they commit a crime, ah,
well, how is a 3rd degree
felony. I'm gonna not commit
this crime. I think, um,
But to answer your question
directly, I think, you know, the
Sentencing mission has been
working on, you know, kind of
reforms to
The Criminal Code, I think
there's been a lot of
conversation around.
Children's code, but I think we
know from.
evidence that
The number one thing that's
gonna
Improve criminogenic behavior
is, you know,
Helping individuals spend less
time incarcerated.
I don't know the
Uh, some of the solutions that
have been offered up are not
solutions in search of a
problem, right? We know the
crime is bad, but
It gets improved by making
systematic improvements in a
targeted way that improves
swiftness and certainty.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Scott. Um, I think that's
interesting. I definitely, you
know, the swiftness and
certainty, um, is 10, you know,
we know that that is the, the
most important thing in terms of
certainty though, if, if the
prosecutors aren't able to
Use appropriate charges. Um, it
sort of, um, makes the certainty
less certain. So I'll be
interested in that and maybe CCJ
maybe the interim committee has
looked at that. Um, I'll try to
find more information on that,
but I appreciate it. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sanchez, um, have you looked at
the
You know, when all the juvenile
detention centers closed pretty
much around the state. There's,
I know where I'm from, you have
to drive to uh Lee County,
Farmington, things like that.
Have you done any research on
the, the fact of when the
juvenile detention centers
closed and we're seeing such as
high rate of juvenile violent
crime, um, the correlation
between the closing of those
detention centers and the rise
in juvenile crime, which is
really where we're at and if you
guys have talked about this
before, Mr. Chair.
You know, but um,
I'm because I'm a big proponent
of reopening juvenile detention
centers, um, with this situation
that we're dealing with now. So
do you have any studies on
closing the detention centers
that seem to happen kind of
across the state years back and
then now the situation we're
dealing with now, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I,
I have not personally done
research into this, but I know
that the LFC has in the past,
you know, done analysis of
juvenile justice, um, I'm happy
to get more information on that
and possibly bring you a copy of
it.
Thank you. That's my question.
Thank you, just to kind of wrap
up, Scott, you know, the, the
numbers that the FBI puts out,
right? And just I'm gonna use
Gallop for an instance that I
know, right?
We pick up people for detox.
So, last night it was 12
degrees, right?
All the policemen are out on the
street with drones and and.
Vehicles looking for people to
pick up so they don't freeze to
death.
When they're taken into jail for
intoxication. That's a
statistics as committed as a
crime.
In the FBI numbers. That's why
Gallup's numbers are so high.
You may pick up 10 or 200.
They're not violent criminals.
They got an alcohol problem, and
they're picked up for their
safety. Um, we're the only city
that does that. Albuquerque
won't pick up homeless people
for their safety.
When the weather's low and don't
have them put them somewhere.
But we do that every single
night, every single day
throughout the whole entire
year, right?
And so when you have those
numbers, that's what shoots our
crime number. They're not
violent crimes.
Now, has it changed in the last
5 to 7 years? Yeah, we, we've
seen some more uptick of violent
crimes, but it's not an astro
number, maybe 3 or 4 cases a
year of murder when we had like
0.
And then sometimes those cases
that that are on the reservation
are brought into are counted in
Gallup as McKinley County issue,
even though their reservation in
crimes and there are federal
crimes on the tribal.
And so
You can play with the numbers
all you want, right in, and our
numbers are completely different
than an Albuquerque number cause
they're not picking up the
homeless people.
They're not saying it's 12
degrees outside. We don't want
you to freeze to death because
you're passed out and
intoxicated.
In a, in a ditch or an alley.
So it's a completely different
scenario for us. I'm not saying
we don't have a crime.
I think there's, there's there's
a study and I remember for his
last session.
And so
An officer is called in
Albuquerque to to crime, right?
And I think there was radio
chatter or something that
verified this.
That and there was a shooting.
That they wanted to wait until
the crime scene calmed down
before they showed up.
Right?
Because they didn't want to get
involved in an officer shooting.
Now they have a consent decree
on top of them.
They're paying the guy a million
dollars a year to manage.
And so
You add in the civil rights
stuff.
That happened what, 5 years ago?
That changed the tone of people
wanting to be an officer too.
Um, because who's gonna risk all
their personal assets in the
civil rights lawsuit to be sued
personally.
And so then we come back and we
said we want recruitment and
retention money.
OK, that's fine. But at some
point, there's a day of
reckoning on retention.
Right? You raise the pay in your
cities and municipalities, we
helped you do that. How are you
gonna keep that pay up and and
give you another example of Gal
we built the we in the
legislature pro in 17 million to
build a new police department,
they built the $49 million
police department.
The sheriff has a building
that's 10 years old.
They're remodeling a 50 year old
school.
And and so they're spending
money, but are they spending
money in the right ways, right?
And can they maintain the level?
Of, of uh retention pay that we
that we pushed onto them, right?
And they maintain that number of
officers at a
from a $20 level to $35 level.
So they can be able to pay that.
Then you come back and say, OK,
the officers show up, but
they're not collecting the
evidence correctly.
When they go to the DA and say
charge this guy with
Whatever it is.
say show me the evidence.
They say, well, this evidence
way you collected it won't won't
stand up in court.
The DA has no other choice than
say I'm not going to court when
I don't have evidence correctly.
And when they do have evidence
correctly, right?
And they go in front of the
judge, sometimes the officers
don't show up.
Sometimes the witnesses don't
show up.
And and so then the cases are
demissed even further.
And then you go to a case that's
getting prosecuted and the, and
the judges and this goes back 3
or 4 years, I mean, the judges
were were sentencing children.
They weren't sent to him at all.
They're like slap on the hand,
go home, have a nice day, your
parents need to manage this,
right?
And when kids knew that there
was no, no retaliation or no
Nothing that happened to them
when they got their crime
whether they got sent home and
in.
And had to sit in the house for
a week.
Right? Cause the judges wanted
them in school and, and
everything else.
The kids have learned that.
I can commit a crime and, you
know, my cousin Joe did it 3
years ago, and so he didn't, he
got caught. He was home in 3
days and
And so, now you look at the
judges and
The kid that shot the one the
other day, they sent that kid to
65 years.
Right, the max.
I mean, it's still kind of
children, right? I mean, should
they get 65 years? That's
might be a little extreme to me,
but uh does it send a message,
yeah, but does it really change
the tone? I don't think so.
But then the judges weren't
holding accountable, and I mean.
If you don't have the
The police are arresting,
collecting the evidence, the DA
is able to prosecute if there is
DAS.
And then the courts upholding
the statute of the law, saying,
I can do anything in the law,
but not upholding the law.
Then, then the whole scenario
just crashes.
And I think we're headed into a
total different.
Prime tsunami or police tsunami
because
Worse, the cities and the
counties going to come to get
the money to keep the pay up for
the officers and and the
recruitment money, they're gonna
come to us, right?
And we're gonna say, well, we
gave you this and hopes that you
planned and budgeted for
future to fix the problem,
right?
And, and we can only create laws
and and tougher laws, but if the
DAs don't charge them with the
laws or the des cut a deal to
get them out in a time cause it
judges don't want to hear the
case or there may be underlying
circumstances, but if they
don't, judges don't uphold them
to the law and say I'm gonna, I
can hold, hold you this
standard, but I'm gonna hold you
to this standard.
Then we're not doing that. The
juvenile detention centers for
us in Gallup, we had like 2 or 3
kids. We couldn't afford to
manage 2 or 3 kids with 5
employees in transportation, so
we sent him to Farmington.
I think that's a lot of the
problem with the juvenile
detention centers.
But
We built up this whole scenario.
we, we funded you, we want all
this done and everything else,
and you look at the numbers and
it's like,
172 million.
Right, and 150 million for
recruitment and retention.
I mean, in, in, it's not solving
the processes. So we got good
officers.
So we get we're retaining
officers to recruiting more in
certain areas.
But we're not
The process is not working for
us and
Not everybody belongs in jail,
but some people do belong in
jail.
And and so I don't know how you
stop that. I mean, a little
crime ring in Gallop was so.
They're robbing our yard left
and right, and and they had an
intricate system set up, so when
a car would pass.
They whistle.
Or they text.
They knew that whoever was in
the yard loading up stuff,
right, would stop and turn off
their lights and.
And everything, and they ride
backpacks, riding bicycles and
backpacks around town, just
seeing where there was
vulnerability.
That they could get to.
I mean, I don't know how you fix
the problem, I mean, you could
say, OK, everybody's gonna go to
jail for life, but that's not
good at all.
I, I, at the end of the day.
My personal opinion is.
Police have to do their job.
have to collect the evidence,
right? You have to show up, they
have to show up in court. They
have to go to the DA's with good
cases and the DA's need to
prosecute.
And the DA's prosecute the
judges now need to uphold
statutes that we put in place.
For them to be put in jail or
whatever the penalty is.
And, and hopefully that starts
sending the message and changing
the, the problem. The
homelessness issue.
I mean, Gallup has done that for
I don't know.
Since
70s, I'm gonna say maybe I was 4
years old then.
But I don't know how long
they've done that, but they've
always done that for for safety,
but no other city will pick up
homeless people and say, we're
gonna put you in a facility even
for overnight.
We can't hold you without your
will.
But we're gonna hold you for
your safety.
And but no other city does that.
And, and maybe that's solves
some of the issue cause you get
to see him every day. A lot of
our detox people are are
intoxication. You see him every
day, we try to get him
treatment, we know who they are,
they know who they're dealing
with, and they can classify them
and say, you know, he's not
really a danger, gets drunk and
wants to fight, or he gets drunk
and they'll actually call him
and say, I want to go in.
I'm not sleeping on the streets.
And so I don't know how that
changes the mentality, but
I don't know how we're gonna get
cities to to retain officers in
in
And at that level without them
planning for it. They have no
idea, they're just
Going blindly saying we'll get
back to the legislature and get
more money.
Which we may have to do, but
But I, the FBI crime statistics
has always bothered me, but
there's no way to change it when
you pick up a person by a city.
meaning service agent who's
training to be a cop.
And bring him in. He, they're
treated because they're put in
there for their safety and in a
jail confine or, not really jail
kindly, but they have cells but
they detox them in in a detox
center, so.
Farmington probably has the same
issue with with that numbers,
but it's just the way it works.
And it's better off for them to
be somewhere in the building
then then sleeping in a ditch
and.
You know, fighting or getting
stabbed. The other thing that I,
I really think, you know, give
me the perfect example.
The Gallup DA.
run off every attorney in the
DA. There's, there's her and one
attorney to handle 600 cases.
And
Everybody deserved justice,
whether being charged or or you
were the victim.
And that system is going to
collapse.
To collapse.
And, and, and there's no way two
attorneys can handle 600 cases.
She tells people, oh well, I
transferred your case to
Albuquerque.
Oh, well, can you give us the
number who's transferred to?
No, that's private information.
So we called the Albuquerque VA
and say, can you look up this
case in Albuquerque and civil
transfers. There's no transfers,
right?
So they're lying to the public,
I mean, make sure you get Gallup
is gonna be.
The number one statistic.
On crimes and dismissals,
whether it's DWIs, whatever it
is, when you have that many
cases,
That the DA is not.
That are accepted to prosecute
in our in the system.
is gonna fail, and it's gonna
fail in a way that a wave's
gonna hit and, and we're gonna
look like.
The worst town, we're gonna
look.
Worse than Albuquerque.
And it's because the system
failed with the DA's.
Uh, I mean,
Everybody's got to get up every
day and go do their job.
And if they go do their job, I
think we'll change the, the, the
crime issue, but if you're not
going to do your job and you're
not gonna do it correctly.
It's not gonna get resolved.
And that's my
We'll take, we can.
There's 60 and
550, so almost 700 million,
right?
That's spent right there and we
removed the needle nowhere.
And it's another behavioral
health deal we throw money at it
and we don't move it, and I
mean, I'm not a lawyer, so how
do you fix the problem? I don't
know, but the data-driven
numbers.
Those are fine, but
Realize what's happening in an
area, take my area, right? and.
You're gonna realize in this
with the data and what's
happening, right?
As you'll see 600 cases dropped
by a district attorney.
And that will just send the
world into shock and and our
crime numbers will say
non-prosecuted crimes in and
released and sends a message to
people.
I can embezzle, the DA doesn't
prosecute the public defender is
there and, and if you have a
contract attorney and only have
one, it's, it's gonna fail, so.
I don't know, I mean, we can, we
can try all this stuff, but I
think it's been tried I don't
know what we do next.
But
Something has to happen and I.
Mm
Leave that up to Senator
Cervantes in his wisdom of how
we fix the whole system, but it,
it, it, everybody's got
Everybody's got to work.
And that's the problem is.
We're not getting things done.
There's 7 officers on duty for
the city of Santa Fe every
single day.
7.
I think Gallup has 13.
And so you imagine what 13
officers in a town of 25,000
versus 7 officers in the city
of.
250,000.
There's, there's not enough to
go every single call when they
break into his car, they're just
gonna do like they do in
Oakland, say, well, we're gonna
write a number down, and you
called in, and here's your
number and you can look up
online and you have an automatic
police report generated and
you're never gonna see an
officer.
You'll never see them for when
they break in your car and steal
something.
So it's, it's just
I don't know.
I don't know how you solve it.
You want to give us some good
ideas, budget wise, we'll work
with CCJ to figure that out and
what the needs are, uh.
And what really works and what
doesn't work, so.
Thank you for your time.
Let's see, long term and aging,
right? Aging, aging.
Good morning.
Good morning. We're ready to
start when you guys are. I don't
know if he has a presentation or
we need.
I don't know if you're gonna put
it up on the screen or.
Look at. Oh, there you are you
scroll down and click on that
PDF. See it's a chair you get to
do everything, manage the
computers, talk on the
microphone.
Um,
for inviting us. Thank you for
the.
Microphone. My name is Emily
Coltenbach, and uh I'm the new
secretary designee for the aging
and long-term Services
department. It's a privilege to
be in front of you today. I
joined the department.
16 days ago. So thankfully I
have uh an incredible talented
and dedicated staff here with me
today, um, at the table is a
Deputy Secretary V Hill. Good
morning and our ASD director,
Letitia Ortiz.
Um, we also have
Our, our team with us today. So
if I could just ask them to
stand so.
Know who's in the audience.
Uh, thank you so much for being
here. Um, I also want to
recognize that many of our
partners and um tribal pueblo
and nation providers have come
from across the state to be here
and so I'd like to thank them as
well. They're in the audience.
Before I dive into the
presentation, I'd like to just
take a moment to introduce
myself. Um, as many of you know,
I'm not necessarily a new face
to the legislature. I've worked
with many of you in the past.
I've worked in New Mexico, um,
for the last 25 years and the
health and public health sector.
Um, I
But I actually had the
opportunity. Many people don't
know that I joined the
department in the early 2000s,
at the aging and long-term
Services Department for several
years. I led the consumer and
elder rights division, um, and
later worked in the office of
the secretary on Policy and
planning. I, I had the honor of
getting to see the aging and
disability Resource Center in
its early days and getting to
know the diverse programs across
the department, so I feel very
fortunate to be back, um, at the
department after.
So many years. I, I grew up in a
rural community in New Mexico
and um that experience really
shaped um my career in public
health. I saw the impact of um
having not having access to
resources and services for older
adults for our adults living
with disabilities and our
caregivers. Um, in fact, my
parents still live in that rural
community down a 3 mile dirt
road and all in their firewood
to to heat their house and so
that
is really made a profound
impact, and I'm excited uh to
continue this work, um, with the
legislature and with the
department. So I want to dive
into our presentation today,
starting with our agency
overview just to round us and
who, who we are, um, I'm not
gonna go through this, but I do
want to highlight that we have a
a
Rod, uh, array of services from
supporting aging in place,
providing services in the home
and community, so people can be
empowered to live independently,
um, for as long as possible.
Prevention, um, and
investigation of adult abuse,
neglect and exploitation,
protecting nursing facility
rights, supporting caregivers,
uh, combating senior hunger, um,
and encouraging healthy and
productive aging.
I want to end on this slide just
noting that it's our
responsibility really to build
and sustain capabilities to meet
emerging needs, um, and
challenges. So if we move to the
next slide, um, one of those
challenges, again, not data that
is new to any of you is that New
Mexico's gaining more older
adults and who are living uh
I want to end on this slide just
noting that it's our
responsibility really to build
and sustain capabilities to meet
emerging needs, um, and
challenges. So if we move to the
next slide, um, one of those
challenges, again, not data that
is new to any of you is that New
Mexico's gaining more older
adults and who are living
longer, so.
I think you've probably heard
the statistic that um we are
going to by 2030 be fourth in
the nation for the percentage of
older adults, um, living in New
Mexico and uh though 20 years
later, I mean, when I was at the
department 20 years ago, we were
just getting a grasp on the
growth of um our older
population and that trend has
not slowed down, and um we are
on track to be 4th in the
nation, um, for older.
adults in just 5 years.
But I wanted to share a little
bit of the data by county, and I
think it's really interesting to
see and not surprising that the
highest percentage of older
adults, um, are living in our
most rural and um frontier
counties. So Catrin Harding and
Sierra, for example, um, and
also not surprising that these
are the areas of the state with
limited services and resources.
We know that all parts of our
state are impacted by the growth
in our older adults, but rural
communities and our tribes
Pueblo and nations are
particularly impacted.
Um, it's been incredible to see
the growth though and the
attention to address this
challenge, but we have more work
to do and our budget request
reflects this need, a 2030 is
only 5 years away.
So,
One of the uh other areas or
challenges is around our New
Mexico caregiving, um,
landscape. This is both.
Family caregivers and
professional caregivers. And
these individuals, as we know,
are really the backbone to um
our long term care system. The
shortage of direct care
providers is an urgent public
health issue. It's combat
compounded by this aging
population. It's compounded by
our opioid crisis, where we're
seeing um more um
Family caregivers taking care of
um in children, um, and also
this growing sandwich
generations so those individuals
who are both caring for an older
adult and a child or children
under the age of 18. I'm in that
generation. I'm sure many of us
sitting here today, our family
caregivers, in fact, uh, New
Mexico has 270,000 family
caregivers providing 250 million
hours
of support, unpaid support, you
can imagine that's a tremendous
economic, um,
Value, but unfortunately, these
millions and millions of unpaid
hours have a significant strain
on individuals' time on their
finances, um, and on their
health, especially mental
health. And so this is uh
something that we plan to dive
in. We already are and planning
to address it. I want to
highlight one, model, and that's
on the next slide. That's New
Mexico, something that may be
familiar. Thank you so much for
your funding in the.
last of this program.
Um, this, this program provides
financial assistance, um, and
training to caregivers who are
assisting friends and family.
And um the goal is to allow
older adults, uh, to thrive in
their home and community, um, to
reduce nursing home placements
and also um emergency department
visits. So just a little
snapshot of where we are. We
officially launched this program
last spring. We currently have
97 active participants across 23
counties.
Those caregivers have provided
nearly 6000 hours in a caregiver
hours and that's translated into
1.3, over 1.3 million in a
direct care services.
We, and we also have 156
application, uh, pending
approval. We've really seen an
increase in the number of
applications over the last few
months in this like the stars on
each of the county just
indicates where we have active
participants by county. I also
want to note that we do, we have
not expanded the program yet to
earn a Leo and Dona Anna, the
two counties in blue, um, we've
been very intentional in phasing
in the program so that, you
know, we know that.
Those are two.
The most population uh areas and
that we don't want, uh, we want
this program to be successful
and so we're working over this
next year to really um increase
um the participants and expand
those to those other counties.
Um, thank you again for the
funding of this portion of the
funding comes from the Grow
funds and um we are already
engaging in a plan for to
conduct the program evaluation
and we intend to start that
program evaluation, the early
planning at the beginning of the
another quick success, I just
want to highlight is the
conference on aging. We just had
that last, uh, October, just a
month ago. Um, we had nearly
700.
Participants from across the
The state you can see there just
the how many people traveled to
Zlata for this um conference,
something really exciting is
that we had 240 individuals join
us in watch parties, so they
didn't physically have to be
there, um, and so we set those
up around the state. Um, this
was an incredible opportunity um
to forge meaningful connections
and educate um folks um across
the state. The next slide is
shows our performance measure
highlights.
I'm not gonna walk through this,
but I do want to flag, um, that
we have surpassed many of our
performance targets. This shows
our 4th quarter of FY 24, so
we're very proud of that from um
live calls, um, in our ADRC to
our APS investigations, um, to
the 1000 hundreds of thousands
of uh caregiver support that was
provided through our volunteer
programs. So now we are going to
jump into.
To our budget request.
We hope that this request and we
recognize is a, an increase, it
is, I hope we see that it's both
reasonable and critically
needed. So I'm gonna start with
the consumer elder rights
division.
We are asking to fund 5 unfunded
full-time ombudsman, even
though, um,
You'll see back in the
performance uh measure slide, we
exceeded our target of visiting
long-term care facilities, um,
that's not enough. That has to
be much, much higher. Uh, we
have nearly 300 facilities
around the state that need to be
visited, and we need to ramp up
this capacity to ensure we're
protecting resident rights and
ensuring quality of care.
We're also asking to fund 5
unfunded uh staff, permanent
staff in the aging and
Disability Resource Center every
month we're seeing an increase
in those calls. We have nearly
200 calls a day, um, in, uh,
through the call center. The
call center is really the entry
point into our, um,
art department and so, you know,
we saw.
Over 6000 additional calls in a
year from FY 23 in that same
division, um, we're asking for a
contractual services, $300,000
in contractual services to
support the call center. I
learned that many of the same
processes and procedures, um,
that were in place when I was at
the department 20 years ago are
still being used, so we need to
modernize that call center, um,
we need to, to do uh an
assessment.
of the current system and
develop a roadmap moving forward
because we need to make sure
that um that entry point into
our department, um, we are
providing.
Um, live calls, we're making
referrals for individuals were
doing warm handoffs and we need
to have a system that supports
that.
In the aging network division,
um, there is a request for
$400,000 in uh for our federal
match for our uh volunteer
program. These are the foster
grandparents, uh, volunteers who
are going into schools, um, the
helping with literacy. These are
the senior companion programs,
um, these are volunteers that
are located in our food banks in
our community agencies, so you
see that there's a benefit not
just for the older adults who
get
Such um important health
benefits, um, for volunteering
cause we know isolation is an
incredible issue, um, for older
adults, but they're also
supporting families and younger
people, so you have a um a
double benefit. The largest
request is 3.1 million expansion
to strengthen direct services in
our aging network, um, with a
targeted investment for elders
of tribes, pueblos and nations.
Um, we saw, and I think this was
brought up in our last.
hearing, although I wasn't here,
about the grab and go meals that
um were was happening in many of
our um local senior centers as a
result of the pandemic. Um,
there's been a new rule change
at the federal level, so the
administration for community
living has um added this new
service and so that's just an
example of the expansion we can
do um with these additional
funds. Um, currently we are
really only touching just shy of
10% of eligible seniors.
in our um across the state, we
have a goal of increasing that
to 30% in the next 5 years.
This um this funding expansion
will allow us to move to 12.5%
of eligible seniors.
And the last um request on the
slide is uh for staffing to
reactivate the long-term care
division, which really creates
strategic alignment in
department services. So if you
go to the next slide.
You'll see um that.
When actually when I was at the
department 20 years ago, we had
the long-term care division.
This is in statute, um, at that
point, the aging and disability,
uh, the aging and long-term
services department ran the home
and community-based waiver
services, the D&E, uh, the
disabled and elderly in the
media. Those services are now
with healthcare Authority, but
what, um, we are seeing is that
there's a huge gap in services
for non-medicaid eligible
individuals who are just above
Medicaid eligibility.
Or home and community based
supports like caregiving
supports. And so there's a real
need for us to have a dedicated
focus in the department on
long-term care needs, um, for
that population. This will allow
us to really create a continuum
of care from prevention to
intervention to long-term care
services and supports. And so
our request is to stand this
division back up, um, it would
be a million dollars for
staffing.
But we also have to move some of
the current programs from our
existing divisions into this new
division. So for example, you
can see from APS moving care
transition specialists in the
funding, um, moving our veteran
services program from APS and
its funding and moving New
Mexico, that caregiver support
program, um, from APS as well as
in the aging Network division,
moving the position.
and the the funding of the
Alzheimer's program.
Um, and so that would make us
whole and um as I I mentioned
before, really be able, we can
develop the the caregiver base
programming and um support
that's not otherwise provided,
um, in the HCA.
So moving on to our specials
request.
So we are, um, start with the um
Kiki Saveja dignity Fund. Again,
thank you for um actually
creating this fund and then um
funding it. And so this year
we're asking for requests for
$20 million.
We have used those funds in the
past to make sure that we are
meeting the critical needs of
vulnerable adults out in mostly
the rural communities. So for
example, around food insecurity,
we know our older adults are
incredibly insecure with food
and so we've used the kiki, um,
money over the last year for
food boxes to expand our New
Mexico grown program, that's
the, the farm to senior center
program, that's part of the.
The governor's food, um, and
hunger initiative, uh, really
partnering with some of our
ranchers and our agricultural
providers to make sure that um
seniors are accessing healthy,
uh, New Mexico grown food, um,
and also supporting SNAP
benefits. So the 20 million
we're asking for this year, um,
will help us grow that the um
caregiver support programs that
I mentioned earlier, um, and
respite caregiving training, and
also.
ation through a voucher program.
So I'd just like to end the last
slide is just our focus moving
forward. I'm not gonna walk
through this, but our budget
requests really aligns with
these focus, you know, from
commitment to caregiving to
increasing investment in elders
of tribes, pueblos and nations.
Um, but I would like to just
note that it's our
responsibility even if we don't.
Regulate programs, fund certain
programs, um.
Implement certain programs that
impact elders and other state
agencies. It's our
responsibility to really elevate
that that aging lens and to work
with our colleagues across
agencies. So, you know, all of
our state agencies touch the
population that we serve in
aging and long term services
from uh corrections, for
example, to workforce solutions
to even the early child care uh
department where we see so many
family caregivers, uh,
grandparents raising
grandchildren and kinship
caregivers.
So really making a commitment in
this department to work across
agencies to make sure that we
are providing the services that
are population needs. So thank
you for the opportunity to
present today. It's a pleasure
to be here in front of you in
this new role. Uh, I'm committed
to the mission of the, the
department, and I look forward
to working with all of you
moving forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Chapville.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome. Thank you. I hope you
stay long
Mr. Chair, uh, that's my
intention,
my heart is here. I haven't uh.
been here too long, but I've
worked with considerable
secretaries and, uh, and they've
done good jobs. Uh, I wanna talk
just a minute about the Kikisa
raider fund.
Uh, Iki Saedra, end of life
dignity Fund.
And I live in
My district is one of the most
remote in the state. District 67
was right down the top corner of
the eastern corner of the state.
I live in Harding County, and
that is the least populous
county in the state.
In 13th least populous in the
United States.
And uh you know that in these
rural areas where the, the
population of New Mexico is
aging, and these rural areas,
it's a
A lot more aging is uh most of
the young people have to move
out there to get a job and, and
the old folks are left. So
Harding County, we had a problem
that we, we didn't even have a
grocery store.
And uh
The old folks who live there.
Uh, there's no place to go buy
groceries. Well, they should
try, no, they after a certain
point, they really can't drive,
you know, and all their kids can
know their kids moved to
Albuquerque to get a job, right?
And uh
We
Along with some help for some
folks I see sitting out there
with your group today.
We implemented a food delivery
uh program that uh
That, uh, the seniors were able
to make a list and get food
delivered to them. They paid for
the food, but they didn't have
to drive to go get it, because
that's a big deal at a certain
point in life, they can't.
And uh I've told this story to
other people, but I'm gonna tell
it to you. I have stood and
watched people being moved out
of their homes in these remote
areas where
For their family lives, where
their kids lived, where they
grew up.
And with tears in their eyes,
they moved them to a facility in
Albuquerque.
And that's not what's best for
them. What's
What's best for them is to stay
in their home.
And so
I urge you to support.
This program that's, it's kind
of a
Um
Pilot program, they're looking
at for maybe other areas of the
state.
The Kikisavera fund has some
restrictions on it.
That, uh, that it is for pilot.
Programs. We put quite a bit of
money.
Into that.
On the last couple of years, if
you'll look, we put more and
more money in it and, and if it
can
We can kind of fine tune it
where it can continue to support
some of these programs, I think
we ought to put more money in it
because I don't think that these
I think the people we need to
help in New Mexico.
Are the people that can't help
themselves, and that's these
older folks and so we need to
make sure that they have enough
to eat, you know, that's.
That's a simple thing. I mean,
it's not, that's what we need to
do for, for our old folks in New
Mexico, so the Kikisaveor fun is
important to me. I will help you
call, call me anytime. I'll work
with you on it.
Um, second thing.
The non-metro
Uh, agency area, agency on
whatever non non-metro part.
How, how is it funded in
comparison to the metro. I know
a lot of like Albuquerque, some
of these bigger cities, they,
they have other funds that go
into their senior meal sites to
go into their senior citizens
and uh I'm, I'm looking at, you
know, there are vices in my
district. It doesn't even have a
senior meal site. It's has
nothing, no place for the older
folks to go get a meal or visit
with their friends.
And uh you know, one of the
things that I've done while I've
been in this.
job is to try to
Make it for all of our old
folks.
Uh, out in those rural areas.
are able to
Just go down and and have a
meal, uh, get out of the house,
have a meal with their friends,
have food to eat.
So
Talk a little bit about how the
difference between
Metro and non-metro.
Uh, agency on aging are funded.
And how much, I mean, do you
know how much they spend roughly
per person. I know that uh the
metro agency has other types of
funding, so
But maybe not be a great
reflection on the, how much is
actually spent on each of these
people, you know.
Well, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you, um,
first for the, um, support of,
of the Kiki dignity uh symmetric
dignity Fund, absolutely agree.
This is exactly what those funds
are for of um food security and
um keeping people in their homes
safe, um, as long as, as
possible. Um, I am actually
gonna turn to one of my staff,
um, to speak to the the Triple
A's.
Um, so Denise King, who's our
division director of the Aging
Network is here with us today,
and, um, thank you. I think she
can begin to answer that
question.
Mr. Chair Representative
Chatfield secretary, um, the
Funding to the area agencies on
aging is based off of a formula
based off of population, um,
those 60+ and then not the metro
AAA, um, gets an allocation of
21%, whereas the non-metro AAA,
given that they have 32
counties, um, it has 60% and
then the, the IAAA, the area,
the uh
The tribe's publication make up
the 19%.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Do you, is there, do you know
how much that
Per person. How does that check
out?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chapfield and and secretary, um,
that obviously changes over
years, um, depending on the
total consumer unduplicated
consumer, um, last year we did
um see a 12.5% increase from FY
23 and uh unduplicated
consumers.
Um, we did see a significant
increase in your in FY 22 and 23
for.
Uh, seniors that had never
accessed services, um, accessing
like those grab and go meals.
And so we know that the capacity
is there to serve more and we're
devoted to, to seeing that
happen. Mr. Chair, is it roughly
the same per person, roughly,
uh, the non-metro and the metro
area.
Do they get to feed a person,
there's 10 people and I live in
Albuquerque and the other 10
live out there in Harding
County. Do they do these uh
senior meal sites get about the
same amount of money to feed
these people.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chatfield and secretary, um,
that does not, um,
Because of the cost of the
service is more in rural areas.
And we did add a rule factor in
FY 22 because of that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
the answer I'd like to hear.
Represented Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question was on slide 10.
The it says that there's a
federal match, what is that
match?
Um, this, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, the match,
so we get federal, we have to
match for our volunteer program,
so that's the $400,000 to be
able to match for the senior
companion programs for foster
grandparent programs, um, for
our RSVP, which is our retired
senior volunteer program. So
that's a required match, um,
that the state needs to provide
in order to get those federal
funds.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Chair. So, um, I represent uh
Mescalero Apache.
and I was wondering on some of
like some of the older folks
that live in the houses, do you
do any kind of grant work?
Or outreach work to winterize
their houses or anything like
that if they need that
assistance. Actually, uh Mr.
Chair and Representative, I did
want to, I, um,
We talked about the Kiki Savera
fund, but we didn't talk about
some of those other specials in
there. One of them is the
emergency preparedness, which is
a $600,000 request for exactly
those types of issues. We know
we've been faced with floods and
fires and um snow storms
recently and so having those
emergency funds um allows like
buying propane, emergency
placement, um, some of those,
um, I just issues and I don't
know if um
Anyone else wants to answer, but
I, I hope that that there's 2
weatherization.
funding sources yesterday from
Amner we heard about one.
And the other one is that.
MFA.
And so you can get
weatherization at home, stairs,
handicap ramps, all the remodels
through those two.
funds, there's 2, we used to
have 1 MFA. Now there's 2.
So there's funds available for
handicapping the bathroom, all
those needs through those two
agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
that's, that's good to know. I
was trying to find another
resource because we write lots
of grants through that and, you
know, just uh uh feel good
story. We wrote a grant.
For some elderly people on in
Mescalero and they heated their
house strictly by wood.
Well, they had nobody to help
them with wood so they would cut
what they would cut.
And they were kind of limited to
staying warm, and once we wrote
that grant and went in there and
winterized their house and put a
new heat pump in.
If you've, I mean, it's, it's
emotional to walk in there
because we take so many things
for granted, like staying warm
and having a hot shower and um
I went in there and
And where they've been piling up
blankets to stay warm. The
gentleman was sitting there
watching Bonanza and asked me to
sit down and watch it with him,
and he had no blankets on and it
was warm in there, so I was just
looking for another resource
because we try to write as many
grants as we can, but, you know,
sometimes we're limited, but
thank you, Mr. Chair. Let's see,
uh, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
good morning, Emily and
secretary and staff and everyone
sitting in the audience. I was
impressed to see, you know, the
turnout today. Thank you so
much. Um, you know, just
thinking about the, the request
that you made and Emily, I'm so
happy you're there. How you put
it under programmatic areas, you
know, there's 5 different
categories and all the
categories, um,
You know, I've, I've seen even
throughout this, this uh
document and others, um, I, I
don't think I could pick one
that's more important over
others, because they're all so
crucial.
And uh we have an obligation, as
we know, preaching to the choir
here to take care of our elderly
and our most vulnerable people.
Um, who can't care for
themselves and who need just a
little bit of extra help
sometimes.
And so the um
Adult protective services, for
example, um, it's an area that
has always touched deeply my
heart. It's on investigating
abuse, neglect and or
exploitation, and we hear some
very scary and bothering story
sometimes, um, about people
sometimes getting abused at
nursing homes. How close are
you, uh, working with the
nursing homes in that area.
We've heard some, can I say it,
horrific stories it just me.
go home and you think about that
weeks, I think, if not for
always. So tell me, what's your
collaboration with them, Emily,
um, at this point. I call you
Emily because I know you so
well. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for the warm welcome. Um,
absolutely have to um.
Coordinate and collaborate with
nursing facilities and so, um,
two different ways or more than
that, but I just want to focus
on two. The consumer and now the
rights division, um, houses are
ombudsman program and as I
mentioned, we have to staff up
that program. We have to expand
the number of volunteer
ombudsmen. Again, we have 300
facilities around the state, we
have to be um visiting those
facilities, developing the
relationships, um, hearing about
some of those concerns from
patients.
Um, and working closely with uh
the Department of Health
Improvement over at HCA um who
licenses and regulates those
facilities. In addition, our
adult protective services also
has a role, especially if we're
seeing abuse, neglect, and
exploitation by family members
of an individual who is a
resident of a nursing facility
and so um we absolutely um
Have to make sure that those
programs are whole to do that
and as you know, I think half of
our staff at the department in
the adult protective services
division.
OK, thank you very much for
that. And just a quick point of
information more than question
here and um representative, I
think it was Vincent who asked
that question, and Senator Monos
elaborated on it, um, on the
response, um, having to do with
like rehab and roofing and any
kind of improvements to homes
for seniors and and the elderly,
and um yes, the mortgage finance
authority does uh do that. Now,
even more in the past, every
year we used to have to approve
a a bill uh that didn't bring in
much money at all for it. It was
the web we called it the
weatherization bill, and uh they
requested funding, but they
hardly ever got anything. So
what we did, you may want to
pull up Senate bill, I think
it's Senate Bill 27
representative, that was a bill
I passed, and we passed with the
help of my, of my colleagues
here, um, I sponsored it about 3
years ago, and what we did is we
expanded the use.
the Affordable housing Trust
Fund, the provisions to allow
for that. So now funds from the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund
can be used for rehabilitation,
um, and for weatherization
programs, if if a person, an
elderly person is on a fixed
income, is disabled, for
example, has roof leaks and
windows, um, cracked and broken
and the house is cold and that
kind of thing. Now this program
uh can help them. So, um, just
wanted to bring that up and, and
it's more
The provisions that I expanded
within that language are all in
Senate Bill 27. Yes, you're
welcome. And um and that is all
I have to say. I want to thank
you again, the 22 million, I
think I wrote it down here, that
you are requesting, or 20
million for the caregiver
support programs is really a a
meager amount considering the
great need that we have out
there. So we'll be looking at
that carefully and hopefully um
get you the funding that you
need for our seniors. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Uh, representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have
a question related to the uh
AAA.
What percentage of the monies
that are allocated to the Triple
A's around New Mexico come from
federal government as well as
state.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thanks for that
question. I'm gonna, um, ask our
ASD director too.
that.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. So in
FY 25, we have about 20 million
of general fund and about $11.1
million in federal funds that
flow through our agency to the
Triple A's.
Mr. Chairman, a follow-up
question to that.
Uh, what percentage are the
Tripolis allocated, they all
equal or is it based on
population, how does that work?
Yes,
they are based on population as
um director King was mentioning,
it is a federal formula that um
allocate.
Is
Albuquerque, the only
AAA
That is both the city.
As the AAA recipient, as well as
the service provider. Is that
the only one in New Mexico or
the others?
De la Cruz, secretary, um.
In New Mexico, the city of
Albuquerque serving as the AAA,
um, is the only one in that
situation. That isn't the case
across the state across the
country, there are others.
So as Chairman, you're saying
that there are others nationally
that do that, but in, in New
Mexico, Albuquerque is the only
one that is both the service
provider as well as the
recipient.
Correct.
That
Mr. Chairman, I think creates a
little bit of an incestuous
relationship.
Because they're basically
receiving the money, spending
the money, and it assumes that
there's equity in their
distribution, but I can tell you
through long standing experience
that that's not the case.
That the unincorporated areas of
Burlio County, Mr. Chairman,
are, are typically uh
stepchildren to the AAA.
Because they serve the city
predominantly.
As an example, there are no
senior centers and the
unincorporated area, they only
reside within the city limits.
And so
Over the many years I
As the former.
Director of Parks and
Recreation, County commissioner
now in this capacity, uh, I
often received complaints from
from the elderly uh participants
that they feel that they are
shortchanged when it comes to
programming quality of meals,
etc. etc. Uh, has there been any
thought of breaking up that
relationship and having uh a
separate entity be the recipient
of the AAA, or, or like, I think
the city is probably most
geared.
Uh, to, to be the service
provider, however, uh, there's
no way of guaranteeing equity,
particularly in a scenario like
that. Can you expand on that?
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative De la Cruz and
secretary, um, so based on that
federal formula.
Based on population, the triple
A's are, um, to allocate.
The funding, both federal and
state, uh, based on the
population.
Now the state general fund had
flexibility over the years, um,
in our last state plan, we put
in in the state plan to ACL that
the general funds would be
progressively applied to that
funding formula or adequate um
and equitable distribution and
so I know that there are senior
centers in Burnleyo County area
that do um get the funding, um,
in whispering Pine Senior Center
and in uh uh the Harris.
Those are considered meal sites
and not senior centers. Maybe
there's a different definition.
I always understood them to be
mill sites where a senior
centers provide much, much more
comprehensive services on
multiple levels. So I, I would
challenge that assessment. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, have you ever
considered or do you do an
assessment, uh, an audit of what
is spent at the various
locations.
Within.
The Burley County, Albuquerque
area.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I also wanna,
um,
As our general counsel to speak
to that, I think.
She has something morning, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, representative,
secretary, um, there is an
annual assessment that is
completed, um, and
Doctor King can speak some more
specifics, um, as it relates to
that. But there is an.
Chairman, I don't know if this
is the proper venue, but I would
like to see uh an an audit done
to see exactly what expenditures
are being done, uh, in Berlin
County, uh, Albuquerque area to
assess whether there's equity
and distribution of funds,
because if you look at the the
collective population of Broo
County, which approximate, I'm
gonna just round to 800,000
people
About 500 or so is within
incorporated area of Berlin
County, the rest reside.
outside of that, and I would
like to to feel assured that
there is equity occurring, uh,
because it's a vulner
population, and I know I
wouldn't hear it if it wasn't
happening to some extent, with a
real or unreal, that is a
perception. And so I would
encourage Mr. Chairman that,
that that'd be looked at
seriously and I'd like to hear
about it later. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
Representative, and thank you
for bringing that concern, and
we'll be in contact with you
about that. Appreciate it.
Uh, representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh
secretary, uh, I was just gonna
ask about the senior home repair
program, but uh uh Senator Nazi
Rodriguez gave a, a great uh.
Information update on what that
is, but I also wanted to mention
that uh for the homes are in
complete disarray, uh, I know
that uh North Central and uh the
non-metro AAA have actually
replaced homes with uh mobile
homes, which is a great program.
So I look forward to uh
hopefully advocating to get more
funding for that program during
the session. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
Representative.
Thank you. I haven't seen any
further questions, um.
You know, the Kiki some major
fund has, has a great name, but
we gotta get some structure
about what we're really gonna do
in there, right? In classify
those and not just say.
They were thereing food tomorrow
we're trying to do this, I mean.
We got to get some
classification, so people need
to know.
And then
You know, they call it the grain
of America, but I get highlights
and so uh.
Um, I don't know how we're gonna
handle that.
Our, our population is great
then everybody else in the
nation and moral to take care of
it.
You guys got to figure out how
we're gonna start building up
that system so.
But when we do hit that age.
Um
That that we have it in place
for people.
And and some of that elder care,
I mean, is very important to me.
That she cared for an elderly
person, you don't know if they
turned off the stove or what
they're up to and wandering
around and, and how they're
handling. They'll just sit there
and watch TV.
My mom locked herself out of the
house one time and,
I wasn't here in Santa Fe and
there's nobody that had a key
but me and so
you just gotta be prepared for
those in in it it's a changing
scenario, so, um, has a Navajo
Nation.
Uh, got the message that, you
know, we need signed
applications by by dates and
timelines and, and are we on
track to help them make sure
we're watching that they get
their, their stuff done.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, and members
of the committee. Deputy, would
you like to speak to that. Yes,
good morning. Nice to see you
all. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
would like to say absolutely
yes. I think all aspects of our
Office of M and Elder Affairs
processes has had a shift in um
timing so that we could help
facilitate.
The timing on the other side for
those agreements and um
contracts to be returned. Um,
there is a definite effort for a
lot of overcommunication, if you
will.
There's ongoing monthly
meetings, you know, reminders.
Um, tasks of that nature to help
facilitate.
Those agreements to come in on a
timely basis, and that's for
everybody in, in the OIA realm,
so yes, we are seeing some
improvement. There obviously are
still some uh long-standing,
maybe outstanding items that
we're aware of, but those
continue to be tasked and worked
on each time.
Thank you. Well, uh, we need to
help him. I mean, at the end of
the day it's, I, you know, the
chapter's houses and the senior
sense. Those are the people that
suffer because somebody in
Window Rock wasn't doing
something, paying attention.
Or didn't get signed by the
president, which was the last
issue and, and so, I mean, I
don't know how we can
micromanage that.
They're gonna have to figure out
a timeline that they're gonna
have to manage in it.
Maybe you change the timeline
for.
He said your stuff is due
earlier than anybody else and.
And, and try to keep him on
track because what happened is
it falls through the cracks,
then I hear it, then I gotta
call you guys and then we got to
do all this extra effort to make
sure that this happens in
And it's just a timeline that
they need to know, it's like.
Christmas Day, everybody knows
what Christmas Day is.
That's gotta be established in
some way and micromanaging each
individual contract coming in on
time is just.
I mean
It's complicated and it's hard,
and that's not what you're.
Your job is to do.
Mr. Chair, if I may add, uh,
just reminded that one of the
provisions in the agreements is
also that we've extended the
IGAs to a 3-year time period, so
that we don't have to do this on
an annual basis, which helps
facilitate.
The requirements of meeting
deadlines. And I think the other
piece is obviously coming back
from the pandemic and staff
changes and ongoing staffing.
You know, everywhere is
Those constant interactions and
meetings with the division and
the tribespes the nation is to
make sure that we know who the
contacts are. So it's division,
the president's office that
didn't sign that forming, so
they did their work and then it,
it lay somewhere else and so
then everybody in the
repercussions were a 3 year IG
as good as everybody in the
state getting the 3 year IG. Are
we doing those throughout the
state to treat everybody
equally.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Our deputies you wanna
um, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee
secretary, um, it's not an
option for everybody currently,
um, but we're looking at
expanding that to make it easier
and more efficient in terms of
processing and getting the IGAs
out that can stand longer.
One that makes sense to have
longer ones for everybody so
that we're not.
Yes, uh, uh.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee and secretary. Yes,
and that's what we're looking at
expanding it for everybody. And
we started that specifically um
with uh some of the tribes,
nations and publics though to
see.
How it worked, um, and then
looking at.
And when do you think that
expansion will be complete.
Um,
Uh,
Mr. Cha, members of the
committee secretary hopefully by
26 what?
It takes us a whole year just to
change 1 to 3.
Mr. of the committee
it's pretty much what it is
but it, it does require
negotiations and conversations,
um, to get it expanded and to
make sure too that the
contracting party that that,
that is also what they want.
They may want to change it every
year, or they may have um ways
that they want to change it.
However, we can adapt that 3
year, um, IGA as well in terms
of amending it and not.
But Mr. Chair, we will make sure
that's priority and, and look
at.
I mean, it simplifies things for
if you're simplifying scene for
one person.
Everybody should be treated the
same and simplify it for other
ones. The documents got to be
changed later, that's just an
amendment to the agreement.
But I mean, shuffling paperwork
with staff and doing this every
year, sometimes.
May lighten the load and it can
reduce your FTEs if we do it
every 3 years.
And, and get better performance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I don't see any
further questions. Uh, thank you
for your time. Congratulations.
Thank you. I look forward to
working with you all.
Take their seats and who's gonna
start us off?
The retiring senator.
He's smiling already.
Glen
Red Center.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, members of the
committee. Uh, we're really
grateful for the opportunity to
come before you with a, a report
on the work that's been done
over the interim by the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee. And I wanted
to first thank you all.
Or uh approving the extra
staffing that we share with the
LFC. It's been an incredible uh
asset for us. Uh, they've made
several crucial studies and, and
reports, uh, to us that, that
have greatly expanded our, our
understanding of what's going on
in, in these programs, but
beyond that, they've served as a
link with you all, and I think
that's something that I hope
will be nurtured and, and
fostered going forward so that
the two committees work, uh
be more closely articulated that
we don't wind up somehow.
urging you to do things that
you've already decided you don't
want to do and vice versa. So
with that, I'll, I'll, I'll, I
think you all have the very
lengthy list that the joint
staffs prepared for us uh take
Rubyen worked uh uh on this
particularly. And um
Uh, but I would also mention
that, that this is kind of the,
the compendium of all the stuff
that we said, gee, that would be
a great idea. We haven't really
endorsed legislation. We do that
on Friday of this week. So I
can't really say that these are
all the things that were
endorsed, but these are things
that I'm gonna go through this
list and just highlight several
of them, add a couple of things
that we're going to talk about
this week, or we've talked about
earlier, they didn't get on the
list, and then the vice
chairman, Representative
Thompson, will do the same for
some of the things.
that she wants to bring
particularly to your attention,
then hopefully enough time for
some questions and some dialogue
back and forth.
Um, if you could, if there's
priorities that you think are
clear in here that we need to
do, could you just touch on
those parts, yeah, that's what
I'll, I'll tend to. So the first
thing is uh on the Medicaid
access to care. I think we just
generally support anything that
you can do to expand the
Medicaid, the 3 to 1 match is
such an incredible leverage, um,
and become, and has already had
an effect in, in the increase
in, in reimbursement rates,
making a difference for the
doctors and the hospitals of
this.
State, and I think anything you
can do to continue increasing
those reimbursement rates were
to fully fund the Medicaid
request, it would be, would be
to the good. Um, we would
certainly support those, um, the
thing I would add to that
Medicaid access to care is um
And number 6, and that is
yesterday we had the
presentation, I think you've
also received it, uh, from UNM
regarding their, their, um, very
ambitious 10-year plan to
expand, not to expand, to
double.
The Medicaid, I mean, the, the,
the healthcare resources that
they're um producing double the
number of doctors that graduate
each year, double the number of
nurses, physical therapists, all
go down the line, they want to
essentially double, and it's
something that if we don't do,
we're gonna continue to be
behind the eight ball in, in
staffing or healthcare
facilities of the state. So we
would certainly be supportive of
that and hope that anything
that, that you can do to add to
their, certainly the
the, the initial request is for
some planning money and uh we
hope that that would be
something you would, would make
a priority.
On child welfare. I know that
we, we had the um
Um, we, we've had numerous
discussions with our committee
and there's the general concern
about the department, um, and
its troubles. Um, I just want to
mention that I will, uh, I can't
carry it, but I'm going to be
asking the committee to consider
for endorsement once again, the
constitutional amendment that
would take the department out
from the governor's
responsibility and make it an
independent commission.
Um, I think we did that with
public public utility, the the
the public regulation
commission, and, and I think
that that's the direction that
if we don't do it, we're
constantly going to be having
the swings back and forth when
the administration changes, new
people come in.
And, and any momentum that's
built up is lost.
And so I know it's
controversial. I know certainly
the governor will not be in
support of it. It's like it
would be a constitutional
amendment, it would be a way, I
think, to begin restoring the
professionalization of that
department. They're down now to
7% of their staff having
master's degrees. And, and
that's
When we got out from underneath
the consent decree, the federal
consent decree in, in 2004.
One of the requirements was that
all the the the staff dealing
with children and families at
master's degrees, another down
to 7% because they simply cannot
attract and retain.
Professionals, and given the
reputation of the department,
it's become incredibly difficult
for them to recruit anybody.
They're having a hard time
getting high school graduates to
work for them. Anyhow, I won't
go into that and to tell you
you've already heard the sad
story, and that would be a
priority of mine personally,
although the committee would
vote on it on Friday.
Uh, you've already, uh, under
your grow uh appropriated money
for CYFD you've already
identified some of the crucial
things we would support all of
those and hope that the results
start coming in. The governor's
veto of the requirement that the
professional social workers be
included in that or be required
for those expenditures, I think
it was an unfortunate step
backward, and I would, I would
hope that she would reconsider
it if you wanted to reattach
some kind of requirement like
that. That just makes no sense.
To say, you know, that, that,
that, that, that wouldn't be the
focus. They're never going to
get from my.
They're never gonna climb out of
that 7% professional social work
staff, if they don't do
something like what you were
recommending last year.
Now, behavioral health.
Uh, there are a couple of things
that uh uh
Our listed later on under other
HHS, on page two that I want to
move up here under behavioral
health. One is item 14.
Which is tuition-free.
Uh, graduate education, uh, no,
I had, I had the wrong number.
Where is it? Oh, it's uh it's
under behavioral health, but
it's item 14. I just wanted to
bring it up and, and highlight
it for your attention. Um,
tuition pre-graduate education
for the four behavioral health
professions. Psychiatric
nursing, counseling, social
work, and um psychology. And if
we could make those programs
tuition-free.
Um
With much as we did with STEM a
few years back.
That's the way we're going to
start restoring that behavioral
health workforce, which is so
lacking. Money, money that
you've appropriated in the past.
have gone unspent because they
simply cannot find the
professionals to do the work to
get the job done. And so we need
to, to, to do that, any, the,
the bill we're gonna look at on
Friday would call for us to fund
HED with $3 million.
That would pay for the tuition
for anybody who wanted to get a
graduate degree in those four
fields at any of our colleges in
the state.
Any of the state schools. And
all it would require would be
that they then work for the
state, work in the state for a
year for every year that they go
to school.
So if it's a 2-year program that
they would commit to 2 years if
it's a doctoral program that
they would commit to 5 years,
whatever it took them, whatever
the scholarship was for, that
would be, and it would just be
for tuition, we don't know if we
could afford much more than
that, but at least the $3
million I think would get us
started. We don't know what the
takeup would be, but we thought
that 3 million would pay for
about 550.
Scholarships at $5000 a year
each.
So that's, that was the, that's
going to be a bill that we'll
consider endorsing.
Um, the other one is, um, and
it's under item 12.
Uh
Uh, on the other HHS.
That is that you would consider
the possibility we've already
been talking to the healthcare
authority about this, um, much
like we do with developmental
disabilities, a separate waiver
for behavioral health.
And that waiver would cover uh
serious mental illness.
People suffering from serious
mental illness, substance use
disorder.
And traumatic brain injury. And,
and we don't have many services
for people's dramatic brain
injury right now. They get
Medicaid, but the Medicaid
package doesn't really cover
some of the things they need.
The intensive rehabilitation
work. And so that would be done
under this uh special waiver.
Um, I know the, the, the, uh
The CMS has approved that for
for several other states. We
don't know if the CMS uh under
the new administration would be
as, as open to that idea, but
it's certainly something that
needs to be developed, we think.
Um, and
I think that's what I, I, I
will, I will leave it up to the
vice chair. 01 other thing, item
15 under behavioral health is
another one that uh is gonna be
considered on Friday, but it's
something we've talked about. It
was introduced last year, but
they didn't get a message, so we
didn't really debate it.
Medic medication assisted
treatment for juveniles, much as
we've done with adults who have,
who have, who are addicted.
We could expand that to
juveniles, um.
And I'll leave the increase and
all the rest of it up to you.
And with that I'll let the vice
chairman talk about her
priorities, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, thank you for
allowing us an hour that we we
were very excited. So, um, the
first thing I'll talk about is
under Medicaid access to care,
Didi waiver rate adjustments. We
heard yesterday from, I don't, I
can't even remember who that
that some of the wages for
direct care staff are as low as
$12 an hour.
Um,
that's right, yeah, and um
many of you have heard my son is
really hard to take care of.
He's in a group home. He's 6'7.
He pulls toilets out of the
floor. He, when he gets
aggressive, it can be really
ugly. He wipes feces on the
ceiling and uh so you can work
with him. I mean 99% of the time
he's fun to be around, but when
he's not, it's really scary. So
you can either, you know, work
at McDonald's doing fries.
for $16 an hour or work with my
son and and it's it, I know
there are people who would love
to do it, but they can't afford
to do it. So we're, we're
getting some people who are not
necessarily the best folks that,
but they're the only folks who
will take the jobs and the
turnover rate in my son's group
home is, um, I don't know what
it is, but just about every
weekend when we pick him up,
there's someone new there.
Um, and then, uh, under child
welfare, uh, I think it's really
number one. I think it's really
important that we, um,
Deal with the Kevinness
settlement. It feels like we're
going backwards and not making
progress, and I just see many
more lawsuits in the future.
Um, and then, um, consider
number 54, consider possible SM
5 task force recommendations
that align LFC and LHHS. I think
that's really uh uh an important
thing to do. And then, um,
OK, let's see, and then
undergrow, there's nothing
really there, but I added a
number 5, which is cost drivers
of healthcare, Representative
Chavez and I put our girl money
into uh transparency, and I did
give you a handout. It's
definitely not ready for
primetime play for prime time,
and it's got errors and things,
but if you just look at the top
part of it, it, it asks for a
million dollars, um, so that we
can continue our work on
developing.
solutions to key cost drivers
that includes um sustainable
hospital system, global budgets,
uh, development networks to
share resources, creating
simpler payment and
accountability systems and
interoperational IT systems and
lowering drug costs, um, impact
clinics and private medical
practices contract with
Consultants, um.
And, and down the line, so the
table is, I, I didn't do this
and it's not uh it's confusing
to me. So, um, I think that's an
important thing if we're ever
gonna get a handle on health
care costs is to first find out
what they are, um, and what's,
what's driving the great
increases.
I think it will be a a great
return on investment.
Um
And then under
Under behavioral health.
OK, never mind. Under early
childhood, the fit race rate,
I'm sure you all know that the,
the rate.
They thought they were gonna get
fit as family infant toddler
programs. That's the birth to 3
program for kids with
disabilities or at risk of
developing disabilities, and I
worked in that system for a lot
of years, and the return on
investment is at least $17 to 1,
um, which is a great plus. I
mean, it will help with our
future behavioral health costs.
It will help with our future uh
addiction and crime and all of
those things. So the the raise
was given, but then it was
rescinded.
Um, I, I was a therapist, a
physical therapist traveling to
Grants and Laguna and Aama, and
when I did my taxes at the end
of the year, uh, because we get
no mileage, we get $10 for a no
show. So I would, I could easily
drive 80 miles and go to 4
visits and get $40 for the no
shows. Um, so I was actually
losing money and so many of the
therapists in the FI program
have gone on to schools because
it's a, a shorter year and
you get paid and you're not
expected to travel, you know,
hundreds of miles a week.
With no reimbursement for that.
So I think it's really important
that we shore up our fit system,
and I will also say back in the
day, if a child was determined
at risk, then we could provide
them whatever services we felt
were necessary now at risk, a
child can get one hour of
service a month, not from each
specialty, but from, you know,
OTPT speech uh development
specialist, case management. So
I, I really think we need to
shore up the
the at risk. Um,
And then just the home visiting
rate increase and hopefully get
more folks to use the Medicaid
uh home visiting to bring in
those federal dollars, um, and
then under other HHS um expand
data sharing with LFC
legislature.
Or uh various uh uh health.
Healthcare data, um, including
the all payers claims data,
which we've been trying to get
for years and it's it's maybe,
maybe starting up now, but we
really need to have that
information and uh and ability
for the systems to to share
data, um,
Further limits on private equity
acquisitions and mergers, we are
the state with the highest
number of equity-owned
hospitals, and we also the state
with the highest risk of having
more of them, and what happens
when they come in is they sell
off assets and then maybe um
Read them back to the local and
shrink services closed down
services that aren't profitable
like uh OBGYN, um, emergency
rooms.
Um, and we, we, as, as was said
before, we can't, uh, we can't
afford to lose oh sorry, that
was the wrong committee. We
can't afford to lose medical
providers in any community
because we are already short
throughout the state, um,
funding county and tribal health
councils, um, as you know, our
county or state public health
system is is not county-based as
it is in most states. It's
state-based, so we depend on the
councils to be our eyes and ears
and
our, our worker bees in the
community and we need to fund
them as such. Um.
Let's see.
And then just, this is just kind
of a, uh, it's not really a.
LFC thing, but um we we are
getting more and more frustrated
with the executive when we pass
the law and we think it's in
process and we come to find out,
you know, that they, they
haven't even made the request
for proposals that happened with
uh a lot of things and so we,
we, we would like a way to be
able to hold the executive's
feet to the fire, that when we
pass a lot means you will do it,
not if you choose to, you can do
it. So, um, and then again I
will talk.
just a million dollars for the
cost drivers will be uh very um
a high return on investment. And
with that, I think we stand for
question. Just wanted to add 3
things that I neglected to add
it before um.
Senator Pinto
Ask me to bring to your
attention, uh, an item that was
in the LFC staff report, the gap
analysis that uh uh uh Mr. Sheer
did yesterday for us, and that
was the, the, the large amount
of behavioral health money that
you all have put into tribal
behavioral health that's not
getting spent, and that, that,
that, that's something that she
asked me to make clear to you
all, we really do need to figure
out how to get that money out
the door to where it's needed
more effectively.
Uh,
then two things that, that I've,
I've asked the staff to prepare
for Friday's action that I
wanted to bring to your
attention. One is the alcohol,
again, the, the, the um the uh a
version of the bill that I've
carried several times in the
past.
We, we, we have the alcohol
excise tax.
Half of it goes to the general
fund.
Let's use that.
Or something more uh effective
in the long run, I think, than,
than just putting it into the
reserves where it winds up now
into some kind of treatment
program. And if we could figure
out a way to match it with
Medicaid, we get a lot more.
Effective use of that money than
simply putting it into reserves
the way it goes right now.
That's independent of whether we
raise the alcohol tax. This is
current policy, uh, half of it
goes into the general fund.
It's, it's not a great deal of
money right now. I mean,
I mean, what's $93 million when
when we're talking about a 12
$12 billion budget, but
It could be matched 3 to 1, we
could have $150 million worth of
services if we just used half of
it that's going into the general
fund now matched with the uh
federal money. And then the last
thing is I will also be asking
the committee to, to take a look
at another constitutional
amendment, when it's, we've been
working on. We made a
presentation to courts and
corrections last week about it.
It's a, it's an amendment that
would
Fix the uh anti-donation clause,
which every other state that has
had an anti-donation clause has
figured out a way to deal with
it. Ours would do the same thing
and so um that barrier to
getting money out the door
that's been such a problem for
us for so long. We think we can
deal with, it would make it
possible for the state money to
go to any nonprofit that's
actually serving a public
purpose, there would be a method
for vetting those projects ahead
of time so it wouldn't be just
whoever you wanted to give money
to.
But it would be a way of making
sure that the county doesn't
have to own the property in
order to give them some
assistance with a roof that
leaks or a
a new vehicle that they need,
the county wouldn't have to
carry those on their books.
Anyhow, that's another one that
we think would be important. And
with that, we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, uh.
Representative uh Chatfield
first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to go back
over to the behavioral health uh
deal and, you know, I'm, I'm
just curious how many
In-house treatment centers, do
we have in New Mexico where you
go check into a programmatic
treatment centers where you can
go there voluntarily check into
a program if you have a drug
problem, if you have a, if
you're bipolar, etc. I mean do
we have in the state of New
Mexico, and is there a waiting
list, uh, can you talk to me a
little bit about that?
You're bringing up Mr. Chairman
and, and Representative
Chatfield, you're bringing up a
real sore point with this. We,
we have been very frustrated
with the Department of Health,
um, no, you're, you're talking
about generally how many are
there, but we were focusing on
how many state operated, there's
one.
Turquoise lodge.
It has its license for 40. It
has not had more than 30 all
year.
And we, when we asked about why
aren't you at least
Reaching your license capacity,
while the space we have, they
moved into the gateway center at
the old Loveless hospitals in
Albuquerque. The space we have
does not permit the kind of
other group meetings and other
things that we need to do for a
rehab facility. So we're keeping
it down to 30.
Have you asked for more space.
They have whole wings available
at the gateways. Well, we're
considering that. Just ask the
guy from, from the city of
Albuquerque, have they asked you
for more space? Not that he knew
of.
State state has a facility in
Roswell.
Absolutely licensed, already
licensed for drug and alcohol
treatment, 0 occupants
currently. The state has whole
wings at the state hospital.
They're not certified for drug
and alcohol treatment. What
would it take to make those
available. We have to apply.
Well, are you doing that? We're
considering it. The lack of
urgency around this is driving
us batty.
Now there are private
facilities, but you have to pay
or use Medicaid and Medicaid is
restricted on how long you can
go to into an inpatient
facility. So the net effect is
that right now, if you don't
have, uh, if you're not wealthy,
or you don't have really good
private insurance, you're,
you're on the waiting list for
turquoise lodge, and the waiting
list is longer than the number
of people that are currently in
there.
Mr. Chairman, yesterday we heard
from the behavioral health
collaborative.
Which has not met in one year.
Which has no executive director.
And which has received $900
million.
And funding
Why
Why
Is this? Why do we allow that?
Is that?
Is that my, I mean, why is this
happening to us? I know
personally somebody that needs
help, wants help.
With frogs.
With the emotional issues.
And they can't get help when
they call, they say, well, we'll
give you help by.
phone. What kind of drugs would
you like, you know, like we have
a mail order.
Well, I'm just not gonna say
that, but uh I'm very
disappointed in our behavioral
health system and apparently,
You know, we're not poor, we're
not a poor state. We have quite
a bit of funding, apparently a
lot of it has gone into this
behavioral health.
And I think we need to step up
and push it forward. I thank you
for the work you're doing. One
other comment in this under
this, it talks about our EMTs.
Uh, probably being more well
trained in that area. I will say
in
In rural New Mexico, I was an
EMT believe it or not, for a
while.
And in rural New Mexico, we
don't get paid.
Every Christmas, every
Thanksgiving you're called out
to go save somebody.
Uh
And uh the young people today
that live out there.
It's hard to live in New Mexico.
You have to have a job, you
might have to have two jobs.
And the amount of training that
is required is enormous. It's
I whipped for 6 months.
Uh, there they.
training.
Now it's more every night I was
doing it at night a lot of
hours.
It's, it's incredibly more and,
and you have to have continuing
education there. You have to go
to the city and ride ride the
ambulance and stuff. We need to
pay our rural EMT, so I just
wanna get that out there, and I
don't know, I don't know what's
preventing it, what's stopping
it. Uh, we rely on volunteers.
My son is actually really,
really
Good at that, uh, he saved two
people's lives. He's in his
twenties that I know of.
He went to look at going to to
be an EMT and said, Dad, I, I
can't.
Work and make a living and
volunteer my life to that many
hours of training. I just, I'm
not capable of doing that.
have to support my family.
So we need to, we need paid EMTs
in rural areas.
Um, I don't know how to fix
that.
But I know what the problem is.
Same way with the
Uh, in-house, uh, treatment
centers.
If y'all could help us know what
to do to fix that.
Call me anytime. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Representative, once
upon a time, the state hospital
in Las Vegas was a place that if
you couldn't take care of
yourself or you're a danger to
yourself or to others that you
were committed for a time until
you were well, if you got well.
Does that still happen?
Actually, no. I mean, it, it,
it's, it's a resource
that is grossly underutilized
and you know, we, we heard
stories in our hearings around
the state this summer of
deputies, for example, with
court orders, taking somebody up
there who, who to the courts,
understanding was not able to,
to function without being a
danger to themselves or others,
getting them all the way, taking
uh
2 deputies driving that person
all the way to Las Vegas,
getting them up there and then
being denied admission because
they didn't meet.
The standards that were employed
at the state hospital or, or the
behavioral Health Institute or
whether or not they, they really
could be admitted. So they then
would have to turn around and
drive all the way back
to where nowhere but a jail.
So
we do have some really serious
problems in, in, in the
understanding that people have
for what state hospital can be
used for and what it actually is
being used for, um, you, you all
are spending
We all are spending, I think $70
million building a new uh
forensic.
Hospital up there, a unit,
forensic unit, 70, is it 70? I
think it is
240, the price has gone up.
Well, that's cause you want an
air conditioning and
running water and all that, so
It's great to have a, you know,
to have a wonderful facility,
but if, if it's not understood
what, what, what it's used for,
or if it's not fully utilized,
because already they have whole
wings that are not.
That are closed down that aren't
being utilized currently.
So not at, not at the forensic
unit, but in this, in it, so it,
it really is an underutilized
resource. It, it, it, it's a
long standing problem. And, and
attracting staff is one of their
problems, but we were told when
we were up there that it's not
the professional staff, it's the
attendance and the nurses, nurse
assistants uh that, that, that
they have trouble attracting
with the salaries that they can
pay because they can make more
at Walmart or Target.
And I would add that that
includes like cleaning staff and
um
kitchen staff, the, the people
we would think would be easy to
hire as opposed to a
psychiatrist, but as the senator
said, it's the low pay Mr.
Chair.
it seems that
Now the granted, there's so many
questions as to the
effectiveness of all of the
dollars that we apply towards
behavioral health.
But that being said, it also
seems to me and
correct me if I'm wrong, that
we, we spend and are looking to
spend more money on relatively
short.
Treatment
Uh, efforts and like Buro
County, they just recently
opened up a facility. They don't
call it a triage facility, but
fundamentally that's what it is.
And in, in doing that, again,
it's, it's a short term effort.
The reality is that there are
some instances with many folks
that are suffering from
behavioral health issues that
it's clearly long term, that
they need long term uh resource
psychiatric resources to be able
to be stabilized to get back to
some.
Form of normality.
And so was chairman.
It seems that we need to
reconstitute facilities like the
state hospital and maybe create
new ones that would be able to
help families because
At the end of the day, most
families are affected by by
behavioral health issues at some
level. There isn't hardly
anyone, any family, anywhere
that isn't effective. And they,
they don't have the capability
nor the resources to help their
loved ones. That being said,
I, I struggle to understand how
it is humane.
To have someone that clearly
can't take care of themselves,
walking around.
In my community, or in
Albuquerque, barefooted in 25
degree weather with barely a
blanket.
And they're mumbling to
themselves, and they're not in a
drug.
Scenario. They are mentally ill.
How is that humane for us as a
state to say, OK, just let him
keep wandering around. There's
nobody who's gonna help them
unless they go do something that
they get picked up by law
enforcement.
And so I, I really think that we
need to consider facilities that
can help families like that.
Thank you, Mr.
and to respond to that, Mr.
Chair. Um, we, we 3 years ago,
we mandated medication assisted
treatment in our corrections
facilities. To date, we have 11
person, you know, so when we get
prisoners in and we don't do
anything for their addictions or
their mental illness, what are
their chances?
of not recidivist, not being
recidivist, and, and so we've
been pushing the corrections
department to try and get them
to actually use Medicaid,
medication assisted treatment,
which is the most highly proven
way to deal with, particularly
substance abuse, and we just
can't get them to, uh, so that's
another part of it is that we're
just making it's rather than
treating folks who get in the
correction system. We're just
housing them and then turning
them out on the streets to be
back in a short amount of time.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman, I
just wanted to add one other
institution to the list of
underutilized resources, and
that's Sequoia.
Our treatment resource for
Juveniles who've been accused of
violating a law.
And but who are mentally ill or
who need some kind of
assistance.
That facility was built.
35 or 40 years ago with the
capacity for 32.
I think their average census
this last year is under 2.
It used to be that you had, you
had to wait in line to get in,
but they've they've so narrowed
and restricted the criteria for
who gets in.
The judges have stopped making
orders to send a kid there
because they won't take him.
They don't, they're not amenable
to our type of treatment. Well,
I mean the whole point is, why
don't you change your type of
treatment so that you can deal
with these kids. The new
children's psychiatric hospital.
I was at the groundbreaking the
other day. It's gonna be a
wonderful facility. It's a
totally different model than the
old one. The old one was a place
where kids were sent, um, and
they stayed there for
345 months till he got
stabilized. This one, driven
largely by Medicaid requirements
or private insurance
requirements, much shorter term.
They're gonna be there for a
couple of weeks and then back
home.
Back to families that may not be
all that prepared for now,
hopefully stabilized, but I
don't know if you're gonna turn
around that many kids. I mean,
the only way to do it is using
medication as, as a
representative Chatfield said,
and that creates a whole other
series of issues. I, I just
worry that we've, we've decided
that short term treatment,
outpatient treatment is so much
better that we dropped the whole
notion of helping those families
out that don't know what to do
with this child.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to
see you too.
It's been a little while.
I only have one question. I've
been, I've been, you know, in
the trenches with you on most of
this stuff, but on other HHS
business, uh, line 12, the, the
HCA waiver.
So these particular for SMI SUD
and TBI. They are covered under
the DD waiver currently or not
at all?
Not
at all. Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Vincent, if like
with brain injury, if it occurs
before the age of, I believe,
26, they may be able to get
under the DD wave, but, but the,
the, the
ED waiver is for things that um
occurred, you know, not, not for
a stroke that you have when
you're 50, it's for something
that happened to you in your
early years. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for the
clarification.
Thank you guys for your
presentation. I mean,
coordinating seems to have
worked this year because a lot
of this stuff is built into the
LFC framework, not maybe not the
bills or the constitutional
amendments. There may be some
difference there, but there's a
lot of that that's built in.
It's interesting to me in the FI
program.
They only get one hour of
treatment and, and like, you
know, you're saying mental
health is a long term deal. It's
not, you're gonna fix this in 3
weeks, we're gonna put a new
tire lug nuts on your car,
you're gonna be mentally fixed.
I, I, I don't know how to
handle.
As a business person, I've come
to the conclusion, I have to
hire an employee, then they have
to hire another employee to make
sure that employee does his job.
Right, and that's the way it's
flushing out in a lot of these
agencies.
Right? We fund them, they
request it. We want things done,
and then they don't do them.
Then we have to come back and
say, why aren't they getting
done? I don't know how we hold
the exec when they violate
statute where there is a clear
way, we can go to court, we've
been there before. Just be
prepared about how many bills
passed for a couple of years
you have the scars to prove it.
There's a few scars, um, but I
mean, the legislature has to say
that at one point, right?
We want this done. We know
what's happening in the mental
behavioral healthcare system,
which is atrocious. Same thing
with crime. We spent a billion
roughly in in each one.
And nobody can tell me where the
needle moved.
Not a single person, I mean, you
know, I don't have anything
against the the place in Las
Vegas where but it was $120
million facility, and now
they're asking for another 120
million on top of that.
And
We're not gonna have the staff
in that.
Community stuff that that
facility.
And so they're gonna sit empty
because they don't have the
staff.
I, I don't know. You've been
longer here than I have,
Senator, and, and do more
governors and, and I just don't
know what makes it change,
right?
What, what can we as a
legislature make it do to
change, right? And we talked
about homelessness and cry a
little while ago, and it's like
Gallup picks up people for detox
and brings them in, and that's
counted as a crime statistics.
Well, that's, I'm fine with that
because it's not really a crime,
and when you dig into the
details, you know, we pick them
up because I'm intoxication and
it's 12 degrees last night,
they'll freeze to death, and I
don't know why other communities
don't do that when they see that
public health issue walking down
the street straight, staring
straight.
Adam. You may not be able to
hold them. So you can hold them
overnight where there's a safe
place and then you know who
you're dealing with on a daily
basis or monthly basis and who
you repeat ones are and who they
are and, and they can figure out
what their needs are as they
move along. I don't know how we
force government into doing
that. Any thoughts?
How are you as uh
yeah, this of course was with
the special session was dealing
with. This is, this is what the
Supreme Court commission that
Representative Luhan and I
served on, dealt with, this is
also what we just heard of
another, yet another, uh, the,
the, uh,
Oh,
what's it called?
No, the, the one yesterday from
the uh the people that are doing
another study of the same issue
here in the state. Um,
To me, it's a three-legged
stool. We, we probably do need
to change our laws somewhat.
They're too restrictive right
now. We can't, we can't hold
people who don't voluntarily
want to be treated even if
clearly they need treatment and
we're gonna be freezing to death
if they don't get it.
So we do need to do some
modification of laws, but
Until we also have the
facilities and the staff to
staff those facilities or the
people to work with the people
who need the services. You need
all three legs of that stool,
and if you just change the laws,
then all you do is fill your
jails up with people who are
mentally ill or substance
abused, and, and the jails are
already near incapacity anyway,
and the counties can't afford to
fill up their jails anymore.
They're, they're spending half
their budgets on jail.
And if you don't have the people
trained.
It doesn't do any good to build
the facility, witnessed what you
just said about the new forensic
treatment center. So we need all
three legs, and we just have to
go at it piece by piece, I
think. I do think we need to
change the laws somewhat, but if
you don't have a facility that
those people can go into instead
of jail.
Then their defense lawyers are
going to go crazy and, and
you're not gonna be able to hold
them. I mean, they, they'll,
they'll just point out you're
violating their, their civil
rights because they have a
disability and you're dealing
them for a disability.
And so, um,
We need all three. We need to
change the laws, fix them a
little bit, whatever it needs,
you would know how to do that,
representative. And, and then,
but we also need the facilities,
the resources, and then the
people to staff those. If you
don't have all three, it, it,
we're just spinning our wheels.
Yeah, but I don't know how you
force the exact into doing some
of that stuff.
That that's the question. We
have the money, right? We've had
the money and it's an apparent.
Really apparent to everybody,
not for a lack of fun, that is
people.
And so I don't if it's a slow
change, it's a slow change, but
at some point.
We have to figure it out for
them. I mean, just the
behavioral health council, not
meeting for an entire year and
not having a director for an
entire year. shows there's no
leadership in changing
behavioral health.
The number one issue I think
that's plaguing New Mexico and a
lot of other states with crime,
homelessness, and whatever.
You want to throw on there, I
mean.
It it it's, it's exacerated
itself, and I'm blame it on
Reagan when he started closing
its institutions and families
kind of took care of people, and
then they got to a point in
2018, 19 when this COVID.
All of a sudden happening,
people are like,
I got my own issues and I got my
own problems and I can't manage.
My child, my
My brother, my sister.
And, and
He sing myself and, and it's
just to me that's.
I blame Reagan.
It's in. Let me just uh try and
uh weigh in a little bit because
I sat in several of the health
committee meetings and thank
you, Senator and Representative
for bringing this up because
what we found also, just to add
a little bit on, on your point,
Senator Ortizipino that we need
staff as one of the three-legged
progs that we have there, um,
but even more than that is when
we discussed that we need the
staff has to be specialized. We
can't just have staff filling.
even if we could, we don't have
the employees, but even if we
did, we need to make sure that
we can not only recruit but
retain goes back to that
retention problem we've had
retaining physicians and
specialists, counselors,
psychiatrist, psychologists,
family support services, all
that you need to be able to fill
in this holistic
um approach that we're trying to
take, and, and so it's, it's
even bigger than than what we're
thinking, but, um, but you know
what, unless we, we truly
continue our
Or avid support and and effort
to change this. We're not going
to get anywhere. We might as
well try and even if it's piece
by piece, just try and put
something together because
they're not getting any easier
as we know it's getting much
worse if you look at different
areas, it's not only rural
communities, which we know lack
so much support and assistance,
but it's also in the urban areas
it's just getting out of hand.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
ahead.
Thank you. I just want to wrap
up and represent small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you both very much, um,
Mr. Chair, I really want to say,
one, I appreciate the forums you
set. I know last year that
really helped us take a step
forward on staff. uh, Mr. Chair,
sort of on that point, I want to
thank our staff, some of whom
are here today, um, really
emphasizing that staff respond
to requests that we make as
legislators. We have and have
added remarkable um capability
and director Calli's leadership.
is awesome. And I take as
absolute gospel that staff is
providing nonpartisan.
clear factual information.
That can mean sometimes that
there may be other information
or additional perspective that I
want, uh, Mr. Chair, and I think
as I started thinking about
this, it's really
Part of my responsibility to
figure out.
how I want the staff to help me
dig deeper.
It is never the case in all of
my experience that the staff we
have is
Um, they are ready to help us
dig deeper. We have to bring
sort of that, you know, learn,
yeah, bring that, which I feel
very confident with the tone and
tenor that we're setting, this
being the 2nd year after the
committee made a joint
investment, Senator, and I
really appreciate for the way
you put it really joint staff,
um,
And, and that's, I guess those
are really my and, and it's
reflected here, you know, we're
moving towards that 150% of
Medicare benchmark with huge
behavioral health increases in
56 years ago, no one would have
dreamed that New Mexico would be
anywhere near that in terms of
provider compensation.
The DD waiver, which the um
Getting rid of the wait lists
even as we confront true and
pressing funding challenges.
First time that I heard about
that was with LFC staff.
Um
Saying, here's an opportunity
that we think it, it exists. So,
just to really emphasize, Mr.
Chair, we have to take staff.
As our
A core part of our ability to
find the answers that'll help
New Mexicans to take as their
work is always in a nonpartisan
fact-based, and frankly,
Advocacy perspective around
trying to get us the very best
information to inform the very
best choices. Um, even as it's
challenging and particularly as
we hear from advocates.
from a very understanding and
well-meaning place close to a
great deal of pain within the
state.
Where they're just frustrated.
And that's, that is fully
understandable. It's something
we have to respond to as a
state, but that frustration
should never reflect back on our
staff.
Um, anyway, thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
No, just to continue that, I
mean, we, we've gone down that
path and when we have public
comment in and someone attacks
that.
That is not
A realm that we're gonna allow.
In any way, shape, or form.
Um, there was something that
happened yesterday.
I haven't seen the video, but
the, the staff came to us today
and in are pretty offended about
it, I mean, you can deny their
numbers, you can argue with
that. I don't think they'll have
a problem with that, but, but
calling an outright name and in
in a committee, uh, is not fair
to our staff and, and
And so, I, I haven't seen the
video of what happened, but I've
been made aware of it and so.
Just
You know, that should not happen
in any way, shape or form. You
can disagree with uh everything
in their paperwork and all their
policies and all their numbers
and, and they'll take that on
and argue that all day, but,
but, uh, a name calling in a, in
a professional scenario is not
something that
That
And I want to hear about,
especially when representative
Small and I have have them under
our our wings, um,
To make sure that they're under
LLC and, and so we have to deal
with the repercussions of that
as, as the chairs, and so we
just don't want that to happen
again and, and I know the staff
is is pretty upset about it, so.
Mr. Chairman, yeah, I'll have to
look at the video too, uh, I was
checking with my vice chairman
here. Neither of us remember
name calling going on, but, but
we would, we'll go back and
double check that. Um there was
some concern that, that the um
from some of the advocates who,
who would approach us even after
they made their presentation,
the identical presentation to
you the previous day came to us
and said, look, here's some
issues. And so,
They they got a lot of questions
that had basically been raised
by the advocates before they
made the presentation to us, so
it may have felt like we were
ambushing them, I don't know.
No, that's just good policy.
That's just good policy to have
the advocates looking at our
numbers and saying you're wrong
here, wrong there. That, that's
good policy to have that debate.
There was a name called in and
so you have to watch a video
and, and so it, it, it shouldn't
happened and we're not gonna let
it happen to our staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
I, I, I believe that it was me,
but I don't remember calling
anyone a name, not you
personally, not, not just to be
clear, not legislators. Oh, OK.
Yeah, so, OK, so, so I
Oh, OK. Um, yeah. Um, and, and I
agree 100%, Mr. Chair, that the
staff is fabulous. They, they do
a great job. I, I did have, uh,
I did have an issue of, uh, as
most of you know, I'm a
passionate advocate for the DD
waiver.
And so in the report, it, it,
one thing that jumps out is that
um.
First off, uh, we can, you know,
we have the chart that compares
to other states and it looks
like Oregon is only spending
$5000 but we're comparing apples
and elephants. I mean, like
Oregon doesn't have any of their
therapies. Most states have
institutions and so the, if
you're at an institutional level
of care, you don't get counted
in the DD waiver. So New Mexico
is very proud that we closed our
institution.
years if not decades ago. And so
the highest level people are in
the general population of
community-based, so it's gonna
make our numbers look higher,
but if the other states added in
their costs for institutional
care, we would be, we would be
nowhere near them, and, and the
one thing to have a waiver is
that you have costs lower than
institutional care. Uh, you can
have the waiver as long as you
do that. We've never come close
to getting to the cost of
institutional care.
I think those are the kind of
things that really need to be
pointed out.
I, another thing about
therapies, you know, Mexico has
like 38% of the people on the
waivers um who get speech and
language pathologists in Alabama
has 2. As soon as people saw
that, they said, oh my God,
we're going toward Alabama. So
we have to remember that these
things are going out to the
public and as a parent, it's
terrifying when you think, oh my
God, you know, the system that's
holding my son together is gonna
be a.
under attack, and I don't think
that, but the advocates do, and
I started getting emails and
texts immediately. Are we
shooting for 2% of people who
have therapies. So I think we
just need to be careful about
being straightforward and what
those numbers mean, like the one
comparing us to other states,
doesn't really have a diff a
meaning because we're all so
different and the fact that we
need to make, remember that the
folks who are looking at this
are peoples who, people whose
loved ones lives.
Depend on this and so when they
think, see things that look like
were um racing to the bottom.
It's concerning to him. So I
apologize um for anything that
was said, um, and it was public
comment and you know how that
goes, you really can't control
people. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
No, I agree with you. You can
argue all the numbers and say
you got a comparison is is off
for this reason and staff needs
to correct that. That, that's
something that's very fair game
and that's something that
everybody should be in the realm
of.
Advocates do a great job at, at
highlighting it in shining light
on stuff that we're missing, and
that's not the issue, I mean,
uh, I was in a PRC meeting where
they had public comment to, and
the lady fired the, the attorney
and I said, well, I think I'm
chair of finance. I haven't
fired you yet.
The dangers of public comment
in, and the repercussions to our
staff or something and maybe
there's guidelines that need to
have place and I just want to
make you aware of that they're
gonna be your staff for the
session too, so, so make sure
you tune them up the way you
want, meet with them weekly,
monthly, you have them, have
them do what you need to do and
shine the light on where you
need to shine the light and, and
let's get some of this stuff
fixed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We do
appreciate the staff. They've
been, the fact that a lot of
this in the um framework is
really exciting to us as a
committee, so thank you. And
that coordination was very key
to us is this is the first time
like a lot of recommendations
match up, ideally with where
we're headed, and so that helps
quite a bit.
So I appreciate that. Thank you.
Then tipio, your retirement's uh
looming in uh how many days I
think you got the number of
hours.
It, it takes effect the end of
December, but I don't have
anything to do after the end of
this week, so I'm, I'm, I'm
counting the hours now. You and
Senator Rodriguez, uh, may wanna
may wanna do a contract in the
Senate Finance.
We're gonna have our
Thanksgiving lunch at LLC and
Artisi Pino and Man Cheri
invited to join us if you want.
I mean, we
LFC is Capitol North down the
long hole.
We don't know where the office
is over there, you don't ever
want to have one.
