If they're planning on going to
the dinner tomorrow.
Can they let me know?
Which one is that the uh Darlus
also, uh, uh, uh, Xander said
if, if tomorrow evening's uh uh
reception and tour, and is it a
dinner also? I think, yeah, uh,
Darla Luz Darlos, uh, on the,
the birthing center on North
Forth. If you want to go to
that, to just to let Xander know
they wanted to get some kind of
a headcount.
what time?
That's a
6 I'll double check. He's gonna
double check it. I, I think it's
at 6.
Mr. Chair, if I could make an
announcement, so they're doing
um COVID and flu shots out
there, but they're almost out,
so or they may, they're probably
out by now, so if you had
intended to go.
Um,
They didn't tell me that, um,
but so if you had planned to go,
um, probably not. I did get one,
so if I'm doing weird things
with my arm, don't think I'm
having a seizure or a stroke.
I'm just trying to keep my arm
from getting sore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Tomorrow's uh tour and reception
at the Darlus.
Is that as soon as the committee
is over, you can just go
straight there. It's in uh North
Forth in Los Ranchos.
So probably
I
I think they mailed us, emailed
us the, the address so you can
look it up.
And that's, but that's tomorrow
night. Just let Xander know and
I, I'll be one of the ones to.
And then October 31st, the
deadline for um.
Then the other issue that we
need to remind people of if you
have any legislation that you
want committee endorsement.
Um
Um
The, the deadline to get that,
do they have to have the draft
in or just the title,
uh, Andrea and I that you want
that bill in for endorsement and
we'll get it ready for that. And
and so they'll have it prepped
by the time we meet in November.
OK. Any other announcements?
Very good. Well, let's move then
into our first, uh, afternoon
panel, and this is the
respiratory illness update from
the Department of Health.
Secretary Allen, good to see
you.
So we have, uh, Patrick Allen,
the secretary, Daniel Sossen,
the medical epidemiologist.
We have Aaron Phipps.
The state public health
veterinarian.
And Miranda Durham, the chief
medical officer.
So we have there's a
veterinarian, and you, the
secretary. Yeah, there's no one
left in Santa Fe, sorry,
uh, Mr. Chair, members
Committee, Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health, thanks for the
opportunity to talk about um uh
the this year's um uh I give you
an update on, on, uh,
respiratory viruses in the
state, um, had we been doing a
presentation like this 3 or 4
years ago, I think we would have
come and talked about the
seasonal update because viruses
followed a pretty predictable
seasonal pattern.
and when we got a little colder
and, and, uh, and people started
going indoors and there was more
mixing, you would see a, a
variety of, of, of viruses pop
up and sometimes the season will
start a little earlier,
sometimes a little bit later,
but it was pretty, it was pretty
regular. COVID sort of changed
all of that, um, uh, in, in a
couple of ways when, when COVID
first came out, of course, we
adopted a lot of tools to hold
down the, the spread of COVID
that turned out to be
extraordinarily effective on
pretty much
any uh respiratory disease, uh,
and so we, you know, we, we saw
flu vanish to to almost, almost
01 line of flu was driven
extinct, uh, during that time,
um, doesn't exist at all as near
as we know, uh uh in the world
today, um, uh, and we're
emerging from that kind of a
dynamic, but, but COVID itself
has not really quite settled
into a seasonal pattern, Doctor
uh, Doctor Sasson will talk
about that, um, uh, a little bit
later, uh, but our, our intent
today looking through the.
If you look at the presentation
on page 2, just to give you a
quick rundown and we'll talk in
a little bit of detail about
influenza, uh, RSV and COVID,
uh, we'll talk a little bit
about um our response and
readiness, especially in the
context of um uh highly
pathonogenic avian influenza in
dairy cattle. Try saying that 10
times fast, uh, and then we'll
just talk about some of our some
of our strategies going forward.
If you look at, um, uh, at slide
3, I do want to take just a
minute to talk about, well, how
do we know any of this stuff.
Again, a little bit of a
difference during COVID and in
COVID, we kind of got ourselves
acclimated to the idea. We're
gonna try to find every case and
report every case in real time,
test every single person at
least once, if not multiple
times for the same disease.
We've never really done that
before, um, uh, in, in the
context of that kind of uh that
kind of a disease and that's not
ordinarily how we do things.
It's frightfully expensive, uh,
and at some point doesn't
actually in the context of an
ordinary respiratory viruses
doesn't tell you much for the
added, uh.
increments. So we talk about
public health surveillance. I
actually, um, with all due
respect to my public health
colleagues, hate the word
surveillance. It sounds like
spying in this context as
surveillance means watching.
We're watching for diseases for
their emergence, for their
patterns, for trends, for ways
that they're being transmitted
places, those, uh, those kinds
of things we use a variety of
tools to be able to do that, um,
we're able to to track
laboratory results that come in,
we have diseases that are
required to be reported when
they're found by healthcare.
Care practitioners. We use the
state health information and uh
uh exchange synchronous, uh, to
be able to harvest information,
uh, about what's happening uh in
the, in the community we use our
vaccination system, NIMSI, um,
and then we used just sort of
good old fashioned, um, talking
to people, doing interviews and
and those kinds of things. All
of these data sources carry with
them a kind of a range of how
accurate are they, how timely
are they, uh, and so part of the
system of surveillance or
watchfulness is having having.
highly qualified trained
professional staff in the agency
who then look at all of that
incoming raw data and make sense
of it and tell us what's going
on, tell us what we need to be
worried about, what we don't
need to be worried about. On
page 4,
Uh, just a, a quick snapshot. I
decided not to try to run the
risk of doing an actual demo,
uh, uh, here, but uh we have a
viral respiratory infection
dashboard, um, where we have
information, uh, we have a
summary page, and, uh, we have
detailed information about each
of those 3 viruses of of RSV flu
and COVID. Uh, we have
information about vaccinations,
hospitalizations, um, all those
kinds of things and so and we
update that once a week. Uh, so
that is, that is a direct
outgrowth of the, of the
pandemic in public.
public health were often used to
a fairly significant data lag
and we wait till data is
complete and finalized and
cleaned and, and sometimes it
can be, it can be quite late
compared to, you know, when it
was harvested, uh, so in this,
in this area now we provide
weekly data based on things that
we are able to track and know
when we, uh, and we share that.
And and one of the uses, a
couple of, couple of uses is for
us to identify what are public
health interventions we might
want to make, but the public can
also use this. Is there a lot of
COVID going around? Um, does
that mean I want to change my
activities, places I might want
to go in a crowd. Does it mean I
might want to go out and get
that vaccine. I think there may
still be a handful left
representative out there. We,
we've done 100 shots so far
today, uh, at that, uh, at that
mobile unit, but that's really
the intent of having that
dashboard. Um, if you look at
the next slide on slide 5,
We do have a little bit of vac
uh vaccination information. This
is what's showing up on the uh
on the dashboard, uh, right now,
um, and we've broken down this
is specifically looking at COVID
vaccine and it's looking at um
uh last season, so 23, 24 from
from fall to to spring, um, uh,
and there's an interesting
pattern that's developed that's
not unique to New Mexico or or
anything like that and it's a
lot more flu shot than COVID
shot.
Um, neither are really at the
level we would love to see and
particularly when you look at
the population 65 and older and,
and even more so, uh, people who
are 85 and over are 340 times
more likely to die from COVID
than someone who's under 50, so
when we talk about, you know,
COVID is just like flu now,
that's sort of true in a sense
and really profoundly not true,
uh, it continues to be much more
serious, much more deadly. We've
now got lots of tools that we
didn't have 3 years ago, 4 years
ago to be able to combat.
it, but, uh, so this gap is a is
a concern between COVID and, and
uh and flu and we're gonna run a
couple of focus groups, I think,
to try to talk to people who've
gotten one and not the other,
and, uh, and, and dig into why,
what is it, you know,
accessibility, they've made a
positive decision. I don't want
to get that one and just uh so
we can figure out is there more
messaging that we can do, um,
on, uh, last slide I'll talk
about is slide 6, and this is on
our dashboard also, it's, it's
uh um uh sewer, uh, uh.
wastewater, uh, testing sewer
sewer samples. This is another
thing that uh that was being
used a little bit in a couple of
places, but really gained a lot
of popularity during uh during
the pandemic. It's one of the
and it's one of these
technological developments that
you kind of have to be a little
bit careful about. During COVID,
there was great promise that we
could do wastewater sampling
and, and have it be an early
warning sign that COVID was
cropping up somewhere and so
that community would need to go
put on masks, but nobody else
would have to or you know,
things like that, and I
In this case, I'm talking more
from my Oregon experience than
here, but I think the same,
you're relatively the same kinds
of kinds of conversations were
happening here. Turns out it's
not that great a leading
indicator. There's about a 7 to
10 day turnaround time from the
time a sample is taken to the
time we know about it and 7 to
10 days later we already know
there's COVID in the community
and so it's not, it's not
helping, uh, it's not helping
dramatically there. It is
helping give us a pretty, you
know, a sort of another data
source that shows that, um, you
know, if you go back a month or
two ago, there was a lot of
COVID in New Mexico.
and we all knew that we saw it
we had ourselves friends, uh,
neighbors, those kinds of things
that um that had it. That said,
wastewater testing, I, I think
it's, I think COVID also helped
push forward the science on
wastewater testing to really
understand that there are places
where it can be extraordinarily
helpful where it's maybe not
super evident that a disease is
circulating in a community and
measles outbreaks is maybe one
good illustration of that where
um uh if you've got a population
that's got a low vaccination
rate, and you might not realize
that measles has taken hold but
wastewater testing.
It is, is a tool potentially
that can um that can uh uh
reveal that. Last thing I'll say
before I, I, I turn the, turn it
over, um.
Wastewater is kind of a good
example of something that I
think did happen during COVID
that we need to, we need to work
on this we all kind of tended to
learn the first lesson we heard
and then by God, we could not
dynamite that lesson out of our
heads if our lives depended on
it in some cases they did, uh,
you know, wastewater testing is
magic was one of them testing
generally is testing is key, you
know, um, and, and, uh, you
know, testing had a role to play
at the beginning of the
pandemic. It's role changed our
understanding of that didn't
really change, um, uh, vaccines.
limit transmission had one
meeting for early variants of
the disease, a different meaning
for later variants, and so I
think one of the things we
learned in public health is we
need to think really carefully
about how we, um, how we manage
and how we do a better job
communicating important
information about diseases and
disease outbreaks, um, so that
we don't get ourselves into that
trap of, of being vulnerable to
misinformation, sharing things
that then get updated and we
don't have a good way to share
those updates, those, those
kinds of things. So with that is
a little bit of introduction to
the overall.
topic to talk about um the three
viral respiratory diseases,
specifically I talk to turn it
over to Doctor Dan Sawson, who
is our medical epidemiologist.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, um,
Madam Vice Chair, thank you for
getting your vaccines, so
important, um, not just for
yourself but for your family and
your community, appreciate that.
Um, the next slide 7, on
influenza, um, like most
respiratory viruses, uh,
influenza peaks during the
winter when people tend to have
more indoor contact and
increased opportunity to share
respiratory virus, uh,
particles.
Um, this graphic on the on the
slide show is from our public uh
data dashboard showing
hospitalizations with influenza
in New Mexico during the past
year and demonstrates the
seasonal pattern, so peaking in
January of this year, as well as
the elevated rates of
hospitalization, um, with
increasing age, so all three
viruses have a propensity for um
affecting and creating more
severe disease in older
patients.
um, some like flu and RSV also
in very young children.
Um, so before COVID-19 as a
secretary was saying influenza
was the most widespread, uh,
respiratory virus infection that
we monitored and the most
severe. CDC estimates that 26
million Americans, some were
just under 8% of the population
have symptomatic influenza
infection, um, on an average,
uh, year, children are more
likely to be infected about
twice the rate of, of persons
over 65 years of age, but they
have uh
They tend to have milder
illness.
Um, as many as 50,000 deaths are
caused by influenza in the
United States during a severe
flu season.
In New Mexico, we monitor severe
infections through
hospitalization and we find that
persons over 65 years of age,
especially those over 75
experienced the highest rates or
risk of severe disease, um,
being a hospitalization,
pre-existing medical conditions
like heart disease, diabetes,
asthma, uh, put New Mexicans at
higher risk of severe infection.
From October of last year
through September of this year,
we estimate that there were 2030
hospitalizations for influenza
at the peak of influenza
infections in January, 6.5% of
all emergency department visits
or for influenza and 13% of
emergency department visits for
children or for influenza.
We have tools for all 3 viruses,
but uh the longest standing for
preventing illness in uh uh from
uh influenza um to uh reduce the
impact on our residents and
consumption of healthcare
resources.
We encourage vaccination to
reduce the severity of
influenza. What CDC now refers
to as taking influenza from wild
to mild, um, yet only 30% of New
Mexicans received the flu
vaccine last year.
In the nine years prior to the
pandemic, influenza vaccination
ranged from 44 to 50%. So
substantially below what, what
we were pre-pandemic.
The highest vaccination rates
are amongst those 65 and older
who are at the greatest risk of
severe disease, yet 40% of those
65 and older in New Mexico were
not vaccinated for flu last
year.
Additionally, we estimate that
27% of persons hospitalized for
influenza in the last two
seasons, did not receive
antiviral medicines within 2
days of admission, which could
have improved their um their
hospital stay.
So increasing the use of
vaccines and treatments for
respiratory viruses requires a
multifaceted approach to change
public perception and um build
clinical support.
On the next slide, um, you can
see that influenza
hospitalization rates in
children, young adults, and
particularly those 75 and older
are higher in New Mexico, the
salad line, than in the US
overall, the dashed line.
In the next slide, I'll go on to
talk a little bit about the
respiratory syncytial virus or
RSV.
Um, RSV causes seasonal illness
with a fall to winter peaks, so
it's uh pretty much the season
now where we'll start seeing
more RSV infections. Infection
with RSV is nearly universal in
the first few years of life and
protection appears to last as
long as a person's immune
system, uh, remains strong as
shown on this slide, 4 out of 5
hospitalizations for RSV in New
Mexico last year, was a child
before their 5th birthday.
In fact, RSV is actually the
leading cause of hospitalization
for children in this age group.
As of last fall, severe illness
is now preventable through
immunization, so it's, it's
relatively recent, um, but super
important now that we have
preventive therapy.
Because of the infant immune
system is immature when they're
most vulnerable during their
first RSV season, immunization
is pursued through vaccines for
pregnant persons who pass
antibody to their child before
birth or through antibody
injection for infants less than
8 months of age who are entering
their first RSV season or her or
who are born during it.
The immune therapy is also
recommended for some children
through 19 months who are at
risk of severe disease due to
risk factors such as lung
disease, severe
immunocompromise, but also
American Indian children are
considered at high risk for
severe RSV and are recommended
to get the immune therapy during
their 2nd season.
Vaccine is currently recommended
for all adults, 75 years and
older and for adults, 60 to 74
years of age who are at
increased risk of severe RSV due
to a wide range of chronic
medical conditions.
Additionally, residents of
skilled nursing facilities are
all recommended to be vaccinated
with RSV vaccine.
We estimated that there were
about 1900 hospitalizations for
RSV last season at the peak of
RSV infections also around that
January time frame a little
earlier, 16% of emergency
department visits for children
less than 5 years of age, had a
discharge diagnosis of RSV.
We currently conduct RSV
surveillance, uh,
hospitalization surveillance
only in Bernalillo County, but
we hope to expand the notifiable
disease list to include RSV
hospitalization and expand our,
um uh surveillance or disease
tracking or watchfulness um for
RSP just like flu and COVID.
On the next slide.
Um, you can see that typical of
many respiratory infections,
rates of RSV hospitalization in
New Mexico are higher than the
US average for RSV, the elevated
risk is predominantly in this
lower, this age group of, of
children 0 to 4 years of age.
RSP antibody injection was in
short supply last year and this
year there's no shortage and the
healthcare community is more
familiar with this approach to
preventing severe disease,
although there's still much work
to increase immunization to
protect our elders and infants
from this disease.
Slide 11.
Um, I'll talk about COVID-19
while no longer a pandemic or a
public health emergency.
COVID-19 is still a big deal.
Um, COVID-19 is the most severe
of our current respiratory virus
illnesses, um, COVID-19 has
challenged our understanding of,
of seasonal respiratory viruses
by showing multiple waves during
a year, including during the
summer when respiratory
infections, uh, virus infection
transmission tends to be low.
It appears that immunity from
vaccination or prior infection
lasts only about 6 months, which
together with changing strains
and the high transmissibility of
this virus results in infections
throughout the year.
COVID-19 causes more
hospitalizations than influenza
and RSV combined.
As you see in the figure,
hospitalizations in the right
column are disproportionately
experienced by persons of, of
older age when compared to all
cases identified through
laboratory testing, which is in
the left column.
And slide 3 slide 12, I'm sorry.
COVID-19 hospitalization rates
have run higher in New Mexico,
the solid line, then the US
averaged the dash line and all
age groups, but especially 75
years and older.
Despite high vaccination levels
during the pandemic in New
Mexico, low COVID vaccination
rates leave many people,
particularly older New Mexicans
with medical conditions,
vulnerable to hospitalization
and death.
COVID-19 vaccination rates have
run substantially lower than
than for influenza across all
age groups as the secretary
mentioned and more than half of
New Mexicans over 65 years of
age go unprotected from this
virus.
National data also suggests that
the majority of our seniors with
COVID-19 are not getting early
antiviral therapy to prevent
hospitalization and death.
So we have much work and uh
common interest to put to
increase uh COVID vaccination
and antiviral therapy and
frankly vaccination and anti and
and therapy for all of these
viruses. Thank you.
So let me go ahead and pick it
back up and talk about outbreak
readiness generally and then uh
before I turn it over to talk
about uh avian influenza
specifically, um, we do a lot to
try to be prepared for disease
outbreaks. Uh, however, I think
COVID-19 got you all and us used
to a fully funded public health
system because there was tons of
money everywhere for everything
that we did related to COVID,
and most of that money now is
gone, uh, and so we're back to
the, the, the, um, not terribly
well funded public health system
to try to
Do the work that uh in some
cases you've you now all expect
a higher level of work like that
dashboard, which is something
that we didn't do before. We've
got some opportunities and some,
some vulnerabilities in this, in
this context. When I was in
Oregon and and COVID first.
broke out and, and I was talking
to the public health lab that I
was responsible that that
initially could run about 40 or
50 samples a day on its testing,
we kind of looked with awe at
the New Mexico Public Health
Laboratory sort of the gold
standard of, of a well equipped,
well staffed.
Public health lab with robust
capacity and that continues to
be the case and it's a, it's a
huge strength for us in the
state, um, as you've heard when
we talked about, um, uh, when we
talked about different systems
of watching for disease. We have
a pretty robust system for that
in New Mexico. We always want to
continue to improve it as Dr.
Sawson mentioned with, uh, with
RSV, but we've got a good
system.
We work well with other agencies
and you'll hear, uh, Doctor
Phipps talk about our
relationship with New Mexico
Department of Agriculture and
that, uh, in that context, um,
and, and, and then there's
there, there continues to be a
rapidly evolving health
information, um, uh, world that
we live in from being able to
visualize and display data as we
do on our dashboard to the kinds
of tools like wastewater
sampling that allow us to know
more about what's going on, but
we do have challenges. I already
talked about the federal grant
funding, um, on the slide we say
unstable, I think that's being
charitable.
the federal grant funding in
many of these areas has now
dropped this fiscal year. It's
really pretty much down to 0 at
this point and so we're left
with our own resources or the
baseline levels of federal
funding that we had in those
programs. Uh, one of the biggest
negative outcomes, um, from a
public health standpoint out of
the pandemic was, was the need
for us to rebuild, uh, public
trust in, in public health, um,
questions around uh around
response and vaccines and
testing and masks and all those
kinds of things.
a politically very charged set
of topics, uh, and we, we got a
little bit sucked into that and
so um if you look at our
agencies, Department of Health's
strategic goals, one of them is,
uh, is, is assuring that New
Mexico Department of Health is a
trusted voice, uh, in New Mexico
for, uh for issues around health
information and advice, and we
know that we've got work to do
to be able to build that back
and then, uh, you know, whether
it's issues related to burnout
from COVID, as kind of the great
resignation that that
began to occur during the
pandemic or just the baby boom,
uh, aging out, we've had huge
amounts of turnover and we're
not unique at the Department of
Health. It's other state
agencies and everybody in the
caregiving industries, uh, it's
a real demographic, um, whatever
the reverse of a tidal wave is,
um, occurring and we're, we're
all challenged with that.
Um,
What I, what I'd like to do now
is turn, turn it over to our
public health veterinarian. You
may be tempted to wonder, as I
was the first time I got into
public health, why in the heck
do we have a veterinarian, um,
and, and as you hear her
presentation, you'll hear why
in, in fact, um, the interface
of animals and humans is a
really important public health,
uh, uh, component and why it's
really critical for us to have
someone as talented as Dr.
Phipps. With that, I'll turn it
over to you.
Uh, thank you, uh.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
delighted to have this
opportunity to speak to you all
today, um, about, uh, the
ongoing outbreak, uh, nationwide
of highly pathogenic avian
influenza.
So the H5N1 strain of avian
influenza first emerged in 1996,
but since then it has mutated
and evolved, uh, over the years
and the strain that is
circulating now is in fact quite
different from that, uh, 2030
years ago.
The current strain of H5N1
reached the eastern United
States at the end of 2021 via
migratory birds coming over from
Europe and then spread westward
over the last couple of years,
uh, through migratory birds, uh,
across the United States.
Uh, early this year, a new
syndrome was identified in dairy
cattle, and it took a couple
months to figure out what was
going on. They were tested for
all of the usual suspects and
then all of the unusual
suspects, and it was all
negative and it was in late
March, uh, that it was
identified to be caused by avian
influenza H5N1.
Uh, it was first identified in
Texas and New Mexico had our
first positive herd confirmed on
April 1st.
Um, to date, H5N1 has been
confirmed in over 330 dairy
herds in 14 states across the
US.
Unlike in poultry, the illness
in cattle is fairly mild, and
those cattle tend to recover in
a couple of weeks. However,
there are very high levels of
virus in their milk, and this
increases the risk of
transmission to humans because
of the very close contact that
humans have with dairy cattle as
part of the milking process.
Fortunately, the pasteurization
process has been shown to
inactivate the virus. So,
pasteurized milk, as well as
properly cooked beef are safe
for consumption.
Comprehensive surveillance in
livestock has been proven to be
challenging nationwide due to
concerns about business
continuity and unknown
regulatory impacts.
HPAA has also been detected in
over 10,000 wild birds and over
400 wild mammals in every state
of the US except Hawaii.
Uh, 27 species of mammals have
been uh confirmed to be infected
with H5N1, which again was
originally an avian influenza
strain and domestic pets can
also be infected, and cats are
particularly susceptible.
I'm gonna interrupt.
I'm gonna interrupt Doctor
Phipps just real quickly to make
11 really laser clear point
pasteurization is one of the
greatest public health
inventions of the 20th century.
Uh, and has saved tens and tens
of thousands of lives, um, and,
and has demonstrated its value
in being able to neutralize H5N1
in milk, which is a source of
contamination.
Raw milk is uh from a public
health standpoint is, is
dangerous and I just want to
clearly put that on the record
that that, um, pasteurization is
one of those things that we
should look at, not as something
that makes up a product worse
for you but unqualifiedably
makes it better.
And for obvious reasons there
have been no studies looking at
raw milk in, in humans and
transmission, but it is believed
that a number of barn cats who
fell ill were likely infected by
drinking raw milk, um, from
infected cattles, infected
cattle.
Uh, so on slide 15, um, I'm, I
wanna talk a little bit about
some of the human infections
that have been confirmed so far,
and, uh, this slide, uh, is
already out of date, uh, since
we finalized it at the end of
last week. Uh, we are now up to
27 confirmed human infections
along with 4 additional
presumptive positive, uh,
infections that are pending
confirmation at the CDC.
Uh, until this year, we'd only
identified H5N1 in one
individual in the United States,
and that person had contact
with, uh, ill poultry.
Um
Currently, in this year to date
since April, we've had 17
infections associated with
occupational exposure to sick
cattle, so dairy workers, we've
had 9 in poultry workers, and
we've had one case with no known
risk factors. Um, this
individual has been interviewed
multiple times, uh, they've had
no contact with livestock or
wildlife. They have no domestic
pets, uh, in their household, no
contact with
other domestic animals and no
raw milk consumption. So efforts
are ongoing to determine the
source of this individual's
infection. But to date, um, that
chain of transmission, um, has
not been identified.
There was an additional
household member with similar
symptoms, uh, that had, uh,
symptom onset that same day. It
was mild and they were never
tested. Um, they are, uh, um,
conducting serology studies on
that household member, as well
as some healthcare workers, uh,
and the results of those
serology studies to look for
evidence of exposure are
pending.
Um
That I, that one case uh was
hospitalized. They had a number
of underlying conditions. All
other infections to date, um,
have been mild and have resolved
without hospitalization. They
tended to show mild upper
respiratory symptoms and
conjunctivitis or pink eye was a
notable, uh, symptom that was
consistent among many of them.
There are anecdotal reports of
additional infections in farm
workers who did not seek care
and were not tested. Outreach to
these underserved communities is
critical to understand the true
number of infections.
Moving on to slide 16.
Um, as previously mentioned,
strong interagency collaboration
is a critical component of
pandemic readiness, especially
when dealing with zoonotic
diseases, which infect both
humans and animals. The New
Mexico Department of Health has
worked closely with colleagues
at the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture and the New Mexico
Livestock Board for years, and
these relationships enabled us
to quickly respond to the H5N1
outbreak with a coordinated
unified response.
This one health approach
promotes effective communication
and mitigates the effect of data
and agency silos. And I will
compliment the relationships
that have been formed over the
years, really enabled New Mexico
to stand out in terms of our
initial response and
coordination. Uh, there were
other states that really, uh,
did not have those pre-existing
relationships and that hampered
their initial response when
herds in those states were
affected.
We have encountered challenges
that are unique to this HPAI
response. Tracking infections in
dairy cattle has proved
challenging for our colleagues
at the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture and the New Mexico
Livestock Board producers are
faced with potential business
disruptions if their herds
tested positive, uh, which
created strong disincentives for
testing.
There were federal mandates uh
for testing, uh, for dairy
cattle that are being shipped
between states. However, there
are no mandates federally, uh,
for testing, uh, other, uh,
categories of cattle.
Dairy workers also may
experience challenges accessing
healthcare in addition to their
personal disincentives for
testing, such as not being able
to work if they test positive
and losing pay.
Some of these farm workers are
also maybe undocumented and
maybe reluctant to seek care or
testing, particularly from a
government entity.
The relationships that the New
Mexico Department of Health has
fostered with our colleagues at
the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture and Livestock Board,
as well as with industry
partners will enable us to
create communications and
outreach campaigns that are
tailored to reach these
underserved communities.
And with that I will pass before
before turning over to Doctor
Durham, just quickly want to
interject, um, you've heard a
number of phrases go by, uh,
underlying conditions, um,
focusing on uh on farm workers,
those kinds of things which are
all profound health equity
elements that we haven't
probably talked enough of about
in this presentation, but, uh,
but there are many elements of
this that skew very disfavorably
against Native American
populations, Latino populations,
uh, African American populations
in the state. I'm super pleased
that within the last, uh, a few
months.
we have now added a health
equity director at the agency,
um, uh, who was uh she was just,
uh, down last week or the week
before, uh, in Hatch uh with um
uh a farm worker health outreach
event including vaccinations and
those kinds of things, love to
have her come back and talk to
you about the work that we're
now doing in health equity, but
I wanted to not pass up the
opportunity to do that. Last
part of our presentation is
around vaccination, uh, and for
that I'd like to introduce
Doctor Miranda Durham, who, who
is our chief medical officer.
Good afternoon.
So I want to briefly just circle
back to vaccines, Doctor Sawen
covered most of them, but just a
reminder that this season's flu
and COVID vaccine are here,
here, um, and available in New
Mexico since mid to late August,
and they are recommended for
everyone 6 months and up.
And then added to the mix, this,
um, starting last season, but um
this year is RSV vaccine, and
that's recommended for everyone
75 and older, and everyone 60 to
74 with underlying conditions as
well as pregnant women at the
end of the pregnancy. And then,
uh, the last is the antibody
shot for infants and as Dr. Saen
explained, it's a little
complicated who gets those, but,
um, but still a powerful tool
for
Protecting infants in their
first and for some in their 2nd
year, uh, RSV season. So at the
Department of Health we're
really focusing on access
information and combating
hesitancy and just fatigue, um,
in, in the vaccine world, um,
number one is our respiratory
vaccine campaign, uh, don't wait
vaccinate. It's really focused
on RSV, COVID and flu vaccines
this winter, um,
ing of uh a marketing tool kit,
commercials, social media and um
also on our website is a
provider, um, locator. In
addition to that, we have our
amazing mobile team that goes
out all across the state, giving
vaccines. It's an outgrowth from
the work we did in COVID, but
now they do flu and COVID and
some childhood vaccines and
they're really targeting
communities where there isn't
good access, um, so both people
without insurance or um
communities that just don't have
pharmacies or providers get
giving vaccine.
Um, I also wanted to mention our
Better Together coalition, which
are also, uh, the coalition is
um a group of community
partners.
Uh, community organizations that
are really tailoring vaccine
messaging and vaccine
information to their communities
so that includes um
organizations like Chaircare
where, uh, um.
Beauticians are trained in, uh,
information about COVID and, and
flu and encouraging their
clients to get vaccinated or at
least to answer questions
accurately about the vaccine,
the empowerment Congress of
Southern New Mexico and so Maz
Unidos Foundation which allows
the Department of Health to come
give vaccines at some of their,
um,
sporting events at their soccer
events.
Also key in our um attempts to
increase access and provide good
information is the Department of
Health hotline, also an
outgrowth from COVID, these
nurses have been working with
us, most of them through COVID
and now in addition to lots of
other things they do. They're
still available for answering
questions about COVID and other
respiratory viruses and really
helping people get connected to
vaccines, so they'll they'll
help people, um, through, you
know,
walk through the Walgreens
website if they're having
trouble scheduling a vaccine. If
it's people without insurance,
they'll um help them find a
Department of Health clinic that
can provide um that vaccine for
free.
Um, the other thing that the
hotline has been doing and
Doctor Sasson mentioned that
somewhat poor rates we have of
prescribing Paxlovid for people
with COVID, um, and the call
center has a Paxlovid
prescribing program again aimed
at people who are having trouble
getting in to see a provider or
getting a prescription for
Paxlovid in that required 5-day
window.
And I will turn it back over to
you. Thanks for that. Let me
wrap up, slide 19 is just kind
of a summary, a little bit of,
of what is now that we're in a
clearly post pandemic emergency
kind of a kind of a phase, what,
what does respiratory virus
season and response and strategy
look like, and I would sum it up
really with the points that you
that you see here, improving
vaccination and addressing
vaccine vaccine, um, hesitancy,
uh, as a, as a key frontline
tool to being able to, to
prevent the spread of disease,
uh.
continuing to develop our tools
for tracking disease so we know
what's going on, sharing that
data with the public, and I
think this is probably the
biggest improvement over what
the pre-pandemic world look like
is, is providing much more
direct information for people to
use directly so they can make
their own assessments about
their risk and the actions that
they that they want to take, um.
Strengthening and using um our
infectious disease response, our
partnerships with other
agencies, um, uh, with local
governments, the media, all
those, uh, all those kinds of
things and then although we
highlighted in the slide for um
avian influenza, I would say,
um, this notion of who all we
work with and widening the
circle of what does public
health uh public health response
will look like, I think is one
of the biggest learnings from
the pandemic that honestly,
we've maybe had to struggle a
little bit against our own
tendencies to, to um to keep up
with.
Uh, if public health is
something that's done only by
public health professionals in a
public health agency in a public
health building somewhere, it's
not as effective as it can be if
it's done in partnership with
community-based organizations,
people working on the ground
every single day with the
communities that we're trying to
trying to reach and uh and
deliver service to and so that's
one of my biggest focuses
personally is to make sure that
we don't lose that element of
what um uh strategy and response
in uh in any area but
particularly in in uh infectious
viruses.
Respiratory viruses looks like
with that, I think that
concludes, uh, that concludes
our presentation. I'd be happy
to answer any easy questions,
and I'll let uh the doctors
answer the hard ones.
Let's start with Representative
Herndon.
Just a reminder, 3 minutes for
not, not to you, but since your
1st 3 minutes for questions and
answers, so be brief. Thank you,
uh, Madam Vice Chair.
Um, my question is regarding the
influenza, understanding that is
that when you get that vaccine,
you, some people actually do
develop a flu, a flu-like
symptoms. My question is, are
they infectious when that
happens?
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herndon for the
question. So I think it is a
common misconception, um, as, as
I think a lot of people
experience during COVID that
when you get the vaccine,
sometimes you get those um
COVID-like or flu-like symptoms
because it's your, it's your
immune system revving up.
But the flu vaccine does not.
Actually give people flu, so
they aren't those symptoms are
not infectious.
That's good to know.
And then I know that that when
we had the, the, I guess the
graft of the increase in
influenza and then the decrease.
Uh, do you actually have data
that shows the highest rate of
influence by county in our
state.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, and
Representative Herndon, um.
We have
Data on.
Influenza-like illness, which
tracks very well to the amount
of flu transmitted. In fact, um,
CDC, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in New
Mexico.
have been using II to track
respiratory viruses in general
and found last year that it
really tracks better to
influenza it didn't go up when
we were experiencing COVID this
summer, so using that as an
indirect marker based on
emergency department visits, um,
we, we.
I mean, I've spent so much time
on this dashboard, I can't
believe I can't remember whether
we have uh.
It's ILI is my county, but do we
have ED discharge for influenza
by county? I don't think we do,
yeah.
So that's the best measure of
influenza alone.
Um, would be the, the, uh,
influenza like illness map that
is by county and then you scroll
over, you can see the percentage
of emergency department visits.
You can see the relative
intensity, it's higher in
Bernalillo County than it is in
Sandoval, that sort of thing.
And if I could just add a couple
of quick things to that. It is
interesting to look at those
maps week after week because you
don't see a predictable pattern
of, oh, well, it's one part of
the state and not another part,
it's they things ripple across
the state and, and, you know,
one week a particular part of
the state will be very high and,
and 4 weeks later, completely
opposite in that part of the
state is low and another part is
high. The other thing is we
didn't talk about it, but it's a
good place to insert. um, we all
got used in the pandemic to
talking about test positivity is
one of these really important
numbers, and we do report test
positive.
activity for COVID uh on our
website and the number right now
is as hanging around 10% or so,
I think, I mean you use back
back things we learned before
that have changed, we learned
well below 5% is good and above
10% is really bad and in between
is, you know, in between, um,
and, and now all of that doesn't
mean anything at all because the
percentage of tests that are
being reported is really, really
small and so the trend is
useful. Is it going up or is it
going down? The number itself
almost doesn't really mean
anything, um, at least.
and not in the same predictable
way it did before.
And and those maps that you're
referring to, those are
available to the public on the
dashboard, so, and that is
accessed through the DOH
website.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Pinto, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
when he talked about the bird
flu, so who's responsible if if
legislation is put forward for
the interstate, um.
To the Department of Ag or who
draws up some of this.
So it was the USDA uh who
implemented that order. So that
was a federal mandate, uh,
covering all interstate movement
of lactating dairy cattle, um,
across the US.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I understand it was
just for the lactating dairy
cattle buying for all the other
livestock because it can
transmit from one to the other
in um saying that because of my
area, a lot of the out of state
travel is the rodeo participants
that go out, mingle with all
other states and then come back
and also still have cattle that
they practice on in the area. So
I can see how this could really
happen, but I don't understand
why they're um.
So how do we implement it within
our state? Is it through our you
guys or who, who should be the
authority.
Uh, thank you for that
clarification and, and, uh,
thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Senator Pinto for the question.
Uh, so that would be through,
uh, my counterpart at the New
Mexico Livestock Board. Uh, so
Doctor Samantha Hollick is the
state veterinarian. I'm the
state public health
veterinarian. We work very
closely together and the New
Mexico livestock Board is the
entity that oversees, uh,
regulations, uh, regarding
import, export, um, of
Livestock, uh, large animals,
um, and so they also work very
closely with the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. Um,
here at the New Mexico
Department of Health, we don't
have, uh, any oversight of
animal movement.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I find that it's
Often we hear that this agency,
that agency, we're not working
together knowing that you're
giving this report saying this
is a health issue, and yet we're
not seeing that cooperation or
collaboration, yeah.
Actually, Mr. Chair, Senator, I,
I, I guess I would say the fact
that different agencies have
responsibility for different
things, you have to do things
like that so that people know
who's doing what. I think the
degree of collaboration that
we've worked on through this,
through this outbreak has really
been excellent, we, we were on,
on, um, uh, twice weekly calls,
uh, early on, it's not quite so
frequent now because things
aren't as intense as they were,
but we were all on calls
together with all those agencies
as well as other partners.
Um, uh, working through these
issues kind of day by day, what
was the response? What was the
federal and CDC response. How do
we need to to implement those
kinds of things, so, so please
don't mistake the fact that
different agencies have
different responsibilities for
the fact that we're not
cooperating. I think this was a
really good demonstration of how
we can do that in a response
like this.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it seems like we're
still not being back to our
conversation earlier about what
we're not doing is really being
proactive, knowing that probably
with COVID and the bird flu that
it was contracted through the
animals and yet we're still
allowing in some sense that
interaction. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pinto of
Representative Cates.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
won't ask questions just wanna
make a brief statement is thank
you very much for your
presentation, um, I am not in
any high risk group. I am not a
healthcare provider. I am very
close but not quite to the age
limit, um, for a healthcare, um,
but I, um,
Got both my vaccines today
because I love my mother and I
just wanna make sure that people
know that my 81 year old mother
lives with me, and that's why I
get my vaccines. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Kates,
uh, senator Pope.
share I love my mother also. I
don't want to get in trouble.
Her birthday is coming up, um,
you mentioned a little bit about
the public health funding and
how a lot of that's gone away.
Um, we know that was important
even before the pandemic.
Uh, dealing with so many issues,
um.
Around the nation and even in
our state.
Um
I guess what can we do as
legislators to.
To um
Maybe shore up some of that
funding.
And
What do you see as.
Um
I guess the cost.
If we don't actually make those
investments. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator, great, great question,
great tee up opportunity, uh,
later this week, you're gonna
hear from, uh, LFC staff a
presentation about our budget
request and you'll see some of
the impacts of that show up in
uh in that request a small thing
but relevant today as we've been
talking about vaccines, um, one
of the places that funding has
gone away is is is in the
commercialization of the
COVID-19 vaccine. When it first
rolled out, it was, it was 100%
socialized medicine. The
paid for the manufacture of the
vaccine paid for the
distribution, did the
distribution, we knew where
every single dose in the state
was, it was completely free, uh,
to the person who was receiving
the vaccine and all of that now
is gone, and in fact we don't
really have any kind of a source
of funding or uh or or vaccine
for COVID, and so we, um, the
doses that we're giving you
today come out of a very small,
um, that you personally, but
that we're giving away today,
um, come out of a very small
supply, uh, and you'll see,
you'll see in that present.
presentation, um, a line item
for a million dollars of
one-time money for us to get
money to buy our own supply of
COVID-19 vaccine, which we
really don't have very much of
at this time, um, you'll see
some macro issues, um, uh, 3 of
them in particular, uh, every
time you all approve a salary
increase for state employees,
which is, is great and necessary
for us to be competitive, you
provide the the state funding
component, but you don't provide
the federal or other funding
source component and so the cost
of of one.
My people goes up by a certain
dollar amount and I get 3% of
the money that that increase
costs and the way that I come up
with the other 2/3 because my
federal sources don't go up to
match it is a whole positions
vacant, uh, to be able to pay
for the higher cost of each of
the field positions and so when
we talk about our vacancy rate,
that's a big, a big chunk of
that similarly, um, at the, you
know, at our facilities, the
cost of food goes up every year
at the lab, the cost of
chemicals and utilities goes up
and so you'll see uh a line item
uh uh.
us from LFC on Thursday, um,
trying to catch up with some of
that. What we should be here
doing is every single year
asking you for basically
inflation, uh, and we don't
historically do that or we
haven't done the Department of
Health and so we're trying to
catch, catch that up, um, and
then uh the third big component
and these are all big dollar
items in our September 1st
request. I'll be done real
quick, um.
Uh, is, is the fact that as the
world changes and as the
competitive landscape changes,
we need to pay more in this
shrinking labor force, as the
baby boomers age out to to
attract the people we need to be
epidemiologists to interpret
that data that we have to work
on vaccine clinics to be able to
get vaccine out to provide
resources to um uh to
community-based organizations so
you'll see an appropriate
placement package where we're
trying to adjust our salary and
just to be competitive, to be
able to fill those vacancies
that we can pay for. So those
are some of the big things.
So you'll hear on Thursday and
that uh of course, you know,
your support for is is extremely
helpful. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair I think
you just emphasizes that, you
know, we need to make those
investments just like anything
we want to be more preventive,
to get the information out, um,
talk to folks early.
And prevent a lot of these
issues and uh we're just seeing
so many issues and.
You know, things happen and
things just spike up, you know,
like.
You know, I remember hearing
about, you know, increases in
STIs and things like that,
right? I mean, these are public
health issues so um.
Thank you for that information.
I'll be looking forward to that
presentation on Thursday. That's
all I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Um,
thank you for talking about
unpasteurized milk that
terrifies me. It just, um, and
then just quickly, my mom was a
nurse back in World War 2 time,
um, where she was going to
school and she got selected to
go her training program to go to
Minneapolis and work with Sister
Kenny, who was very big in polio
and she, she was so my older
sisters tell me she was almost
giddy and my mom was very stoic,
um.
vaccine came out for polio
because her three daughters, she
already had could be protected,
um, so I'm kind of a, I'm.
Vaccine poster child. I mean, I,
I got it from birth, um.
So I'm really, really worried
about the um the anti-vector
vexers and the dis and
misinformation and, and when we
think about it, um, we are
under-resourced for healthcare,
and if we're going to have
double the number of babies with
RSV or, you know, triple the
number of adults with flu taking
up those scarce healthcare
resources. We're really shooting
ourselves, maybe not even in the
foot, in something more.
More, um, so I, I wanna thank
you, thank you for letting me do
this and not have to go to CVS
this time. Now I have to make my
husband go, but, but thank you,
uh, it's, I mean, it's just
awful. My mom always said the
people who don't believe in
vaccines have never seen the
diseases and that's exactly
right. If you, if you, I, I was
looking through my phone, my
granddaughter had RSV, uh, just
before 2, she was a little sick
and then before we knew it, she
was at the hospital.
on the west side and had to be
ambulanced to press downtown,
and she, we thought we were
gonna lose her and it was awful
and she's my only girl. I had 2
boys and then a grandson, so I
got my girls like, no, this is
not happening, but so I just
want to plead, plead, plead with
everybody to please get
vaccines. They're, they're,
they effect is much more, is
much greater than any minor, um.
Injuries or whatever you might
have, but thank you so much.
Thank you Representative. If I
could just comment briefly first
from a history standpoint I'm,
I'm there with you. My
grandparents lost their hearing
due to childhood illness. My dad
had a tetanus when he was a
teenager. I had measles when I
was an infant, uh, and, and so
yeah, you're right, coming up
close with those kinds of
things, I think, I think it
certainly makes me uh uh in
favor of, of vaccination, um, I
would say one word about um
vaccine hesitancy information
misinformation, those kinds of
things, um, a study came out not
very long before.
the pandemic that that talked
about the fact that that the one
thing that doesn't work when
someone believes something
that's not true is to show them
evidence that it's not true, um,
uh, and, and so that really kind
of creates a conundrum for us in
public health about how we
communicate, um, back to the
budget question that Senator
Pope asked, um, you know, each
year we try to put in some money
for marketing in our budget, um,
and, and, and some years we get
told well agencies shouldn't
market so we call it public
information and then last year
someone said, well, that's just.
marketing? Why aren't you
calling it marketing?
I don't, I don't care, just, you
know, give us the money, right?
um but when we talk about them,
that's really what we're talking
about is for us to do a good job
of communicating with the public
and providing good information
we need. I talked to um uh a bit
ago about uh focus groups on why
people are getting uh flu
vaccines but not COVID vaccines.
Well, you actually can't just go
do that, you have to, you have
to spend money to be able to do
that and so being able to have
resources to do that is really
important.
Thank you.
Representative Ferrari, thank
you, Mr. Chair. I have a whole
bunch of things so I'm gonna go
really fast. Um, I wanted to,
um, suggest that, um, the dairy,
um,
Farmers have a newsletter, OK,
you know about it. Moon news, I
think it is, um, uh, that's a
good way to get that information
out. Um, also, is there testing
of all cattle, um, need, you
know, to be done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferry, there is
no mandatory testing in New
Mexico beyond uh for interstate
shipment of lactating dairy
cattle, uh, voluntary testing is
encouraged. There are several
herds that have, um, signed up
for and are conducting a
voluntary, uh, bulk milk take
testing program where the milk
is tested every week.
Uh, they were, were we up to 9?
I forget how many herds we're at
now. However, that is a
voluntary program. Do we need to
legislate that, you know, there
are samples taken from every
herd
I, I think that's a complicated
answer.
We'll leave it there.
I know where the complication
is, um, but that's something
that we might, um, start the
conversation and see if we
could, you know, draft or do
some legislation that would be
reasonable, um, to, uh,
livestock board, especially, um,
also, um,
Uh, let's see. Oh, are you
aware, um, Doctor Phipps, um,
about the equine infectious, uh,
anemia that is.
plaguing our state and then
we're spreading it to other
states. What, what do we do
about that? Uh, uh, thank you
for the question, Mr. Chair.
Representative Ferry. Uh, so I
am, uh, familiar with the
investigation. Uh, there's, it
is, there's multiple states
involved, um.
To our knowledge at this point,
it's iatrogenic transmission, so
it is not being transmitted, uh,
does not appear to be
transmitted through flies, which
is the normal uh or insects,
which is the normal routes of
transmission, um, it does appear
that there are human actions
that are, um, transmitting this
from horse to horse. Um, I
understand that there are
facilities that are, um, under
kind of surveillance or
monitoring. They are rechecking.
horses, uh, periodically
according to those protocols.
And, um, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Doctor Phipps. The
protocols were not followed, um,
and that's why it was being
spread and there are lots of
people and lots of months that
were um in.
had gone by and um yes, it's by
the illegal doping that it's
being spread, um.
And so I think this is something
that
You know, Department of Health,
if you can to assert how that is
being, um, followed and also for
the accountability with the
livestock board and the uh
racing commission, I think it's
going to be very important, um,
to our state and if we're going
to continue to be able to
support that, um.
And then I would just need to
get the health equity contact
person
and do you haven't heard his or
her name? Yeah, Susan Garcia.
Thank you on other issues we'd
like to speak to her. So thank
you very much. My time's up.
Is is that the Susan Garcia that
was at CYFD.
Why do you want to know?
No
Yes. OK, thank you.
Um
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um.
So in terms of the vaccines, one
of the things that I've always
wondered about is who's keeping
track? Is there one main
database that keeps track of
vaccines no matter where you get
them, um, for everybody in the
state.
Yeah, thank you for the
question, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chavez, so the
statewide database is called
NISIS, the New Mexico
immunization
state information system, yeah,
and, and every, um, it's
actually in legislation that
all um vaccines need to be
reported into that system. We
have a few gaps.
But overall pretty good
compliance and you can actually
search your own record and, um,
there's a, a sort of public
facing portal and you can go to
Vaview and um and pull up your
own vaccine record.
Well, I didn't know that.
It's very cool, yeah, yeah, I
always wondered when I go get my
COVID shot, the pharmacy where I
go says, OK, yeah, this is the
one that you need. You've had
all these, and I'm like, how did
you know? Yeah, yeah, they're
pulling it up and it, it
actually has a forecaster, so
for providers, it's very
helpful, especially with
childhood immunizations where
it's really complicated and
sometimes people aren't on
schedule, but it, you know,
it'll help the provider by
saying these vaccines are due on
this day.
Oh, that's which ones I haven't
had, OK.
Um,
So the other question that I
have is around um farm workers,
um, in terms of you said
something about the farm workers
aren't, you know, trusting and
um all of that kind of stuff, so
my question is around, are you
looking at the farm workers just
in the dairy industry or are you
looking at farm workers in any
industry in the state of New
Mexico and then the second part
to that is um sort of what
organizations are you working
with to sort of get it in with
the farm workers so that they
are able to get their vaccines.
Yeah, thanks for that, um, in
terms of, of avian influenza, it
really is, we really are focused
on uh workers in the, in the
dairy into a somewhat lesser
extent poultry industries, um,
uh, in the, in the state. More
broadly, uh, it's really all
farm workers because that's a
population that's not well
connected to health care, uh,
immigration status it has an
impact on access to insurance,
um, those kinds of things and we
have been, um, one of the things
I discovered when I came, um,
was there was not sort of the
ready list of.
organizations um engaged in farm
worker advocacy that I was maybe
kind of used to, uh, and so that
has been one of, uh, Ms.
Garcia's primary focus is to
start reaching out to
organizations and she has been
doing that. I don't recall the
names of the organizations off
the top of my head, but we can
report that back to you. Yeah,
that would be great. I would
really appreciate that when we
were in Portales we went to the
FQHC in Port Dallas, and they, I
had asked them a question around
uh farm workers and if they had
seen sort of a change in terms
of where
workers were coming from and it
was very interesting to me a
couple of things was that farm
workers were now coming from the
workers were coming from Central
America and then they had also
moved from um onions and other
kinds of produce into the dairy
industry, and I didn't know
that. I thought that was very
interested and they raises
significant language issues
among other things. Doctor
Phipps has some more information
on organizations just quickly if
we could. Thank you and thank
you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chavez. So we
have uh communic
with the and I always forget the
exact name, but it's, I think
the border farm workers,
agricultural farm workers
project, um, and one of my staff
members has communicated
regularly with them. We've also
provided, uh, personal
protective equipment, uh, such
as goggles, masks, gloves to
them, and they've created, um,
baggies within and uh handed
them out to their, uh,
community. Um, we also had one
of our staff members go down to
hatch with the group.
Um, even though that was
primarily agricultural workers
versus dairy workers. We did
provide information on West Nile
virus, as well as avian
influenza to try to get that
information out to the broader
community. And of course big
differences in the population of
whether uh whether uh uh farm
workers are, are moving with
seasons and crops or in the
dairy and poultry industries
where they're there year round,
those kinds of things we can
come back and do a whole
presentation on that.
If I could just add one more uh
comment there's also the border
agricultural Workers Union out
of El Paso. I don't know how
much they come into New Mexico,
but Carlos Marentes is the
president, yeah.
Yes, thank you. We, we've uh had
uh calls and meetings with him,
yes.
Senator Savia Lopez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. um, I was, uh, well,
OK, I'll just ask my question.
I, I, um.
I was wondering why you didn't,
when you're talking about
respiratory diseases and
respiratory ailments, um, you
weren't talking about the
environment, so I went on your
website and now I realized why
you weren't talking about the
environmental um like ozone.
Um, methane, the precursor to
ozone and the relationship is
because you don't have the data.
Um, when I look at the, the
website, it's showing ozone most
most counties.
There's no monitoring.
And the sad thing to me about
that looking at the monitoring
map is areas in which there's
the most methane emissions don't
have monitoring data, um, and
that's kind of a concern because
it's a compounding uh factor for
a lot of the diseases you were
talking about. And so I was
wondering, are you going to?
Step this up or work with the
environmental department because
that's, that's a severe concern
because when you have the
toxins, you know, the methane or
the or the ozone coupled with
these infections.
That's that even raises the risk
higher.
Sure, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Sio Lopez, um, fantastic
question, um.
This is why you need
epidemiologists and data
scientists, um, to be able to.
Layer different information
sources together to try and
better understand what is really
causing risk.
Um
There are many factors in New
Mexico that increase our risk of
respiratory illnesses, um,
certainly, um, underlying health
status, access to healthcare,
showing up, getting access late
in the course of an illness,
these kinds of things inevitably
contribute, um, um, being a poor
state and, and health.
00, a factor, but, um, we
suspect that there is an
environmental, um.
component to the higher rates of
respiratory infections here, um,
but as you said, um, we don't
currently have the data and uh,
you know, we'd love to dig
deeper into this to identify
some sources of, of data to
geographically layer them to
look at rates and whether they
vary by some of the factors that
you've raised. Thank you.
And if I could just
an opportunity to to make one
more comment on the on the
budget. This is one of the
tensions that occurs in the
budget because as you all know,
the, the, the process works
where we propose things governor
makes a recommendation, LFC
makes a recommendation. We're
all aimed at some kind of a
target of how much we want the
budget to grow and when I'm
putting the budget together I've
got these big 3 challenges I
talked about around unfunded
salary increases and, and
inflationary costs and, and
keeping up with wages and then
on one side and then the other
side.
of things that we need to do
that we're not doing or that
we're doing that we need to do
more of and, and, and there's
this tension I've got to kind of
put a cap on all of it, and then
honestly,
You all tend to like the new
stuff more than you like paying
for what we're doing now, uh,
and that's, that's kind of the
crux of the conversation that
I've been trying to have the
last couple of budget cycles is,
is we got to be able to try to
figure out how to make progress
on both, otherwise we, we do new
things and we just, we fail at
doing the things that we've been
doing for a long time that are
also really important.
I hope uh that you can get into
that because it's, it's another
compounding environmental
justice factor and sad to see
that we don't have the data and
then just very briefly, um, I
love the vaccination campaign. I
wonder if you'd be interested in
an alcohol campaign like that.
If I, if I had the, if I had the
resources for that, I would love
to do that.
Uh thank hint hint, um, thank
you, Mr. Chet.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um.
Going back to this vaccine
tracker, what's the name of
that?
It's immsis N M S I I S, which
is New Mexico, um,
state immunization information
system.
I don't know why states in
there, but confuses every state
has an SIIS and then it has the
states abbreviation before it.
And does this track me as an
individual.
It tracks the vaccines that you
have received, yes, yes,
so you have my name and you can
tell me exactly what I've been
vaccinated with. Yes.
Very interesting. It's by state
law.
What, what law is that? I don't
have the statutory reference. We
can get you that.
That's very interesting.
Is there an opt out out of that?
No.
It's similar, similar in some
ways to the prescription drug
monitoring program, another
program that exists by state law
is that OK. I'm sorry, go ahead.
Go ahead. Yeah, it's, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair, um.
Uh
House minority whip Martinez.
Um,
the opting out is by the
patient.
And otherwise it's automatically
um expected to be reported by
the provider.
Um, the intention here is that
as health care is mobile and you
go to multiple different places
to get your health care that
your providers will have the
information they need to be able
to keep you up to date on the
appropriate vaccinations because
it used to be that I could.
Request
That Walgreens communicate with
my personal physician and get
that information.
It's a little concerning to me
that.
Anybody can go on there and
find.
My medical information. No. Not
anybody. You can only look up
your own information. They'll
have you report specific
information to you to be able to
look it up.
Or
A public health authority and
your health care provider.
When you say
That only I can do that.
Oh,
Fingerprint
Name, date of birth, and uh
Yeah, I think the elements are
names, date of birth, and, uh,
cell phone number or email, then
it sends you an authenticator
and then you put it in and
that's extremely hard
information to get on anybody.
What worries me is that's very
private information.
I could Google you and get that
information.
Oh absolutely you have to get
the don't think that you can
Google somebody and get their
name, address, email address
that's that's what the
information that they just gave
me, yeah, but if you, if I
Google your cell phone number
and I put that cell phone number
in, then that cell phone number
that you have the cell phone is
gonna get the code, I won't get
the code.
It's still bothersome.
It, it would seem like there
would be.
A little bit more, uh,
protection of my medical
information.
Because I could walk away with
somebody's phone.
Get it done
It doesn't seem like that's a
lot of protection.
In my opinion.
Um
I'm not an attorney or a doctor.
Just a guy
But that is that's concerning to
me.
I understand
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Hickey, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for this brief opportunity.
I'm gonna go off on a tangent,
but first, I am a physician and
your health information is
protected by HIPAA federal law.
Only people that you authorize
to have access to that
information has access to it, so
that's your, you know, they can
the um the state can look at
deidentified data and so forth.
It it is housed, but it's housed
there for your clinician.
or for you to be able to access.
So that that that is, that is
the law very strictly enforced,
uh, my tangential question is
um.
Just a very brief one, data as
we are hearing today is
critically important and I'd
like to convene a meeting
between the Department of Health
data warehouse people and the
LFC to see if we're able to get
the complete free flow of
information out of the data
warehouse to the LFC and so I, I
just, I'm kind of notifying you
that before the session, so if
we have to write bills or
whatever, we'll learn that.
But we do want to get all that
information in the data
warehouse to the LFC. Thank you,
Mr. Shirt Senator, I presume
you're talking about the all
pair claims database and uh and
yeah, I think as I indicated
when we did a presentation on
that, we're happy to have a
conversation with, with LFC and
try to figure out how within
HIPAA and the other requirements
that we have that we can provide
appropriate access to data.
right
As we're gathering information
to assess programs and what have
you, cost of health care, um,
that's what's fundamental, um,
as well as the epidemiologic
use. Thank you very much. I just
need to be sure we follow the
law,
We must follow the law. This is
HIPAA.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Chasey, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you all
for your information. Did you
happen to give our vaccination
rate on COVID and if you did,
I'm sorry, I just don't think I
heard it. Yeah, I'm sure
representative that uh for the
last season that's on slide 5.
Uh, which breaks down the
vaccination rate for flu and
COVID by age groups. Uh, the
total vaccination rate, um, you
know, the total vaccination rate
is about 30% for flu in about
16% for COVID. 30% for flu and
16% for COVID, it's on slide 5.
I've got.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and I only had a couple of
questions when one has to do
with I missed somehow the
connection between avian flu and
dairy cattle, is it the same
fluid it just moves back and
forth. And now you said even
dogs and cats and
And people
But it all started with birds.
Correct, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that question. So yes, and
actually all influenza viruses
originated in birds, and then
they have mutated and so now we
have human strains. There are
horse strains, there are dog
strains. Now this, this strain
of avian influenza is, is still
a bird virus primarily, but it
is spilling over into mammals,
uh, more often than we've seen
in the past, and it has for the
first time infected cattle.
Um, so it is genetically an
avian adapted virus that is, uh,
spilling over into mammals.
And, and.
You know, we don't have a large
Poultry industry in New Mexico,
but, but do we do inspe does the
agriculture department do
inspections of the, of the
licensed poultry, not the little
household farms or whatever the
chicken coops, the urban, the
urban coups that we can have
now, but at least the big they
are they checking them regularly
and thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes,
they are. We actually have one
licensed commercial poultry
facility in the state. Um, this
is a notifiable disease.
To the Livestock Board. So when
a bird falls ill, if that is a
positive test, then that is by
law reported to the Livestock
Board, as well as the uh New
Mexico and I think US Department
of Agriculture. Um, it is a very
fatal disease in poultry, um,
and not to go off on a tangent,
but, um, those farms when it
hits them, they are actually
depopulated, yes.
Mhm. And I believe that it also
with the um wild game with the
ducks or the um it's also an
issue that it's there in the
refuge or something.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Pinto. So yes, so that does
affect, uh, wild birds as well.
Um, the USDA AFIS Wildlife
Services conducts regular
surveillance, um, among uh
migratory waterfowl. So they
will test for, they will test
live birds. They will also pick
up dead birds. The New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish will
also, uh, if there's a die-off,
they will collect those birds
and test them.
So there is some wildlife
monitoring, um, occurring.
On that point, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. On that point, we're
learning more about um POs
contamination and wildlife,
picking it up, especially like
in the White Sands area and um
wildlife that is contaminated,
you know, can go to other parts
of the nation, but also our own,
um,
Hunters. Is there a way that we
can warn people.
Um, that if they consumepossibly
contaminated wildlife that it
can affect their own health.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Ferry. Um, I
don't know that much about, uh,
PAS and wildlife, um, Mr. Dustin
Cox with the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture is,
uh, kind of the, the head. He's
doing a lot of work with that.
And so I suspect there's a lot
going on that I do not know the
details of
that as well. Um, it's a little
bit of a tricky challenge
because we've got areas that are
certainly hotspots for, for.
PAS around Clovis, La Senega,
there's come to mind, um, but
there's also widespread presence
of PAS in the environment
generally, uh, and uh and and so
you have to be a little bit
careful of, of this is again one
of those COVID lessons to learn,
be a little bit careful about
how you talk about this and what
you try to provide so that you
provide useful information, um,
uh, uh, that people can act on
and and and do things with and
so I think we're still learning
a lot.
about the presence of PAS and
PFOS and uh we work closely our
environmental health bureau,
which nobody here is from, uh,
together with the Environment
department, uh, we're working
closely on PAS issues right now.
I believe game and fish is also
when, when anybody picks up a
license, a duck license or
something like that, that
there's some kind of education
that goes through it.
Right, cause there's a lot of
other contaminations too that
are happening, so thank you.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
eating um.
Flew
Animals, cooking them.
Thoroughly will destroy the
virus and so is there any
thought or anything happening in
terms of when you get your
hunting license as a reminder to
uh please cook your meat
thoroughly, what anything along
those lines.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Thompson. Uh, my
understanding is a lot of that
education is happening not
specific to avian influenza, but
to all of the other bacteria and
viruses that birds carry, um,
and it will, uh, carry over in,
uh in relation to this virus as
well.
Mm
I can see a new marketing
campaign ahead. Don't eat raw
duck.
Um,
I, my last question has to do
with the wastewater, uh, is that
going on, uh, checking of the
wastewater, is that going on
routinely now or was it already?
Yeah, that dashboard that I
showed you is, is, is, uh,
real-time data that's through
September 24th captured here,
um, uh, I think there's uh
through September of 24, excuse
me, um, I, I can't recall the
frequencies. Is that weekly
weekly data not necessarily
every source.
is on time every single week,
but that's the general intent.
And, and how do you do, does
the, does the local water
department sample and send them
into you to the lab. Oh, great.
Well, thank you so much for
what's been a fascinating and
and important topic. Thank you
for keeping us up to date. And
I, I would hope that the next
summer, next interim.
Uh, whoever is chairing the
committee would have an
opportunity to have the, um,
Uh, what are you calling her the
equity director, uh, Susan
Garcia, whoever is the equity
director come and and give a
full, a full, uh, uh.
Report on activities and, and
whatever is going on, so thank
you so much. I'm gonna put
Xander on that just in case I'm
here.
That's good.
All right then we'll move to the
next DOH issue, which is
School-based health centers.
We'll do this hockey style where
we'll have the first line, uh,
head out on the second line on
the fly in.
So we have uh uh Secretary Allen
again, but also, uh, Kristen,
uh, Oreskovic, Reskovich.
And uh Nancy Rodriguez, uh,
Christian uh reskovich, Doctor
Chrisakkovic is the clinical
operations manager for the
school-based health center
program and Nancy Rodriguez is
the executive director of the
New Mexico Alliance.
For school-based health care. So
thank you for coming and sharing
your findings with us. OK,
thanks, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee again, Patrick
Allen, secretary of the
Department of Health. Uh, I'm
gonna, uh, shut up and talk lots
less on this, uh, topic, uh, and
leave it to uh to our experts. I
just wanna, uh, to lead in by
saying I'm just really proud of
the work that we've done in this
area of the data you're gonna
show, you're gonna see shows I
think how vitally important
school-based health centers are,
uh, not just to health but to
educational outcomes in the
state we've we've gone through a
significant expansion of uh of
our program where we've got some
really exciting data to be able
to share and with that, um, I'll
turn it over, I think to Nancy
first, right?
Go for it.
Push the person.
There we go. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Madam Vice Chair,
secretary, I'm Nancy Rodriguez.
The other Nancy Rodriguez, as
I'm often known at the at the
roundhouse, um, I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Alliance for School-based
Healthcare, and I have a very
brief sort of introductory, uh,
presentation so you should have
a PowerPoint that looks like
this, um, and I know that this
committee has always been very
supportive of our organization
and of school-based health. So I
won't belabor that description,
but we
have our website, um, and our
national organization's website
on the presentation and you're
always welcome to reach out to
us if you have other questions
and I want to start by saying
thank you this, um, committee
has always been really
supportive of bills, um, of SB
397 of um funding bills and
funding for Department of Health
for school-based health centers
and the expansion that the
secretary mentioned is really
exciting to see when I first
started coming to this committee
more than.
A decade ago during the
recession, it was a different
story and now we're in a growth
period and we're really excited
about that. And it's sort of a
compounding effect as we grow,
more people are learning about
school-based health centers and
so more people are requesting
school-based health centers, uh,
because they know the need in
their school and community, so
we're excited to, to, um, keep
growing. Our first slide really
is just about our organization.
We're a nonprofit organization.
We're one of about 25 such
organizations around the
country.
We have a national organization,
the school-based Health
Alliance, that also provides
resources for this field and we
are also the Department of
Health's, um, training and
technical assistance contractor
for the school-based Health
Center field. And our mission,
while we are focused on
school-based health centers, the
individual clinics, we are also
focused on school health more
generally. So we collaborate at
the state level with the school
nurses Association, um, school
social workers, other school
health providers, um, focused,
um,
On the school-based health
center model. I know that there
are, especially when, when
Kristen and I were doing our
work on SB 397 with your help.
Um, there are a lot of questions
about what is the model of
school-based health centers, um,
and that is, again, our website
and the national organization's
website has more detail on that,
but really the integrated school
site located primary and mental
health care for children in
schools is really the best
practice model for school-based
healthcare, um, in collaboration
with
educators working in the
schools, uh, to support families
and hopefully the families who
have uh least uh access to
healthcare and have the greatest
need.
The second slide tells a little
bit more of the story of the
growth, and I know many of you
know, um, about that growth in
2023, um, during that
legislative session, there was
more funding provided through
the Department of Health Office
of School and Adolescent Health
for growth in the school-based
Health Center program, and
you're gonna hear Kristen talk a
little bit more about the
numbers there, but we have
approximately 116 school-based
health centers funded by the
Department of Health now
compared to 53, uh, which is a
significant expansion.
in a very short amount of time,
so we're really excited about
that from the 2023 school year
to the 24, 25 school year. Some
of that is still in process as,
um, clinics and schools make
capital improvements to provide
space for those school-based
health centers, um, but some of
those school-based health
centers don't need much space
because a big part of that
growth has been in telehealth
and mobile school-based health.
Um, back pre-COVID, this is, if
there's an upside to a pandemic,
a couple of them are related to
school-based health centers.
One is we had, I think, 6,
telehealth visits happening in
school-based health centers
prior to the pandemic, and
during the pandemic that went
into the thousands and we expect
to see that grow because many of
these new school-based health
centers are, um, in small,
smaller schools and more rural
communities via telehealth, um,
and mobile school-based health
centers is a growing part of the
field, not just here in New
Mexico. This is a trend we see
nationwide and it's exciting
that our state is sort of at the
front end of that.
Um, frontier. I listed a couple,
uh, for you here of the new
brick and mortar school-based
health centers because there are
certainly larger communities and
larger schools that don't yet
have school-based health
centers. I'm a rear rancho
resident. We're in the Riar
Rancho Public school building.
I'm sorry to say, despite my
very best efforts, there is yet
to be a school-based health
center in Rear Rancho Public
Schools and before I die, I hope
there will be one. So there are
still, uh, metropolitan large
schools that don't have
school-based health centers.
really that telehealth and
mobile growth we're seeing in
rural communities.
Um, but Moriarty, West Mesa, and
New Futures are 3 that we wanted
to call out that are getting new
brick and mortar, um,
school-based health centers. The
other thing that that growth in
funding has done has allowed our
organization and the Department
of Health to try to respond to
the growing requests, uh, for
school-based health centers. So,
you have what I know requires a
microscope to read this little
graphic here, um, uh, uh, plan
that we have put together in
collaboration for a new planning
grant process.
So
through this funding, we've
created a model where if a
school or community is seeking a
school-based health center and
wants to investigate that as an
opportunity. They can apply for
a planning grant process through
our organization in
collaboration with Department of
Health and get on a track for
the Department of Health's next
request for applications to
potentially be funded. And I say
potentially because we've done
this once, we've had one
planning grant process and some
communities
decide, oh, what we really
needed was a school nurse. Oh,
what we really needed was a
school social worker. Oh, what
we really needed was a
school-based health center, but
we're not quite ready yet, and
we need 3 more years to get our
ducks in a row to have a
school-based health center. So
we're formalizing that process
in, in, you know, in the
assumption will continue to be
funded at the state level for
school-based health centers and,
um, so if you have schools,
community members who reach out
to you and are interested in a
school-based health center, you
can, um, ask them to contact.
The New Mexico Alliance for
school-based Healthcare, and we
will add them to a mailing list
to get more information
generally and also to sort of
get in line for this planning
grant process. Um, and I should
say, I know many of you are also
interested in, um, involved in
education.
The investment that the state
has made in community schools
has really contributed to a
growth in interest in
school-based health centers. One
of the pillars of the community
schools model is integrated
student supports and healthcare
when they do assessments in
community often is one of the
top needs that is unmet. So
often community schools
coordinators call us and say,
how do I get a school-based
health center? We just did an
assessment of all the families
at our schools and they have
unmet health needs and that's
why they're not succeeding
academically.
So that is um funneling in this,
um, this growth and need for
expansion, so I wanted to share
that with you.
Moving on to the next slide, um,
there's a little bit more
granular information about these
new models. I talked a little
bit about telehealth. I know you
guys have heard about the hub
and spoke model from a number of
parties around the state where
one brick and mortar clinic,
whether it's a community clinic
or an existing brick and mortar
school-based health center is
where the providers sit and they
provide the healthcare via
telehealth, and that looks a
couple of different ways
depending on the community and
their needs, but two of the
largest providers of this
expansion through telehealth are
our El Centro Family Health,
which is an FQHC and Sunrise
Medical Services, which I think
is still look like but applying
to be an FQHC.
And then some of our longtime
school-based health center
operators have invested both in
state funds and federal funds in
mobile school-based Health
center expansion, um, and you
should all be getting in January
the school-based Health Center
calendar, which we started
providing to all of you a few
years ago, so you will see
Debaca Family Health Center's
new mobile clinic, um, which
they purchased through a
combination of state funds and
federal HESA funds, um, in that
calendar, so coming soon, please
watch for that. And then, and
They are a DOH funded
school-based health center
operator. We have a new operator
that is not state funded, um, in
Bernalillo County that some of
you may be familiar with if
you're in, in the metro area,
um, the, uh, Berlio County
Behavioral Health Initiative
invested money in school-based
health several years ago, and
they are just about to get going
in a contract with an
organization out of Los Angeles
called the Health Equity
Alliance to start with 3,
hopefully growing eventually to
12, um, schools in Albuquerque
Public schools that will be
visited by a mobile school-based
health center program. At
present, they're not DOH funded.
It's possible they could be in
the future. They're gonna start
at 2 elementary schools and a
middle school in Albuquerque
public schools.
And lastly, one pilot that is
about to grow uh through a
collaboration with our
organization, Department of
Health, um, ECECD and some
funding through, um, the Brindle
Foundation is to look at whether
school-based health centers can
serve the early childhood
population. Some of them already
do on a very small scale, and
we're gonna be looking at how we
can help invest in, um, you
know, sort of doubling and
compounding the investment the
legislature has already made in
the early childhood population
by making sure, um, those young
children have access to.
healthcare through school-based
health if that's a model that
makes sense.
And then looking at some other
state and national trends on the
next slide. We just wanted to
share with you too, there's
many, but the first one is that
another upside of the pandemic
is that people started seeing
school health as one large field
and an important field, um, in
terms of its impact on academic
outcomes, and you're gonna hear
from Kristen when she talks
about very specific academic
outcomes we can point to in our
state. So our national
organization has
been working newly with the
National School Nurses
Association, the American School
Counselor Association,
Association of Community Health
Centers, school mental health,
school social workers, school
psychologists, so that it's not
one or the other, it's how do we
sew those pieces of the quilt
together to make sure all
children have access to the
healthcare that they need.
Um, and then lastly, um, oh, and
I wanted to mention there cause
I know that the governor is
particularly interested in this
and that some of you are as
well. We have, Chris and I have
both been involved in the MSBS
expansion. Sometimes this is
confusing for.
Ffos cause it's called
school-based services sometimes.
That's where Medicaid in schools
is. It used to be that that was
only for students who had an
IEP. Now, um, through, um,
collaboration with CMS, our
state's Medicaid office has
expanded a pilot to offer more
school-based services, which is
separate from school-based
health centers, but again, it's
part of that larger quilt that
we're trying to put together to
maximize access to healthcare
services.
And then lastly, I wanted to
share um that there's some new
grant money and uh that's coming
into the state and hopefully
some more that will be coming to
the state to try to address
challenges in healthcare and
expansion of best practices. We
just had a meeting today.
There's funding from the federal
HHS Office of Minority Affairs
coming into New Mexico and West
Virginia to address care
coordination in rural
communities, and, um, right next
door in Bern Leo, El Pueblo
Family Health
Services and a little bit
further north, Les Cliniccas del
Norte are going to be getting
funding to hire CHWs as care
coordinators to help wrap around
the family and especially
families who have children at
different school levels to make
sure that the whole family gets
access to the care they need and
so that the school-based health
center, so can support them, um,
and that care coordination piece
is a big part of national
trends. And then, uh, our
national organization SBHA is
also involving um New Mexico and
some other.
funding initiatives, um, at the
national level to try to get
money for school health
workforce issues. I know you
guys have had sort of ad
infinitum presentations on our
health workforce challenges, and
that is equally true in
school-based health centers. You
guys could give us a billion
dollars tomorrow and we couldn't
find people to spend it because
we don't have enough workforce,
but homegrown is the solution
and UNM's, um, Health careers
pipeline program is being looked
at as a model that could be
replicable, um.
Grown in our state and also
replicable around the country.
So if SBHA gets some funding, we
may see some of that come to UNM
and to some New Mexico
school-based health centers to
try to grow, um, our young
people and encourage them to go
into healthcare. So to be clear,
we would take the billion.
My begging bowl is never closed,
just to be clear, yeah. So those
are just some highlights and
some trends. We're really
excited about the expansion.
It's a lot of work. There are
challenges like workforce to,
to, to making it happen for kids
in the community, but we
couldn't ask to work on a more
worthwhile challenge. So thank
you for your support in the past
and the future, and I'll be here
for questions after Kristen's
presentation and my contact
information is on the last slide
if you think of questions later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Vice
Chair.
Great. Thank you, Nan. Thank
you, Nancy. um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us today. It's
really, it's really great to be
here, uh, to talk about the work
that we're doing in school-based
healthcare. I'm gonna just start
with stuff that you guys already
know, um, we have an absenteeism
problem and a graduation problem
in our state, um, and
A lot of these things can be
addressed or helped anyway with
school-based health centers. If
you look at the number one or
the most common reasons for
absenteeism, a lot of them
revolve around healthcare issues
and mental health issues. Um,
and so that's really one of the
things that school-based we were
school-based law centers can
help meet the need for our, our
kids and our communities.
Um
And on the next slide we see
this is a slide from the CDC,
um, we know that when kids don't
show up to school, they don't
get very good grades, and that
puts our children at greater
risk for a whole host of other
things, um, substance use, more
likely to have multiple sex
partners, um, feelings of sad
sadness and hopelessness and
That those again are things that
we can help with in school-based
health centers.
Um
Aces is Aces is on the next
slide, and that's a term that
we've all been
All too familiar with in the
last several years, um.
And
We know that New Mexico is also
also disproportionately, um.
Our children have
disproportionate number of ACEs
compared to other states. We
know that we have the highest
number of ACEs in the country.
Um, when we look at those
numbers.
All of this feels really, really
overwhelming.
Um
And so I want to talk about the
good news here next, um.
I was at the National School
Based Health Alliance
conference, a year and a half
ago, and there were 2 physicians
from Alabama who were talking
about paces and which is
positive childhood experiences,
and this was something that was
brand new to me. I didn't know.
I hadn't heard anything about
it, and in fact, the research
that they were referring to had
only been published about 6
months prior to the conference,
um, occurring and
What this new research is
telling us is that children who
have increased number of
supportive relationships and
supportive environments.
Have improved health, so in
school-based health centers, I
think are a positive experience
and a positive environment for
for our children.
Um, and in fact, when we have,
so we, we can't, we can't negate
and we can't get rid of the
negative experiences that our
kids are having, um, but when we
add positive experiences we
create resilience in kids, and
they have better healthcare
outcomes as children, and they
also longitudinally because they
studied 7000 adults and
interviewed them about their
life experiences.
longitudinally, we know that
they have better health outcomes
and better.
Expectations as adults. And so
this was, this was
groundbreaking information for
me and it was super exciting and
made us, you know, I came out of
the this this session and I ran
into Nancy and I was like, oh,
like my world has changed by
knowing this information, and it
really impacts, I think for me
and encourages us to keep going
with the work that we're doing.
Um
So Nancy mentioned a lot of
this.
Uh, already, but I wanted to
give you a little more detail
about what we've done with the
expansion funds that we've
received, um, this, this
committee and, and the
legislature as a whole has been
really, really generous, um,
with us, and we have been able
to double our school-based
health center budget in about
the last 5 years. Um, this has
allowed us in the program to
hire 2.5 FTEs. So for many years
I was, I was
staff of one. I was the only
person in the program, and I now
have 2.5 additional, you know, 3
people who are helping me with
things, um, so we can really
spend a lot more time reaching
out and providing technical
assistance and training. We have
somebody who manages a lot of
the administrative functions
that I was tasked to do
previously and is not my
strongest skill set.
As a nurse practitioner, um, and
so it's, it's been really just
So altering for me, um, and in
terms of the work that we can
do. Nancy already mentioned that
the new initiatives that we get
to start to explore with the
planning grants and the
expansion into pre-K and so
we're really looking at how do
we continue to grow and what
else can we do to help support
our kids in New Mexico.
And
So there's a little bit of a
fiscal year timeline on the next
slide, whereas in 20 FY 22, we
had 53 brick and mortar
school-based health centers that
we supported, um, with funding.
In FY 23, we passed the
school-based health center act,
um, thanks to so many of you
for, for supporting that with
us, um.
We released the RFA for.
Funding for FY 24 for
school-based health center
operations in that we included
the ability for organizations to
seek funding for delivery via
telehealth or via mobile.
Traditionally, uh, before then,
we had only funded brick and
mortar clinics, so we expanded
what, what services or how the
delivery of services, um, could
be funded.
In FY 24 after the RFA was
funded, we added 6 new brick and
mortar clinics, uh, plus 41
additional schools that had
access via telehealth or mobile,
and in FY 25, we expect an
additional 5 brick and mortar
clinics to be opening and an
additional 11 to be serviced,
uh, schools to be serviced via
telehealth. In fact, on Friday,
Nancy and I are going to Las
Cruces to celeb.
rate a grand opening for two
brick and mortar school-based
health centers and, um, and 6
spoke sites uh that are
elementary schools, so it's,
it's really overwhelming and
exciting to be able to do that.
The next slide is really a comp
uh comparison of the two maps
where we were in 2018 and where
we are going to be, uh, in 2025,
and you can see there's quite a
bit of growth, um, some of the
other opportunities
opportunities that we're
exploring, um, are partnering,
we've talked about partnering
with the MCOs and
UnitedHealthcare is partnering
with an organization called Good
Side Health, um, and Good Side
Health has really robust.
telehealth models in both Texas
and Florida, and Nancy and I
have been working with them to
connect them to the Northwest
and other areas on this map
where we see that there are
some, some open spaces that we
don't have quite enough, um,
quite enough access, so we've
also worked with, um,
Molina Molina has great services
for behavioral health and has a
behavioral health app that's
available to kids, so there's a
lot of opportunities that we
have to partner with our MCOs
and and continue to expand and
continue to expand services for
our kids in, in rural
communities, and then
In 2019 October 2019, um.
I was at a the American School
Health Association conference
and one of the options at the
conference was to go tour a
school-based health center in
downtown Cincinnati. It was the
most amazing school baseball
center I've ever seen, and it
was, it was just terrific.
Um, after we did the tour.
All of us who are part of this
tour went to, uh, went into a
conference room and we were
talking about
How do we get more school-based
health centers? How do we
convince school districts and
school boards and um
administrators, what a great
thing school-based health
centers are for their kids, and
as I was walking out to get back
on the bus to go to the
convention center, uh, Greg
Frosted, who I think probably
many of you know, he was the
director of the Safe and Healthy
Schools Bureau at PED.
Also happened to come on this
this.
Uh
trip with us and I said, Greg, I
think we can answer some of
those questions that came up in
During that tour, if we can get
PEDs student level data.
And so the next slides are
really
The result of that work and it
is really exciting for us, um.
It was
This these data are from 2013
and 2014 school year through
2018, 19.
Uh, we got the data transfer
from PED.
Like March 2020, so you know,
then the whole world shut down
for a couple of years, um.
And it was.
An incredible lift. It was so
much more difficult to match
those those two data sets, then
we could have ever anticipated.
Um, but the findings are pretty
terrific. What we learned is
that
Students who used a school-based
health center for any reason
were 47% less likely to be
chronically absent at any point
in high school compared to
non-school-based health centers.
So when we go back to those
first slides when we were
talking about chronic
absenteeism and the sequelae
from that. This is a big deal,
um, also.
Students who use school-based
health centers for any reason,
we're less likely to be
chronically absent for multiple
years of high school, 33% less
likely to be absent over a
whole, a whole for your high
school career.
We also learned that DOH funded
Um.
That high school students who
visited a DOH funded
school-based health center more
than once, were 3 times more
likely to graduate on time, then
their classmates that didn't use
the school-based health center.
If we broke that out by primary
care visits or, or behavioral
health visits. Students who used
the school-based Health Center
primarily for primary care
visits. We're still 3 times more
likely to graduate on time
compared to their, their
counterparts and those who used
the school-based health center
primarily for behavioral health,
we're still twice as likely.
Um, to graduate on time compared
to other students.
We know that graduating from
high school has
All kinds of
great things associated with it,
right? We have better life
outcomes, um, increased earning
potential, job stability, um,
and just other opportunities for
education and training and
lifelong success. So these
findings are really, uh, we're
really excited about these
findings. We're currently
working with PED to get the next
round of data that will go from
uh, school year 2019.
through
1920 through school year 23, 24,
so that we can see that that
trajectory, and it's really it
actually is kind of a convenient
breakdown, um, that
That will have the COVID year
right in the middle, and so
we'll be able to see, you know,
a little before COVID and a
little after COVID as well.
And so
What's next?
Um, we are not going to be,
we're not gonna ask for
additional funding right now
from, from this committee or or
from the legislature we really,
we have a lot going on, um, and
we really want to make sure that
we have that solid and that we
have a great plan to be able to
move forward.
Um
We're going to continue to work
with the alliance to be able to
do that and looking at those
planning grants and, and
communities that we have where
we have blank spaces on the map,
and how do we target them and,
and what's the best modality for
delivery of care.
Uh,
that, that's it. So let me just
make a couple of final points,
um, to wrap up and then we'll
take questions that uh that
you've got first, um, just a bit
of an aside, one of the things
the governor charged me with
when she when she um appointed
me to run the agency was
repairing and, and uh improving
our basic business functions in
the agency and school-based
health centers were kind of
exhibit one of those challenges.
Last year was pretty much total
chaos across our ability to fund
school-based health centers.
getting contracts out the door
funding expansions, um, uh, all
that work and I'm, I'm really
happy to say that, that we're in
a really, really different place
this year, um, with those
contracts in place and executed
and being funded, and so we're
bearing fruit in that kind of
behind the scenes work that
isn't super sexy, but it's
really necessary to tighten up
our business operations. Second
point is really just to, if I
were to kind of summarize all of
this in a piece, it's that, it's
that we lead the nation in
adverse childhood experiences,
and that leads to
all kinds of negative outcomes
that perpetuate through uh
through a kid's life into
adulthood, we know from this
data that school-based health
centers provide um a connection
to health, to better health, as
well as connection to positive
experiences, and we know among
other things, those lead to
better attendance at school,
better attendance, among other
things, contributes to um less
of the negatives like uh like uh
exposure to drug addiction, more
of the positives like higher
graduation rates and that.
Through those investments, we
actually drive down the ultimate
result, the the rate of those
kids, uh, exposing their
children to, to adverse
childhood experiences, um, uh,
when they, when they have kids
and so it really um although,
you know, it's the sort of an
investment timeline that uh that
policymakers sometimes, you
know, kind of gnash their teeth
out because it takes a while,
but it really is on the right
track to being able to make the
kinds of investments that make
New Mexico a better place and
make and make it a better place
for our kids, so with that we'd
be happy to answer questions.
Good. Let's start with the
Representative Chasey and we'll
just come right around. Well, we
can't go too far around cause
they will go as far around as we
can.
7
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and um I believe I
heard you say, um, which one,
Nancy Rodriguez, that Rio Rancho
doesn't have a school-based
health clinic, right?
I think the compelling argument
is right here on, on these two
slides, 10 and 11.
On the use of the school-based
health clinics, and it's effect
on the graduation rate.
I mean, I can't imagine. I know
my son's graduated from Highland
High School, and, um, at that
time, we had the, it was the
most culturally diverse high
school in the state. I'm not
sure that it is any longer, but,
um, they, for a time we went on,
they went on block scheduling
and that improved the graduation
rate because students could
re-enter at any time because
they could get a whole year's
course in one semester and so
That helped with the graduation
rate. But everyone's always
after the graduation rate.
Um, but I remember when I was
early in the legislative career.
There was a lobbyist who's no
longer living who grew up, um, I
think in the Clovis area and he
He was just very emotional
because we were being asked to
cut school nurses at the time.
And what he was trying to convey
to everyone is, that's how his
family got
Chair, medical care was the
school nurse. And he was
emotional, telling us about
this. And
I, I, I guess what I would like
to find out and, and I encourage
you to go there is to try to
find out what about that contact
helped that kid stay.
In school and it would require,
you know, some kind of a uh
drilling down and qualitative
evaluation and interviews with
kids if they're willing to do
it. But that would be such
valuable information. I mean,
not only health information, but
that's like their whole future.
So I, I congratulate you for
finding this out. I mean, I've
always been an advocate.
Highland always had a
school-based health clinic and
And we knew about it and
appreciated it. I don't think my
kids had to use it because we
They were all already
established with their, their,
um, doctor, but not all families
do, but it would seem to me this
would help families trust the
schools more and, and we have a,
a project we heard, um,
Report on yesterday and it is,
um, it's called, we're calling
it the Blueprint Project, and
it's $500,000 that went to, um,
that we worked on with the
governor to get that in so we
could start
Helping to support families
throughout the state and
children so that they don't
experience ACEs.
And so I'd like to connect them
with you because they're working
on that. They've started to
have, um, community meetings in
under-resourced communities.
And, um, I, I would, I will get
them in touch with you.
OK, thank you. And if I could
just quickly comment you started
out your comments making
reference to uh Ms. Rodriguez's
comments about Rio Rancho not
having school-based health
centers. I think one of the, one
of the pieces of kind of secret
sauce of this is whether you
have a school-based health
center, how that school-based
health center is funded who your
partners are, what services are
offered is all at local
discretion and while you or I or
we might all make a different
decision than that particular
school district. I think the
fact that that all those
decisions are really made at the
local level really is an
important part of the.
Of the of the program, uh, and
really I think contributes to
some of the success that we see.
Thank you
Mr. Chair, if, if I could add
before Superintendent Cleveland
is at my front door, um,
tonight, especially since she
was kind enough to let us use
this space, uh, for this
meeting. I will say thanks
especially to a lot of the
federal money, this district
invested a lot post pandemic in
additional school social workers
and additional school nurses,
and they are doing a really good
job. Um, the reason our
organization has looked at the
district, um, and, and thinks
there's value in having a
school-based health center here.
is because the grads program,
which many of you may be
familiar with and have supported
funding for reached out to us
because they wanted a
school-based health center in
the district. So we'll continue
to have that conversation with
the district and unlike the
Department of Health, we're
advocates. So we will encourage
leaders like Superintendents to
consider school-based health to
um meet the students' needs, but
no one at the Department of
Health or our organization is
ever going to cram a service
down their throat that they and
their community don't want.
And I just want to say I think
Doctor Cleveland is one of the
best superintendents in the
state, and I've been in the
field of education and worked
with her, so.
Senator Hinkey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for a very enlightening
presentation, uh, quickly, who
are the purveyor or how, what's
the structure of services that
are provided? Is it a nurse
practitioner who's doing both
physical and emotional health or
are they referred out for
behavioral health.
Ms. Rodriguez, Senator Hickey
members of the committee, um, so
the model is to have a, it's
typically a nurse practitioner,
um, sometimes a PA, sometimes a
physician. It depends on who,
who the organization is and and
who they hire and then a
behavioral health provider who
is on site, uh, licensed, uh,
social worker or um clinical
counselor who are on site.
Thank you for that, and Mr.
Chair, um, is we look at the
difficult health situation in
New Mexico and as I am not here
most of the time I'm out
canvassing, um, and the, an
issue that's now almost topping
crime is lack of accessibility
to health care. And so being
able to do this in the schools
is really fundamental and with a
little cost, I mean, if, if
We could invest a lot in that
and the aces and so forth and
the new data that says the
positive experiences actually
can reverse some of the old
experiences and were trying to
leverage difficult social
situations at home that then
lead potentially to crime and
other things. It seems as this
is almost really early childhood
education, but putting it on,
uh, not as many steroids, but
steroids to
Really enhance this as a way to
be able to get care to these
kids and particularly the
emotional component that we hear
a lot about it and again, in
canvassing, that's our families
are saying, boy, your kids are
having trouble in school and
that's, there's no one to turn
to and so I, I hope we revisit
this in our recommendations to
vastly expand the program, the
analytic components and really
start to structure it out with
the proof. Thank you for the
references, newer if you have
more.
to date references that would be
greatly appreciated, but thank
you very much for your
presentation.
Representative Martinez. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I'm curious.
Mm
Do charter schools have this
availability.
Yes, uh, Representative
Martinez, members of the
committee, they do. We have
schoolba centers and several
charter schools.
I'm I'm very happy about that,
um.
We, we have some great charter
schools, um, in Rio Rancho.
I'm very supportive of and and
uh.
I like to see them involved in
this because I do think I, I
think these health centers are
very important.
I remember when I was a kid.
Going to the nurse.
Um
Broken knuckles, twisted ankles.
Yeah
I'll leave that.
Yeah.
We'll have that conversation
later.
Um
my, my other question is, um, I
remember when some of these
bills were being debated over
the last couple of years, there
was a lot of discussion about
We're cutting the parents out.
We're, we're separating the kids
from their parents and the
parents can't show up and they
can't get this information.
In practice.
How is that happening?
Or how is, how is it going?
Yeah, in practice school-based
health centers operate like any
other medical clinic, so we get
school-based health centers get
consents from parents, um, my,
my son also goes to Highland
High School, um, they send the
consent form in the registration
packets. I sign it every year.
Um, each school-based health
center does it differently, um,
but it is, it is required that
parents consent for students to
get services there. There are a
couple of exceptions where we
have minor consent laws, and
that is for behavioral health
and reproductive health. So if a
student who is um 12 comes into
the school base health center
and is requesting, um,
reproductive health services.
They by law can get those
without a parental consent, um,
for the behavioral health
services, it's 14 and above.
They can self-consent for those,
so the school-based health
centers follow all of the same
state laws for parental consent
that any other clinic in the
state does.
And Representative Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh.
I have to tell you we are
overwhelmed by requests from
parents for school-based health
centers. Do we get questions
exactly like the one you're
asking so that people can get
clear on what their rights and
responsibilities are 100%. And
luckily we have a number of
partners in the community who
are lawyers, of which I am not
one that can explain those laws
very clearly and, and really
they're the same if you go to
Presbyterian, if you go to
Loveless, if you go to a
school-based health center, so
it's good for parents to know
what the laws are that affect
them. um, but I think also,
There's something about the
pandemic that created so much
fear amongst parents and as a
parent myself, I completely
understand that and, and it led
to, I think in some cases
unnecessary fears about what
school-based health centers were
doing. Most school-based health
centers end up involving the
parents and a lot of the parents
who use school-based health
centers don't have
transportation, have 3 jobs,
don't have a way to get there,
kiddos to another clinic. And so
they're grateful, they're there
and they're asking, let's say
they're, they've got one high
school student over here who's
going to Highland.
that they're grateful has a
school-based health center,
they're calling us and saying,
why doesn't my middle school,
where my younger child is, have
a school-based health center and
what do I have to do to advocate
for that. So I think most
school-based health centers
without fail are doing their
best to involve parents and
guardians in the care of those
children unless the, the young
people are are demanding their
rights under the law to consent
for their own care. And if I may
just add one thing to that, um,
senator and Representative, uh,
members of the
when we survey our school-based
health center users consistently
25% or more. Tell us that the
school-based health center is
the only place they get
healthcare.
So I think that that's um
You know, that's another factor
that in terms of access to care.
Thank thank you very very much
for that, um, I remember when,
when it was being debated, it
was my first session and.
I mean, my head was spinning
because I was there was a lot of
information miscommunication.
Uh, arguing back and forth.
but I wanted to see what it was
like in practice, because I will
get the calls. I do wanna put
out correct information and some
of the marketing money that uh
The secretary is asking for
maybe might be used to uh.
prop up the school-based uh
health centers.
Nancier, I would be happy to set
one up for you.
anyone on the committee or
others.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Savia Lopez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, these are so
important to so many
communities, and I'm so happy to
have them, um, and this is kind
of relating to the last, the
last time we talked about
school-based health care uh
centers. I asked about
confidentiality of records and I
guess I, is the answer just the
same? You're treated like every
other clinic?
Yes, Senator Sadia Lopez, Mr.
Chair members of the committee,
yes, we treat all the confident
all the records are treated
confident confidentially per
state and federal law and just
like any other clinic, um, or
healthcare organization in the
state.
So do you share records with
their other family physician,
then we do so, um, they will
sign a consent and we can
transfer records just like if
your child gets seen at an
urgent care, those records may
get sent to their primary care
provider, that, that same thing
happens again with consents and
in compliance with all the laws
that I think that that's really
important. What I was concerned
about, but I, and I was
concerned about if you bill
insurance for those.
Services, um, that the parents
might get uh confidential
information. Is that still a
problem or you just don't build?
Uh, yeah, Senator Cedillo Lopez,
members of the committee, we,
there is less concerning as it
was, it had been a concern
several years ago, um, regarding
that, I think that that
insurances have tightened up,
especially because most of the
students who use school-based
health centers are Medicaid
eligible, and we have a really
great relationship with the HCA
and work on those processes all
the time, so if, if we get
notification, um, from somebody
that uh.
uh,
explanation of benefits and EOB
went home, um, inappropriately
for, you know, for example, for
a visit that was supposed to be
confidential, um, then Nancy or
I are usually on the phone
pretty quickly with the HCA and
working through where that where
that happened and working
through that MCO but it I have
not gotten one of those requests
in
A few years, so we've really
worked hard to make sure that,
um, those are, that's pretty
tight. That is excellent to
hear. I'm so happy to hear it.
Um, then along the the lines of
really making the case for these
centers, correlation doesn't
equal causation, and so on, on
that slide, they're less likely
to be chronically absent. I
mean, it, it looks great, but
are there confounding factors
that that people like maybe uh
somebody who reaches out to a
health care center.
just have a different motivation
than.
Then students who don't or how,
how would you?
This I think relates to uh
Representative Chasey's question
about drilling down and really
getting that data to be robust,
Senator Sidilia Lopez, um,
And members of the committee,
yeah, it, it, it is just an
association. That's all we can
say at this point. We can't say
that because of the school-based
health centers, um, and so it
could be just the example you
gave or that that schools that
choose to have a school baseball
center really.
are great about putting together
resources and, and, um, things
to help support students. We
don't know what, what any of
that looks like yet. Those are
one of some of the things that
we wanna dive into a little bit
more as we have this opportunity
to work with this incredible
data set and and really see
where it takes us. Mr. Chair,
I just oh go ahead so when we
have budget conversations as
Senator Pope raised about things
like backfilling, salary
increases to be able to fill
vacancies that we
can't afford to fill because of
higher pay rates, those lead to
things like epidemiologists who
can then do that work that we
can't always get done with the,
with the structure we have right
now. I always seem to give you
an opportunity to advocate for,
for more, um, but I also wanted
to note that most medical
research is all about
correlations and not causation.
Anyway, so thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I love school-based health
centers. Um, I, I'm, I'm very
happy to see that there's gonna
be one at West Mesa High School.
2 of my kids went to West Mesa,
um, and so I, I have 5 kids, the
youngest, um.
came to me when he was 16. He
attended Crisco Heritage. They
have a clinic there. You
probably know about it. It's run
by UNM, um, and that clinic sees
the entire community. um, so
that is the clinic, he graduated
last year and he continues to go
to the clinic and that really is
his primary care.
Um, because that's where we can
get in and that's where he's, he
chooses to stay.
Um
One of the questions that I have
is one of the things that I
think that would be great if we
could get into the um health,
the clinics and the school-based
health centers is dentists.
Um, that, and I don't know why
sort of in healthcare, we, we
see medical, we see dental, we
see behavioral health. I think
it's great that the school-based
health centers have, you know,
medical and, um, mental health
services. Trisco has a
psychologist um there which was
which has really been great for
the for the kids, but are there
any plans to look at getting
dental, um, services into, into
the clinics.
Sure. Thank you, Representative
Chavez, um, Mr. Chair, the
Department of Health prior to
the pandemic actually included
in one of their previous RFAs
additional funding if, um,
operators of school-based health
centers were willing to add
dental and vision. We have a
dearth of vision providers, and
we hear this from school nurses
all the time that the, the stock
of glasses that they have, um,
for young people runs out by
about Christmas and 2nd
semester, people are squinting
at the board, um.
And so there are um some of the
operators who have added dental,
probably the best one is in
Cuba, um, New Mexico, they have
a full dental offertory and can
do full repair, um, that
challenge to growing that is
that, you know, about 70 and
it's probably gonna come up to
75% of the school-based health
centers are run by federally
qualified health centers, and
they struggle to find, um, oral
health providers. So we need to
address that longer range
problem of the healthcare
shortage.
in oral health and vision
health, um, but in the meantime,
one of the things that we have
worked on and our organization
has in particular worked on is
having nurse practitioners who
can do oral health exams, work
to the full level of their
licensure and then refer out in
a very concrete way if they do
not have oral health internal to
their organization. And so we
have seen a little bit of
increase there and we want to
continue to grow that. And
Kristen and I have certainly
talked a lot about that so we've
seen small.
Improvements, um, but it has
been challenging and on the
vision side too, we've, we have
a collaboration with Blue Cross
Blue Shield and the Kiwanis
International to try to look at
vision care as well. We feel a
little bit like a finger in, in
the dike until we get more
providers in the state in those
two areas, but, um, so we're
open to any suggestions that you
all have along those lines
because I know that's a goal of
ours and a goal of the
Department of Health.
Mr. Chair, with, with apologies
to the rest of the committee.
I've got a meeting in an hour in
Santa Fe with a senator who has
a lot of influence over my
budget, if you know what I mean,
and so I'm gonna excuse myself
and leave you and uh Christian
and Nancy's capable hands.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and
thanks for, and drive carefully
on your way back.
Um, Representative Ferrari. Oh,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you for, um,
Continuing the great work for
the um school-based health
centers, um, can you tell me in
Las Cruces the two new ones.
The brick and mortar. The two
that are opening, um, in the
next couple months that we're
going to the grand opening for
our Lynn and Picacho, um, and
then I
I, I have a list of the, uh,
those three hubs that is
associated with with each one,
but I don't have it in front of
me, so, but I can get you the
information of those 3 smaller,
the 3 hub schools or spoke
schools, I'm sorry, that are
going to be associated. Do you
have that? OK.
Alameda Elementary School,
Booker T. Washington Elementary
School in Conley Elementary
School.
Are there more? Sorry, Dona Anna
Elementary School, let's see,
you said 6, you were MacArthur
Elementary School.
And Massa Park Elementary
School. Is that 6? Oh good. My
kids went to Alameda, but Lynn
already had a school-based
health center, I thought.
They opened and closed under
another operator. Sorry, Mr.
Chair and, um, Representative
Ferrari under another operator
and closed and they're reopening
as a full brick and mortar under
the deamia. All of these are
with the clinicariamilia, um,
previously at Lynn Middle School
and, and again, this goes back
to my previous statement about
the community schools, um, Ben
Archer Health Center used to do
some preliminary services, um,
through the invitation of the
community school coordinator at
Lynn Middle School, but it was.
never a fully operational, um,
clinic and now that the
clinicafamilia is taking over,
um, it will be both, um, a fully
operational clinic and it'll be
the hub for these, for
telehealth for these elementary
folks.
Oh, this is wonderful. Thank
you. And Mr. Chair, um, is, um,
a community school, dependent on
having a school-based health
center.
Mr. Chair Representative
Ferrari, no, um, but nationally
that model does, when you look
even at graphics of the model
with this pillar of integrated
student support. It usually says
school health of some sort and
so a lot of states, a lot of
communities have interpreted
that to mean a school-based
health center. And so I think
ideally, if it's possible, um,
the community school folks, I'm
on the state's Community School
Coalition, so I'm sort of
speaking for my coalition here,
that ideally
the model would include a
school-based health center, um,
but in some cases, the community
schools team is leaning on the
school nurse, is leaning on
school social workers and doing
whatever they can and where they
have none internal to the
school, they try to have a
robust referral system to
outside community services to
make sure those needs are met,
and that's the spoke.
Concept, no, no, ma'am, that is,
that is just a referral process
to try to meet the need of that
pillar of the community school
model for the school-based
health center, usually when you
hear the terminology hub and
spoke, you, you're talking about
telehealth, you're talking about
a brick and mortar clinic where
the providers are sitting as the
hub and the spoke is a
telehealth. Sometimes there is a
healthcare provider there at the
other end or a community health
worker or the school nurse, but
typically there's a kiosk or a
computer where the providers
back at the hub providing care
via the.
Um, telehealth unit where Mr.
Chair, and where they can get a
referral or some type of um
support Representative Ferrari,
the care is provided via
telehealth unless they determine
there is some sort of clinical
need that can't be met via
telehealth. So in some cases,
the, the kiosks and we'd we'd be
happy to have you guys come out
and visit some of the
school-based health centers that
have a full physical kiosk that
can take vitals, that can do
some very limited labs that have
a camera that can look in your.
here, down your throat. So in
some cases, they can make a
diagnosis through the telehealth
kiosk if they determine that a
greater level of clinical
assessment is needed, then they
would refer. And in the example
of a lot of the hospitals are
fairly qualified health centers
that run the school-based health
centers, they might be referring
to their own community clinics,
um, and, but if they don't have
a community clinic, they refer
to another entity. And when Mr.
Chair, when are you, um, having
this, uh,
In Las Cruces, the ribbon
cutting or Friday, this Friday,
5 to 7 p.m. and I believe, is it
at Lynn Middle School is my
recollection. We can, we can get
that for you if you think you'd
be available for anybody else
would be and would like to come.
I know they'd be thrilled to
have you guys. I'm still up
here, but thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Subscribe to our newsletter and
we'll have pictures of the
event. If you don't, haven't
already subscribed to our
newsletter. It's always uh nice
to see good things happening
like that. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank both of you.
Um, I've been a health, uh,
school-based healthcare
champion. I have the award to to
prove it, so just a couple of
things for my colleagues, um,
the fact that they have physical
health and behavioral health
together. I was so thrilled when
they talked about a warm
handoff.
That, that if you and, and
another reason for that is that
if you're going into the
school-based health center.
Nobody knows if you're going in
for a runny nose or you're going
in for behavioral health. So
that gets rid of some of the
stigma and.
They have done amazing things
and I'm so appreciative and I
think there should be one in
every school. I know that's pie
in the sky, but you know, I
dream a lot. Um, so my only
question is.
Do you, and in what ways work
with uh county and tribal health
councils.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and vice
chair. So how we work with both
the Alliance of Health councils
and individual county health
councils, frankly has changed
depending on how much funding
and capacity they have over the
years, and I know, and I will be
here tomorrow morning. Um, I
know they're presenting to you
and I know this question may
come up because we do
collaborate and prior to the
recession, when there was a
pretty significant amount of
funding in the county health
councils, and they had the
funding to do the countywide
needs assessments.
Often if they do, um, found in
their assessments that there
were pediatric healthcare needs
that were unmet, um, or people
were just flat out requesting
school-based health centers,
they would feed that data from
the community assessments to the
alliance, and we would try to
collaborate with the Department
of Health to sort of register
that need and reach out to them
when there was an RFA for
funding, and in the meantime, we
tried to help them find um
access to other healthcare
resources if they weren't
familiar with them. Um, that
has, I think it's fair to say,
limped
along a little bit since they
have lost funding, so sometimes
I reach out to them more than
they reach out to me. Um, I will
often see their, um, their
teams, their volunteers in
particular at Public Health Day
as an example, where we come
together at community events and
they try to let us know if
things are happening. Um, and I
would say the other thing they
let us know is if they're having
challenges, if they have a
school-based health center, most
recently, the Lordsburg
School-based Health Center, um,
they lost their provider.
And that's a community that is
again a healthcare provider
shortage area and um Hidalgo
Medical Services, which is the
FQHC that runs that clinic was
having a heck of a time finding
a provider to staff that. And
the County Health council called
me and said, Nancy, why is this
Glo Health center not open and
what is happening and what do we
need to do about it? Um, that
has happened less since they
have lost funding, uh, but we do
still try to collaborate, um,
so, you know, with, with other
states, I talked to my
counterparts in
states, other states a lot, and
we're one of the few states that
have a state Department of
Health instead of county health
departments, and so we feel like
the County Health council's kind
of function like we would if we
had county health departments
and what I hear from my
counterparts in other states in
terms of how they do that, um,
to here on the ground needs. Um,
and so that's how we, we
perceive, and you, you can ask
them tomorrow how they, they
think our relationship is. Thank
you for that answer, and I see
Valeria back there, um,
teary and uh.
Promises that um a group of us
are working on increased funding
for the health councils and
fingers crossed and talk to your
legislator and all of that stuff
cause we really need to beef up
what they do for us. So thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Vice Chair, and, and thank you
for the opportunity to talk
about someone behind their back
in a good way, and I didn't even
know she was here, so thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Pope, it's your turn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You're
going to get a bonus question
from me. You should only do one
meeting, but I'll do a little
extra
Thank you, Representative
Senator Pope, it's your turn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You're
going to get a bonus question
from me. You should only do one
meeting, but I'll do a little
lecture,
um, thank you for being here and
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, I just think these are so
important. Um, I just remember
going up and growing up and and
a lot of cases, uh, seeing a
school nurse or getting health
care to school is one of the few
places that I can actually have
access.
and get it.
Um
I also had a chance last year,
we actually visited one of the
um school-based health care
clinics up north. I'm forgetting
which community, but we actually
made a visit.
Um, it was awesome just to see
what was happening there. And
you're right, in many cases,
that is really the only clinic
for that community. So you have
families in the community
actually going there to get
service, so it's so important
and it's so needed, um, it's
really unfortunate that a lot of
the uh
Political partisan rhetoric got.
put on this issue when we passed
it.
We see it still going on
nationally, right, you know,
especially the attacks of your
students gonna go to school one
day and then they're gonna come
back a different gender the next
day, just outrageous stuff,
right, that's out there.
Um
And I just want to say, you
know, I, thank you for what
you're doing, but I do have one
question, and that's last year
when we went, I think there was
an issue where.
There might have been a delay in
some payments to some of the uh
contracts and the folks in some
of the clinics, um, how we
resolved that from last year and
and and are we making sure that
that's not happening again
because I just think it's so
important um that we have these
school-based clinics, um, we
need to expand it, but I don't
want us to be in a situation to
where we lose, lose them because
it's gonna be so tough to try to
get any of them back if they
don't get the funding. Thank
you, mister, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Representative Kate, um, Mr.
Chair.
She, if she could answer that
question. Oh, I'm sorry, I'm
sorry. That's OK
Senator Pope and uh Senator Xi
Jin members of the committee,
yeah, last year we had a hard
time. We had, we had
transitioned to a different
process to get funding out, um,
and that transition did not go
as smoothly as possible. We have
um.
We have worked diligently, uh,
over the last 18 months to
ensure that that is not going to
continue to happen. All of the
school-based health centers as
of this year, this, this school
year, um, have been paid within
a month or less of submitting an
invoice, but that transition
period did was was tough, and
I'm, I'm with you. I hope that
that never happens again.
Thank you for that answer and um
thank you, Mr. Chair. You know,
I mentioned the visit we made
and how a lot of cases that the
actual community is, that's
actually where they're getting
their medical care in some ways,
um.
Could you tell us a little bit
about maybe some of the
challenges to having.
A school based.
Um, healthcare facility in
Albuquerque, Santa Fe compared
to in Taos compared to Espinola,
I guess what are some of the
different challenges and I think
we all know probably the
workforce part of it, but um are
there any other challenges that
we need to be aware of?
Uh, Senator Pope and
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, yeah, there's a lot
more, um.
Anonymity when you're in a
bigger community and so some of
the misinformation that was that
was occurring a couple of years
ago, I think maybe put some
people off in smaller
communities, um, but as we've
talked about already that
because school baseball centers
provide a whole breadth of
services, primary care,
behavioral health, um, sometimes
they just wanna go in and
talk. When I, when I was a
provider in a school-based
health center, I kept a drawer
full of snacks and sometimes
kids would just come in and get
snacks out of the drawer and
hang out and chat.
Um, and so I think when we have
that, when we can create those
situations where it does feel
safe, um, regardless of the, the
location, um.
Then, then we get more kids
coming in. The provider
shortages, you're 100% correct.
Um, we have more access to
providers in, in more metro
areas.
Uh, and it's harder to get
providers to to work in, in very
rural communities, uh, there are
some grow your own programs
where you know we're
You know, there's one through
UNM that they're trying to
Recruit students from rural
schools and then bring them up,
um, and have them be medical
providers or behavioral health
providers or dentists, um, but
that just takes time. That's
where things like, uh, this
project with Goodside Health
doing telehealth in rural
communities or mobile health,
um, other, you know, all of our
FQHCs and UNM doing telehealth
for other schools, that helps
kind of fill the gap, um, but,
but we still have
be able to focus on, on growing
our own and and recruiting folks
into the state.
And
um, Senator Pope and Mr. Chair,
I think, um, there are trends in
clinical needs that vary
depending on whether you're
rural. I think you guys were in
Penasco and certainly Penascos
had challenges recruiting
providers to that community and,
uh, sometimes the providers are,
I mean, it sort of feels like
we're back in the horse and
carriage days because they're in
a car now, but they're still
driving community, community to
provide that care in smaller
places like Penasco, um, but you
might see asthma is a
in New Mexico, there's a burden
statewide, but in Estancia,
they're, um, burning pellets and
pellet stoves, so that's a
trigger in Albuquerque, uh,
cockroaches and apartment
complexes are, are the trigger.
So, so we hear about some
things. I will say I think
vaping is, is a bigger problem
in urban areas because of the
anonymity that Kristen
mentioned, um, Albuquerque,
Santa Fe, Rear Rancho, Las
Cruces. I think we're hearing
more from on vaping because it's
easier to buy.
Illegally for young people,
whereas if your aunt runs the,
the corner store in a small
community, she's gonna know if
you're over there trying to buy
a vape pen, um, so that is, I
think, more of an urban problem,
but even in Albuquerque,
especially on the behavioral
health side, they're waiting
lists. They're more providers
here, but you might wait 4
months and, and we do not need
a, a child with suicide ideation
to be waiting 4 months to see a
behavioral health provider. So,
you know, I, we're a very small
organization and I never thought
10 years ago we would be
talking.
and investing in efforts around
workforce. I thought that's
UNM's job. That's the
legislature's job, but it's
every job, everybody's job is
how we feel now because it
stops, you know, positive
improvement on all of these
things in urban and rural
communities, and, and that's
what we hear from all our
operators.
Thank you panelists. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. It's all I have.
Thanks, Senator, uh,
Representative Cates.
Uh thank you, Chair. Thank you
once again, this is great and if
uh I am uh team school health
care clinics as well. Uh, I, I
think the senator for um his,
his very uh insightful
questions, um, I, uh, I'm
assuming the information you
gave us, things like, you know,
ear infections and those are
things that can be diagnosed at
a school-based health clinic
even if it's a telehealth,
correct?
Representative Kate's, uh, um,
members of the committee, yes,
yeah, that's what, that's what
the telehealth cart, it has the,
the otoscope that then you can
see the whole eardrum really
magnified on a computer screen.
It's exciting. So also, um, I
wanted to, you said what do you
have to do to get ready for a
school-based health center. I,
I, uh, my children graduated
from rancho High School, um, and
so I am disappointed, um, that
something that.
has um increased graduation like
in what I believe also has saved
the lives of our children are
not quite embraced here, but I
do know that our superintendent
has a very difficult job in
balancing budget. So you explain
where you get your money and how
you fund, but, but tell me about
the burden upon the school
systems when they decide to
bring in a school-based health
care system. What is the cost?
or what is the administrative
and, and I'm very excited to
hear about your, um,
Your grant program as well, the
planning grant with DOH, but
what I I know that when we do
planning grants for like water
infrastructure. Individuals can
be subject experts about water,
but not necessarily grant
writers. Are we having that same
sort of um difficulty with our
education systems with that
grant writer and as well as what
is the school have to do to get
ready to bring in a school-based
health center. Thanks.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Kates. I think
there's a couple of different,
um,
Questions in there, so let me
take the readiness part first
because it, it really depends on
the community. I would say
buy-in of some, of some large
enough proportion of either
school administrators, school
staff, and community members
that they're, it can't just be
one person. We certainly have
the school nurse, the teacher,
you know, the school social
worker who call us, but if they
can't get buy-in from, say,
their principal or a vice
principal or a
cadre of teachers, then it's
gonna take a while for them to
get ready. Another readiness
piece and this can be impacted
by where your community is, is,
is there a medical provider in
that community who's willing to
be an operator, um, of a
school-based health center or,
or grow in any way. So part of
the planning grant process is a
little bit like, I feel like a
matchmaker sometimes it's trying
to find a medical provider who
is willing to partner with the
school distric.
district to look at this model
and see whether, um, see whether
it's a good fit for them. The
financial piece also varies a
little bit. I will say the
greatest burden, um, can be met
with state funding and federal
funding, though there are some
districts who, um, for example,
we can take Moriarty as an
example. They opted to pay for
the capital costs of rehabbing a
portable themselves because they
were so invested as a district
in that clinic.
but you could apply for federal
HHERSA funding for capital
costs. You could use some of
your state funding for capital
costs and rehabilitation of
either a physical plant or a
portable as an example, um,
Highland High School, you'll be
glad to hear, um, 4 leader
Chasey that they've been in a
tiny closet for about 20 years
and they are moving in about a
month into a more of a, from a
Pinto to a Cadillac, hopefully
to 9 rooms and and that.
through the school district
funding and they're using a
little bit of their community
schools funding. So it's really
up to the community and the
school how they want to fund it,
but when a district decides
they're going to partner with a
medical entity, they have a
memorandum of understanding that
usually is 0 to $1 a year. So
the, the district typically
provides the, um, utilities,
sometimes but not always the
custodial services, and that's
it. So the startup costs
sometimes do have a capital
cost.
Which um is higher but on an
ongoing basis, billing Medicaid,
billing insurance, having
Department of Health grant
money, um, and, and in some
cases, larger operators like PMS
as an example, get other grants
to support their operations. And
at that point, really the, the
time of the school folks to
collaborate is really the only
cost to them.
OK, thank you very much Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kate.
Senator Pinto, did you have any
questions?
More comments, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for the work you did
in your presentation. We did go
to a hero, um, one of the
The schools and there was no
posted hotline numbers. I know
we have those available, so I
just wanna make sure that there
is some kind of foundation or
standard set of what they're
going to have in there,
especially when you talk about
resources that are available
through us. And the
suspension, students are
suspended, but still part of the
school or they have not been
expelled. Are they allowed to
come in?
To to talk.
Uh, Senator Pinto, members of
the committee, it would, I think
it would depend on because each
school-based cell center is
different. We joke that when you
see one school baseball center,
you've seen one school base
health center, um, and so I
think it would depend on the the
school-based health center would
have to work with the school
administration to get approval
for that student to come back
into the school to go to a
counseling appointment. Now some
of the some of
sometimes that's easier, depends
on probably
whether or not that would
happen, how embedded in the
school, the school-based cell
center is, if you have to walk
through, you know, 3 hallways to
get to the school based cell
center or if it sits in a
portable on the campus in the
parking lot, then, then it may
be different, but that would
really be a conversation that
the school-based health center
would have to have with the
principal, um, or whoever the,
the disciplinarian is at the
school, whether or not that
student could come in. One other
option for them um would be.
for that student to receive
services via telehealth, um, so
they could, they could talk to
their counselor that way.
And, and if I may, Senator
Pinto, we'll make a note to do
education. The Department of
Health funded school-based
health centers have standards
and benchmarks they're required
to follow that include posting
of hotlines, um, but it's, you
know, there's turnover in, in
every kind of clinic. So that's
a good note that we can do some
education and outreach on that.
So thank you for that. And Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
and I say that because they're
saying, well, we want to address
absenteeism.
But if you don't have some kind
of process, especially when we
talk about restorative justice
for our students, then I, it
sounds like, oh, it's gonna be a
no. Well, guess what the
student's gonna come back and
do.
After they're expelled.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, thank
you, Senator Senator Pinto, um,
thank you for the presentation.
Um,
thank you for.
incredible advances that you've
made over the last several
years. It's really important.
And uh I think you can see the
level of support that this
program has, uh, from the
committee from the legislature
generally so don't hesitate to
uh bring requests to us and
we'll do what we can to support
them.
Thank you again.
And then the final panel of the
day is on, uh,
A brasso's family support
services, April Spalding, the
executive director.
And Madam Secretary, were you
here for this particular item
or?
OK, did, did you want to come up
and join her or?
You're just going to
April
Up to you, April. Do you want,
do you want? OK.
Yeah, good. OK. That's great.
Oh, thank you.
So good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
sticking with me through the end
of the day. I appreciate that.
You've heard quite a bit about
early intervention from ADCAP to
parents to sweet little Helena
this morning, um, and I'd like
to give you a glimpse into the
provider perspective, but before
I get into my full presentation,
I would like to really ground us
in who we are talking about.
So as you see in front of you,
we all know a child. When I say
this, you may picture your own
child, a niece, a friend's baby,
a constituent son, but we all
know a child.
We want you to picture that
child and their family. I can
imagine they're smiling and
happy and well, um, adjusted in
their communities and their
homes.
But now I want you to alter that
picture.
That I've asked you to create in
your mind. Let's give that child
developmental hurdles. Let's
place barriers in his path
forward. That child may have
trouble speaking.
And it's so frustrated to the
point of tantrums each time he
needs something, or she may not
be crawling as expected, or
perhaps that child was born
exposed to drugs and is being
raised by his grandparents.
That child may have Down
syndrome, cerebral palsy, or
autism.
Can you see the delay or
disability in that child that
you've drawn in your mind.
Is the child in a wheelchair or
wearing a helmet to protect
their brain, or do they have
hearing aids? Perhaps you can't
see anything, but we know it's
there because it's our picture
that we're painting.
Regardless of the challenges we
give to that child, their
success is proven to be based on
how soon someone can be drawn
into your mental picture to help
this family.
Early intervention is often that
first support to enter this
picture.
This is a stranger sent by an
agency funded by the state.
Why would your imaginary family
invite the stranger into their
home to observe their struggles
and their dirty dishes, witness
their fears, critique their
habits.
I'm gonna tell you why. A
developmental delay or
disability is more than just a
number on an assessment tool.
It is the stress of the unknown.
It is the anxiety.
The fears of the what if, the
fears of failure.
Early intervention services are
bigger than helping youngsters
just meet their developmental
milestones. These services are
about educating and empowering
parents.
On how they can support their
child to reach those much
anticipated developmental
moments. It's about celebrating
the small steps, the big jump,
the first word.
Even when those milestones are
later than we may have pictured.
And sometimes even when we are
not sure that these milestones
will ever occur for that child
and their family.
Early intervention will be with
that family through their
journey, identifying resources,
providing therapies.
Offering an ear to the parent
who may not feel heard.
So this family in your mental
picture, they're not alone.
About 16,000 New Mexico children
require early intervention
services, so this child, this
family that we've drawn, well,
they may not be your child, or
maybe they are.
Chances are, you know them.
So if you need help picturing a
child, you can see the first
page in your packet is, um,
Lincoln.
We also had Helena here this
morning, but with Lincoln, he is
pictured here with his mother,
Nikaela.
Lincoln was born just over a
year ago with cerebral palsy,
and his mother, who is also a
nurse, is on our board of
directors. So please hang on to
this image, whether it's the
child, you know, Lincoln or
Helena, as we discussed the
details of early intervention.
Again, thank you so much for
sticking with me through the end
of the day. My name is April
Spalding, and I am the executive
director at Abrazo's Family
support services. I'm honored to
know several of you, and I'm
really excited to get to meet
those of you who I've not yet
spent time with, and a special
thank you to Representative
Martinez, who made it, this is
the catalyst for my being able
to be here with you today.
So I want to share with you more
about Abrazos and early
intervention services in
general. First, wonderful state
of New Mexico. I also recognize
that I am the person standing
between you and the end of your
day. So I'm going to do my best
to keep my time with you lively
and engaging. A little bit about
me. I started my relationship
with early intervention services
as a young mother. All 3 of my
sons received services, so I was
in the system for about 7 years.
And it impacted our lives so
much that I decided to
completely change my career and
go into early intervention.
I've worked as a family service
coordinator and as a program
manager for respite and autism
services.
And after about 8 years of
working in the field, I
progressed into the leadership
role and have been the executive
director of Brazos. I just
celebrated 17 years with this
wonderful organization last
month.
I'm a voting member on the
interagency coordinating council
or as you might refer to them as
the ICC as well as the advisory
council on Quality Supports for
individuals with IDD, also known
as the ACQ. I sit on the early
childhood professionals
subcommittee for the ECECD's
advisory council, and I'm a
member of the association of
Developmental Disabilities
Community Providers, also known
as ADCAP. So full disclosure,
while I do sit on several of
these governor councils. I am.
Simply here as April, the
executive director of Abrazos,
and nothing that I'm saying or
sharing with you today is a
reflection of any of the
councils or committees of which
I am a part.
So my objectives for you today
are to walk away with some
general information about
Abrazos as well as early
intervention in New Mexico and
how it's unique from other ECECD
programs. We'll also discuss a
few challenges that we face, and
then lastly, I have a call to
action for you.
So in slide 4, you can see our
mission is to enhance the
quality of life for individuals
with developmental delays and
disabilities by providing
specialized family-centered
community-based services.
And for a brazos, you can see on
slide 5, the list of the service
area that we provide early
intervention to. It is all of
Sandoval County and the far
northwest corridor of Bernalillo
County.
Abrazos was founded in 1978, we
are a 501c3 nonprofit entity and
we're located in the small town
of Bernalillo.
We served about 600 children and
their families last year. And
during my tenure of leading
Abrazos, which keep in mind is
only about 1/4 of its history,
we have served over 6000
children and their families in
Sandoval and Bernalillo
counties.
It's also something we're very
proud of is that 3 of our staff
have a personal attachment to
our mission.
On slide 7 is a list of our
services that we provide at
Abrazos. We work to provide a
continuum of care to children
and families from the time they
are released from the hospital,
all the way through adulthood.
And while all of our programs
provide high quality care for
individuals with developmental
disabilities and delays, I'm
really here today to focus on
early intervention.
Early intervention or as we
lovingly call it EI provides
support for families of children
ages birth to 3 who have or are
at risk for developmental delays
and disabilities. And while we
know that the birth rate in New
Mexico is decreasing, the
statistics of children born with
developmental delays and
disabilities is actually on the
rise. So according to ECTA,
national data, the rise in
children with developmental
delays and disabilities that are
identified in the United States
has risen from 2% in
2001 to 4% in 2023.
And according to ECECD, early
intervention serves about 9% of
New Mexico's birth to 3
population.
Children come to us in a variety
of ways.
They are often referred by their
pediatricians. It is our number
one referral source, but we can
receive referrals from anyone.
Families do not need health
insurance, and they do not need
to be documented in order to
receive services.
Identifying children at the
earliest possible phase is vital
to ensuring that we take
advantage of this critical stage
of their development. And this
allows us to really take
advantage of the limited time
that we have with each child.
And in fact, finding those
children as has already been
mentioned today, is something
that New Mexico is really good
at. We are number one.
In the nation for finding
children who need services for
their developmental delays and
disabilities. We're so often at
the bottom of the good list or
at the top of the wrong list. So
this is something we should be
very proud of and we should be
bragging about much more.
In fact, other states are
looking to us right now to lead
the way. So it's very important
that we do just that and lead
the way. You'll see on slide 11,
how children are determined to
be eligible for early
intervention services.
Any child ages birth to 3 is
eligible to receive an an
assessment or an evaluation to
determine their eligibility. The
majority of the children that we
serve are eligible because they
have a delay in one or more of
the areas of their development.
This can include delays in their
physical development, such as
crawling, walking, using their
hands.
It could be a delay in their
problem solving skills. Their
ability to learn from their
environment or just to do things
for themselves. We also look at
a child's ability to use and
understand communication, words,
nonverbal words, and so on.
And how children are able to
interact with others and express
emotions that are appropriate
for their age.
Children are also eligible who
have a diagnosed condition that
we know is likely to result in a
developmental delays such as
Down syndrome, vision
impairment, or hearing loss.
And we also provide services to
children who have other at-risk
conditions that increase the
risk for delays in development,
such as preterm birth, prenatal
drug exposure or environmental
conditions such as abuse or
neglect.
We believe that parents are the
experts on their children and
that children really learn best
from their natural caregivers.
In contrast to the traditional
education or medical models,
early intervention uses a
coaching model. Cassandra spoke
about that a little bit this
morning, right? And that really
focuses on supporting the family
and the other important
caregivers in that child's life
to learn the strategies to help
support the child during their
daily routines and activities.
So our teams of professionals
coach the.
family on how to engage in those
activities. And that part in
their daily life to ensure that
that part of their daily lives
is enjoyable. We often talk
about it looking like play,
right? It's the best way for a
child to learn. We also
recognize that we only have
these children for a maximum of
3 years.
So, in addition to supporting
the developmental growth of the
child, we really have to work to
develop the advocacy muscle of
the parents. They will need
that. They will need to be able
to advocate for their child, not
just for resources, but for
their rights and for their
services, as we often hear they
move through the school system
and the next stages of
transition in their lives.
Our services are home and
community based.
They are often provided in the
family's home in the caregiver,
in a care center or daycare
center.
In another natural caregiver
such as Grandma's house, I think
was referenced this morning and
also in the community.
This ensures that our team are
working with the children's
toys, their natural experiences
and environment in order to have
the best impact. You'll see the
last bullet there does have some
early intervention organizations
also do provide services at
their sites as well if that is
needed.
In slide 14, we outline who are
providing these services to our
community. At Abrazos all of our
professionals are degreed. In
fact, according to the federal
mandates in order to fully
complete their job duties,
including assessments and
evaluations. All staff are
required to be degreed or they
have to meet special criteria
for a waiver.
The service providers include
developmental specialists,
family service coordinators, OT,
PT, SOP. We also have infant
mental health specialists and
social workers and nutritional
consultants, which are
particularly hard to find for
the pediatric field.
So what does early intervention
look like?
Here are two examples of how
individualized early
intervention services can be for
two different children and their
families.
Early intervention services are
provided in accordance with the
child's developmental needs and
the family's routines to ensure
that we have measurable
progress.
Early intervention is really
truly made to meet that family
and child where they are. The
program is not a one size fits
all curriculum. So in these two
examples, both families receive
service coordination to assist
with referrals, resources,
timelines, rights, plans, and
compliance.
They also both have
developmental instruction, which
takes a global perspective of
the child's developmental
progress, and in this example,
Johnny might receive physical
therapy to work on those core
muscles to ensure he is able to
sit to crawl, to walk.
And he might have low muscle
tone based on his diagnosis.
He might have speech therapy to
watch for feeding concerns.
Whereas Annie might receive
speech therapy to assist with
her oral motor strength, and
that would help with her
articulation.
Well, I have not gotten to the
challenges in this field.
It is worth noting here that
service coordination is only a
reimbursable service if we
achieve a full hour in any given
month.
So in this example, we would not
be able to bill for service
coordination for Annie because
it is only 30 minutes.
And if a family cancels any of
these services,
We still have to pay our staff
and we do not have billable
time.
Makes it incredibly challenging.
You can imagine what the
holidays and flu season looks
like.
Our staff who wished to focus on
serving children and their
families are also burdened with
the fact that they might not be
able to bring in enough money in
any given day or month to cover
their role.
On page 16, I want to point out
those are my babies. Aren't they
so cute? They're much bigger
now, but transition is always a
challenge, and you might hear a
lot about the challenges of
transitioning out of early
intervention. EI agencies
support families as their
children reach that 3-year mark,
whether they need continued
services in the school setting.
Monitoring through home visiting
or whatever setting the family
chooses to move their child
into.
Additionally, due to request and
requests of families, the ECECD
has engaged with a stakeholder
group to explore the possibility
of expanding the early
intervention program to exceed
the age of 3. When my children
received early intervention, we
had this option, and it made a
very significant difference for
us. This changed in about 2012
due to cost containment.
The overwhelming feedback from
the stakeholder group was that
it would be very beneficial to
have this option for children
and their families to stay with
early intervention beyond the
age of 3.
But unfortunately, it was also
strongly noted that the early
intervention system is not
financially able to support this
change in the field. It is just
not stable.
So I page 17.
I want to point out just some
logistics about early
intervention within our state.
Abrazos is just one of 34
providers throughout our, our
beautiful state here. And you
hear a great deal about other
ECECD programs. You hear about
childcare and pre-K and home
visiting, but as we've seen, it
is past time to highlight early
intervention programs.
We are one of the critical legs
of the stool which supports
early childhood services in New
Mexico.
And just to clarify some
terminology, possibly late but
better than never. We provide
early intervention under the
family infant toddler program,
or fit, but under the federal
government, we are known as Part
C, and this just keeps us all on
our toes to have 3 different
names.
But those terms are all
interchangeable. EI fit, Part C.
So early intervention is the
only federally mandated program.
Within the ECECD, EI is funded
through Medicaid and through
state general funds.
And it's interesting to point
out that according to the RAND
Institute. They are quoted as
saying, Early intervention
programs have been shown to
yield benefits and academic
achievement, behavior,
educational progression and
attainment, delinquency and
crime and labor market success
among other domains. Thus, early
intervention has been found to
generate a return to society of
up to $17.07 for each dollar
spent on the program.
I have to point out that study
is very old.
I imagine that number is much
higher now.
And last but not least, again,
these services are at no cost to
families.
Slide 18 shows you the IDEA Part
C expectations from Congress.
I'm not going to read those to
you today, but I did want you to
have them, should you wish to
reference them.
We always like to point out in
EI that if you didn't need us,
you might not know us.
So, and we're often mistaken at
times for home visiting.
So I'd like to kind of point out
some differences there. Home
visiting is preventative. Early
intervention is intervention.
Home visiting is an option for
our state to provide. Early
intervention is not an option.
We are federally mandated to
provide early intervention
services in every county of the
state.
Home visiting has a curriculum.
Early intervention is completely
individualized to that
individual child and their
family's needs. Home visiting
services are provided by
Friendly Experts, whereas early
intervention is provided by
degreed professionals.
And home visiting serves about
5000 children annually in New
Mexico, whereas early
intervention is at about 16,000,
which is a 5% increase from last
year.
Home visiting often refers to
early intervention when there
are concerns about development,
and early intervention refers to
home visiting, particularly when
a child no longer needs our
intensive intervention or when
the child transitions out at the
age of 3, but it's also worth
noting that families can take
advantage of both programs
simultaneously.
So challenges we all have them,
and as you can imagine, early
intervention shares a lot of the
same challenges as other
departments in the ECECD as well
as businesses throughout our
state. We have a few challenges
that we can necessarily control,
and others that we have the
power to impact.
On slide 21 lists a few of our
federal mandates.
As previously mentioned, seeing
that early intervention is a
mandated program, we therefore
have the federal mandates.
All children must receive a
comprehensive multidisciplined
evaluation conducted by 2
professionals of different
fields, for example, an
occupational therapist and a
developmental specialist.
And they have to use state
assigned protocol.
Which includes a developmental
assessment, vision screening,
hearing screening, autism
screening, and review of their
medical records. All children
who are determined to be
eligible for early intervention
must have an individualized
service plan written within 45
days from the date of referral.
And services identified in the
family's plan must be provided
within 30 days, regardless of
your staffing capacity.
All children receiving ongoing
services must, must have their
plan reviewed every 6 months,
and their development reassessed
annually.
And preparation for transition
into the school system starts at
enrollment and continues until
the day of their 3rd birthday.
This means that every child in
every community is entitled to
this service within the
timelines and expectations set
forth by the Office of Special
Education.
Receiving 5 referrals or 20
referrals in a given week is
irrelevant when it comes to
terms of compliance. There is no
allowable waiting list for
children who need evaluations or
enrollment into the program.
However, there are waiting
lists. There are waiting lists
for specific services for
children and families, they may
need, such as occupational
therapy, or as I mentioned,
nutritional counseling is a
challenge.
And while waiting lists for
needed services are upsetting,
they are a reality.
Slide 22 outlines some of the
provider required purchases.
Early intervention agencies must
absorb the cost to purchase
testing protocols, including the
state required developmental
tools and manuals.
We have to purchase and
maintain.
An OAE, which is an auto
acoustics emissions instrument.
Say that 3 times, to screen each
child's hearing with these
machines costing close to $6000
each, not including annual
maintenance repairs.
It's incredibly expensive and
clearly one machine will not
serve hundreds of children every
year.
Reflective supervision is
another mandate for our
services, and this is a very
valuable style of supervision,
which supports staff who are
often faced with traumatic
situations, uncontrolled
environments and challenging
conditions. Reflective
supervision is a technique that
provides time and space for
field-based staff to receive
much needed support and
guidance.
Reflective supervisors are also
required to receive the same
level of support from their
trained supervisor.
So while this is an invaluable
tool, it is required for every
team member to receive one hour
every month, and this is a
tiered approach. So when you
look at the tiers of which we
are providing and receiving for
brazos alone, it is taking us
370 hours of unbillable
non-service related time which
equates to close to $50,000 a
year.
This year, and for the first
time, ECECD began providing
funds to organizations to
acquire interpretation and
translation services for
families. This is one of the
mandates for early intervention
is that we provide services in
the family's home language.
With a variety of languages in
our communities, that can be
both challenging and incredibly
expensive.
We're incredibly grateful to the
department for taking this step,
and we hope that that will
continue into the future that
they will support early
intervention agencies
financially to meet that federal
mandate.
We also have staffing challenges
cause who does not?
We do receive some.
Funds for staff training to give
you an idea, Abrazos has 24.
field-based and admin staff. We
receive up to $3000 a year to
train those 24 people.
That equates to $125 per person
per year.
So that's clearly not an
adequate amount.
Our professionals have to learn
while on the job, as there is
not a current bachelor's or
master's degree path for a
developmental specialist.
And while higher education
institutions are looking into
this for the future. The page
just simply isn't enough to
recruit, any interest in these
programs. Currently, without
this specific degree path and
formal training, a developmental
specialist even with a
background in early childhood is
going to take about 3 to 6
months on the job training
before they can independently
carry a caseload.
This means that for those 3 to 6
months, we're not able to recoup
any funding.
And obviously we're still paying
them, so it is a challenge with
retention and recruitment.
Our teams are out in the
community using their personal
vehicles, driving all over the
county which for Sandoval alone
is 30 over 3500 square miles.
They're isolated, they are
entering into environments that
can be unpredictable,
unwelcoming, or in locations
that are very difficult to
reach.
They can drive for 2 hours to
see 1 child, I believe was
referenced yesterday as well.
We're also expected to meet
family's needs regardless of
schedule, so if they can only do
a weekend or an evening.
We are expected to accommodate
that.
You add low pay to this picture,
and we have to wonder why anyone
would stay in this field, let
alone enter it.
They can work at the schools now
or daycares.
Not drive for hours in their own
cars, have summers off and good
pensions and have on-site
controlled environments.
What do we have that draws them
to us.
I want to highlight the
developmental specialists a
little bit now on on slide 24,
you can see some of the
requirements it takes to work as
a DS in our field. They're
required to have 25 hours of
documented continuing hours of
education each year. They're
required to have an individual
professional development plan.
They have to have the ability to
assess developmental strengths
and needs, as well as administer
score, and interpret formal
testing instruments and
summarize those results, and
they have to have a dance
training and education in order
to work with their counterparts
who have masters and at times
doctorate degrees. And as we all
know, with the advancements in
medicine, supporting
microreenies and children with
very complex significant medical
complications who are living now
where they may not have lived
many years ago.
ago, those children and families
require the most skilled
professionals, the trained
professionals to ensure that
this most vulnerable population
has the best chance to thrive.
I want to bring your attention
to slide 25.
As I highlighted on the previous
slides, the knowledge, skills
and training for developmental
specialists.
are very much increased in order
to provide quality early
intervention services due to
just the unique and complex
needs of children and family.
That is represented on this
slide.
Our staff must be skilled and
trained to be the expert. The
rock for the families when their
foundations are shaken by
unexpected diagnoses, missed
milestones and challenging
behaviors, and sometimes loss of
life.
In this slide, I took a, a few
common roles that we see in
ECECD. We have the childcare
worker at the bottom, the home
visitor in the middle.
And the developmental
specialists at the top.
This slide is meant to show an
increase in requirements and
expertise as well as a decrease
in the number of professionals
who have that skill set.
Now, the next slide's going to
feel counterintuitive.
Looking at these same roles.
The current rate of
reimbursement system in fit has
those with the most expertise in
education, making the least
wages.
Every time the ECECD or PED
provides an increase to staff,
which is much deserved.
This pay disparity increases,
particularly for developmental
specialists.
Teachers in New Mexico just
received another increase,
taking a newly graduated entry
level teacher to over $50,000.
Childcare workers now get an
ECECD pay parity and without a
degree, make $55,000.
Greed early intervention,
developmental specialists based
on market information, make less
than those and they have much
higher requirements.
The fact is that DS jobs are
being advertised right now for
under $40,000 a year.
So I spoke about the comparison
about what our team of
professionals are expected to do
each day versus what a teacher
or childcare worker, we need to
not only pay these professionals
for their expertise, their
skills, their training, but we
need to pay them for the extra
challenges that we also require
from them in order to provide
early intervention.
So, on slide 27, I want to go
back to the fact that we are
number one in the nation for
finding children.
But unfortunately, according to
the state's annual performance
report, which is sent to our
federal partners, we're really
struggling with compliance in
several areas when it comes to
serving the children,
particularly in a timely manner
and providing the services that
they need to thrive.
So we can get them in the door,
but once inside, the walls are
crumbling.
And it is greatly due to the
lack of funding to appropriately
and fairly compensate the
professionals who do this work.
Slide 28.
This is the history of the
funding over the last several
years, specifically to the
family infant toddler program.
You can see any increases that
have occurred have been minimal,
particularly in the last 3
years. ECECD has stated with the
historic lack of investments and
the structure of provider
reimbursements, fit providers
are struggling.
It does not benefit
professionals to stay in this
field, and it does not behoove
them to enter it.
We can no longer rely on heart
strings as a payment for these
professionals. The FI program
needs more money.
And now ECECD is asking for that
money.
On slide 29, you can see the
budget request that has been
submitted $173 million for the
upcoming year. In that budget
request is 96.5 million for
childcare, 46.2 million for
pre-K, 10 million for home
visiting, and yes, 14.7 million
for early intervention rates and
services.
Easy ECD's commitment to New
Mexicans is to create a
cohesive, equitable, and
responsive prenatal to 5 early
childhood system that supports
families, strengthens
communities, and enhances child
health, development, education,
and well-being.
To stand by that commitment, it
is imperative that all legs of
the stool are appropriately
funded and supported in order to
ensure that our foundation, our
system is strong, balanced, and
of high quality.
If we are not careful, we can
pull from one leg to strengthen
or lengthen another.
This will eventually result in a
fractured system.
I believe we are at that
breaking point right now.
Early intervention must receive
the attention.
And funding needed to maintain a
strong foundation in ECECD.
According to the 2022 cost
study, only about half of early
intervention organizations were
solvent.
That was 2 years ago and things
have only gotten shakier since
then.
I believe yesterday it was
mentioned that the FIT funding
had been forgotten.
That's a perfect example of the
system on the brink of collapse
for early intervention.
So this is my call to action for
you. Please support the ECECD
fit budget request.
Just as it is critical to
identify and serve children as
early as possible, it is more
critical now than ever to
provide the funding.
So please join me in changing
the trajectory of these
families' lives because, as we
now know, we all know a child.
So the last slide is my contact
information, my website, social
media, please feel free to reach
out to me if I can be of any
support or answer any questions.
And with that, I stand for
questions of the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Um
Let's see, let's start with the
Representative Cates. Do you
have any questions? Thank you,
Chair, and, and thank you April.
Uh, this was an excellent
presentation of, of what early
intervention, how it works, um,
and they're gonna time me, so
I'm asking for really short
answers, and I please forgive
me, um, how long has, uh, the
federal government mandated
early intervention services.
What year was that, do you know?
I think in '93, my right there?
OK, so we know the federal
government doesn't mandate
services unless they've been
doing them for at least 20 years
before then, so why do you think
the federal government mandates,
uh, early intervention services
throughout every state.
Um,
well, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, Representative Kates, I
hate to speak for the federal
government in any way, shape or
form. Um, my guess would simply
be that this falls under the
education component, right?
We're fall under the Office of
Special Education, which is a
human right. So, um, for lack of
a better answer, that would be
the answer I could give you off
the top. Thank you, April. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. My, my answer is
because the federal government
realized every dime that we
spent on early intervention
saves us money.
When they're in public school,
period.
They, they don't do it saves
money.
So do you know, and you may not
cause I've never seen the
statistic either with early
intervention. How many children
go through early intervention
that by the time they are 5,
they're streamlined in public
school. They don't have a 504 or
or or I and IEAP.
Um, how many do you think, what
percentage?
I do not believe that
information is tracked,
especially in the state of New
Mexico, um, particularly through
the age of 5 at early
intervention, they exit at 3 and
at that point, our relationship
with them tends to, to end at a
brazos, I can say we have about
3 of our children go into the
school system, different regions
in the state have different
populations of which they serve,
so there are different um ratios
per agency that you'll get an
answer for that though. Thank
you so much, April. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I just
want to say that that is the
importance of early intervention
is that uh our baby brains are
hardwiring at such a vast speed
that there are vulnerabilities
in a concurred birth, my child
had one of them as well, but
because of the dedicated
services of the developmental
specialist and the, and the
early intervention services, um,
they actually have a fighting
chance for a typical life, and
so, um, thank you very much.
Thanks, Representative, uh,
Representative Thompson.
Boy, I could talk about this all
day, Mister Chair, um, so just,
just a, an idea of some of the
things that I was a
developmental specialist for a
couple of years in PT for a lot
of years. One visit we went to,
um, out in Aama we pulled up to
the house the development
specialist and I pulled up to
the house and we're getting
ready to go in and 2 pickup
truckloads full of men with guns
showed up.
And it turns out that Dad had
severely abused Mom the night
before, and so her family were
gonna go out and look for Dad.
That didn't feel real good to be
there, um, and those, I mean,
once I was in a home in Los
Lunas where um Dad was an
adjudicated rapist. He had a
monitor, but I went on a home
visit by myself with him, um,
and everything was fine, but
Not me
So,
and I started tearing up when
you talked about I know a child
because that was my child.
And uh it makes such a
difference. I mean, if we just
look at dollars and cents.
There's no comparison. I mean,
we, you know, my son still has
major challenges, but I'm not
sure I would have survived
without early intervention. I
mean, I was suicidal and I was
gonna take him with me because
our life was that hard.
Um, so, and, and it really bugs
me that we have started this
giant fund for early childhood,
and these are the kids that
needed the, I mean, all kids
need it, but these are the kids
whose lives are going to what
the trajectory of their life is
gonna be depends on what we can
do for them for from 0 to 3
because of the neuroplasticity
and all of that stuff. It just
makes families survive and it
just, I, I'm just sad that we
have to, that you have.
To be here begging for money
when we're sitting on billions
of dollars waiting for a rainy
day, and we are being flooded.
We've been flooded. I mean, I
started my first early
intervention job in 1992, um,
and, and back then things were
so much better, and maybe it was
just the programs I was in. I
was always out west or down
south or I, I never until later
years did I ever work in
Albuquerque.
But, um, and, and as I said
before, I would when I decided
to retire when COVID hit. I was
losing money.
When I put in my mileage and
because we didn't get money for
mileage, no money for driving
time, $10 for a no show, um,
it's.
I, I loved it, but I thought
this is really stupid. I may as
well volunteer and then I could
take it off my taxes, um, so we
need to fix the system and it's
not a lack of money, it's a lack
of will to do it and we, we need
to get the money people.
To realize, I mean, we get it.
Uh, but the money people are,
000, you know, it's not their
money, but they act like it is
and we just need to stop doing
that and fund these programs at
the level that they need to be
funded. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, um, I
totally agree with our vice
chair that this is something
that is
Um
It's incomprehensible.
that we don't fund this, and as
you were saying, the budget
requests, I didn't get the
amounts. I see that you have the
percentages.
I
Pardon me.
Just your chair, Madam Vice
Chair, representative Ferrari,
those amounts, uh, the total is
173,173 million for the ECECD
budget.
96.5 million for childcare.
46.2 million for pre-K.
10 million for home visiting.
And 14.7 million for early
intervention. There are
supplementals I, I understand,
um, not.
The one that we've been
discussing over the last few
days, but, um, there's an,
there's like a $2 million
educational component
supplemental for early
intervention. There's some other
supplementals that are smaller
in there as well. OK, that's
good. So we have an, uh, I can,
I have it down. Um, also, Mr.
Chair and um uh I, um,
It, it's April. Thank you, um.
Have you spoken or presented
before LFC.
This budget and the need or
well, I should start out with um
early childhood education
department.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, as
Representative Ferrari.
My answer to my awareness is no.
Early intervention specifically
has gotten very little.
Attention.
At the LFC and that is
definitely something we wish to
change. I have personally not
been invited to present, um, and
any.
Times that I have watched those
presentations, I would say the
attention to early intervention
has been lacking.
And, uh, Mr. Chair, in April.
has, um, ECECD been able to
include this in their budget.
It is my understanding, I'm
sorry, um.
Mr. Chair, Madam vice chair.
Representative Ferrari, it is my
understanding that this is from
their budget, yes. OK.
So that's one step closer, um,
and then making sure that their
whole budget is accepted and
included, um, and as a
committee, I think we should
write a strongly worded letter.
are famous, yes.
Yes, and support and make sure
that um possibly when they're
looking at they probably already
have seen their budget and said
whether they're going to approve
it or not, but you know we as
um.
Healthcare need to be sure and
support possibly even show up
when they have any other
considerations for this, so
thank you very much for this
great presentation. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. You
can possibly, uh, work with
Uh, Xander on getting a draft of
a letter, we would circulate.
It's
Representative Chaves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I
Gonna ditto what's been said in
terms of uh programs like this
needing to be funded early
intervention is very important,
um, I do have a couple of
questions in terms of the
presentation.
So, um, you have the Ebrazo
service area, so in Bernalillo
it's uh you, you're only doing
Northwest Albuquerque. I'm
assuming that other early
intervention programs are
covering the rest of the county,
is that right?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Chavez, that is
correct. And there is overlap.
There are other, we're not the
only agency to provide early
intervention to Sandoval County.
There are other agencies as
well, areas that have more
population tend to have more EI
agencies to help support that
level of need.
And then the other, the other
piece that I was interested in
is um you talked about needing
to get an interpreters.
Um, and so do any or, or do your
providers, your, um,
what you call them your, yeah,
your development specialists,
are they bilingual?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
Representative Chavez, that's
That's a variable answer right
now. I don't have a
developmental specialist who is
bilingual. We lost um our
developmental, our single
developmental specialist who is
bilingual. Um, we do have some
service coordinators and we do
have a speech and language
pathologist who we like to term
a unicorn, who happens to also
be bilingual. It is incredibly
challenging to find monolingual.
Providers to work in this field
for this rate of pay that they
receive at the bilingual
component, and we simply cannot
compete with other businesses
who can pay them more.
The amount that we were given by
ECECD this year can be used to
supplement those staff who are
bilingual, but we also have to
keep in mind to pay a translator
for services, let's say through
Arabic or Vietnamese, those
languages are harder and more
expensive, so the staff will
receive whatever is left of that
amount that ECECD.
To engage in the same type of
practice just to make sure
services are rendered. OK. Can
you tell me, Mr. Chair, what
the, um.
What languages um to the family
speak that you see.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair Representative
Chavez, any language.
We are required to provide
services in any and every
language. Um, primarily it would
be Spanish speaking families
that are the non-English
speakers, but we also serve a
lot of the tribal areas, so
those languages are brought in,
um, as I've mentioned, we have a
few families who have, um, need
an Arabic interpreter, and we
actually found him through the
court system.
Um, so there's, you have to be
creative, but there has been
talk in the fields regarding
refugees and how do we make sure
that we have all the language
capacity to serve those families
as well, whether they come from
Ukraine or whether they come
from the Middle East.
The compliance component doesn't
care what the language is. We
have to find the interpreter and
translator. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm so sorry to
interrupt. I just want to bring
to the attention of the
committee when we talk about
languages we're also talking
about sign language and my
Sesame Street sign language
would not cut it. This is
medical
information and it must be an
American Sign Language certified
provider, which are very
expensive as well. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you for an
excellent presentation and uh
you know I wanna.
Concur with everything that's
been said about support for
these programs, um, on the
language issue, there's a
language access bill that
requires each of the agencies to
do a report on language access.
I haven't seen that report, but
it seems to me that that report
should be justification for
having a supplement included as
part of the funding that would
be adequate, um, and I can help
you with that like maybe talking
to to the DFA or or or do that
because I know the.
report has to be done and the
whole point of the report is to
justify the funding for it.
So I just uh throw that in there
and then um I was looking at the
the ECED.
But ECE CD budget request, um,
and at 58% of it is in child
care. Does any of that childcare
include services for um.
We're developing developmentally
delayed children or is it just
straight childcare, do you know?
Just curious because sometimes
the
The funding isn't always so
clear, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, Senator Sidi Lopez, it
would, my understanding and I do
not work for the department, so
please take it with a grain of
salt. My understanding is that
that is strictly for childcare,
daycare usage, it does not
transfer over into early
intervention. We do go into
those settings and provide the
support, which includes the
support to their staff in their
environment and ways to help,
um, things function better when
you have a child with a
developmental delay and
disability, but I am not skilled
and knowledgeable enough.
to answer questions on how the
department um intends to use
that $96 million for childcare.
It because it
I mean, I hope that the
childcare isn't just childcare
that it includes the services
that the child needs, which
means that this balance might
need to be a little bit, a
little bit different, um.
What somebody's shaking their
head you go into the childcare
and you provide your services
and, and teach the staff that's
there, but there's, you know.
It, it doesn't include it.
OK, well, that's important to
note too because they're just
I mean, I don't, I'm not an
expert. I don't know what the
balance should be, but I just
encourage you, the experts, to
continue advocating for what it
needs to be to meet those those
children's needs. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Senator, uh,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
try to ask my 14 questions as
fast as possible.
Um
First of all,
I want to tell you, April, you
and your staff are unsung
heroes, and I am proud to have
you in Sanol County.
Because you fight, you fight,
you fight.
Not for yourself.
But for these kids.
And the first time I met you, I
walked away.
Holding my breath because I
wanted to make it back to my
truck.
Before I could.
Uh, let it out.
Uh, so I thank you for what you
do for the kids of this county.
My first question is what
happens to that child after
their 3rd birthday.
Like.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Martinez, it
depends on the child and their
needs if they qualify for the
school setting as far as needing
services through an
individualized education plan.
It is the early interventions
requirement to provide that
support to them to get
transitioned into the school
setting. It is a warm handoff.
There are meetings. They are
involved in writing that IEP in
order to make sure that that
child is fully supported and
then as of that.
3rd birthday, we step out of the
picture. There is some followup
possible if there is a need,
let's say that child is having a
hard time in the school system
with the setting or the teacher,
we can have someone go in as a
follow-up service, but it is
very limited. If the child no
longer needs services, they can
go to home visiting or a daycare
or they can stay home with their
parents. It's really based on
the child's needs and the
parent's desires.
Is there any tracking after
that, do you track that child?
No, sir, we do not.
Um, next, the training dollars
for your staff, is that a flat
rate?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Martinez, that is
built into our contract with the
ECECD that we receive in
addition to the rate
reimbursement we received $3000
to train our staff.
So
it's $3000 whether you have
10 staff members or 50 staff.
I cannot answer other early
interventions contracts. I can
only answer for a Brazos
contract. I am, I would guess
that there is some variability,
but my understanding is that it
is limited across the board.
One last question.
Um, on the inverted.
Mm
Um
Slide 26.
Who sets those salaries.
Is, are they set by contract
with ECCD.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
Representative Martinez.
That's a tough question to
answer because what happens is
we are able to build for the
services rendered as an
organization such as the Brazos
where we are primarily in early
intervention agency. We have to
set what we can afford to pay
that staff.
Other agencies have other
programs such as the adult
services, we've heard that also
in this committee in the last
couple of days, they're using
other programs to supplement
early intervention funds that
are not covering their costs.
Obrazos doesn't have that
capability because we don't
provide excessive amounts of
other services. We are an early
intervention specialized agency.
So for us it is simply about the
money that we are able to put
into our budget based on the
rates that are set by ECECD and
funded by the legislature.
Thank you very much April, and
once again I, I.
You, you were an amazing person,
you and your staff for what you
provide this county for.
Very, very little funding. I'm
the first one to stand up and
jump and say some of these
agencies are their budgets are
out of control, but I will tell
you, I will also be the one
jumping up and down saying this
funding needs to expand.
And it needs to become
permanent, and it needs to be a
major part of the ECECB budget.
Thank you for what you do. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, just as an aside, I
believe, like Altamira has
raises their own money. I mean,
they have the kite fest and so
and what they're not getting
from the state, they're.
They're raising their own money,
which is a whole other issue and
uh much more work on top of
people who are already working
too hard for no pay or very low
pay.
Thanks, Representative Martinez.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
don't have any questions. I want
to thank you for your work and I
appreciate what your challenges
are.
I, I, I concur, I, I appreciate
hearing the incredible work
you're doing, um, we had, we had
heard yesterday that the um
Um
Request for money to to increase
the rates for the staff.
Uh, didn't get included in the
ECEC budget this year through
some type of oversight and so,
um.
The increase that was announced
and it began in July had to be
rescinded in August.
So we were hoping we could find
out if there's some way that
those can be re-established and
since the secretary is here, I
wondered if you wanted to
respond to that issue.
So I want to join all of you in
thanking April for an incredible
presentation and really
highlighting the depth and the
beauty and the impact of early
intervention Part C, family
infant toddler, uh, a program
that we know and love and that
has been a big, um, priority of
this administration, um, so in
21 rate increases to April's
point. They weren't nearly
enough in 24, again, rate
increases and now in our 26
budget, um, a substantial rate
increase that really
is based on the input from the
provider community.
Um, in regards to the
supplemental, we do anticipate a
supplemental being needed just
to address the insignificant
number of children that are
being served, which will of
course also impact our fit
provider community, but our
focus is to make sure that come
July 1, 2025, this $14.675
million. The state plan
amendment, first we have to get
it through the legislature, uh,
we have to get a supplemental
through also just to make sure
that the program is whole to
April's point. This is an
entitlement program. All
children must be.
served, uh, and working together
with the fit community, the
legislature, the governor's
office, and the interagency
coordinating council to make
sure that July 1.
We are ready to go with rates,
um, I think what April has
highlighted, and we didn't have
time to go into it, but you've
all highlighted it too, some of
the structural inequities that
are in the current way that fit
program is funded and so our
goal is to address with this
budget request those inequities,
not just increasing on a rate
structure that doesn't
necessarily work, um, from what
we've heard directly from fit
providers, so, um, we will, you
know, welcome from the
legislature any insights, um,
you know.
the, the trust fund is
statutorily prescribed. I don't
have access to the trust fund
beyond the $250 million that the
statute allows, and I don't have
to tell all of you.
Appropriations are made for a
purpose, and so, um, those
opportunities that I don't have
access to the trust fund in
terms of being able to just
borrow money in from the trust
fund. It is statutorily
prescribed and so I think those
are good conversations that we
can all have, um, with the LFC
about how we want to look at the
Trust fund, but we also wanna
make sure that trust fund is
there in 100 years from now when
we're still going to have
children, hopefully not as many
because we're gonna build this
prenatal to 5 system that does
support all children, so it's a
long answer to your question of
yes, a supplemental will be
needed to make fit whole for
this year. I think we have to
look at, um, the whole system
and know that our federal
partners provide less than 5% of
the budget needed to serve the
children that we're serving in
our state, so.
We have to continue to advocate,
I think, also for our federal
partners to do more and to
continue to invest the money
that we have through the trust
fund, through the land grant
permanent fund, through general
fund in improving outcomes for
our infants and toddlers with
developmental delays and
disabilities just but but this
is.
Medicaid funded, isn't it? Um,
not all of it. Um, they, um,
Medicaid is the pair of first
resort for children who are
Medicaid eligible, um, but
oftentimes in April, I'm sure
can contest to this, you know,
those claims get paid, they get
denied, they get resubmitted,
um, they get paid again, but it
is, um, we do have Medicaid
paying for the services and
private insurance. We build
private insurance for those
families who have um private
insurance so that it's that
general fund trust fund, uh,
Medicaid.
And um private insurance. So,
um, you're, you're gonna ask for
both the supplemental to finish
up fiscal year 25 and an
increase over that then of 14.6
in state general fund for fiscal
year 26.
Well, I, so let me um.
Yeah, so we, we have to talk
together um with the governor's
office and with the legislature,
um, and to see what is what is
possible to make sure that we're
able to close the gap for 25 and
make sure that we can fund all
the children who are required to
be served and make sure that we
also, um, and I think you all
are more knowledgeable than I
am. I'm new to this with the
supplemental. We haven't had to
do that and so the supplemental
adds to your base, maybe then in
26. And so the question is do we
take that?
In addition, then another 14.65
or is it that supplemental.
Mine, so that I think those will
be good conversations and I'd
love your good guidance on how
that works and of course,
talking to the legislative
Finance Committee and Charles
and Kelly and uh Senator Munoz.
She, she had to leave, yeah,
we had in here it was, you know,
our staff from the LFC um if I,
if I could just say one thing
too about the system that we're
building here in New Mexico and
thanks to all of you for being
part of creating that department
is when our childcare ask, you
know, is about raising the level
of quality for
more children, so that's
reaching 32,000 children, um, in
all day full day, full year
care, pre-K, another wonderful
support to families, but it's
about the integration and the
alignment of these programs
working together, 10 of our fit
providers are also home visiting
providers. So we know that
there's such great benefit when
those children are benefiting
from both programs and high
quality childcare, so I just
wanna say that it's, it's about
building a stronger system that
works for all children, um, and
that.
is high quality and is family
centered so, um, I agree that
the focus on fit, we focus on it
in our five-year finance plan.
It's always one of our four core
programs, um, but we can do more
and better with the ICC to make
sure I've had to advocate
sometimes with the LFC, put it
in the accountability report,
you know, home visiting and
childcare and pre-K definitely
are the three programs that
often get highlighted and so
we'll do a better job at ECECD,
making sure all four of our core
programs.
are highlighted equally.
Um, I guess the question about
Medicaid was, was, I brought it
up because um at yesterday's
hearing, I got the impression
that whatever we were able to
come up with it as an increase.
Next year would be matched
essentially 3 to 1 by Medicaid.
But
you're saying that's not
necessarily the way the fit
program.
His financed that that their
kids served who aren't Medicaid
eligible and for them, then it
has to be all state funds or
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair. what's the
percentage?
Huh?
What the, the, the children
served
by the states
The children served by state
general funds. Uh, what
percentage of the fit kids are
there, the majority of the
fitkits are served through
Medicaid funds. There are some
that are state general funds,
but it is, you, you said that
it, there was that the federal
government was only in 0.05%
into the overall, that's hard
for me to fathom, uh, Mr. Chair.
Representative Kate, I'm sorry,
5% of the overall budget is
funded through the Federal
Office of Special Education
Programs at the US Department of
Education.
Um, so yes, it's a little under
3 million that we get from the
federal government annually to
serve, um, the FIT program.
But in addition, then there's
for those, which I would assume
would be something like 70% of
the kids are going to be
Medicaid eligible, maybe higher
because 70% of all the kids born
in the state are born on
Medicaid. So,
Assuming that that percentage
for the kids with special needs.
I would think it might even be
higher, but you're just assuming
it's the same 70+% of the kids
in the program will get 75% of
their costs paid by Medicaid. So
I think, I think there's,
there's an opportunity here to
parlay that 14 million into some
significant
increases in rates so that you
can raise your steps, salary,
uh, April, but also to cover
whatever additional caseload
you, you face.
Correct, Mr. Chair.
OK, well
Representative, thank you. I
just, so your supplemental is
just to um.
For additional
as opposed to fixing the
retraction. We were, I think I
can speak for the committee that
we are very concerned about the
retraction, and we would love to
help you, um.
Figure out a way to to undo, I
mean, like April said, you can
go work at a school for 9 months
a year, make twice as much money
and you, it, it's just, it's, we
can't keep going this way, so
if, if we can figure out a way
to fund the retraction, I mean,
I, I was on.
Appropriations for 4 years, but
I still don't quite understand
everything. I don't think
anybody does, but if we can
figure out a way to, to undo the
retractions and I mean we've,
I'm sure the programs have lost.
Most, if not nearly all of their
therapists and some of their DSs
as well, and we may never get
those back, but we, I, it just,
it breaks my heart that that
happened. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Vice Chair, just to, um, I did
talk to our bureau chief Lea
Davidson today to just confirm,
uh, you know, I was, um, out of
town with my sister's 50th
wedding anniversary yesterday,
so I was listening in, um, and
hearing from my staff, so
apologies that I couldn't be
here yesterday, but um, you
know, we have not heard
directly.
So if programs are that you know
people are losing staff as a
direct result. I do know I
talked to April at the time and
she definitely said it was gonna
be a pretty, you know,
significant hit. I've taught as
I I said to the reporter
yesterday, I've talked to
programs who are at different
stages. I just worry about that
now I don't worry about.
It's the timing because.
As your point is, Medicaid pays
much of this, so it has to go
through a state plan amendment.
We don't know till the
legislature's done deciding
where the money goes, and then
we have a very short window to
get the state plan amendment
drafted out for public comment
written so that July 1, new
rates are in effect, so we.
If that
The legislature feels strongly
that we need to do the
rescission to this year's and
that I just, I'm trying to
figure out how do we do that and
can we focus, is there another
way to do it where we are able
to focus on getting the new
rates in place July 1 with the
new funding, and I know that's
not a great response for our
providers, but I think it's just
trying to think logistically of
how to make it all happen.
I thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
understand that, uh, but the
healthcare authority yesterday,
the secretary said that things
don't have to take as long as, I
mean, it's 2 months for routing
within the, I mean those numbers
are just ridiculous, um, so.
We can't keep using the excuse
that everything takes forever.
It takes forever because we make
it take forever, so, um, OK, I
guess I'm chair now.
So let, let, I'll let April go
and then uh send it.
That's the deal Lopez. Thank you
for allowing me to respond, um.
Vice chair um members of the
committee.
It is a really difficult
situation and providers speaking
for myself can accept that and
move forward at the same time,
we didn't get to rescind our
raises that we gave to staff and
contractors we.
Provided that
And we are on the hook for that.
So the response to the financial
responsibility now lies on
providers who are already not
receiving rate reimbursements
that are adequate. We have
already lost to developmental
specialists, and I have two
therapists. One is our unicorn
bilingual speech and language
pathologist who has said, we're
not valued. We're not paid,
we're not valued, and we know
it's not a brazos, but we can
feel it and we want to let you
know we will be leaving by.
the end of the fiscal year if
things don't turn.
So
It is unfortunate and we
appreciate the department's
willing to work and hear us and
they have spent a lot of time
listening to us in some very
emotional and upset forums, but
the fact of the matter is, is
that brazos is now on the hook
for that money, Altamira is now
on the hook for that money. Zia
and Alamogordo is on the hook,
right? So it is a very
challenging situation, so I
appreciate the committee's um
desire to work with the
department and providers in
order to address it in the best
way.
possible moving forward. Thank
you.
A senator sent Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. My question is in
people who've been on on the.
Finance could probably help.
Isn't it possible to make a
special appropriation to
reimburse the providers for this
error. I mean,
I feel sort of straightforward
to me, just a little special
appropriation with the sole
purpose to reimburse providers.
You know, and then maybe
providers can, if I understand
that some of them might have
rescinded the race, and if so,
to reinstate it and
To reimburse them for being on
the hook for these, for these
funds.
Is that something that can be
done? It seems to me.
Like it should be
Uh
Senator
from my time on the house
appropriations.
Everything happened. I mean,
it's like the Wizard of Oz.
Everything happens behind a
curtain, you know, um, even on
the committee, it's like, oh,
well, this is what we're doing
and it's done and you know, so I
can't say that that's, but I
hope someone from LFC is
listening in and uh and they
they hear what we're saying, uh,
representative Martinez.
Um, as a former agency guy, it
is possible. You can go in for a
supplemental funding you can pay
like a contract going back.
Uh, you can make those, those
people who we did it.
With some of the contractors we
had leading up to the 2008
debacle.
Uh, so I know it's possible.
Um, but while I have the floor,
can I ask the secretary one
question.
How did this happen?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair, um, it, um, happened. I
sent a letter to all of you, so
hopefully you received it both
hard copy and electronic
explaining um that uh there was
um.
Not good communication in the
department, I ultimately have to
take responsibility. I'm the
secretary and so once it came to
my attention, which was in early
August of this year, then that's
when I had to make the decision,
so they um budget requests were
not made, rates increases were
made all, you know, um.
Without coming through the
office of the secretary, so once
I realized it, then I made that
decision because the legislature
appropriates to me money for
specific purposes and so to to
go ahead and make a decision
that had not been in the budget
and appropriated I thought was
not being a good steward of the
public dollars, knowing though
how valuable these services are
and knowing that we did have
this substantial request coming
in for 26, um, so that was, it
was my, my fault, um, my, my.
decision and I apologize.
I appreciate that.
I, you know, in 2008, 2009, I
had to make those same
decisions, not on such a wide
scale.
But I do appreciate that um.
I, I, I.
just can't fathom how
They were announced.
I mean that takes some public
comment.
Before they
Published
I'm, I, I guess, uh.
Maybe we could talk offline.
How this all
Happen you didn't know about it
till the middle of August.
Not, you know, not
in
You with it but I I I just it
seems like somewhere before that
it would have been caught by
somebody.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez.
I, I don't know, um,
procedurally what's the best
thing I'm always complaining
about the lack of communication
between LFC and the and the
various committees, but I think
that.
And I'm happy to help, um, it
should be a priority to work
with LFC to, to get this little
special appropriation in House
Bill 2, that it be clear about
what it is and just be upfront.
This is a mistake we made and
our, our, uh, uh, agencies are
providers suffered because of
it.
And it's really a moral
obligation of the state to make
them whole.
And that your mic.
And that I was gonna say, Mr.
Chair, but I miss you, um, the
idea when I went to the speaker
to ask for 3.
Folks from LFC to be dedicated
to this committee to do those
kinds of things. Well, that's
not the way it's worked out. Um,
and I, I recently, um, spoke to
the speaker again, and I'll just
be perfectly upfront, he said,
just start treating the staff.
Like they belong to us.
So, so if you have um financial
things we have Ruben and we have
um.
Allegra
Um, we lost Nathan, but, but
oh, OK, well, see, we don't even
know that that's, that's my
issue that we don't have finan I
mean we have 2 $12 billion that
we're overseeing as the Health
and Human Services Committee
with no budget people to help
us, and the idea for those,
well, she's for our caucus
though, yeah,
yeah,
yeah, yeah, but yeah, yeah, he
does know about it and he, he,
that.
That's what he told me to do is
just start acting like they are
dedicated to this committee, so
I'm gonna put it out there that
if you have fiscal things that
around this committee contact
Ruben or Allegra.
Well, we
Well, that was, that was the
request, but
I mean, Rubyan was here, um,
but.
Yeah.
Well, Mr. Chair, manager,
whoever, uh, can I make a motion
that this be a priority and
that.
Um, that we instruct, I mean,
I'm happy to do it, um.
I don't know if they're gonna
take it from me as they would
from the chair or the vice
chair, but, um, I, I think that
we should have this prepared,
this special appropriation
prepared and that we should try
to get it on the agenda of the
LFC.
If possible, but I, we need to
push it and I think we should
push it as a committee.
And I think we need to make this
case. It's a moral case, um, and
I know it's difficult for the
secretary to be uh.
You know, to be doing this,
that's why I say it should come
from the committee, but, but you
tell.
You tell us, Madam Secretary,
thank you, Senator, uh, madam,
Madam Chair, um, you know, the
supplementals are due November
15th, uh, so that is what I've
instructed my staff to start
preparing, so if you want me to
work with these folks you've
mentioned, um, with the LFC and
you and of course with the
governor's office and Kendall
Chavez is my policy person in
the governor's office, uh, and
talk with, um, Chief of Staff
Schlegel, and you know to just
see what what we what we feel
good doing, you know what I
mean, to your point, the timing
thing.
And uh that shouldn't be the,
the reason. I think it's just
the budget process does go till
March and so we know that
programs um so to your point I'm
happy, um, and I wanted Ali
Hedrick is our new director of
family support early
intervention, so she's uh 4
weeks on the job and so I wanted
her to be here too, to meet all
of you and to become familiar,
so she's working directly over
these issues, um, so I'm happy
to do whatever I can to, to
support the fit community to
support um the LHHS.
As we work, of course, with the
governor's office as well.
I, I, I think we need to, to
talk to uh uh Charles Selie
about this. Here's Xander just
reminded me, one of the issues
is that.
This may take a a change in the
in the state Medicaid plan and
it has to be approved by CMS.
And that's, that was one of the
things that wasn't done by
itself.
Well, if, if, if
just a special appropriate 4
times is a special appropriation
will get you your state share.
If you don't get CMS approval,
Well, 75% of what you'd be
spending on anybody on Medicaid.
So if we, if we got a special
appropriation of let's say 5
million.
I don't know if that's enough.
10 million, let's say 10 million
that would generate probably
about a 35, 30 to $35 million
program.
Which would be enough to raise
all the salaries.
But
Mr. Chair, what I'm speaking
about is not not a future race.
I'm talking about a special
appropriation to make whole like
an emergency I don't know what a
special appropriation with an
amount of money that would make
whole those providers who are on
the hook for raises they gave
relying on the state's word, I'm
not, I'm not as no blame or
anything. It happens. Mistakes
are made, but I just think we
have a moral obligation to make
those providers whole, so I'm
not talking about
You know, changing the plan or
anything, I'm just talking
about.
An appropriation is, and I, I
would defer to represent
Martinez because he's seen it
done, that would make.
These providers hold and.
Well, that's why I think we do
need to talk to Charles Soli to
see what, what it would take to
accomplish what we would like to
see done.
Um
And then see the, the, the
advantage of doing it with
Medicaid match would be that you
then
Ready to just build on that in
the future, that becomes part of
your base for any subsequent
growth in the program.
Mr. Chair, with all due respect,
that's one of the reasons and
Lasa did not take Medicaid
because it was such a nightmare.
Um, so I'll just, I'll just
leave it at that I missed what
she said. Oh, and didn't take
me. We just, we just, we just
didn't, it, it, we provided this
service without, without.
Mr. Chair, just for the
information, we do have
precedent in the state where the
state has, um, appropriated
funding and then later went out
to CMS CMS will pay retroactive
if, if you, uh, especially on
this kind of situation, so if we
did a special supplement for
state funding immediately. We
may not be able to distribute it
full force yet until we get our
matching funds from CMS, but
then we could also go to.
EMS and asked for those matching
funds and to pay starting fiscal
year July 1st, retroactive. We
do have precedent in that in the
state. We have done it before.
All of which I think reinforces
the need to talk to Charles,
figure out how best to go about
doing this and to try to get it
lined up on the on the LFC's
agenda so that they can
introduce it during the session
and Mr. Chair and vice chair and
committee, I would welcome to be
part of those who want to learn,
wanna see how we can be better
stewards and, and really be
partners with the legislature,
um, and the executive as we, we
build this incredible program in
the system, this prenatal to 5
system here in the state for
families, so.
Well, with that, then we'll
conclude today's meeting. Um,
reminder that 15 minutes ago,
the, the reception and dinner
started at uh New Mexicoan.
It's a 211 12th Street.
Uh, Northwest, just, just north
of Central.
Right next to the old um.
Um
Loveless mansion
On 12th Street. It's a very nice
little building they bought. So,
uh, hope to see you there. We'll
see you in the morning at a
meeting in the morning will
start at 9:15 again.
